The Economic Report
of the President
TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS
January 1953

Together With a Report to the President
THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW
By the

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS







The Economic Report
of the President
TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS

January 14, 1953

Together With a Report to the President
THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW




By the

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 1953

Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington 25. D. G.
Price of single copy, 50 cents




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
THE WHITE HOUSE,
Washington, D. C., January 14, 1953.
The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE,
The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress,
as required under the Employment Act of 1946.
In preparing this report, I have had the advice and assistance of the
Council of Economic Advisers, members of the Cabinet, and heads of independent agencies.
Together with this report, I am transmitting a report, the Annual Economic Review, January 1953, prepared for me by the Council of Economic
Advisers in accordance with section 4 (c) (2) of the Employment Act
of 1946.
Respectfully,







Contents
Page

THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
The progress of the American economy during a quartercentury
Production, jobs, and living standards
Economic justice and the higher values
Reinforcements against economic fluctuations
Much remains to be done
Purpose and performance under the Employment Act . . . .
Purpose of the Act
Performance to date under the Act
Basic economic principles for the future
(7) Full employment must be a constant objective of policy .
(2) Full employment requires the maintenance of economic
balance
(3) Full employment requires planning ahead
(4) Full employment requires responsible Government as
well as responsible private enterprise
(5) Full employment can be maintained without inflation .
(6) Full employment requires that group interests be reconciled with the general interest
(7) Full employment does not depend upon war
The promise ahead
New frontiers of economic growth
New frontiers of economic justice .
New frontiers of world development
THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW, JANUARY 1953 (a report to the
President by the Council of Economic Advisees)




1
1
1
4
7
7
8
8
11
14
14
16
17
18
20
21
22
24
24
25
26
29




To the Congress of the United States:
In this, my seventh and final Annual Economic Report to the Congress
under the Employment Act of 1946, I think it appropriate to review the
period of which the Act is both product and symbol.
Early in the past quarter-century, the United States fell from good times
into a period of great economic adversity. Out of this experience, there
arose the compelling demand which finally produced the declaration of
national economic policy contained in the Employment Act—that our great
resources were pledged to the maintenance of maximum production, employment, and purchasing power.
Later within this quarter-century, we achieved in great measure the
kind of economic society of which the Act is a symbol—a prosperous and
growing economy of free men, with increasing opportunity for all. In this
accomplishment we have testimony that we can hold fast to our gains and
add to them in the years ahead.

The Progress of the American Economy
During a Quarter-Century
During this past quarter-century, the strength and vigor of the American
economy have been severely tested. Since 1929, the Nation has suffered
its most disastrous depression, fought its most costly war, and moved
through a difficult postwar readjustment. Most recently, it has devoted
a large portion of its output in the effort of the free world to overcome the
menace of aggression.
Now, despite the wastage of depression and the heavy but necessary
expenditures for war and national security, the Nation is far stronger
economically than it was a quarter-century ago. Its people are enjoying
a much higher standard of living. Its farms and factories are far more
productive. And it is displaying in remarkable fashion the capacity for
economic growth on which its future welfare and security so largely depend.
Production, jobs, and living standards
The Nation's progress during this past quarter-century is evident in the
figures which sum up total economic activity.
In 1929, the output of all goods and services was 172 billion dollars;
in 1952, total output amounted to 345 billion dollars—measured in both
cases in uniform 1952 prices. Industrial production has doubled, and
agricultural output has risen about 50 percent.




CHART 1

GROWTH IN PRODUCTION SINCE 1929
Total output and industrial production have doubled since 1929
and agricultural production has risen by almost one-half.
TOTAL OUTPUT OF GOODS AND SERVICES ^
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, 1952 PRICES
0

100

200

300

400

I

1

1

1

1

1929

50

INDEX, 1935-39 = 100
100
150

200

250

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION
1929

-ACROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT.

SOURCES: VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES. SEE APPENDIX B,

Last year, on the average, more than 61 million workers had civilian
jobs, compared with almost 48 million in 1929. Both were good years for
employment. In 1952, however, the average individual worked fewer
hours—and produced more goods. From 1929 to 1952, the length of the
workweek for all types of activity dropped from about 48 to 40 hours, but
each worker turned out on the average 80 percent more goods and services.
This greater yield reflects more and better equipment, and higher skills,
than existed 25 years ago. Invention and business initiative have more
than kept up with the rise in the number of men and women seeking work,
and have made it possible for them to find better jobs.
While we have been producing more for consumers, we have at the same
time been adding to equipment on farms and in factories. In 1952, for
example, we spent about 26 billion dollars for machines and other kinds
of durable equipment, compared with a little more than 11 billion dollars
in 1929, both measured in 1952 prices.




CHART 2

NATIONAL OUTPUT AND LABOR INPUT
The expansion of production since 1929 has been accompanied by
rising trends in employment and productivity and a declining trend
in working hours.
I N D E X , 1929 =100

I N D E X , 1929 = 100

220

1 220

200

200
TOTAL OUTPUT OF
GOODS AND SERVICES-I/

180

180

160

160
OUTPUT PER
MAN-HOUR

140

140

120

120
/^X, NUMBER OF
EMPLOYED WORKERS

(00

100

80

80

I I
1929 30

I I
32

I

I
34

I

I
36

I

I
38

I I
40

! I
42

I I
44

I I
46

I I
48

I I
50

I I6o
52

•!/ GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1952 PRICES.
NOTE: B R O K E N LINES SHOW ESTIMATES B A S E D ON DATA WHICH ARE F R A G M E N T A R r BUT W H I C H INDICATE
APPROXIMATE TRENDS.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, AND COUNCIL OF
ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

Vast resource development projects and conservation programs have
been undertaken in the past quarter-century, some public, some private,
and many a mixture of the two. Public construction expenditures for flood
control, navigation improvements, agricultural land reclamation, hydroelectric power facilities, and soil and forest conservation have increased more
than 300 percent in real terms. Multiple-purpose development of the
Tennessee, Columbia, and other rivers has been far advanced. Huge additional amounts are being invested in atomic energy. Private mining, timber, and other concerns have increasingly adopted conservation practices,




and have invested heavily in research and development. Individual farmers, frequently aided by the Government, have greatly enlarged their investment in their own land. Production and consumption of nearly all raw
materials have increased since 1929. These developments have enormously enlarged the productive power of our factories and farms, helped to
power and equip the American home with the most modern conveniences,
and correspondingly lifted the standard of living.
The Nation's progress is shown also in greatly increased earnings and improved living standards. In 1929, average annual income after taxes was a
little more than $1,000 per capita, while last year the average was about
$1,500—again measured in 1952 prices. It should be noted that, while the
real buying power of individuals was rising, the population of the United
States increased by about 35 million. Our economy now provides much
more for many more people.
The greatly improved living standards which have been achieved during
the past quarter-century are evident in more tangible data than the number of dollars earned or spent.
In 1929, there were 23 million automobiles in use, and in 1952 there
were 44 million. In the same span of time, the number of homes with a
mechanical refrigerator increased from about 10 to 80 percent. The number with radios increased from 40 to 96 percent, and 40 percent now have
television sets. Compared with 10 percent in 1929, nearly 90 percent of
all farms are now electrified.
During the era as a whole, we have built 12 million new nonfarm homes,
most of them since World War II. Home ownership increased from 48
percent of all families in 1930 to 55 percent in 1950. Terms of housing
finance have improved greatly, bringing home ownership within the reach of
lower income groups, and also facilitating construction of apartments and
other houses for rent. In the blighted sections of cities, a hopeful number
of slum clearance and redevelopment projects both public and private have
been undertaken, though far from enough.
And the record has not been written in total quantities alone, whether of
dollars, automobiles, or houses. The products of our economy are now far
better distributed than they used to be. Adequate statistics do not go back
to 1929. But since 1935-36, the real incomes of families and single persons
in the lowest two-fifths of the income range have increased 90 percent, while
the increase in the top fifth has been about 40 percent. This improved distribution is not only a mark of social progress and increasing human contentment; it is also a vital underpinning of sustained and advancing general prosperity for all sectors of the economy.
Economic justice and the higher values
Improved and more widely available education, medical care, and economic security are among the cherished features of the American way of
life. So are the basic freedoms, full enjoyment of which depends upon




CHART 3

IMP ROVEMENT IN LIVING STANDARDS
SINCE 1929
CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES
PER CAPITA -^

FOOD CONSUMPTION
PER CAPITA

NDEX, 1929 = 100

C)

INDEX, 1929 = 100

50

100

150

1

0

1

50

100

1

150

1

1929

:

: • - :

1952

\:L.L.^'...:. :.:. :;i

"i

ELECTRIC POWER USE
PER RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER
NDEX, 1929 = 100

C)

100

200

300
i

PERCENT OF TOTAL HOMES
500 C)
50

400

t

OWNER -OCCUPIED HOMES ^

l

1

l

100

1

1929
1952

. '"""

!

1

HOMES WITH RADIOS &

PASSENGER CARS

PERCENT OF TOTAL HOMES

PER HUNDRED PERSONS

C)

50

100 C)

1

1929
1952

25

50

1

1

I

1
.-

-""I

1

j

U INDE< BASED ON EXPENDITURES IN 1952 PRICES.
•=•/ DATA ARE FOR 1930 AND I960.
*/ END OF YEAR DATA.
SOURCE S: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, EDISON ELECTRIC
INSTITUTE, AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

progressive removal of discriminatory practices in the market place and
elsewhere. These are higher values in the sense that they are abiding objectives of policy and action. But they also undergird the economic and
moral strength of the country. They provide the source of a strong,
healthy, and skilled labor force, and an imaginative and responsible management. They provide a motivation for economic growth.
Although the pursuit of these values during the past quarter-century has
been interrupted by depression, world-wide war, and the necessities of the
defense build-up, considerable headway has nonetheless been made.




Total educational expenditures, in constant prices, have about doubled
since 1929. Capital outlays for public schools, again in constant prices,
have gone up 63 percent in the same period. Teachers are better trained,
curriculums have improved, and schools are designed for more effective
learning.
Total per capita expenditures for health and medical services have nearly
doubled during this era, after adjusting for price change. Outlays for
hospital construction, both public and private, have risen about 83 percent.
There is one doctor for every 740 persons now, compared with one for every
800 in 1929. Expenditures for medical research mounted to nearly 200
million dollars in 1952. The quality of medical care has improved with the
development of new drugs, better techniques of surgery and hospital treatment, and the extension of preventive medicine.
It has been essential to do justice to those who have fought to defend
us against enemies. Since 1929, the number of veterans has increased
from 4.7 million to 19.7 million. Veterans and their families now comprise
40 percent of the total civilian population. Some 7.8 million veterans have
received education and training aid since World War II, and an additional
600,000 have received vocational rehabilitation training. Increasing numbers of Korean war veterans will be receiving similar help. Unemployment
insurance has been paid to about 9 million veterans. Farm and business
loans, and housing mortgage guarantees and loans, have also helped
veterans.
Progress in social security has been significant, with the advent in the
mid-1930's of old-age insurance, unemployment insurance, and new and
improved public assistance programs. The Federal old-age and survivors
insurance program covers 45 million persons, while Federal-State public
assistance is available for dependent children, the blind, needy old persons,
and the permanently and totally disabled. The Federal-State unemployment insurance system now covers about 35 million jobs.
The eventual elimination of discrimination based on race, religion,
economic status, or section of the country is a continuing objective of
national policy. Discrimination is in part economic in origin, and can
be reduced by economic measures. Throughout the past quarter-century,
particularly as part of the economic and social reforms of the thirties, great
though insufficient gains have been made.
Workers have been guaranteed the right to organize and bargain collectively. The Fair Labor Standards Act established the principle of minimum wages and maximum hours. Fair employment practices acts have
been passed in some 12 States.
Economic justice for American agriculture has advanced tremendously
since the period just before the great depression. Vast conservation programs, intensified agricultural research, loans and assistance to farm families, especially low income families, price supports to reduce instability, and
rural electrification have combined to improve rural life. Since 1929, per




capita farm income in constant dollars has increased about 80 percent.
The gain here has been relatively large, because the farmer had been
left so far behind during the uneven prosperity of the late 1920's.
Opportunities for business have also widened, particularly as a result
of the unprecedented period of prosperity since around 1940. There were
only a third as many business failures in 1952 as in 1929, even though the
number of business firms in operation has increased by one-third. In this
quarter-century, while wholesale prices rose 80 percent and consumers'
prices 55 percent, corporate profits rose more than 300 percent before taxes
and more than 100 percent after taxes.
Working conditions have benefited enormously under the joint impact
of union efforts, business policies of sharing productivity gains, and government programs. For factory workers with three dependents, the increase in average weekly take-home pay (after allowing for the taxes paid
by a family of this size) has been from $39 to about $63, measured in 1952
prices.
Reinforcements against economic fluctuations
During recent weeks, a variety of commentators far and wide have noted
the profoundly protective and stabilizing elements which have been built
into our economic system during the past quarter-century. There is now
a rather prevalent view that the danger of any economic setback getting out
of hand during the next few years is minimized by broader and fairer
distribution of income among individuals and economic groups; a more
progressive tax system which automatically adjusts in part to changes in
business conditions; a level of public expenditures which, while we all want
to see it lower as soon as world conditions permit, stabilizes demand
and stimulates private investment; unemployment compensation and the
rest of the social security system; farm price supports; a far more shockproof system of banks and securities exchanges; the greater firmness of
wage rates due in part to strong unions; and more enlightened business
practices with respect to pricing, marketing, collective bargaining, and
investment planning. And not the least of the stabilizing effects of these
programs is the increasing confidence in the maintenance of prosperity
which they inspire.
Much remains to be done
Despite these great gains, many of our domestic economic problems have
not been solved, some things should have been done better, many inadequacies still exist, and above all, the task of maintaining and advancing the
rate of progress and forging new tools to meet new needs is always with us.
In addition, while the current defense build-up is near its peak, the new
problem of America's role in the world economy presses for solution. This
problem will long endure, and it will call for many further changes in our
thought and action.




Here at home, the recent period of economic growth has been accompanied by periodic inflation. Such periods of inflation not only threaten
the continuance of growth but also prevent the benefits of growth from
being enjoyed equitably by all the people in all sectors of the economy.
We can still observe, despite unparalleled prosperity, deprivation of one
kind or another among American families to be counted in the millions.
We may face in the future, particularly when defense spending can safely
be reduced, more serious tests of our ability to avoid depression than those
which have occurred since World War II. And as we continue to build
safeguards against such a test, it would be imprudent to rely excessively
upon the stabilizing factors already in being which have been set forth
above. They are not of themselves sufficiently strong to check inflation
when it threatens, or to safeguard us from depression and maintain continuous prosperity and growth.
While much has been accomplished, much remains to be done.
The basic legislation which calls for this Economic Report—the Employment Act of 1946—is the framework within which we should strive to
develop the further improvement of our economic condition. In the remainder of this message, I shall endeavor to evaluate this framework and
to set within it some of the problems we face and some of the promises
that lie ahead if we meet these problems effectively.

Purpose and Performance Under the
Employment Act
Purpose of the Act
The Employment Act of 1946 is one of the most fundamental compacts
in domestic affairs which the people through their Government have made
during my tenure as President. It represents the refusal of Americans
in all pursuits—in business, labor, agriculture, and Government—to accept
recurrent depression as a way of life. It voices a profound conviction that
all of us—working together—can maintain and enlarge prosperity, not
only during or as an aftermath of war, but enduringly for all time.
The Act is more than an essay in wishful thinking. It represents the
closely reasoned conclusion of economic minds, both scholarly and practical, that its objectives are obtainable by sensible private and public policies
and can best be sought within the framework of our established political
and economic institutions.
There were historical roots for this endeavor. The lessons of the past had
been particularly compelling in the decade and a half which preceded
1946. These had been years of unprecedented contrast, so far as economic
abundance was concerned. On the one hand, there was the stark tragedy
of the early thirties, and then the seemingly boundless energies of the early
forties. The period had been rich in careful social experimentation and
legislative reform; the economic role and responsibilities of the Federal




Government had increased enormously. Many of the experiments had
been temporary in character, to meet the emergencies of the depression or
the extraordinary demands of war. But many of them were developed
and improved to become permanent additions to our economic and social
fabric.
Yet the Employment Act was not written in a spirit of conflict. It was
not focused on the interests of any one group, whether powerful or downtrodden, but was addressed explicitly to the general welfare. And to an
amazing degree, when one considers the thinking which it marked, it was
noncontroversial. The subcommittees of the Senate and the House which
skillfully ushered it into the legislative world worked to a large extent as
bipartisan teams, and the final bill commanded overwhelming majorities of
both parties in both houses of the Congress.
There are those who have suggested from time to time that, because the
Act was relatively noncontroversial, it cannot have been very consequential.
This is erroneous. Near unanimity, in this instance, was not a mark of the
unimportant or the hackneyed; it was evidence that a legislative proposal
of the greatest moment was extraordinarily well timed. It wrote into the
codes of the Nation a great new area of agreement about the essential functions and responsibilities of the Federal Government almost as soon as that
agreement existed.
It is likewise a mistake to underestimate the importance of the Employment Act, as some have done, because it did not set down a specific prescription of economic policies for solving future economic problems. The
decision of its framers in this respect was deliberate, and did not represent
simply an inability to get agreement on more technical or specific provisions. Instead, the decision was that such basic legislation should not
attempt to prejudge the exact character, causes, and remedies of all of the
future's general economic problems, but rather to define the general spirit
and provide the general method for meeting these problems as they arise.
With these problems in view, the Act has three specific purposes.
First, it is the purpose of the Act to achieve, within the Congress and
the Executive Branch, and also between private enterprise and all levels of
government, better economic policy coordination. In the thirties, and
again during World War II, the economic programs of the Government had
become increasingly diverse and complex, and any realistic appraisal indicated that they would remain so. The special pressures which were brought
to bear upon public economic policy-making had become more powerful,
more numerous, and more confusing.
But this growth of complexity had not been matched, especially within
the permanent institutions of the Government, by the development of adequate means for gauging whether our farm programs, developmental programs, international trade policies, tax policies, credit policies, business
regulatory policies, industrial relations law, and the rest, were consistent
with one another and fitted together into a sensible economic policy for the




over-all economy. In the thinking of Congressmen from particular sections
and on particular committees., and of leading administrators with specialized
responsibilities, the whole too often was lost in preoccupation with the
parts.
The governmental reforms in the Employment Act have sought to meet
this problem by strengthening the President's facilities for economic policy
coordination within the Executive Branch, by supplying the Congress with
a similar facility, and by providing in the Economic Report a regular method
for improved coordination between the two branches. Thus the Act meets
the problem squarely within the framework of our constitutional system of
separated powers. Instead of attempting to circumvent the system with a
hybrid agency which would be clearly responsible neither to the Congress
nor the President, it installs a mechanism intended to make the traditional
system work better. And it provides also, by requiring consultation with
business, farm, labor, consumer and other groups, for cooperation and
coordination between private and public economic thought and action.
Second, it is the purpose of the Employment Act—the one most widely
recognized at the time of its passage—to prevent depressions. As World
War II drew to a close, recollections of the shocking costs of the great depression were much sharper than they are today after a dozen years of
uninterrupted high prosperity.
The minds of most of us in 1946 were still deeply etched with the memory of the winter of 1932-33, when about 15 million American workers,
or about 30 percent of the total civilian labor force, had no jobs; when
industrial production was only half what it had been in 1929 and the total
output of the economy only about two-thirds; w7hen business was deep in
the red; when farm prices and incomes had dropped out of sight; and
when banks were collapsing by the hundreds. It has been calculated that
the depression cost us some 600 billion dollars of output, measured in 1952
prices, or 3J/2 times everything we produced in 1929.
The Employment Act stands as a pledge on the part of the people voiced
through their laws that never again shall any such sacrifice be laid on the
altar of "natural economic forces." In the bigger economy we now have,
a disaster of anywhere near the same proportions could mean some 20 millions of our workers walking the streets.
Moreover, the cost of another serious depression would not stop at our
own borders. What was becoming apparent in 1946 is now a reality: the
strength and stability of the whole free world depend on the avoidance of
economic collapse in this country.
Third, the Employment Act had still another clear purpose even more
profound and challenging than those of improving economic policy coordination and preventing depressions. It is one which carries beyond the
essentially negative and intermittent objective of counteracting slumps. It
is the positive resolution of a great people, not simply to avoid pitfalls, but
to maintain as a matter of continuing policy a full, bountiful, and growing




10

economy, for themselves, for their children, and as a standard and inspiration toward the freedom and welfare of all peoples—and to do this in full
peace no less than in limited war.
This is a purpose of which we must never lose track. The Act is not
meant simply for salvage operations; it does not set up a standby mechanism
to be brought onto the scene only on those extreme occasions when the
economy needs to be dredged out of a hole. It symbolizes the marshaling
of the forces of private and public policy in support of a full and growing
economy.
In such an economy, performance is not measured in the dimension of
employment alone; instead, a dynamic, growing productive potential enables us to provide a steady expansion of output as well as full employment.
In such an economy, expansion facilitates the spread of economic justice,
and the quality of the expansion is measured in terms of justice as well as
efficiency.
In such an economy, there is abundance and stability enough to permit
an increasing devotion of energies to the higher values. More and more
people, being able to take the needs of their stomachs for granted, can
devote increasing attention to the needs of their minds and hearts.
Performance to date under the Act
Such are the purposes of the Employment Act. And after 7 years, it may
be fairly said that we have made a start toward fulfilling these purposes.
The job of course has not been finished. Indeed, since the purposes are
perennially fresh, it will never be finished. But the start has been good.
The progress has been tangible in the matter of policy coordination.
These last 7 years have been extraordinarily eventful ones in the realm of
economic policy. We have negotiated a transition from major war to substantial peace with unprecedented economic success. We have experienced
a relatively peaceful period of restocking and retooling in the civilian economy, while at the same time bringing the United States' economic role in
international affairs into line with its newly expanded international responsibilities. And then, most recently, we have been executing the build-up of
a preparedness defense mobilization of a character which has no forerunner
in American history, and which has been managed in a fashion not to
weaken the civilian economy but rather to strengthen it.
I submit that in no previous period have the economic programs of Government shown so high a degree of internal consistency, or so clear a relationship to the needs of the over-all economy. This achievement I credit
in large measure to the existence of the Employment Act, to the facilities for
policy coordination with which it provides the President, and to the greater
concern for systematic and interrelated programming which the Act has inspired in most Executive Branch officials. And it has been accomplished
in a Government conducting economic programs far more extensive and
complex than ever before.
234197—53




2

11

Correspondingly, there has been greater coherence and clearer attention
to the needs of the total economy in the economic legislation of the Congress
within the last few years. Outstanding in this respect has been the tax legislation since the Korean outbreak, which has evidenced an unprecedented
sense of fiscal responsibility on the part of the Congress. And this was implemented by the alert and emphatic insistence of the Congressional Joint
Economic Committee^ immediately after the Korean outbreak, on the need
for a pay-as-we-go anti-inflationary tax program.
Beside the improvements in policy coordination which the Employment
Act has assisted in both the Legislative and Executive Branches, it has been
useful in reinforcing the channels for communication between them. It
would be foolish to deny that many difficulties in legislative-executive coordination have persisted. But these are a reflection of broad political problems
in our governmental process; they are no indictment of the mechanism of
the Employment Act itself. As the basic obstacles to legislative-executive
policy-making are progressively overcome, that mechanism will prove increasingly useful.
More commonly overlooked but equally significant, the machinery under
the Employment Act has helped to bring to private enterprise a better
understanding of the problems of Government, to bring to Government a
better understanding of the problems of private enterprise, and to help both
to integrate their actions more effectively for the benefit of the whole
economy. This is the most realistic way—the American way—to avoid
excessive centralization of authority. The continuous consultation among
the Council of Economic Advisers, other agencies concerned with economic affairs, and representatives of workers, farmers, businessmen, and
consumers has brought improved results over the years and should be
continued. It has helped greatly in the development of national economic
policies and in the preparation of these Economic Reports.
The Employment Act's second great purpose, that of preventing depression, has been served well since 1946. The Nation has thus far traversed
its first aftermath of a major war without a major depression. This record
as a whole cannot be attributed to the Employment Act. But at the very
least, the Act symbolizes the related operation of many public programs,
the longer-viewed character of business, labor, and agricultural decisionmaking, and the better coordination of private and public policies, which
have featured this period. And these things together have vastly assisted
in the maintenance of high prosperity.
In 1947 and again in 1948, reporting under the Employment Act was an
important device for calling the attention of the Congress and the Nation
to the inflationary danger then in process. It was pointed out that excessively rising prices, if unchecked, would ultimately result in an economic
downturn. Specific actions—both private and public—were suggested to
meet this threat. Where these actions were taken, they proved valuable.




12

To the extent they were not taken, in private action or in legislation, the
inflation was not sufficiently arrested.
Because inflation was not sufficiently arrested, the postwar economy
encountered its first recessionary test in 1949. When this occurred, the
various reports under the Employment Act measurably helped the Government and the business community to understand that episode and to meet
it successfully. In much the same fashion, the Council of Economic Advisers, in its current Economic Review, the Joint Economic Committee, and
other Government agencies are now laying foundations for successful transition to a more civilian-oriented economy in the years ahead.
And finally, there has been a strengthening in practice of the Employment Act's third great purpose, that of positive, continuing maintenance of
an economy operating at maximum—which means growing—levels of employment, production, and purchasing power. In some ways this has been
the most significant accomplishment under the Act, sometimes lost sight of
by those who believe that the Act has not yet been tested because we have
not had a depression to challenge its effectiveness.
The periodic reports under the Employment Act have helped to express
in a practical way the possibility and promise of an expanding economy.
In 1948, when there was some sentiment that employment and production were at abnormally high levels and that there must be a serious downturn before progress could be resumed, the reports under the Act pointed
out that an economy like ours must move forward to remain healthy. By
mid-1950, despite the slight recession of 1949, and before the Korean outbreak led to increasing defense outlays, the economy was registering levels
of production and employment higher than in the boom year 1948.
Immediately after the Korean outbreak, when there was some doubt as
to whether we could greatly accelerate our security efforts without imperiling the civilian economy or without great and prolonged shortages of
civilian goods, the work under the Employment Act was fundamental to
the program of over-all economic expansion which the Government
adopted. What has happened since is in some respects even more striking
than what happened during World War II. Starting with productive
resources not nearly so slack as they were in 1939, and without the extreme
pressures of total war, our national output has risen from about 285 billion dollars in 1948 (the peak before Korea) to an annual rate in excess of
350 billion dollars at the end of 1952, both measured in 1952 prices. The
difference between these two figures is far greater than the increase in total
security efforts, and consequently per capita civilian supplies and per capita
incomes after taxes and adjusted for price change are higher now than in
1948. This is a remarkable record. It reflects the practical application of
the philosophy of the Employment Act, and it opens up limitless prospects
for the years ahead if the same approach is maintained and further
improved.




CHART

4

TOTAL NATIONAL OUTPUT
In spite of the increase in expenditures for national security,
expenditures for civilian purposes are higher now than in 1948.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, 1952 PRICES*

400

400

•:•:•:• EXPENDITURES
*•••:•:• V-V:V.i;i---; FOR NATIONAL
;V/:;-.:v.-X;Vv:v.;:; SECURITY :••::

300 -

300

200 -

200

100

-

100

1948

1949

I960

1951

1952

* QUARTERLY DATA ARE AT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.
SOURCE: COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

While the details of action must change with the times, I believe it worthwhile now to set forth a few economic principles for the future—principles
arising out of experience, and already justified by what their application
has achieved.

Basic Economic Principles for the Future
(1) Full employment must be a constant objective of policy
Under the Employment Act, full employment means more than jobs.
It means full utilization of our natural resources, our technology and
science, our farms and factories, our business brains, and our labor skills.




The concept of full employment values ends as well as means; it values
leisure as well as work; it values self-development as well as dedication
to a common purpose; it values individual initiative as well as group cooperation. In the broadest sense, full employment means maximum opportunity under the American system of responsible freedom.
And it is a concept which must grow as our capacities grow. Full employment tomorrow is something different from full employment today.
The growth of opportunity, with a growing population and an expanding
technology, requires a constantly expanding economy. This is needed
to abolish poverty and to remove insecurity from substantial portions of
our population. It offers the prospect of transforming class or group conflict into cooperation and mutual trust, because the achievement of more
for all reduces the struggle of some to get more at the expense of others.
Although our dedication to full employment has made great strides
within recent memory, we cannot afford to be complacent. We cannot
assume that henceforth what needs to be done to promote the maintenance
of full employment will be done. None of us—regardless of party—should
let the idea of full employment degenerate into a slogan bandied about for
narrow political advantage. Like freedom, it needs to be guarded zealously
and translated into action on a continuing basis. Moreover, if we fail in
this, our very freedom may be placed in jeopardy.
The enemies of our free system say that, in the long run, we cannot
succeed in this task. They point to history and to the false conclusions
which Marx drew from the defects of nineteenth century industrialism.
They point also to the calamity of the great depression of the early thirties.
They argue that general economic insecurity must grow remorselessly in
our society, leading ultimately to collapse and revolution. These enemies
say that time and history are on their side. But history and time are on
our side if we use our opportunities wisely.
This does not mean that we know enough to avoid economic fluctuations
completely, or that we would want to even if we could. In a dynamic, free
economy, the consumer is sovereign. Business is always seeking to anticipate the nature and intensity of consumer demand. In response to anticipated or actual changes, the economy is marked by a ceaseless shifting of
resources from areas of lesser to areas of greater demand; existing industries are growing or contracting; new industries and products make their
appearance, requiring new skills; prices and employment are being accommodated to the ebb and flow of demand; investment decisions are adjusted
to changing conditions.
This process requires the flexibility which is so characteristic of our
economy. Some errors of anticipation are inevitable. The expansion of
capacity may appear temporarily excessive, inventories may have been overbought, and waves of excessive optimism and pessimism may appear in
the economy. These factors must lead to some fluctuations in the general
level of business. This is the price we pay for a dynamic economy, and it
it is not too high for what we gain.




15

But while some economic fluctuations may remain necessary or even
desirable, it does not follow that we should not try our best to maintain
full employment, or that we should wait until small recessions begin to
spiral before seeking to reverse their course or to prevent them from growing
into large depressions. Such a passive attitude is fraught with danger.
For all experience has taught us that, when the economy starts to roll down
hill, it becomes progressively more difficult to check the decline. It is far
easier, and a far more rewarding task, to maintain the momentum of a
growing economy than to reverse a downward spiral. Thus the essence
of sound economic policy is constant vigilance and prompt action. The
Employment Act is not an antidepression measure; it is a pro-prosperity
measure. It does not call for quiescence until hard times; it calls for daily
vigor, in the American tradition, to make tomorrow even better than today.
(2) Full employment requires the maintenance of economic balance
Expansion is vital, because our population is growing, the number of
those seeking jobs is growing, and their individual productivity is growing.
But expansion cannot continue smoothly unless it is based on a sound and
fair distribution of the increasing product. Our economy is built upon mass
markets. Unless each important sector receives a workable share of the expanding output, the expansion will come to an end because the market demand will be lacking. Growing capacity to produce requires growing
ability to buy.
I have already cited the great gains we have made in bringing about better balance in our economy during the past quarter century. But while
our economy now seems to be in fairly good balance, there are signs of
some trends in the opposite direction. It is none too early to note these.
While agriculture is highly prosperous, the most recent period has witnessed a relative inability of agriculture to join in the gains which other
groups have registered. Even in absolute terms, there has been for a year or
so an adverse trend in farm incomes. This may be looked upon with
favor by those who believe that the farmer's prices have been relatively too
high, or that he has received more than his fair share of the national income,
during recent years. But it will not be looked upon favorably by those who
know that, even at the peak, the farm population as a whole did not attain
real parity of income with other major sectors of the population. Nor will
it be looked upon with favor by those who realize from bitter experience that
any decline in relative farm prosperity is not a good omen for the economy
as a whole. This is a problem of economic balance which requires active
attention and far-reaching efforts.
A second area, in which we should strive for even better economic balance,
is in the wage structure. While the gains made by the strongly positioned
wage earners have undoubtedly tended to lift labor standards generally, and
while most of the working population has made real gains, there is now
need for relatively more stress upon helping those at the bottom of the wage
structure. This places a large responsibility upon public programs, not only




16

such programs as minimum wage laws, but also those which by developing
natural resources, facilitating private industrial growth, and improving the
level of education and health, raise the productivity of these types of workers.
There is also need for even better balance between the opportunities open
to large and to small business, through the further encouragement of competition and the strengthening of those laws designed to prevent unfair competition and to restrain monopoly; and also through more positive programs
to make the benefits of ample credit and full access to the new products of
science and research and invention available to business regardless of size or
financial power.
And finally, there is need to work toward even better economic balance
in and among the different geographical regions of the country, through
improved protection against discriminatory practices, and through Federal
programs designed toward the strengthening and further equalization of
opportunity for human and material development. Top priority on this
list, of course, should be accorded to the broader extension of adequate
health services, housing, and educational facilities, and to the further development of natural resources and industrial potentialities.
(3) Full employment requires planning ahead
While the Employment Act calls for an appraisal of recent economic
trends and foreseeable future trends, it places main emphasis upon future
needs and how these needs may best be satisfied. It imposes the responsibility to define what maximum levels of employment, production, and
purchasing power we should seek to attain in the year or years immediately
ahead. It requires also that we state the policies, both private and public,
best suited to reach these goals.
Thus the Act rejects the idea that we are the victims of unchangeable
economic laws, that we are powerless to do more than forecast what will
happen to us under the operation of such laws. Instead, the Act correctly
asserts that our economy within reasonable limits will be what we make
it, and that intelligent human action will shape our future.
In accord with this faith in human progress through human endeavor,
the reports under the Employment Act several years ago began to estimate
what levels of employment and production should be our goals for the
years ahead, taking into account the material and human resources at our
disposal. These estimates were then used to analyze what kind of purchasing power, what relative flows of income to investors and consumers,
to businessmen and workers and farmers, would be most conducive to the
achievement of these employment and production goals.
This was primarily an effort in economic education, and not a blueprint
for central planning in the manner of the totalitarian states. It was in the
American tradition of planning—which means the cooperative effort to
look ahead and to work together toward making the future better than the
present. The idea has been that, if our private and public policies are
geared to planning for economic growth, we can achieve this growth.




If businessmen and farmers plan their investment programs with the
realization that a steadily expanding economy will provide markets for
more food arid more industrial products, these regularized investment programs in themselves will contribute to a high and stable rate of growth.
If business and labor plan their price and wage policies to encourage the
balanced expansion of production and consumption, of jobs and markets,
then our economic growth can be steady.
And Government, because it is the most powerful single force in the
economy, has the clearest responsibility to plan its operations so that they
will make the greatest contribution in the long run to economic stability
and growth. Under current world conditions, this problem of Government
is complicated. Government must now give prime consideration to our
national security, which is even more vital than absolute economic stability
or a uniform rate of economic growth.
The more effectively all of these forces within the American economy
work together in this kind of planning for the future, the greater the likelihood that economic fluctuations will be ironed out and a steadier rate of
growth maintained. The less effectively this is done, for example if important groups in the economy assume that the traditional business cycle
is inevitable and conform their actions to this belief, the more difficult it
will be to maintain steady growth.
It is noteworthy that efforts to encourage this kind of action have met
with increasing response in recent months. Not only governmental agencies, but many planning organizations supported by business, and many
business organizations themselves, are now following this same approach
with hearty enthusiasm. They are studying future markets and how to
serve them. This is one of the most concrete signs of progress. But it is
only the first taste of what may be accomplished as this process continues
in the American tradition.
(4) Full employment requires responsible Government as well as responsible private enterprise
Private enterprise, under our free system, bears the major responsibility
for full employment. This report has already set forth the basic features
of that responsibility, and how much its exercise is contributing to the
well-being of the American people. The role of responsible Government,
while vital, is in a sense supplemental.
It is the duty of Government to help improve the environment in which
private enterprise works. In normal times, this means the minimum use
of direct control over materials, prices, and wages. As soon as we safely
can, in view of the world situation and our own increasing productive
ability, we should suspend operation of these controls. To aid in maintaining stability in the longer run, the Government should place principal
reliance upon the careful use of fiscal and credit policy, along with the wellestablished regulatory and protective programs.




18

But in addition to encouraging an environment favorable to enterprise
and exerting a stabilizing influence, responsible Government has an even
more general task. This is to enable the people to develop together those
resources which in their very nature cannot be developed otherwise. Public
spending, as determined by the Congress and other legislative bodies
throughout the Nation, represents a continuing determination by the
people as to what part of their total productive power they wish to devote
to the things which they must do together instead of doing separately.
While there should be true economy in public spending no less than in
private spending, it is obviously superficial to regard public spending as
unworthy by definition. Throughout our history, the American people
have recognized that their public programs represent a high order of
national priority, and are undertaken for this very reason. These services
under current conditions include defense, foreign aid, benefits to veterans,
social security, public education, and the like. And they include longterm resource developmental programs, aids to agriculture, aids to housing,
and other efforts which, while clearly desirable in themselves, are also necessary to improve and to support the functioning of the free enterprise system.
All of these programs, like those of private industry, should be geared
primarily to the long-run needs of the Nation. The pace and timing, however, are partly dependent upon changing conditions. For example, the
speed-up of our defense efforts has caused us to cut back some other programs to avoid undue strain. If and when we can relax our defense efforts,
we shall be able to push ahead with the other programs which serve the
long-term peaceful needs of the people.
Since public spending diverts resources from private use, except in times
of depression, the burden of this diversion is borne by the people whether or
not taxes are imposed. But taxation serves to impose the burden more
equitably, and in a manner least detrimental to the whole economy. For
otherwise, particularly when the economy is running at very high levels,
spending in excess of taxation aggravates inflation—the most unfair and
damaging way of imposing the burden. Under present conditions of very
high defense spending, we have made a good record of keeping close to a
balanced budget, although we should have done even better. In times of
very high prosperity but a lower level of defense spending, we should accumulate a budget surplus for the independently desirable purpose of reducing the large national debt.
If we should run into periods of declining economic activity, on the other
hand, we would expect some decline in revenues. But this should not
frighten us into cutting back those programs which the Nation needs, and
which in fact would help to cushion the decline and to restore full employment. If a substantial part of our productive resources were lying idle
because private enterprise could not utilize them, it would do good rather
than harm to utilize them through public action even though this occasioned
some deficit.




(5) Full employment can be maintained without inflation
It is not true that the goal of maintaining full employment must be sacrificed in order to avoid inflation. The postwar inflation was not a continuing process; most of it came in two major spurts. The first followed
shortly after the war, when controls were prematurely abandoned before
supply could come into balance with demand. The second took place in
late 1950 and early 1951, under the impact of the Korean outbreak followed
by the large-scale Chinese intervention.
The fact that these two inflationary spurts came under the peculiar conditions of an immediately postwar period or the first stages of preparation
for defense against the possibility of future war is no reason to neglect the
lessons of this experience. We live in a world where peace is neither
complete nor certain, and where changes in the international situation
could rapidly occur. It was a mistake to abandon controls too rapidly
in 1946, and we should not abandon them too rapidly now, although the
outlook for stability is better now than it was at that time. Similarly, we
would have been much better off if price and wage controls could have been
imposed more quickly after the Korean outbreak and especially after the
Chinese intervention in late 1950, instead of early in 1951. But we were
handicapped not only by the inadequacy of legislative authorization, but
also by the absence of a standby organization ready to cope with the first
wave of inflation. The sharp price increases between the Chinese attack
and early 1951 were a dramatic illustration of the importance of adequate
economic preparedness in a cold war world—a lesson we should not forget.
Nonetheless, this peculiar problem of dealing with near-war situations
should not be confused with the more general and enduring problem of
maintaining full employment without inflation. Since early 1951, despite
the pressure of the defense program, we have achieved a reasonably stable
price level while enjoying full employment, and the prospect is that we
will continue to do so this year. This does not mean that we have thus
far learned fully how to reconcile enduring full employment with adequate
price stability. Much more work needs to be done in this direction, in the
field of fiscal policy, monetary and credit policy, and other public policies
which are not limited to use in emergency periods. Even more important,
we must learn more about the value of individual and group self-restraints,
about the general economy and its interrelationships, and about those private price and wage policies which may contribute most to a stable and
growing economy.
But we should guard against the dangerous solution of trying to avoid
the problem of preventing inflation by abandoning the pursuit of full employment. Stable prices do not outweigh the disadvantages of a sluggish
or static economy; and downward-spiralling prices are certainly no blessing
in a declining economy.
While striving vigorously to avoid inflationary movements, we must realize that our primary purpose is full production and employment, and the




20

fair distribution of this abundance among all people in all groups. Price
policy, like all other economic policy, should be constantly tested against
these objectives; it should not be allowed to obscure them.
These comments apply to monetary policy. That policy can contribute
to economic stability. For example, during the inflationary period, as part
of a comprehensive program to combat inflation, I made recommendations
to the Congress which were not accepted to restrain inflationary bank credit
through changes in reserve requirements. More recently, some changes in
monetary policy have occurred, affecting bank credit, the bond market, and
interest rates. This is one weapon in the anti-inflation armory, but price
stability since early 1951 has been the product of many economic forces and
Government programs in the field of taxation, credit restraints, and material
and price-wage controls, and has resulted largely from increased production.
Monetary policy is a tool which must be used with great wisdom and
skill. It is the function of monetary policy to control the expansion of
credit, so that the total money supply will be commensurate with the needs
of the economy, avoiding on the one hand excessive credit creation which
might lead to speculative abuses, and avoiding on the other hand contractions in the money supply which would interfere with production, employment, and investment. A money supply which is in balance with the level of
economic activity, adequate credit at reasonable rates of interest, and, above
all, the distribution of the money supply on a fair and workable basis among
individuals and groups have been essential to our growing prosperity.
Just as a money supply which is redundant can have unfortunate inflationary consequences, so an inadequate supply of money, or of credit, can
push backward the businessman who must borrow to operate, the farmer
who traditionally depends upon credit to produce and market his crops, the
home owner who wants a decent house that he can afford to live in, and the
worker who is not willing to accept lower production and more unemployment in exchange for lower prices.
We must and can find ways to price stability which do not threaten to
bring on the very hardships they are intended to prevent. Excessively
tight money, which means higher cost of capital, may reduce prices, but it
does so by depressing productive efforts. The sound method to stabilize
prices is not to reduce incomes, but to expand productive effort and the output of goods.
(6) Full employment requires that group interests be reconciled with the
general interest
Big business, big labor, and big farm organizations are permanent parts
of the American economy. Few of us would change this if we could, for
much of the economy's dynamism and productiveness depends upon this
very circumstance. Nonetheless, thoughtful and continuing efforts are required to keep an economy of large groups from damaging conflicts of
interest.




21

There is the problem, first, of maintaining fair and peaceful bargaining
among the powerfully organized private groups. The Government can
help in this by protecting the development and encouraging the maintenance
of balanced bargaining power.
Beyond this, however, there is the problem of reconciling the interest of
particular groups with the general interest. The net bargains of the organized groups—as is sometimes the case, for example, with a "price-wage
spiral"—do not always add up to the public interest. Nor do they protect
the broad interest of weakly organized consumers.
Government intervention into such situations should proceed cautiously,
and be more inclined to wield the instruments of persuasion than those of
authority. Above all, the effort—in both public and private quarters—
should be to set the particular problem in an economy-wide framework.
It is essential, for instance, that the best available thinking of farmers and
farm experts be brought to bear on the farm policy problem. But this is
not enough; the needs of consumers, of industry, of national security—to
name but a few—must also be weighed carefully in the process of developing
a farm program. This, indeed, is the theme of the Employment Act, and
why utilization of its machinery is essential to the treatment of economic
matters affecting the whole Nation.
Finally, there is the fundamental problem of reconciling the effective
operation of an economy of large groups with the maintenance of effective
competition. For competition is the shield of the often inarticulate consumer; and by opening doors to new ideas, new enterprises, and new successes, it is a prime source of economic progress.
The Government has a long record of concern with this problem. That
concern must not be allowed to flag; the cutting edge of competitive markets must not be allowed to dull. At the same time, there is no need to
stimulate those speculative excesses of competition which stampede markets
into violent upward and downward fluctuations. Moreover, our action in
this sphere must not be the creature of stereotype. We must be quick to
recognize and encourage new forms of competition, so long as they work
to the advantage of the public.
(7) Full employment does not depend upon war
Some people say that full employment is possible only during war, or
only while meeting the shortages caused by war, or only while building
defenses to fight another war if it should come. This idea is fallacious,
although it may have some utility if it warns us to prepare for the new
economic problems of a more peaceful world.
The two depressions which we suffered after World War I came when
the country had no substantial economic policies to prevent them, and no
commitment to a policy of full employment.
It is true that the economic recovery between 1933 and the outbreak
of World War II in 1939, while very substantial, was not complete. This




22

proves how difficult it is to recover completely from a great depression once
it has been allowed to occur; it does not prove that prosperity cannot be
sustained once it is achieved. Moreover, the task between 1933 and 1939
was to achieve recovery and reform at the same time, which is a peculiarly
difficult undertaking which we should never again be faced with in the
same degree. The real test of the economic reforms then enacted came,
not during the period when they were first put into effect, but in the period
following World War II. It is against this later history that we must test
the adequacy of these measures to avoid depression and maintain prosperity without war.
After World War II, the level of defense spending was reduced by an
annual rate of well over a hundred billion dollars, expressed in the price
level of today. While there were important war-created backlogs, the support for the very high levels of economic activity which prevailed from 1946
to mid-1950 was increasingly found in the satisfaction of the peacetime
needs of our industries and our people. I have already cited the high
significance of the quick rebound of the economy from the minor fluctuation of 1949, a rebound which was fully manifest before the new defense
program was foreseeable. By mid-1950, only a relatively small portion of
our economic activity could be attributed to the shortages created during
World War II, and out of our total annual output of about 310 billion
dollars (measured in the prices of today) only about 20 billion dollars, or
less than 7 percent, was being devoted to national defense and related
international purposes. This was prosperity without war.
Since our response to the communist aggression in mid-1950, our prosperity has of course been accompanied and stimulated by high and rising
defense spending. But it is erroneous to say that this spending has been
the main prop for our economy, because taxes have been correspondingly
increased so that the defense program thus far has been on a pay-as-we-go
basis and consequently has not added the amount of inflationary stimulus
which would otherwise have been the case. In this respect, the situation
is very different from that during World War II, when only about half the
cost of the war was being paid out of taxes. It should also be noted that
defense spending draws resources away from production for civilian use;
and in this sense, the increase in civilian supplies since mid-1950 has not
been because of defense spending but despite it. We have not only been
paying as we go for the defense program measured by taxes; we have also
been paying for it as we go measured by the expansion of production.
Despite this vastly increased production, which has exceeded the expansion of the defense program, full employment has been maintained during
recent months when a decreasing portion of our total national output has
gone to defense spending and an increasing portion has been supported by
civilian demand despite very high taxation. This trend is now continuing
and, according to the accompanying appraisal by the Council of Economic




Advisers, it is likely to continue throughout 1953. Here we have a strong
indication, once again, that prosperity need not depend upon war.
The reductions in defense spending in the years ahead, no matter how
estimated, will be only a fraction of the reductions which we took in our
stride after World War II. Meanwhile, we must continue to improve
further our economic knowledge and understanding, and maintain and
advance those policies which have stood so well the test of critical times.
If we do this—and only if we do this—nothing can be more certain in
human affairs than that the American people will increasingly enjoy the
blessings of prosperity, supported not by unfavorable world conditions but
rather by the essential strength and soundness of our own economy.

The Promise Ahead
The past illustrates the wisdom of adhering to the principles which have
just been outlined. The future will reward us well for so doing.
The potential for further growth and improvement in the American
economy, even over the short span of the next 10 years, is challenging—
in production, in living standards, in correction of inequities, and in stable
and more satisfying jobs. In addition, the opportunity and necessity for
economic development in other countries of the free world represent a
vastly important new frontier. With all of this, we need to sustain our
national security lest opportunity be denied us altogether.
New frontiers of economic growth
Ten years from now, a labor force of 76 to 80 million, working more
effectively with better tools but somewhat fewer hours per week, could
produce annually about 475-500 billion dollars worth of goods and services—measured in today's prices. This is about 40 percent above the present level, and represents an average increase of slightly over 3 percent a
year.
The consumer portion of total production could by then come to about
340-350 billion dollars. This would be about $2,000 for every man, woman, and child in the country, or about 40 percent more than each person
received in 1952. Over the next 10 years, we should be able to raise the
average income of all American families correspondingly.
With a gross national product of about 475-500 billion dollars, well over
40 billion dollars could be spent for new nonfarm plant and equipment;
15 billion or better for new housing; more than 15 billion on schools, highways, hospitals, resources development projects, and other public works.
Investment in American agriculture could be substantially larger than the
1952 level of 5.5 billion dollars.
Growth in certain industries, such as plastics, man-made fibers, and electronics, undoubtedly will continue to far outrun average growth. Machinery and electrical lines will have to expand steadily, along with the basic




24

services of transport and electric power. Better housing, more and better
automobiles, and a whole range of new or improved fixtures for the home,
are well within reach over the next decade. A steady improvement in the
American diet will take place.
We shall run into some difficulties. Certain raw materials, especially
metals, may become scarcer and more costly. The base of natural resources
will wear thinner. Consumption expenditures will have to expand persistently, to provide adequate markets for business.
But with intelligent and timely adjustment of private and public policies,
to serve a fully employed and active economy, we can during the next
decade reach the goals set forth above.
New frontiers of economic justice
The promise ahead is more than reaching certain levels of employment,
production, and income. It also involves the further improved distribution
of the benefits of economic growth, and special care for those who are less
fortunately situated.
Despite great progress in raising income levels and distributing these increases in a manner favorable to low and middle income groups, there are
still many American families whose incomes are inadequate. In 1951,
one-quarter of all families had less than $2,000 of spendable money income;
40 percent had less than $3,000. Some of these families have home-produced fuel and food which raise living standards. Some are aged couples,
or other families with substantial assets to draw on; some are young single
persons whose needs are less. But the picture does not justify complacency.
The median liquid asset holding, excluding currency, for the under-$2,000
income group is less than $10; and about one-third have debts.
The problem of low income families is no longer caused by general
unemployment, or generally substandard wages, or very low prices for
farm products. The problem centers in families with special disabilities:
racial minority families, broken families, families with sickness, families
where there is lack of sufficient training and education for the principal
wage earner, and farm families on substandard farms. Unskilled and
service workers had an average family income of only $2,320 in 1951.
We must press forward to reduce these disabilities, and to care for them
when they are unavoidable.
It is feasible within a decade to raise all the families whose incomes
are now below $4,000 annually to that level (measured in present-day
prices), plus providing all the new families with this much income, in a
full employment economy. We should set this as a target for a basic American standard of living for all within a decade. In fact, this would require
less than half the total gain in personal incomes that we can achieve,
leaving more than half for raising still further the incomes of families
already above this basic standard.




In the mid-1930's, it was no exaggeration to speak of one-third of a
Nation ill-fed, ill-clad, and ill-housed. Since then, the one-third has been
reduced to one-fifth, or maybe less, on the old standards.
But as our power to produce increases, our standards and goals rightly
increase also. The job ahead of us remains large. About one-fourth of
our nonfarm dwelling units and a much higher percentage of our farm
housing are substandard. Many families still suffer from malnutrition.
The amounts spent in recent years for schools and hospitals have been
far less, as a percent of total national production, than was spent in
1939. Living conditions in large sections of our cities are distressing, calling
for vast slum clearance and redevelopment effort.
Despite much progress in social security since the real beginning of
the program in 1935, important gaps remain. Farmers are not covered
by old-age insurance. Some 5 million wage and salary workers are still
outside the unemployment insurance program. Welfare assistance is not
adequate to meet the requirements of many disabled people, uninsured old
people, and their dependents. About half of our families find difficulty in
meeting the cost of essential medical care.
Standards of adequacy change with the times. What is enough in a
250-billion-dollar economy is not enough in a 350-billion-dollar economy,
and will be still less than enough in a 400- or 500-billion-dollar economy.
For example, old-age insurance has not only been insufficiently adjusted for
changes in the price level; it has not been brought into line with the fact
that the economy of today and tomorrow can afford a higher standard
of living among the old than the economy of yesterday. In our longrange programs, we should provide for growth as the whole economy grows.
This will have economic as well as social benefits. For if the millions of
our people who are beyond working age should be unable to join in the
demand for more and better products, the total market would not be
adequate to support our expanding productive power. What we do in
these fields should not be regarded as measures necessary to save a weak
economy from disaster. Instead, we should scale these efforts to what
a strong and expanding economy can and should accomplish.
New frontiers of world development
The international responsibilities of the United States are carried out
in part through its political and moral influence, and in part through the
use of its vast economic strength. The deployment of much of its economic
force abroad, in the form of military and economic aid, may appear to
be at the expense of lifting living standards at home.
If there be any conflict between these two purposes^ it does not permit
the choice of one course to the exclusion of the other. Should the United
States reduce sharply or prematurely the military and economic aid which
is doing so much to strengthen the free world, this country might be forced
to abandon the domestic gains which it plans for the future. For if commu-




nism should gain abroad, we would have to become an armed fortress at terrific cost. The prerequisite of a free, strong, and prosperous America is full
participation in the effort to create strength and prosperity throughout the
free world.
In short, the free world cannot be permanently peaceful until the free
world makes further progress toward full and more productive employment—toward release from the burden of the underemployment of its potential resources. Prosperity, like peace, is indivisible, and in our pursuit
of a full employment policy at home we must never lose sight of this supremely important truth.
Hence our concern with the economic development of other free countries. This is especially true of the economically less developed countries
and areas of the free world, where the provision of capital equipment and
managerial and labor skills is a prerequisite to speeded up economic growth
and improved living standards. As the momentum of industrial and agricultural growth gathers in these less developed areas, incomes will increase,
and they will buy and sell more in other markets. As the level of world
trade increases, the benefits to us will involve increased supplies of many
raw materials, including critically needed strategic metals. We must import to live; and we must import more if we want to export at high and rising levels. We must work with other free nations to remove trade restrictions, and to make more effective the sound policy of reciprocal trade. We
must not reduce aid so quickly as to undermine the improving foundations
for trade.
America is now confronted with the challenge to make its fair contribution
toward world peace and security. Happy will be the day when we can
rise to the nobler challenge of participating more fully in the advancement of
world prosperity. This may be our most significant contribution to human
betterment in the second half of the twentieth century.
HARRY S. TRUMAN
JANUARY 14, 1953.

234197—53




3

27




The Annual Economic
Review




January 1953

A Report to the President
By the

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,
Washington, D. C., January 12, 1953.
The PRESIDENT:
SIR: The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report, the
Annual Economic Review: January 1953, in accordance with section
4 (c) (2) of the Employment Act of 1946.
The members of the Council, in this our final Review, desire to acknowledge the fine assistance and cooperation received during its preparation
from economists on the Council's staff, including Karl M. Arndt, Benjamin
Caplan, John C. Davis, Rosalie K. Epstein, Joseph L. Fisher, Catherine A.
Heitzman, Frances M. James, John P. Lewis, David W. Lusher, Walter S.
Salant, Charles Schultze, Mary W. Smelker, Penelope Hartland Thunberg,
Haskell P. Wald. We desire also to cite the conscientious hard work performed by our administrative and clerical staff, including Mayme Burnett,
Catherine T. Connors, Margaret F. Foley, Robert A. Garlock, Margaret E.
Gooding, Cathryn S. Inman, Nina A. Kleger, Joseph W. McKenney,
Mary M. Millspaugh, Isabelle M. Peterson, Dorothy L. Reid, Odelia C.
Scales, Gertrude Shepard, Royal E. Shepard, Mabel Skrock. And without
listing their names, we shall never forget the contribution made by earlier
Council members and staff during the vital formative years of the Council
and its work. Finally, our work would not have been possible without the
constant cooperation of other governmental agencies and personnel upon
whom we must draw heavily for data and critical evaluation; or without
the eager and continuous interest of those representatives of business, labor,
farm, and consumer groups with whom we have consulted at frequent intervals during more than 6 years.
Respectfully,




Chairman.

iW

31




Contents
Page

CHAPTER I. DEVELOPMENTS DURING 1952
The economy in general
Production
Employment and unemployment
Economic stability
Trends within major sectors
Consumers
Business
Government
International developments
CHAPTER II. NEAR-TERM PROSPECTS AND POLICIES
The outlook
Government expenditures and the fiscal outlook
Private domestic investment
Net foreign investment
Personal income and consumption
Supplies
Prices
The composite near-term outlook
Near-term policy issues
Defense mobilization policy
Tax policy
International trade policy
CHAPTER III. LONGER-RUN NEEDS AND PROSPECTS
Introduction
Employment and production needs, 1953-55
The labor force
Hours of work
Productivity
Total needed production
Amplifying comment by Mr. Keyserling
Demand prospects for the longer run
Prime assumptions
Government expenditures
Private domestic investment
Net foreign investment
Consumer expenditures
The composite longer-run outlook
Separate note by Mr. Clark




33

35
35
36
37
39
48
48
51
58
65
70
70
70
71
72
72
72
74
75
76
76
77
79
80
80
82
82
83
84
84
85
88
88
89
91
97
97
102
102

Page

CHAPTER IV. NEEDED POLICIES FOR SUSTAINED PROSPERITY. . . . . . .
The general nature of the adjustment problem
The size of the problem
The primacy of private adjustments
The needed emphasis on consumption
Workable lines of policy
Private price and wage policies
Private investment policies.
Credit policy
Tax policy
Social security programs and other transfer payments
Agricultural policies
Housing policies
Public developmental and service programs
Two matters of emphasis
Anticipatory adjustments
The responsibility of business
CHAPTER V. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENTS
Introduction
The size of the problem
The nature of the problem
United States demand for imports
Factors operating to curtail United States imports
Foreign supply of exportable goods
Industrialized areas
Food and raw material producing areas
Conclusions regarding international economic policy
APPENDIXES
A. Statistical tables relating to the Nation's Economic Accounts.
B. Statistical tables relating to employment, production, and
purchasing power
INDEX




34

104
104
104
107
108
113
113
116
118
119
122
124
125
127
133
133
134
136
136
138
141
142
142
145
145
148
149
153
153
163
214

Chapter 1.

Developments During 1952
THE ECONOMY IN GENERAL

T THE BEGINNING of 1952, it appeared likely to most observers that
the security program, showing accelerated strength throughout the
year and making heavier inroads into the stocks of scarce materials, would
absorb all the expected gain in national output and curtail the production
of consumers5 durable goods and private construction.
By the second quarter of the year, however, these expectations had begun
to waver, and by the fourth quarter they had been overturned. The
economy was prosperous as it entered the year, and it was even more prosperous as it moved into 1953; but during the year the expansive factors of
production and employment shifted from public demand toward private
demand and were adequate to sustain both types of demand without strain.
Meanwhile, a remarkable degree of price stability was achieved. Neither
Government spending for security nor private demand expanded enough
to force a rise in the general level of prices in the face of powerful general
measures such as high taxation to restrain inflation, while wage and price
controls served to curb increases in those selected areas where inflationary
pressures were greatest.
In the first 6 months of the year, increasing Federal outlays for defense,
together with a small rise in spending by consumers and a slight gain in
other Government expenditures, more than offset a fall in net foreign investment and the drop in domestic private investment which resulted from a
sharp decline in the rate of inventory accumulation. The combined effect
of these changes (seasonally adjusted rates) was a moderate growth in
total production. These developments were mainly a repetition of the
second half of 1951, except that there seemed to be a few more soft spots in
the economy, and the possibility of deflation began to receive some of the
attention long given to inflation. (See appendix table B-l.)
In the second half, output expanded considerably faster than during the
first half, despite the fact that national security expenditures were only
slightly higher. There was a general rise in private demand, particularly
in the last few months. Beginning in the third quarter, there was a marked
upturn in the rate of net additions to business inventories, and in the fourth
quarter, consumer expenditures made the best gain of the year. Net foreign
investment continued to fall, and there was little change during the period
as a whole in the rate of gross private domestic investment other than in
inventories.

A




35

It is noteworthy that the accelerated rise in total demand during the
last months of 1952 did not result in a new rise in prices. The increases in
demand were heaviest in consumer goods areas where there had been some
underutilization of productive capacity. Moreover, the rapid growth in
productive capacity during the previous 2 years had improved the general
ability of the economy to meet increases in spending.
CHART 5

CHANGES IN TOTAL PRODUCTION
Total output of goods and services, measured in either current
or constant prices, expanded about one-third as much in 1952
as in the preceding year.
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT
0
+5
+10

4-15

+ 20

CURRENT PRICES
I960 TO 1951
1951 TO 1952

1952 PRICES

1950 TO 1951
1951 TO 1952

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

Production
The output of goods and services during 1952 totaled 345 billion dollars,
compared with 329 billion during 1951, a rise of 16 billion or about 5 percent. When allowance is made for price changes, this represents an expansion of about 2J/2 percent in physical output, much less than in 1951. (See
chart 5 and appendix table B-2.) In 1951, production had responded
to strong pressure from private expenditures only during the early months
of the year, and to strong pressure from Government demand throughout.
In contrast, additional demands were less in 1952, although private demand
showed increasing vigor toward the end of the year while public demand
was rising very little.
The monthly index of industrial production, which is more sensitive
than .gross national product to changes in the business weather, averaged




CHART 6

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
Industrial production declined after the first quarter of 1952,
and reached a low during July largely as a result of the steel
strike. But it rebounded rapidly during the fall and ended the
year about 5 percent above the 1951 high reached in April.
INDEX, 1935-39 = 100*

INDEX, 1935-39 = 100*

DURABLE
MANUFACTURES

300

^^^

300
\.

250

250

200

2OO

150

150

100

100
J F M A M J J A S O N D

J F M A M J J A S O N D
1950

1951

1952

* ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION.

SOURCE' BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.

219 percent during 1952 (1935-39= 100), or about the same as during the
previous year, but varied considerably from month to month. (See chart
6 and appendix table B-17.) During the first quarter, the index averaged
moderately higher than in the fourth quarter of 1951, but by July it had
been pulled down 13 percent, as a work stoppage in the petroleum industry
was followed by an 8-week shutdown in steel and iron ore production
which in time curtailed the output of durable manufactures, notably
automobiles. Industrial production rebounded rapidly in the third quarter
to reach a new postwar high in September, as the output of steel soared
to new record rates. During the fourth quarter, the index was pushed up
further by generally increased production, which reflected in large part the
rise in consumer and inventory buying.
Employment and unemployment
Total civilian employment was estimated at 61.5 million in December
1952, or 500,000 more than in December 1951. Comparing the 2 years
as a whole, the civilian labor force averaged about 63.0 million in 1952,
or approximately the same as in 1951. (See chart 7 and appendix table




37

CHART 7

CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE
The civilian labor force averaged about the same in 1952 as in
the preceding year, due to the build-up in the armed forces.
Nonagricultural employment was at its highest recorded level,
while employment in agriculture continued its long-run decline.
MILLIONS OF PERSONS*
70

MILLIONS OF PERSONS*
70

I960
CIVILIAN
LABOR FORCE

1952'
60

60

NONAGRICULTURAL
EMPLOYMENT

50

-

—

50

_l_L_Jo

nH_L_L

10

10
^1950
AGRICULTURAL
EMPLOYMENT

_ UNEMPLOYMENT

*I4 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COM MERGE.




xx

*^*»*

* * * *

B-12.) Civilian employment rose only slightly from a monthly average
of 61.0 million in 1951 to about 61.3 million in 1952. At the same time,
unemployment fell from 1.9 million in 1951 to 1.7 million, or 2.7 percent
of the total civilian labor force, in 1952, the lowest annual average since
World War II.
Over the year, there were small increases in the number of government
civilian workers (Federal, State, and local) and those engaged in finance
and service activities. Agricultural employment between 1951 and 1952
continued its long-term decline, and there was a fairly sizable drop in
mining. • Employment in manufacturing industries was somewhat irregular. A rather steady drop during the first 7 months of the year was followed
by a sharp rise during the last 5 months, concentrated largely in industries
producing durable goods. The monthly average for manufacturing was 16
million in 1952, about the same as in 1951. (See appendix table B-13.)
Despite the reduction in unemployment generally, the labor supply situation in most of the Nation's major production and employment centers was
riot markedly different at the end of 1952 than it was a year before, although
some tightening appeared to have developed. During the past year, the
labor force was on the whole adequate to meet defense and civilian needs,
although there were shortages in some areas and surpluses in others. In
November, the Department of Labor reported 4 labor shortage areas and
18 areas with substantial labor surplus.
Work stoppages. Man-days of idleness directly due to work stoppages
during 1952 were more than double the 1951 total. More time was lost
because of strikes than in any other year since 1946. The brief strike in the
steel industry in April and May, and the prolonged one in June and July,
directly involved about 560,000 workers, and accounted for more than
two-fifths of the total time lost. Among other important work stoppages
were those in petroleum refining and natural gas, railroads, carpet and
rug manufacturing, coal mining, West Coast lumber, the manufacturing of
farm machinery, the telephone and telegraph industries, and construction.
Economic stability
Although the economy encountered many changing currents during 1952,
it demonstrated a remarkable degree of over-all stability. It was marked
by selective inflationary pressures, mainly in the markets most directly
affected by the defense program, and with considerable easiness in the
markets for consumer goods. The high degree of general stability was
aided by general and direct restraints which limited inflationary pressures
in some markets, while the interaction of supply and demand held down
prices or reduced them in others.
Prices. Consumers' prices varied little from month to month, and in
November were only 1.3 percent higher than a year before. (See chart 8
and appendix table B-24.) In contrast, during 1951 there had been
a rise of nearly 6 percent. Much of the rise in 1952 is accounted for
by the upward creep of rents, the cost of utilities and services, and




39

CHART 8

CONSUMERS' PRICES
Consumers 1 prices rose 1.3 percent during the year. Food
prices reached a peak in August, and then dropped during the
rest of the year. Apparel prices were steady during the last
few months, after falling earlier. Rents increased throughout
the year.
INDEX, 1935-39*100
250

INDEX, 1935-39 »100
250

225 -

- 225

200 -

- 200

125

-

i i i

I960

1951

1952

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

the prices of items in the miscellaneous category of consumers' goods and
services. Retail food prices, after rising to a high in August, accompanied
wholesale prices of farm products and processed foods in moving downward, but averaged somewhat higher than in 1951. The prices of apparel
and house furnishings declined. In general, the consumers' prices which
continued to advance during the year were those for rents and consumer
services, for which there are no counterparts in the wholesale index. (See
chart 10.)
The monthly index of wholesale prices was about S1^ percent lower in
December than a year earlier. (See chart 9 and appendix table B-23.)
In the first half of the year, the average decline was a continuation of the
downward wholesale price trend during the last 3 quarters of 1951, and reflected reductions in most major commodity categories. In the second half
of the year, however, it reflected only the sharp drops in farm prices and, as
a result, in prices of processed foods. Industrial wholesale prices showed
some disposition to stabilize.
It was increasingly apparent that the readjustment of the price structure
during the 15 months after March 1951 had eliminated the worst interprice




40

CHART 9

WHOLESALE PRICES
The decline in wholesale prices during the first half of the
year occurred in all major categories. From September on,
wholesale prices declined as a result of substantial drops
in farm and food prices.
INDEX, 1947-49 = 100

INDEX, 1947-49=100

- 130

- 120

100

I960

1952

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

distortions caused by the violent waves of post-Korean inflation, and had reestablished roughly the relationships among raw material/ industrial, and
retail prices that prevailed in early 1950. The most dramatic aspect of
this readjustment had been the prolonged rapid decline of the prices of
imported raw materials from their early post-Korean peaks.
Wages. Wages continued to increase slowly in 1952. Average hourly
earnings for the Nation's factory workers reached a new peak of $1.715 in
November, 5J/2 percent above the year before. Excluding overtime, average hourly earnings of manufacturing workers increased about 4 percent
during the same period. During 1951 and 1952, workers in manufacturing
industries producing durable goods enjoyed the greater gains, although the
differential was considerably larger in 1952. Wages of all other major
groups of workers also increased during the past year. (See chart 11 and
appendix table B-15.)
Only a small part of the wage increases during the past year was dissipated
by higher living costs. But when account is taken of taxes as well as prices,
the wage gains of workers were moderate. Thus, the take-home pay, that
is, net spendable average weekly earnings of factory workers with 3 dependents, adjusted for price changes, increased only about $2.50 during




CHART 10

COMPARISON OF WHOLESALE
AND CONSUMERS' PRICES
The divergence in the movements of the wholesale and
consumers' price indexes since the Korean outbreak has
resulted mainly from price c h a n g e s in items which are
not c o m m o n to both indexes.
INDEX, JUNE 1950=100
120

INDEX, JUNE 1950 = 100

120

TOTAL INDEXES
•-WHOLESALE

115

— 115

MO

— I 10

105

100
115

110

-

105 —

100

ALL OTHER COMPONENTS^
WHOLESALE

— 105

100
J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

S

1952
ZJ- THIS WHOLESALE GROUP INCLUDES RAW AND SEMIMANUFACTURED MATERIALS AND PRODUCERS' EQUIPMENT;
THE RETAIL, RENTS AND SERVICES.

SOURCE: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM, BASED ON DATA
FROM DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.




42

O

N

D

1952, compared with an increase in gross average weekly earnings of
approximately $5. (See appendix table B-16.)
Price and wage control. Early in 1952, the Office of Price Stabilization adopted a policy of suspending price controls in those areas where
market conditions permitted. Among the commodities affected by this
suspension of ceilings were fats and oils, hides and skins, leather, shoes,
cotton, wool, synthetic fibers, textile fabrics, most clothing items, soft floor
coverings, and radios and television sets. In addition, Congress in renewing
the Defense Production Act in mid-1952 exempted fruits and vegetables
from price control. At the present time, ceilings apply to about 70 percent
of the wholesale price index, compared with over 90 percent early last
year, and about 50 percent of the consumers' price index, compared with
about 65 percent when price control was established. About one-quarter of
the portion of the consumers' price index under control, however, involves
commodities for which, under the law, ceilings automatically rise if farm
parity prices rise.
Exceptional price ceiling increases were made in 1952: in the case of
steel after the strike; in the case of copper after the foreign price of copper
rose from 2 7 5/2 to 36*/2 cents a pound when the agreement with the Chilean
Government was not renewed; and in the case of aluminum to increase
supplies. Otherwise, requests for price increases to offset cost increases were
approved or rejected in accordance with OPS' regular relief standards. The
increases granted were mainly in defense-related areas where, in the absence
of controls, it seems clear that prices would have gone even higher.
Since the establishment of the Wage Stabilization Board, approximately
121,000 applications have been submitted by employers wishing to alter,
in one respect or another, the compensation of their employees. Until the
Wage Stabilization Board became inoperative on December 6, as a result
of the resignation of the industry members, this tripartite Board had
examined and acted on 109,000 of these cases, of which 83.3 percent were
approved, while 16.7 percent were modified or denied.
The result of wage stabilization—which is not, and cannot be, an absolute
and enduring wage freeze—is shown by some comparisons of wage movements. During 1950, adjusted for shifts in employment, average hourly
earnings of production and related workers in manufacturing, as calculated by the Wage Stabilization Board, rose at an average rate of 0.7 percent
a month. During the second half of 1950, following the Korean outbreak
but prior to the start of the wage stabilization program, the rate of increase
was even higher—0.9 percent a month. From the date of the establishment of the program in January 1951 until November 1952, average hourly
earnings advanced at the rate of only 0.4 percent a month.
One outcome of the steel case, which was settled after a prolonged
strike, was that in renewing the Defense Production Act the Congress replaced the original Wage Stabilization Board with a statutory board having more limited authority. Under the revised Act, the disputes function
234197—53




-4

43

CHART 11

!CHANGES

IN HOURLY EARNINGS IN
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
DURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES
PERCENTAGE CHANGE, 1951 TO 1952 1/
+1
+2
+3
+4

c)

i

I

i

+5

-t-6

+7

+8

+9

i

i

i

1

i

1

» PRIMARY METALS

•'

ORDNANCE

-HO

1

i

j

,

I

TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT;

'

INSTRUMENTS

.

FABRICATED METALS

J

I

1

MISCELLANEOUS!

1

: i MACHINERY (EXCEPT ELECTRICAL);
STONE, CLAY, AND GLASS
i ELECTRICAL MACHINERY

'1

FURNITURE
LUMBER

1

NONDURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES
PERCENTAGE C.HANGE, 1951 TO 1952 U
(}
+1
-1-2
+3
+4

i

i

i

1

+5

+6

+7

+8

+9

1

1

I

1

1

RUBBER
PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS

.

PAPER
CHEMICALS

.

1

PRINTING AND PUBLISHING
. FOOD
j LEATHER
TOTAL NONDURABLE GOoSI
TOBACCO ;

J
1

1

I/

TEXTILE-MILL PRODUCTS

APPAREL

PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM NOVEMBER 1951 TO NOVEMBER 1952.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.




44

1

-HO

1

i

Was separated from the wage stabilization authority. More recently, the
Wage Stabilization Board, in acting on a request by the coal industry for
an increase of $1.90 a day, which had been agreed to by the union and the
operators, approved only $1.50 a day. After a thorough review of the
case, the President directed the Economic Stabilization Agency to approve
ths original agreement. This decision was made because it was felt that
no steps should be taken at that time which might lead to an industry-wide
work stoppage, or that might make it impossible to turn over a going stabilization program to the incoming administration. Following this, the Chairman of the Wage Stabilization Board and the industry members resigned.
Because of difficulties in securing new industry members, the Economic
Stabilization Administrator designated the four public members to serve
as a Wage Stabilization Committee. Thus, efforts to reduce the backlog
of 12,000 cases can continue.
Bank credit and money supply. It had been thought early in 1952 that
the banking system might have to supply a considerable amount of new
money to the Government to finance a substantial cash deficit. There was
also reason to believe that the volume of private borrowing from commercial
banks would level off, partly because of restraints on civilian production.
However, private borrowing once again, as in the preceding year, was the
principal agent of expansion of bank credit and the money supply.
Commercial bank loans increased more than 6.5 billion dollars or about 12
percent during 1952, compared with 5.5 billion or 11 percent during 1951.
Consumer loans accounted for a much higher percent of the rise in 1952.
Commercial bank holdings of U. S. Government securities, which had deTABLE 1. Factors changing the volume of the privately held money supply

1

[Billions of dollars]

1952

1951
Factor

Loans of commercial and mutual savings
banks ,
__
_
Securities of U. S. Government held by banking system 3
._
Securities of corporations and State and local
governments held by commercial and mutual savings banks
Treasury deposits * .
Monetary gold stock
Other factors, net
Net change in privately held deposits
fl
and currency
_
__ _.

IQKA

total

Total

First
half

+10.8

+7.2

+3.5

+3.8

+8.0

+2.1

+5.9

—3.9

+1.2

-2.1

+3.4

+2.4

—1.5

+3.9

4- 2 1
+.4
—1.7
—.6

+1 2
-.2
(8)
-.3

+4
-3.0
-1.0

+ 7
+2.8
+.9
—.3

+1 4
—1.7
+.5
-1.8

+1 1
-2.6
+.7
-.9

+.3
+.9
-.2
-.9

+7.1

+9.1

-2.2

+11.3

+8.8

—1.1

+9.9

1

(8)

Second Total 2
half

First
half

Second
half 2

Includes State and local government deposits.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data; second half by Council of Economic Advisers.
a Includes commercial banks, mutual savings banks, Federal Reserve banks, and the Postal Savings
System.
* A decrease in Treasury deposits is denoted by a positive figure, and an increase by a negative figure.
In8 the case of other specific factors, the reverse is true.
Less than 50 million dollars.
9
See appendix table B-29 for aggregate money supply and its components.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. Signs preceding figures in columns
indicate effect on the money supply.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




45

creased 0.5 billion dollars or less than 1 percent in 1951, rose by 2 billion or
3 percent in 1952, and in both years investments in corporate securities
and State and local government issues expanded about 1 billion dollars
or 7 percent. (See appendix table B-28.)
In both 1951 and 1952, an expansion of Federal Reserve bank credit
was one of the factors which supplied commercial banks with reserves.
During 1952, borrowing by member banks provided the greater amount of
reserves from this source, while in the previous year the net increase in
Federal Reserve bank holdings of U. S. Government securities was more
important. The average of Federal Reserve discounts in 1952 was more
than one and one-half times greater than in 1951, but Federal Reserve holdings of Government obligations averaged about the same. (See chart 12.)
The privately held money supply (including the bank deposits of State
and local governments) expanded almost 9 billion dollars or about 5 percent in 1952, nearly as much as in the previous year. The principal factor
in the rise last year was the growth in bank loans, with the increase in
investments next in importance. The agents which tended to expand the
CHART 12

BANK LOANS AND INVESTMENTS
Totol bonk loons rose at about the same rate in 1952 as in 1951.
Investments expanded more rapidly than a year earlier, primarily
because of increased holdings of U. S. Government securities.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
150

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
150
TOTAL
, (ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS)

125

100 —

100

INVESTMENT IN
U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES

75

50

75

>--

50

25

25

m0
J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D

1950

1951
END OF MONTH

SOURCES^ BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SVSTEM AND
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




46

1952

money held in the non-Government sector of the economy were only partly
offset by the higher level of Treasury deposits, and by other factors. Also,
in 1952, a large part of the growth in the private money supply was in time
deposits, about 4.2 billion dollars compared with slightly more than 2
billion in 1951. Demand deposits and currency, the active portion of the
money supply, increased in substantially smaller volume in 1952 than in 1951.
Credit policy. During 1952, the credit controls which had been imposed
under authority of the Defense Production Act were terminated or suspended. These actions, whether on the initiative of the administrative
agencies concerned or in compliance with new legislation, reflected the
moderate character of consumer demand relative to supply, the increasing
availability of many scarce materials for civilian production, and the growing
belief that the return of serious inflationary pressures had at least been
postponed.
In May, the voluntary program of credit restraint was placed on a standby basis, and the regulations applying to consumer instalment credit were
suspended. In June, the terms of residential mortgage loans were eased.
Then, at midyear, in renewing the Defense Production Act the Congress
withdrew or extensively limited the power to use these controls. The new
legislation provided that, in the future, voluntary campaigns to restrain
credit could no longer be organized under the authority of the Act. It also
withdrew authority to place controls on instalment credit or other forms of
consumer borrowing, and restricted the power to impose significant restrictions on residential mortgage credit to periods when the seasonally adjusted
annual rate of housing starts, based on the activity of the preceding 3
months, exceeds 1.2 million units.
In accordance with the last provision, mortgage credit restrictions, with
minor exceptions, were removed in September, since the adjusted index of
new starts during June-August fell below the stipulated rate. The restrictions on loans for commercial construction were lifted at the same time.
During 1952, the Federal Reserve System, through purchases of Government securities in the open market, partly offset the drain on bank reserves
resulting from a growth of currency in circulation. Additional bank reserves required to support expansion of bank deposits resulting from increases in bank credit were obtained by banks through borrowing from the
Federal Reserve Banks. No change was made in the Federal Reserve
Banks' discount rates during the year.
Materials policies. In addition to the effects of price, wage, and credit
policies during the year, an important contribution to stability was made
by materials allocations and controls. These measures, primarily directed
to the facilitation of essential production, have helped to expand our total
economic strength, the most fundamental approach in the longer run to
overcoming inflation. These measures have also assisted in the stabilization of scarce commodity prices by limiting the effective demand for such




47

commodities. Under the current mobilization program, early 1952 was the
peak period of materials controls restraint. The improving materials supply
situation was reflected in increased allocations for the second half of 1952
and the first half of 1953.
Moreover, important as all of these specific anti-inflationary programs
were in 1952, probably the greatest supports to stability were those provided
by the Nation's continued rapid expansion of productive capacity and by
the maintenance of the high tax rates enacted in 1950 and 1951.
TRENDS WITHIN MAJOR SECTORS
Consumers
Income. Personal income was about 14 billion dollars or 5^2 percent
higher in 1952 than in 1951. Most of the 1952 rise occurred in the last
months of the year as labor income, which had been creeping up gradually,
began to climb sharply because of higher wages, increasing employment,
and longer working hours. (See chart 13 and appendix tables B-6 and
B-7.)
Net income of farm proprietors was slightly lower than in 1951, with
prices falling and costs still rising. The level of net farm income in 1952
was substantially higher than in 1949-50, but well below 1948. Income
from other businesses and the professions rose in 1952, but less rapidly than
in the year before. Dividends, rents, interest, and transfer payments also
increased.
Total personal earnings expanded about 6 percent during the year,
but personal taxes went up at a faster rate, so that spendable income
gained about 10 billion dollars or 4 percent. In constant prices, this rise in
disposable personal income represents an increase in per capita purchasing
power from $1,486 to $1,496 (1952 prices), a level exceeded only in 1944.
(See appendix table B-10.)
Spending and saving. In 1952, for the second consecutive year, the
average rate of personal saving was exceptionally high, measured by either
prewar or earlier postwar experience. Consumer expenditures were about
8 billion dollars greater in 1952 than in 1951, an amount sufficiently less
than the expansion in disposable income to lift the percent of income saved
from 7.6 percent to approximately 8 percent. (See appendix tables B-4
and B-9.)
During the first half of the year, consumer buying (at seasonally adjusted
annual rates) increased faster than relatively stable disposable income.
The rate of saving dropped from about 9 percent in the second half of 1951,
a postwar record, to less than 7.5 percent in the first half of 1952. (See
chart 14.) During the third quarter, however, the rate of consumption expenditures remained steady, despite a considerable rise in earnings; and the
saving ratio climbed most of the way back to the peak level reached in 1951.
The third-quarter calm in the consumer markets was partly the result of
the steel strike, which by sharply reducing the output of automobiles contributed to a reduction in sales.




CHART 13

PERSONAL INCOME
In 1952, personal income increased about half as much as in
1951, with most of the rise occurring in the second half of
the year. All major components except farm proprietors'income
participated in the increase.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

300

300

250 -

- 250

200

— 200

150

- 150

100

— 100

1950

1952

* SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.

SOURCE:

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.

Compared with the third quarter, the fourth quarter was one of vigorous
activity. Disposable income, seasonally adjusted, registered the largest
quarter-to-quarter rise since the last 3 months of 1950, and spending the
greatest gain since the first 3 months of 1951. The saving ratio, however,
remained virtually unchanged from the previous quarter.
The markets for durable goods felt the greatest impact of the fourthquarter growth in consumer spending, as might be expected from the jump
in automobile production following the end of the steel shutdown. But
the increased buying was by no means limited to automobiles or to the
relatively small number of other commodities which had been scarce. Nor
can it be directly accounted for simply by the suspension of instalment credit




49

CHART 14

PERSONAL INCOME, SPENDING,
AND SAVING
Personal income and consumption expenditures expanded significantly in the fourth quarter of 1952, after 3 quarters of
moderate growth. Saving for the year as a whole continued at
a high level.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

300

300

250 -

250

200

- 200

150 -

- 150

100 -

100

10 -

AS PERCENT-OF DISPOSABLE INCOME

5 -

- 5

"SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES-.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




5°

controls early in May, which appeared to have given a fillip primarily to
automobile sales. The rise in buying during the last months of 1952 embraced nondurable goods as well as durables, textiles as well as cars. It was
felt throughout the Nation and in the markets for all major classes of
commodities.
Housing. Expenditures for new residential construction in 1952, which
had seemed to many analysts likely to fall from the 1951 level under the
combined pressure of materials shortages, credit restrictions, tightness in
the market for Government-insured or guaranteed mortgage loans, and a
decline in the rate of new marriages, slightly exceeded the 1951 total of 11
billion dollars. New nonfarm housing starts, which had been just below 1.1
million units in 1951, were just above that level in 1952. (See appendix
tablesB-18andB-19.)
Personal debt. Although consumer and residential mortage debt continued to increase, the former much more rapidly than in 1951, saving in
the form of liquid and other financial assets also remained at a very high
rate. The high rate of liquid saving, and the steadiness of the price level,
probably resulted in some net improvement in the financial position of consumers in 1952 despite the rapid rise in debt.
Consumer credit outstanding expanded more than 3 billion dollars or
about 15 percent, compared with about 0.5 billion or 2.7 percent in 1951,
and 3.3 billion or 19.6 percent in 1950. Practically all of the 1952 expansion was in instalment credit, which began to climb largely in connection with purchases of automobiles after the suspension of the consumer
credit regulations in May. (See chart 15 and appendix table B-27.)
It is estimated that in 1952 residential mortgage debt on 1- to 4-family
nonfarm houses expanded 7 billion dollars or 14 percent, to reach a total
of 59 billion. The dollar increase was about the same as in 1951, but
about 10 percent lower than the increase in 1950.
Business
As is apparent from the general production and employment data already
cited, 1952 was a good year for business. The first half of the year was much
like the last part of 1951. But the story of the second half of 1952 was quite
different. It began quietly enough, but it ended with a display of activity
which raised sales and incomes for the year as a whole above the levels in
the last half of 1951 without causing significant upward pressures on prices.
This rise was associated mainly with a pick-up in inventory buying and with
a substantial increase in retail sales, particularly of durables. (See appendix
tables B-21 and B-22.)
Inventories and sales. Beginning in the third quarter of 1951, the rate of
business inventoiy accumulation declined, as businessmen attempted to bring
over-plentiful stocks into line with sales volume. By mid-1952, sellers of
such diverse commodities as textiles, apparel, autos, and home appliances
appeared to have completed the process of paring down the excess inven-




51

CHART 15

CONSUMER CREDIT
Consumer credit outstanding declined seasonally in the first
quarter of 1952, and then climbed in each succeeding month.
Most of the expansion was in instalment credit, reflecting
in part the rapid rise in loans on automobiles which followed
the suspension of consumer credit restrictions early in May.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
25

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
25

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J

I960

1951

J A S 0 N 0

1952

END OF MONTH
SOURCES: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

tories which they had accumulated in the preceding months. Indeed, in
some areas retail inventories had probably dipped below the levels required
by sales, while business purchasing agents were pursuing a policy of handto-mouth ordering.
During the third quarter, a change became evident as nonfarm inventories were accumulated at an annual rate of 3 billion dollars. Since
there was some decline in inventories of steel during this quarter, the
rate of accumulation of nonsteel items exceeded 3 billion dollars. Most
nondurable goods industries and the nonsteel-using segments of durable
goods industries shared in this rise. However, business sales to ultimate
consumers did not rise in line with inventories; production and shipment of
producers' durables and automobiles fell, largely as a result of the steel
strike. But as the final quarter of the year got under way, metal-using
firms had already completed in most cases a remarkable recovery. Production and sales of automobiles, appliances, apparel, and almost all types
of commodities expanded considerably. At the same time, inventories con-




tinued the more rapid climb begun earlier, while government purchases of
goods and services rose moderately.
Earnings. Business earnings reflected the change in the pattern of general economic activity. Corporate profits before taxes in the first half of
1952 were slightly above the levels to which they had fallen in the latter
part of 1951. Rising costs in relation to prices, and lagging sales volume,
joined with continued increases in depreciation allowances to prevent a
more substantial improvement. During the third quarter of the year, profits
before taxes remained approximately unchanged. Considering, however,
the sharp drop in third-quarter profits of auto manufacturers and many steel
producers and fabricators, the maintenance of over-all profit levels meant
that many firms not affected by the steel strike improved their profit positions
noticeably. (See appendix tables B-34 through B-38.)
The rapid rise in business activity during the closing months of the year
showed up in substantially higher profits. (See appendix table B-34.)
The rise in profits was not due, however, to any general rise in price levels,
although in some areas higher profits reflected price increases permitted
by the Office of Price Stabilization under its relief standards. And in other
areas they reflected lower prices of raw materials. Profits after taxes in
1952 averaged about the same as in the second half of 1951, but well below
the level of 1951 as a whole.
Investment. During 1952, gross private domestic investment was about
7 billion dollars lower than in 1951. (See chart 16 and appendix table B-5.)
All of this decline was due to a drop in the rate of inventory accumulation from over 10 billion dollars in 1951 to 2 billion in 1952. Investment in fixed capital actually rose during the year by about 1 billion dollars.
New construction, both residential and other, remained relatively constant
in 1952, while producers' durable equipment rose by 1 billion. Investment expenditures for nonfarm producers' plant and equipment rose
during the first half of the year to an annual rate of 31 billion dollars,
3 percent more than it had been in the final half of 1951. In the third
quarter of 1952, however, delays in shipments of producers' durables and
slower rates of progress on construction projects, under the impact of the
steel strike, caused investment outlays by business to decline moderately.
The quick recovery of steel operations and equipment deliveries made
possible an increase in expenditures for nonfarm plant and equipment in
the fourth quarter to a new record level.
The largest increases in investment during 1952 were made by manufacturing industries, which added 1.3 billion dollars to their expenditures.
(See appendix table B-20.) This new investment was fairly evenly distributed between manufacturers of durable and nondurable goods. In
nonmanufacturing, only public utilities showed increased plant and equipment expenditures for the year as a whole, with mining, transportation,
and commercial firms showing a decline. Beginning in the fourth quarter
of 1951, and until the third quarter of 1952, expenditures for plant and




53

equipment by the commercial, communication, and construction group of
industries declined, responding to restrictions on the use of steel, aluminum,
and copper. The final quarter of 1952 found these firms once again increasing their expenditures.
TABLE 2. Changes in business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1951 to 1952
IPercentage
change,
1951 to 1952

Industry
All industries* total

+2 0

Selected manufacturing industries:
Primary iron and steel
Primary nonferrous metals
_.
Electrical machinery and equipment
Machinery except electrical
Motor vehicles and equipment
Transportation equipment excluding motor vehicles
Chemicals a n d allied products.
_ _ _
Petroleum arid coal products

__ _ _ ___

__ _

+28.9
+81.2
+8.4
+13.0
+10.1
+17.6
+17.5
+23 8

+2 7

Public utilities
L Sources: Department of Commerce and Securities and Exchange Commission.

One of the important factors influencing the heavy investment program
in 1952 was the Government's policy of allowing accelerated tax amortization for defense or defense-supporting types of investment. Since Korea,
investment programs amounting to 25 billion dollars have been aided in
this manner, about 60 percent of this total being subject to accelerated
amortization for tax purposes. It is estimated that during 1952 approximately 10 billion dollars in facilities were put in place under this program.
Table 2 lists industries showing the most significant increases in plant
and equipment expenditures.
As 1952 drew to a close, most industries increased investment expenditures, and civilian industries increased their relative share in the total. A
few of the defense-supporting industries cut back moderately, reflecting
the substantial expansion accomplished since 1950. The combination of
increased allotments, immediate or prospective, of metals for less essential
uses and the beginning of a decline in accelerated amortization-type investments was partly responsible for this changing pattern.
Business financing. Business borrowing from commercial banks expanded about 1.8 billion dollars or 7 percent during 1952, compared with
4 billion or 18 percent during the previous year. A breakdown by halfyears reveals that business loans increased 1.7 billion dollars during the
first half of 1951, but declined 0.6 billion during the first half of 1952.
During the second half of each year, which includes the period of seasonal
expansion, business borrowing rose—but somewhat more rapidly in 1952
than in 1951. (See appendix table B-28.)
The contraseasonal rise of commercial and industrial loans in the first 6
months of 1951 was in large measure due to the build-up of inventories.
The somewhat greater expansion in the second half of 1952 than in




54

CHART

16

BUSINESS INVESTMENT
The increase in business investment during the second half of
1952 was due largely 1o a rise in the rate of inventory accumulation. Expenditures for producers' durable equipment were at
record levels for the year as a whole.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

70

70

60

60

50

50

TOTAL GROSS PRIVATE
DOMESTIC INVESTMENT

40

40

PRODUCERS* DURABLE
EQUIPMENT

30

30

\

20

20

NEW CONSTRUCTION

\

10

10
\

NET CHANGE IN
BUSINESS INVENTORIES

J

-10
2

3

4

I960
*

I
2

-10
3

1951

4

2
3
1952

4

SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

the previous year reflected the higher rate of inventory building and the
increased tempo of consumer buying. Loans to wholesalers and retailers
were greater than in the comparable period of 1951, and borrowing by
manufacturers of textiles declined slightly compared to the very sharp drop
the year before. Sales finance companies, which had reduced their bank
debt in 1951, increased it substantially in the second half of 1952. On the
other hand, there was a sharp falling off in the rate of increase in loans to
manufacturers of metals and metal products and the public utility and transportation industries—activities generally considered to be defense-related.
Corporations increased bank loans in 1952 at a much less rapid rate
than in the previous year, but they floated a record volume of new securi-




55

ties. Outstanding bank loans and mortgages of corporations increased 1.5
billion dollars in 1952 compared with 5 billion in 195k, while net new security issues, which totaled 7 billion dollars in 1952, exceeded the previous
high reached the year before by 9 percent. The relatively greater importance of long-term external financing last year reflected the fact that
corporate outlays for plant and equipment were also running at a new
high, while net investment in inventories was negligible in contrast with
inventory expansion of more than 10 billion dollars in 1951. The total
volume of corporate funds available from retained earnings and depreciation allowances was about the same in both years. (See appendix tables
B-ll and B-39 and chart 17.)
CHART 17

SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS
Internal sources of corporate funds totaled about the same in
1952 as in 1951, while funds from external sources were considerably less. The large decline in corporate inventory
accumulation was the greatest change in uses of funds.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
10
15

20

SOURCES
RETAINED
EARNINGS

DEPRECIATION
RESERVES

OTHER SOURCES
(EXTERNAL)

USES
PLANT AND
EQUIPMENT
OUTLAYS

CHANGE IN
INVENTORIES

13

OTHER USES

_L/ PROFITS ESTIMATES FOR THIRD AND FOURTH QUARTERS 1952 BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.
NOTE

EXCLUDES FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA (EXCEPT AS NOTED).




25

Developments in selected industries. The improvement in the level of
business activity, although fairly general, was especially noteworthy in some
industries. Table 3 compares the sales of a few of these industries with
total business sales.
TABLE 3. Retail sales, total and selected groups
[Millions of dollars, seasonally adjusted]

Total retail
sales

Period

1952: January.
February
March .
April
May
_
June
July
August
- _
September 1
October l 1
November

_--_'__.

-

1,968

13, 154
13 406
13, 020
13 348
13, 838
14, 000

_ . . ._

2 147
1,938
2 148
2,505
2,407

13 648
13, 343
13, 558
14, 187
13, 991

_

._

Motor vehicle Household
and other
appliance
automotive
and radio
stores
dealers

2 102
1,758
2,129
2 494
2,444

Apparel
stores

310
310

291
274
294
318

871
836
823
854
848
910

308
297
310
304
315

876
889
865
925
870

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
Source: Department of Commerce.

The first half of 1952 found the textile industry still in the doldrums.
Just before midyear., a gradual improvement set in and it continued
throughout the rest of 1952. Retail inventories of apparel, and in turn producers5 inventories of textiles, had been reduced throughout the latter
part of 1951 and early 1952, and some retailers and textile product manufacturers found themselves understocked as sales began to rise.
Prices, production, and employment in the industry responded to the
increase in sales. On the other hand, a sizable cotton crop, sharply reduced exports of cotton, large capacity for producing rayon, and the absence
of large-scale military buying of wool kept raw material prices from rising.
The end of 1952 found the textile industry in a much improved position.
The automotive industry also showed fluctuation of considerable magnitude during the year. Reduced from the peaks of late 1950 and early 1951
by materials restrictions, credit controls, and moderate consumer demand,
automotive production and sales in the early part of 1952 were at good but
not record levels. Producers took advantage of available price increases to
advance average prices about 5 percent. While buyers accepted these increases during the spring, there were some fears of market softening until
the steel strike cut sharply into production. Production fell from 394,000
cars in May of 1952 to 160,000 in July, and as a result inventories and sales
of cars at the distributor level fell off.
The comeback was equally rapid. By September, production reached
441,000 cars, retail sales were increasing rapidly, automakers were pressing
for greater allotments of metals, and looking forward to further improvement in sales throughout 1953. During the second half of 1952, they did
not apply for further ceiling price increases which were available under




57

price control standards, and in some instances they reduced slightly the
prices of 1953 models.
Agricultural output for 1952 is estimated at a record level, 44 percent
above the 1935-39 average and 3/2 percent larger than in 1951. (See
appendix table B-l 7.) Production records were realized despite drought in
large areas and a shrinking farm labor force. Indicated food production
was up 4 percent from 1951, a large part of this gain being due to the big
wheat crop, some of which went into reserve stocks. Cattle marketings
rose substantially in the latter part of the year.
With the large volume of marketings, prices received by farmers in 1952
averaged almost 5 percent lower than in 1951, with rather marked declines
in the latter part of the year. For 1952 as a whole, lower average prices
for livestock products were only partly offset by slightly higher average
prices for crops. Prices paid by farmers averaged about 2 percent above
the level of 1951 and, with the reduction in prices received for their
products, the parity ratio dropped from 107 percent in 1951 to 101 percent
for 1952 as a whole. In December, the ratio was 96. (See appendix
table B-25.)
Government
The flow of goods and services to the government sector of the economy
was almost one-fourth higher in 1952 than in 1951. This flow accounted
for 22 percent of the gross national product in 1952, compared with 19
percent in 1951 and 14 percent in the period immediately preceding the
Korean outbreak. More than four-fifths of the increase in governmental
purchases in 1952 was attributable to the major national security programs.
The next largest increase was in purchases of goods and services by State
and local governments. (See appendix table B-l.)
Governmental cash revenues also increased in 1952, in absolute amounts
and in relation to the gross national product. However, for the Federal
Government as well as the State and local governments, the rise in receipts
fell somewhat short of the advance in expenditures. The cash deficit for
all governmental units combined was 3.1 billion dollars, divided about
equally between the Federal Government and State-local governments.
(See chart 18 and appendix table B-33.)
Federal fiscal operations. The results of Federal fiscal operations, as
shown in the conventional budget, are summarized in table 4. Expenditures totaled 71.4 billion dollars in the calendar year 1952, and receipts
65.5 billion. The budget deficit of 5.8 billion dollars compares with a
deficit of 3.4 billion in 1951. The sources of financing the deficit are
indicated in table 4.
The public debt expanded from 259.4 billion dollars at the end of 1951
to 267.4 billion at the close of last year. Almost half of the increase of 8.0
billion dollars in public debt issues was taken up by the Government
investment accounts which held 45.9 billion dollars of Federal securities
at the year-end. (See appendix table B-30.)




58

CHART 18

GOVERNMENT CASH RECEIPTS FROM
AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC
In 1952, cash payments rose more than cash receipts, resulting
ln
smalLcash deficits for both the Federal and the State and
local governments.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

70

70

60

60
FEDERAL CASH
PAYMENTS

50

50

40

40

30

30

STATE AND LOCAL
CASH PAYMENTS

20

20

STATE AND LOCAL
CASH RECEIPTS

10

I0

+ 10

(MAGNIFIED

-HO

SCALE)

TOTAL GOVERNMENT
SURPLUS

r

+5

TOTAL GOVERNMENT
DEFICIT

-5
1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

CALENDAR YEARS
SOURCES: TREASURY DEPARTMENT, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, AND COUNCIL OF
ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

234197—53—5




59

1952

TABLE 4. Summary of Federal fiscal operations
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year 1952
ICalen- Calendar
dar
year
year
Total First Second
1950
1951
half
half

Item

Budget accounts:
Expenditures
Net receipts »

„

.

_

_

_

_

_

_

All investors __
.. .
Net increase (— ) or decrease in General Fund balance
Miscellaneous *
.
Total sources of financing

71.4
65.5

34.9
38.3

-.4

-3.4

-5.8

3.5

3.4
_ n

3.8
4.2

2.2
-2.5

1.6
6.7

'.4
.4

2.7
-.1
.7

8.0
-1.8
-.4

-.3
-2.7
-.5

8.3
.9
.1

3.4

5.8

-3.5

9.3

256.7

.

Sources of financing:
Net increase or decrease (— ) in public debt held by:
Government agencies and trust accounts
Other investors
_ .

56.8
63.5

.4

Deficit (— ) to befinanced,or surplus

38.3
37.8

259.4
4.3

267.4
6.1

259.1
7.0

267.4
6.1

(2)

36.5
27.2
-9.3

Addendum
Public debt, end of period *._ ~
General Fund balance, end of period

_

4.2

i Gross receipts less appropriations to the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and
refunds of receipts.
» Leys than 50 million dollars.
* Net excess of receipts over expenditures and investments of trust accounts, other transactions, and
clearing account.
4
Public debt excludes guaranteed obligations, which total less than 50 million dollars.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Daily Treasury Statement, Treasury Department.

The impact of Federal fiscal operations on the current flow of private
income and purchasing power is shown more clearly when the conventional budget accounts are adjusted to a consolidated cash basis. Two
broad types of adjustments are involved: first, the elimination of noncash
transactions, such as interest accruals on outstanding U. S. savings bonds,
interest on securities held by the trust accounts, and transfers to the trust
accounts; and second, the merging of the budget accounts with the trust
and miscellaneous accounts. The result of these adjustments is a consolidated statement of all cash receipts from and payments to the public, apart
from sales and redemptions of Government securities. (See appendix tables
A-6 and A-7 for a statistical reconciliation of the conventional budget and
consolidated cash figures.)
As shown in table 5, both receipts and expenditures are higher on a cash
than on a budget basis. The difference, however, is considerably larger
in the case of receipts, chiefly because the substantial tax collections for the
social security funds are much in excess of expenditures therefrom. The
cash deficit of the Federal Government was 1.6 billion dollars in 1952, or
4.2 billion less than the deficit in the conventional budget. There were
cash surpluses in both 1950 and 1951, although the conventional budget
showed deficits during these years.
Expenditures for national security. The major national security programs (including military services, international security and foreign rela-




60

TABLE 5. Federal receipts and expenditures: Conventional budget and consolidated cash
statement
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year 1952
Calendar Calendar
year 1950 year 1951

Accounting basis

Conventional budget:
Receipts _
Expenditures

Total i

65.5
71.4

First
half

Surplus or deficit (—)

-3.4

42.4
42.0

59/3
58.0

71.4
73.0

41.3
35.6

.4

Cash surplus or deficit ( — )

53.5
56.8

-.4

_.

27.2
36.5

38.3
34.9

37.8
38.3

Consolidated cash statement:
Receipts
Expenditures

Second
half i

1.2

-1.6

5.6

-5.8

-9.3

3.5

30.1
37.4
-7.3

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Treasury Department.

tions, atomic energy, promotion of defense production and economic
stabilization, civil defense, and merchant marine activities) accounted for 71
percent of total budget expenditures in calendar year 1952. In the preceding year they were 65 percent of the total. Although national security
expenditures rose from 37.1 billion dollars in 1951 to 51.0 billion in 1952,
all of the growth occurred in the first half of the.year. (See chart 19.)
The data given in table 6 show that during the second half of the year these
expenditures were about 800 million dollars higher than in the first half.
TABLE 6. Federal budget expenditures by major classes
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year 1952

Calendar Calendar
year
year
1951
1950

Total i

38.3

56.8

71.4

34.9

18.5

37.1

51.0

25.1

25.9

13.3
4.0
.6
.5
•2

31.0
3.5
1.3
.7
.5

45.1
2.6
1.8
1.0
.5

22.0
1.5
.9
.5
.2

23.1
1.1
.9
.5
.3

Veterans' Administration

5.8

5.2

4.6

2.3

2.2

Interest on public debt

5.6

6.0

6.1

3.1

3.0

All other

8.4

8.6

9.8

4.3

5.4

Expenditure class

Total expenditures
Major national security programs
Department of Defense, military functions *
International security and foreign relations *
Atomic Energy Commission...
Stockpiling of materials
Other national security *
_
_
_.

First
half

Second
halfi
36.5

1 Estimates based on incomplete data.
foreign military assistance.
Includes economic and technical assistance, Export-Import Bank, State Department, and miscellaneous
foreign aid and relief programs. Foreign military assistance is included with Department of Defense.
4
Includes maritime activities, promotion of defense production and economic stabilization, civil defense,
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and the Selective Service System.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Daily Treasury Statement, Treasury Department.
2
Includes
8




61

Other budget expenditures. Veterans benefits were somewhat lower in
1952 than a year earlier. On the other hand, interest on the public debt
was slightly higher. The increase in expenditures of the Commodity Credit
Corporation accounted for about half the rise in the "all other" classification
shown in the table.
CHART 19

FEDERAL BUDGET EXPENDITURES
The rise in total budget expenditures since I960 has been almost
entirely for major national security programs. Expenditures for
all other purposes have been relatively stable.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

25

25

-

5 -

10

-5

2

3
1951

CALENDAR YEARS
SOURCE: TREASURY DEPARTMENT.

Budget receipts. The advance in budget receipts in calendar year 1952
was due to the over-all expansion of business activity and the tax legislation enacted in 1950 and 1951. (See table 7.) Each of the major sources
of tax revenue was affected by the legislation. The increased withholding
rates for the individual income tax under the Revenue Act of 1951 became
effective in November 1951, as did the excise tax changes made by that Act.
In the case of corporate taxes, the full increase imposed by the 1951 Act
will not be reflected in receipts until March 1953, when most corporations
will make their first tax payments on their profits for 1952. Corporate tax
payments during 1952 were based for the most part on profits and tax
rates in 1951.
Because of the 1951 rate increases for the individual income tax, and the
rise in incomes, the percentage of personal income withdrawn by direct
Federal taxes on individuals rose to 11.4 percent in 1952, according to the




62

TABLE 7. Federal budget receipts by source
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year 1952

Calendar year
1950

Calendar year
1951

37.8

53.5

65.5

38.3

27.2

17.5
9.5
8.1
.5
2.2

Source

25.4
16.3
8.6
.6
2.7

30.5
21.9
9.6
.6
2.9

17.8
14.2
4.5
.3
1.5

12.7
7.7
5.1
.3
1.4

Net receipts 2
Direct taxes on individuals 3
Direct taxes on corporations
Excise taxes
Customs
Other.

__ _

Total i

First
half

Second
half i

1
2

Estimates based on incomplete data.
Gross receipts less appropriations to the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and refunds of receipts.
s Individual income taxes and estate and gift taxes.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget.

national income accounts. The percentage was 10.0 percent the year before;
in the first half of 1950, it was 8.4 percent. Although the proportion of
total personal income left after payments of direct taxes declined during this
period, the dollar amount moved steadily upward.
Corporate taxes became relatively more important as a source of Federal revenue in 1952. They accounted for 33.4 percent of budget receipts
last year, compared with 25 percent in 1950. This shift is the combined
result of the tax legislation, including the imposition of the excess profits
tax in 1950, and the response of corporate profits to changes in general
business activity. Federal corporate tax liabilities, as distinguished from
corporate tax payments, were 56 percent of profits before tax in 1952; in
1949, when the pre-Korea rates applied, they were 38 percent.
TABLE 8. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar
year 1950

Calendar
year 1951

Calendar
year 1952 1

00.8
61.4

78.9
78.7

92.3
95.4

-.6

.2

-3.1

42.4
42.0

Receipts or payments

59.3
58.0

71.4
73.0

.4

1.2

—1.6

18.4
19.4

19.7
20.7

20.9
22.4

—1.0

—1.0

—1.5

Total government:
Cash receipts
Cash payments

_

._

- ___ -

Total cash surplus or deficit ( — ) . _ _

_._

Federal Government:
Cash receipts
Cash payments

.

Federal cash surplus or deficit (—)

_

.

State and local governments:
Cash receipts 2 2
Cash payments

_ _ _ _ _

State and local cash surplus or deficit (— )

1 Estimates based on incomplete data.
2
Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments
since they are included in Federal payments.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Treasury Department, Department of Commerce, and Council of Economic Advisers. (See
appendix tables A-5 and B-33.)




State and local finances. Cash payments by State and local governments have exceeded cash receipts by a small margin in each year since
1948. (See chart 18.) The excess of payments is estimated at 1.5 billion dollars in 1952, compared to 1.0 billion in 1951. These data are given
in table 8.
Revenues have more than kept pace with the rise in operating expenses
in recent years, but increasing amounts have been required for capital outlays by State and local governments. Expenditures for new construction,
primarily highways and public schools, were 6.6 billion dollars in 1952.
Outstanding debt of these governments amounted to 29.6 billion dollars
on June 30, 1952, having increased by 2.6 billion during the previous 12
months. Because of the relatively low interest rates of the past decade, the
annual interest on this debt was no higher in 1952 than in 1942, even though
the amount of State and local government debt outstanding rose by about
50 percent in this period.
Public debt operations. In addition to a net increase during 1952 of
3.3 billion dollars in special issues for U. S. Government investment
accounts, the volume of new borrowing by the Treasury from the public
was considerably larger than in other postwar years. (See appendix table
B-31.) Some of the new financing was used to repay holders of issues that
were redeemed and of that portion of matured issues which was not exchanged for other Government obligations; some was used to augment the
General Fund balance, which rose by 1.8 billion dollars during the year, and
some of it went to meet the cash deficit of the second half of 1952. The
combined effect of sales to the investment accounts and to outsider buyers
was to increase the total public debt to 267 billion dollars at the end of 1952.
This represented an increase of 8 billion dollars for the calendar year, compared with an increase of 2.7 billion in 1951.
New marketable securities offered to the public were short- or mediumterm maturities. Several increases in the weekly offerings of 3-month
Treasury bills lifted the outstanding volume from an average of 15.6 billion
dollars in January 1952 to 17.2 billion in December. In June, the Treasury
accepted bids in the amount of 4.2 billion dollars for a heavily oversubscribed issue of 2 ?/8 percent 6-year bonds, and in October and November
it sold two series of tax anticipation bills, totaling 4.5 billion, one to mature
in March 1953 and the other the following June.
Securities of the last-named kind are useful in meeting the problem arising
from the unequal seasonal flow of Treasury receipts, which generally run
much higher in the first half of the calendar year than in the second half.
This imbalance has been accentuated by the plan under which an increasingly large percent of corporate taxes on the earnings of the preceding
year must be paid in March and June.
As for nonmarketable securities, which with few exceptions may be purchased only by investors other than banks, the Treasury offered in May,




partly for cash subscription, long-term nonmarketable bonds of the series
first issued in the spring of 1951. In May and June, furthermore, extensive
changes were made in the types and terms of U. S. savings bonds with
the intention of making them more attractive to the individual investors,
for whom they are especially designed.
There was, after some easing early in 1952, an upward trend in yields
on short-term Government securities. This became quite pronounced
in the closing months, the average yield on new issues of 3-month Treasury
bills being 1.92 percent in the fourth quarter of 1952 compared with 1.65
percent a year earlier. (See appendix table B-32.)
International developments
United States exports. United States total merchandise exports dropped
sharply during the middle of 1952, and in the second half were below the
rate of both preceding half years. (See appendix table B-43.) Exports of
United States goods, excluding Department of Defense shipments financed
by the Mutual Security Program, declined even more sharply than total
exports. (See chart 20.) From a monthly average of about 1.2 billion
dollars both in the second half of 1951 and in the first half of 1952, domestic
exports, exclusive of military aid items, declined to a monthly average of
about 1 billion dollars. This drop of nearly 17 percent was almost entirely
one of quantity, with export prices remaining practically unchanged. (See
appendix table B-44.) Only exports of manufactured goods maintained
their 1951 level in the second half of 1952; exports of crude foodstuffs and
raw materials declined sharply. Geographically, the decline was widespread, but commodity exports to Western Europe, the sterling area,
Argentina, and Brazil suffered the largest decreases. (See appendix tables
B-41 and B-43.)
The drop in the volume of United States exports in the second half of
1952 is traceable to a variety of factors. Among the most important was
the decline in United States commodity imports between March and
September 1951, to a level more than 25 percent below the peak reached
briefly in the first quarter. From the fourth quarter of 1951 to the third
quarter of 1952, imports fluctuated on a level moderately above the 1951
low. The resultant decline in the dollar earnings of foreign countries, occurring as it did while their expenditures in the United States remained
at record heights, contributed to an eventual drop in United States exports.
The export surplus of the United States in the second half of 1951, only
partially counterbalanced by foreign aid, caused some foreign countries to
lose gold to this country and to draw more heavily on their dollar holdings.
In its Midyear 1952 Review, the Council described the developments
abroad which had accounted for the size of our export surplus and the imposition by other countries during the period since mid-1950 of increased import
restrictions and anti-inflationary policies. Briefly, the payments balances of
many industrialized countries, especially in Western Europe, had de-




65

teriorated because of rapid accumulation of inventories of imported goods
after June 1950, and a lag in the rise of their export prices relative to import
prices. At later dates, many raw material producing countries also suffered
balance of payments problems when the declining rate of inventory accumulation in the United States caused their exports to fall, while their imports, swollen because of high internal incomes and demand, remained high.
In late 1951 and early in 1952, the United Kingdom, many other members
of the sterling area, France, and certain South American countries imposed
sharp important restrictions and adopted anti-inflationary policies to correct
balance of payments deficits and to stop losses of reserves.
The decline in the gold and dollar reserves of the sterling area, which
had started in mid-1951, was halted after the first quarter of 1952. By the
fourth quarter of 1952, the area as a whole was earning gold and dollars
from the European Payments Union which approximately balanced its
deficit with the dollar area. The improvement in the international position of the sterling area in the second half of the past year resulted from the
previously imposed import restrictions, the decision in many instances to
draw on existing stocks of imported commodities, and restraint on internal
demand by credit and fiscal policies.
From a high of 730 million dollars in the fourth quarter of 1951, United
States exports (exclusive of "special category items") to the sterling area
declined to 313 million in the third quarter of 1952. This drop of nearly
60 percent may, of course, have involved some seasonal factors. United
States exports to the United Kingdom alone declined from 299 million dollars to 117 million. The improvement in the United Kingdom's balance of
payments occurred despite a decline in total United Kingdom exports, reflecting import restrictions imposed by the rest of the sterling area and other
countries. Exports by the United Kingdom to the United States, however,
were as high in the second and third quarters of 1952 as they had been in the
first half of 1951.
United States exports to other Western European countries together
similarly declined from a seasonal high of nearly 900 million dollars in
the fourth quarter of 1951 to about 500 million in the third quarter of
1952, a drop of about 45 percent. Exports to continental Western Europe, like exports to the United Kingdom and the entire sterling area,
fell off sharply in the second half of 1952, because of increased import
restrictions imposed by certain countries; because of increased availability
of certain commodities, especially agricultural goods and coal, from domestic and nondollar sources; because of the existence of sizable stocks of
imported goods in many countries; and because of a lower level of demand for consumers' goods, especially textiles. This last development was
the foreign counterpart to the softness in certain consumer goods industries
in this country.
United States commodity exports to countries in the Western Hemisphere in the aggregate remained at about their 1951 level during the




66

CHART 20

MERCHANDISE EXPORTS AND IMPORTS
After mid-1952, the U. S. merchandise export surplus fell
sharply. The increasing volume of shipments of grant-aid
military equipment failed to offset the drop in the volume
of other exports. Merchandise imports averaged somewhat
lower than during the first half of the year.
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
1,600

MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
1,600

TOTAL MERCHANDISE
EXPORTS

1,200

1,200

800

800
MERCHANDISE EXPORTS EXCLUDING
GRANT - AID SHIPMENTS-17

TOTAL MERCHANDISE
IMPORTS

400

400

J

J A S 0
1950

N D

J F M A M J J A S O N D

F M A M J J

1951

A S O N D

1952

-1 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SHIPMENTS OF GRANT-AID MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES UNDER THE MUTUAL
SECURITY PROGRAM. SHIPMENTS PRIOR TO AUGUST 1950 AMOUNTED TO 47 BILLION DOLLARS,

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY, AND
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY.

first 9 months of 1952, although higher exports to Canada were counterbalanced by lower sales to certain Latin American countries. Especially
sharp was the drop in exports to Chile and Argentina, where high internal
demand supported by inflation had led to a loss of reserves and the necessity
for curtailing imports.
In 1952, for the first time since 1945, industrial production in Western
Europe failed to rise above the previous year, as chart 21 indicates. The
failure of industrial output to rise was not all loss; the breathing spell
in this rapid advance was accompanied by significant gains. It appears
that the reaction to the post-Korean buying spree has about completed its
course, thus permitting a continuation of post-World War II economic
growth on a more stable foundation. The year 1952 represents a period
of consolidation and internal industrial adjustments, in contrast to the
rapid expansion which characterized the earlier phases of the post-Korean
boom. The inflation suffered by many Western European countries after




CHART 21

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION IN
WESTERN EUROPE
During 1952, industrial production averaged about the same as
in 1951.
INDEX, 1948 «100

INDEX, 1948* 100
160

160

150

150
1952
140

140

130

130

120

120

110

110

100

J

I

100

NOTE: INCLUDES AUSTRIA. BELGIUM, DENMARK, FRANCE. FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY. GREECE,
IRELAND. ITALY, LUXEMBOURG, NETHERLANDS, NORWAY, SWEQEN,TRIESTEJURKEY,

SOURCES: ORGANIZATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND MUTUAL
SECURITY AGENCY.

June 1950 injected considerable distortion into their economies—especially
in their external position—which required much subsequent correction.
The serious inflation that developed in France, for example, tended to divert production from exports to domestic markets. In other Western
European countries, the previous rapid expansion in the output of consumers' goods had made more difficult a shift of resources to defense output.
Thus, the decline in demand for soft goods, which developed in mid-1951
while the output of the machinery, coal, steel, electric power, and defense
industries was rising, has aided in facilitating these adjustments.
Wholesale prices were generally lower at the end of 1952 than at the
beginning of the year. Cost-of-living indexes either remained the same
or moved somewhat higher. (See appendix table B-26.) Unemployment,
while higher during the first half of 1952 than during previous years, was
of significant size only in Italy, Germany, and Belgium. In Germany,
unemployment at the end of 1952 was the lowest in the postwar period and
was ceasing to be a serious economic problem.
United States imports. United States commodity imports in the second
half of 1952 were slightly higher in value than those in the second half of




68

1951 after the sharp decline had occurred. (See appendix table B-45.) The
relative constancy in the value of imports, however, conceals the substantial
recovery in volume that has meanwhile occurred. The index of import
unit values (1936-38=100) has declined from 299 in the fourth quarter
of 1951 to 280 in the same quarter of 1952, while the quantity index has
risen from 136 to 154 (1936-38= 100). (See appendix table B-46.) The
lower level of commodity prices throughout the world is responsible for some
of the increases in volume of imports, for when prices were at their peak in
early 1951 price ceilings in this country served to keep United States prices
below those elsewhere, and thereby to discourage imports of some commodities into the United States. The higher level of imports in 1952, however,
can also be accounted for in part by the previous working off of inventories
of imported goods which had been accumulated earlier.
The relative constancy of aggregate foreign dollar earnings from commodity sales in the United States between the second half of 1951 and of
1952 was not shared by all areas. United States imports from Latin America were substantially higher in value than in the previous period. The
value of imports from a few countries, including Japan, Italy, and the
Netherlands increased somewhat, but lower imports from some other areas
offset these rises.
Other means of financing exports. The level of foreign economic and
defense-support aid was slightly lower in 1952 than in the previous year, since
a substantial rise in military aid did not counterbalance the decline in economic aid. (See appendix table B-42.) United States Government purchases of goods and services abroad, largely in Western Europe and Japan,
continued to play an increasingly important role in financing United States
exports. Direct investment of United States capital abroad reached the
record amount of 560 million dollars in the first half of 1952, almost equal
to the entire outflow of the previous year. Total net outflow of private
capital was smaller in 1952 than in 1951, however, chiefly because of sales
of Canadian securities by United States residents in the last half of the year.
Again in 1952 the largest part of private investment abroad occurred in
Canada and Latin America, but the capital outflow to countries in Africa,
the Near East, and Far East increased somewhat.
In the first quarter of 1952, the size of the export surplus of goods and
services forced foreign countries to sell gold and draw on dollar balances in
order to cover their dollar payments; in the latter part of the year this
situation was reversed. With a considerable reduction in the export surplus, other dollar receipts proved sufficiently large to enable foreign countries as a whole to accumulate gold and dollars. (See appendix table B-40.)




Chapter II.

Near-Term Prospects and
Policies
THE OUTLOOK

A year ago, the official estimates of the prospective pace of defense
expenditures were higher than the developments which actually followed.
This led the Council and other business observers to expect somewhat
stronger inflationary pressures and civilian shortages in 1952 than in fact
developed. By midyear 1952, the Council's reexamination of short-run
prospects led to a modification of its earlier view in the light of the revised
mobilization program. At that point, the Council foresaw a 12-month
period not likely to differ markedly from the period of high-level stability
which had preceded it for a year and a quarter. It seemed that production and incomes were apt to keep rising and unemployment to stay low,
without substantially augmenting inflationary pressures. But the Council
stated that there might be a shift, in the event of incalculable changes in
inventory investment and consumer buying—for which funds were ample—
which might for a time accentuate the risk of inflation. Moreover, it
appeared that, at some point beyond the short-run outlook as then defined,
new demands might be necessary to protect the economy from deflationary
dangers.
In broad outline, this general approach is still applicable for the months
now ahead. The principal change thus far has already been underscored
in the discussion of 1952. It is the relative shift in emphasis from rising
public to rising private demand, reflected in the volume of consumer and
inventory buying in the final quarters of 1952, accompanied by the absence
of a significant rise in defense spending during recent months. Before
evaluating to what extent this shift may continue, and the significance
thereof, it is desirable to examine the components in some detail.
Government expenditures and the fiscal outlook
In 1953, as in the 2 preceding years, the course of national security expenditures constitutes the best starting point for an analysis of prospective
developments. Under the present national security program, expenditures
are expected to rise gradually during most of this calendar year, and thereafter to level off on a plateau which will carry well into next year. While
most of the growth in this sector of demand has already occurred, the annual rate of expenditures in the fourth quarter of 1953 may be 4 or 5 billion
dollars higher than in the fourth quarter of 1952.




70

Government outlays at State and local levels probably will continue to
increase slowly, as defense-related restraints diminish and the pressure to
meet long-term developmental needs grows stronger. Some recent surveys
of State and local government spending plans indicate increases in 1953 of
from 1 to 2 billion dollars over the 1952 level of 23.3 billion.
The fiscal outlook is for a moderately larger Federal deficit in 1953 than
in the calendar year just closed. The Budget of the President estimates
a Federal deficit of about 2 billion dollars on a consolidated cash basis
in the fiscal year which ends June 30, 1953; it indicates a cash deficit
of 6.6 billion dollars in the succeeding fiscal year. If the post-Korea tax
increases are not allowed to run off as provided by present law, the cash
deficit in fiscal 1954 would be about 2 billion lower. The State-local
deficit has ranged between 1 and 2 billion dollars a year in the recent
period, and will probably continue at that level in calendar 1953.
Private domestic investment
There are strong indications that, taken as a whole, private expenditures
for new fixed capital assets will hold up to the very high 1952 level during all
or most of 1953. In the case of plant and equipment outlays, while most of
the private projects "programmed" under the Government's industrial expansion effort had been approved and more than half put in place by the
first of this year, the expansion in many "nonprogrammed" areas probably
will prevent any significant weakening in the total this year. This follows
from the recent survey of business investment intentions for 1953 made by
the Gommerce Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission,
just reported in detail in the Gommerce Department's study of "Markets
After the Defense Expansion," and summarized in table 9.
TABLE 9. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment
[Millions of dollars]
Industry

1951

Total expenditures
Manufacturing
Durable goods
Nondurable goods.

..

._

26, 860

26 271

11, 130
5,168
5,962

12, 452
5 869
6,583

11, 907
5 326
6,582

911

Transportation

Commercial and other 2

19531

26, 332

_ _ .__

Mining

Public utilities

19521

._

_

.. _

__

...

.

„ .

850

871

2,966

2,792

2,504

3,855

3,961

4,017

7,470

6,804

6,972

1 Estimates for the fourth quarter of 1952 and for 1953 are based on anticipated capital expenditures as
reported by business in October and November 1952.
2 Includes trade, service, finance, communication, and construction.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Securities and Exchange Commission. (See appendix table
B-20.)

The same survey indicates that commercial and recreational construction, much of which up to now has been held back by materials controls,




should rise in 1953. In housing, the removal of credit restrictions last fall,
together with rising incomes, seems likely to keep 1953 starts fairly close to
the 1952 figure of 1.1 million.
Inventory accumulation, as already has been emphasized, will play an
unpredictable role in the months ahead. An acceleration of the rates of
inventory-building estimated to have occurred in the last 2 quarters could
lead to some pressures on prices. Excessive stocks could, in turn, lead to a
reversal of the inventory movement later in the year.
Net foreign investment
If United States imports and private investment abroad in 1953 follow
the trends of 1952, and if Government expenditures for foreign aid conform
to the pattern now in prospect, foreign countries will be able to continue
rebuilding their depleted dollar reserves, and perhaps even to relax somewhat their import restrictions. However, assuming no change in United
States international economic policies, it seems unlikely that the dollar
positions of foreign nations will permit United States exports to rise greatly
from present levels before the end of 1953. Agricultural exports during
1952-53 will be down substantially from the record levels of the crop year
1951-52. A general increase in foreign output of farm products is largely
responsible for the reduced foreign demand for United States farm products.
Personal income and consumption
Personal income will probably rise in 1953 at a more moderate rate than
in the last half of 1952. Wage rates can be expected to increase under
present and prospective high levels of employment. Business earnings
should exceed the levels of 1952. The income of farm operators, which
decreased moderately in 1952, threatens to decline further in the absence
of countervailing policies, as a result of rising costs and somewhat lower
farm prices.
Spendable income will not increase as much as personal income, under
present tax rates, because personal taxes and other types of taxes will absorb
part of the income increases. Nevertheless, moderate gains in consumption
expenditures are likely, since there is no reason to forecast an early increase
in the rate of personal saving.
Expenditures on services should continue to mount. In addition to the
effect of income changes, prices are still rising in this area, and the rapid
rate of new home construction requires expansion of all types of utilities.
The demand for automobiles may exceed total sales in 1952, and lead
to a further increase in instalment debt. If prewar patterns are followed,
jnany persons who bought a new car in the peak years of 1949 and 1950
will again be in the new-car market in 1953.
Supplies
In general, the condition of supply, which proved ample along with restraining measures to prevent inflationary trends during 1952, should certainly continue in 1953. In fact, the productive power as well as the actual




72

product of the economy now are considerably higher than a year ago, and
these sources of basic strength can and should be augmented in the year
ahead. If high-level employment is maintained, we are now clearly in
position to lift the total output of the economy by far more than the increase in the defense take, and by sufficient amount to meet moderately rising demands in other sectors of the economy. In fact, these moderately
rising demands are likely to occur only if high employment is maintained
and production thus increased.
Turning to more specialized supply problems, although some effects of
the steel strike are still being felt, the outlook for steel supplies for civilian
users is generally optimistic. Because of the increase in capacity, and the
leveling off of military requirements, manufacturers of civilian-type
products will receive during the second quarter of 1953 allotments higher
than any yet granted under the Controlled Materials Plan. However,
steel plate, heavy structural shapes, tubular products, and certain other
items are expected to remain relatively scarce for a somewhat longer period.
Despite the rapid increase in aluminum capacity since Korea, domestic
supplies increased less than expected this autumn as a result of power
CHART 22

EXPANSION IN MAJOR INDUSTRIES
While scheduled capacity 'expansion in some industries is nearly
finished, the programs in other industries are far from complete.
50

INDEX, 1950 CAPACITY = 100
100
'
150

STEEL

ALUMINUM

ELECTRIC POWER

SOURCE: OFFICE OF DEFENSE MOBILIZATION.




73

200

250

shortages in the Northwest. Larger imports from Canada have helped
ease this situation. The general outlook is for increasingly available supplies for nonmilitary uses, although it should be noted that aluminum
capacity in the United States is by no means over-plentiful in terms of
either requirements for full mobilization or expanding peacetime civilian
usage. (See chart 22.)
Copper appears to be the scarcest of the three basic metals. Fabricators
of copper products, however, have recently been rebuilding their inventories. While potential supplies should not fall significantly short of demand
for current use during 1953, they are somewhat deficient in terms of
stockpiling objectives. Consequently, contemplated second quarter 1953
allotments are only slightly higher than fourth quarter 1952. Taking the
longer view, it is expected that military requirements will soon begin to
decline modestly, the extent depending heavily not only upon ammunition
use in Korea, but also upon how rapidly progress is made in substituting steel
for copper in shell cases. The price of imported copper is still above the
ceiling price established for domestic supplies, and the outlook for a narrowing of this differential depends upon the rapidity with which supplies improve and upon the foreign suppliers.
The generally optimistic picture for the major metal supplies cannot,
of course, be transferred to the much scarcer alloying metals. The heavy
military requirements both for current usage and for stockpiling of these
scarce alloy metals promises to keep them in tight supply, certainly through
the near future. The technology of modern armaments puts a severe
drain on these high temperature alloys, and even though the Government's
program of increasing the supplies of these metals has borne fruit in most
cases, the enlarged production must be channeled into the defense program.
Prices
The general price structure seems now to have readjusted to
a reasonably stable condition. Within the structure itself, there are only
selective pressures for further realignments of raw material, manufacturers',
and distributors' prices. There seem to be no demand developments in
early prospect which would force the general level of prices either up or
down—unless it were a more sudden shift in inventory accumulation or
durables buying by consumers than there now is good reason to expect.
There will be some upward pressures. For one thing, many businesses
will face further cost increases. Moreover, in those areas where ceilings
are now holding prices below what would be their present "equilibrium"
levels if markets were uncontrolled, there would be a tendency for prices
to rise if controls were too quickly abandoned. On the other hand, increasing supplies should reduce this risk as the year progresses. And it is quite
possible that the tendency toward more competitive pricing now observable
in many retail quarters will spread. As more and more new productive
capacity comes into operation, supplies are becoming increasingly abundant
relative to demand.




74

The composite near-term outlook
On balance, the economic outlook for the near-term future does not
justify at this time any sharp change in the mood of the business community
or the consuming public, nor does it justify any sharp change in public
policy. The period should witness in the main a mild continuance of the
shift toward relatively more emphasis on civilian demand, and relatively
less emphasis upon the increase in military demand. Since civilian demand
is directed toward sectors of the economy where our productive facilities
can meet this demand with less strain than the highly selective demand of
military expansion, it should be easier in 1953 than during the past 2 years
to hold inflationary pressures in check. This outlook for stability makes it
desirable to continue or even speed up the process of sloughing off direct
controls.
The question remains whether the increase in civilian demand during
1953 will be sufficient to close the gap between further increases in our
general productive power and the less sizable increases in military demand,
or whether in the alternative we shall be faced with substantial deflationary
trends and corresponding unemployment. For the major portion of the
year 1953, the weight of evidence is clear that such a deflationary movement is not in prospect. And there is certainly no reason yet to alter
drastically private or public economic policies on a premature assumption
that these unfavorable developments will take place toward the end of the
year.
The only factors which the Council can now discern which might prevent
the late portion of 1953 from being bright would be (1) a prevalent determination early in the year, contrary to the weight of the evidence, that the
business outlook for the latter part of the year is gloomy, or (2) sharp departure from private and public policies which as of now have brought us to
a position of price stability combined with maximum production and employment. Such unfavorable shifts would be unwarranted, and the Council
advises against them. While there are always new problems to be solved,
the Council feels that the year 1953 commences with the economy in better
shape than at the beginning of any year since our work was started 6 years
ago. We are not confronted with the highly ambiguous situation of early
1947, when it was not clear whether the then current inflation would continue or explode in the much-advertized postwar deflation. We are not
confronted by the hectic inflationary trends of early 1948, or the disturbing
downward movements of early 1949. The throb of economic activity and
of confidence are stronger than in early 1950. And our ability to sustain
the heavy burden of our new world responsibilities without economic impairment is now clear, although many doubted it in early 1951 and some
still doubted it in early 1952.
In taking this fairly firm stand with respect to the near-term future, the
Council does not challenge the proposition that a later period will confront
us with more difficult tests of our ability to maintain stability and growth.
234197—53




6

75

In subsequent portions of this Review, we shall discuss this longer-range
issue, and point out that it is none too early to begin improving our defenses
against the forces of deflation. Nor is it too early to note that the sea even
now is not entirely placid. The recent trends in the agricultural sector of
the economy, and in international economic arrangements, challenge us even
now to forestall events fraught with real dangers to be averted later on even
though not in the short run.
NEAR-TERM POLICY ISSUES
The Council's discussion of near-term policy will focus on three issues:
defense mobilization policy, tax policy, and international trade policy. The
expiration of basic statutes affecting each of these national policies will
compel congressional decision, in the current session, to permit the respective
statutes to expire, to renew them, or to replace them with new or modified
plans.
Defense mobilization policy
Since the Korean outbreak, the Nation's prime production objective has
been to build up its defenses and expand its mobilization base. To accomplish this in an orderly fashion and at the same time to maintain stability,
it was necessary to increase taxes greatly, to erect a comprehensive structure
of controls covering materials, prices, wages, and credit, and to develop additional incentives for the expansion of supply both at home and abroad.
It is a tribute to the coordination of public and private efforts that during
the past 2 years the Nation has built up its productive and military strength
with relatively little strain on the economy, while maintaining a high degree
•of economic stability. The great resiliency of our productive system has
permitted maintenance of a very high and increasing over-all level of consumption. These developments have led during the past year to a progressive relaxation of the controls in those areas where expansion of supply
and the absence of excessive demand have permitted.
It would be imprudent to make changes now in economic policies which
would be so drastic as to interfere with the continued orderly build-up of
our defenses or to upset the balance in the economy. This note of caution
is underscored by four basic considerations: (1) the mobilization program
under present plans has yet to achieve its peak, and we do not yet know the
scope or direction of any change which may be made; (2) the level of private demand is now very high and may increase; (3) the controls program,
though in process of contraction, continues to make a positive and major
contribution to the orderly flow of materials and to economic stability in
important areas; and (4) the international situation continues highly
uncertain.
The Defense Production Act expires June 30, 1953, except price, wage,
and rent controls, which expire April 30. The improving materials supply will justify further relaxation in controls during the first half of 1953.
But it is quite clear that the improvement in the supply of materials will not




be sufficient in all cases to permit the complete termination of controls before
the existing powers expire. It will be absolutely essential to have continuing authority for priorities and allocations controls to assure the supply
of necessary types of steel, copper, aluminum, and certain other materials
for defense production. Under these circumstances, it would be wise to
extend the present legislative authority for the direct controls. This would
enable a continuation or acceleration of the present policy of tapering off
controls as shortages and inflationary pressures in individual markets ease.
To end these controls prematurely would adversely affect the defense program most of all, since the shortages and price-pressures are greatest in
certain of the metal and metal products industries. At this time, with the
Budget as high as it is, it would be poor economy to add to the cost of the
defense program through inflationary price and wage increases.
Unless some new international crisis should occur, or the national security
program should be expanded substantially above the levels now planned,
it probably will be desirable to eliminate practically all of the present
direct controls well within fiscal 1954. It now appears, however, that in '
the interest of national security two types of controls should probably be
continued even beyond that date. The first of these is allocation of the
most critical materials—particularly, certain of the scarce alloying metals—
in order to expedite accumulation of the stockpile. The second is priority
powers to assure that basic materials and certain critical types of equipment
are channeled to military and atomic energy needs ahead of all other needs.
This raises, as part of the current policy problem, the question of what
our longer-run preparedness policy should be. Our traditions of freedom
make us naturally impatient with direct controls. We prefer in more normal times to let the market forces determine the flow of goods and services
and the levels of most prices and wages. But these are not normal times.
The Nation recognizes that, so long as the cold war lasts, it must maintain
an adequate state of military preparedness. It must also maintain an adequate state of economic preparedness. This suggests careful consideration
of stand-by legislative authority to be invoked under specific conditions, and
maintaining the nucleus of a staff which can keep plans for controls continuously up to date and be prepared to meet quickly the contingency of any
new Koreas. The experience after the Korean outbreak indicates that it
may take as much as 6 months to enact legislation, recruit staff, and put controls into effect. We should be forearmed to prevent recurrence of such
costly delay under comparable conditions.
Tax policy
One of the most notable features accompanying the build-up of the
present defense program has been the effectiveness of fiscal policy. Federal
budgetary expenditures are estimated at over 185 billion dollars for the fiscal
years 1951 through 1953. The security program accounts for about 125
billion of this total. Yet the cumulative deficit in the conventional budget




77

is expected to be less than 6/2 billion, and on a cash basis there will be a
surplus of more than 5J/2 billion. This is a remarkable result, considering
that in fiscal 1953 spending will be almost double that of fiscal 1950, increasing by about 35 billion. To achieve this result, it has been necessary to
increase Federal taxes to the point where, in combination with State-local
levies, they take a larger percentage of our national income than at any
other time in our history.
From the start of the mobilization program, the fiscal objective has been
to strive for a pay-as-we-go policy as a bulwark against inflation and to
permit a fair distribution of the defense burden. In the July 1952 Economic
Review it was said: "Taxation should be the last inflation control measure to
be relaxed, since it is a basic measure and the most effective one for longcontinued use." This statement is now all the more pertinent, since important tax decisions must be made in the coming months. The President's
Budget indicates a deficit of 10 billion dollars in fiscal 1954, on a conventional budget basis, and about 6^2 billion dollars on a cash basis, assuming tax reductions in accordance with scheduled termination dates.
If the excess profits tax, which is due to expire June 30, 1953, and the 1951
increases in the individual income tax, which will terminate December 31,
1953, were to be extended beyond these dates, revenues would be increased
by over 2 billion dollars in fiscal year 1954, and by about 6 billion dollars in
subsequent fiscal years, above what they would be with the tax reductions.
To decide now to let the excess profits tax expire without compensating
increases in the regular corporate income tax would be to furnish a stimulant
to the economy which it does not now need and might need later on. The
scheduled termination date for the individual income tax increases might
also prove to be premature. Because these increases are not due to expire
until December 31, 1953, however, more time is available to study the
matter in the light of the developing budgetary situation and economic
prospects generally.
Unquestionably, present rates create heavy burdens for large sections of
the population. It is also true that the present high rates are not always
conducive to maximum efficiency in industry and may in certain circumstances undermine incentives. In urging that it would be premature to
effect a general rate reduction in 1953, the Council is not insensitive to
these considerations. It is convinced, however, that high taxes are on balance an important stabilizing influence under current economic conditions,
and that insufficient taxation would represent a greater risk to our economic
well-being in 1953 than the continuance of the present high rates.
Looking beyond the near-term outlook, the time may come, as discussed
in chapters III and IV of this Review, when it will be necessary to provide
some new support to the economy. Under such circumstances, it would
be appropriate to reduce the tax burden to stimulate private demand. But
it would be inappropriate to make these tax reductions prematurely,




when they are not needed to stimulate demand and could even have inflationary effects, and when we are facing the prospect of sizable budget deficits
despite full employment.
International trade policy
Another basic decision to be taken in 1953 is with respect to international
trade policy. The Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act expires on June 12,
1953. This Act has been a powerful, constructive force in expanding the
rlow of trade in the free world, and it has symbolized our awareness that
trade must be a two-way street. We are engaged in forging a strong community of free nations with great defensive strength. Basic to the other
free nations' military strength is their economic strength. The more they
are enabled to pay their own way, the better for us as well as for them.
The Reciprocal Trade Agreements program has also been an important
factor in giving the countries of the free world some assurance that, as
their trade with the Soviet Bloc declines, trade elsewhere will increase.
Alternative sources of supply are largely in the dollar area, and the ability
to earn dollars depends in large part on United States trade policy. However, in its most recent form, the Act contains certain new provisions, contrary to its basic objectives, which have threatened an increase in duties
whenever consumption of foreign products became anything more than
insignificant in the United States. Provisions of this sort are directly in
conflict with and tend to defeat the broad purposes of the Act. So far
as the United States is concerned, it is sound economics to adopt legislation on tariffs and customs procedures which furthers our objective of a
greater volume of international trade without crippling qualifications.




79

Chapter III. Longer-Run Needs and Prospects
INTRODUCTION
N chapter IV of its Midyear 1952 Economic Review, the Council
began to explore the longer-run outlook for the economy—the outlook
extending further ahead than the year or so which we have generally encompassed in the near-term outlook. In the 6 months since midyear 1952, this
longer-run problem has been receiving increasing attention. It has already
been made the subject of several helpful private and public studies, among
them the recently released report on "Markets After the Defense Expansion" issued by the Department of Commerce. In the current Review,
the Council extends its midyear 1952 analysis of the longer-run outlook, first
by attempting to identify the problem with somewhat greater precision, and
then by pressing further the discussion of general private and public policies.
There is a prevalent tendency to fix a point in time ahead at which it is
presumed that the basic economic climate will change, and that new
problems—usually designated as deflationary—will confront us throughout
the economy. There are many who follow the line of reasoning that this
change will occur when defense spending stops rising and either levels off
or begins to decline. This line of reasoning, in terms of only one sector of
the economy, however important that sector, is clearly inadequate. A complete analysis must encompass all parts of the economy, private and public,
and it must view the economy as a whole, for the whole is more than the
sum of its parts. It must identify those factors which have been mainly
responsible in driving the economy upward since Korea, and which may lose
some of their up-pushing momentum. It must also identify other areas
which may come forward to take their place in an economy where stability
and prosperity require not merely the maintenance but the expansion of
total demand. And it must study the interrelationships among these factors, and how they interact upon each other and upon the total.
The Council accepts and follows this last-mentioned broad type of
analysis, but our interest in the longer-run problem and our point of concentration go beyond it. The Council recognizes that for purposes of
economic analysis there is a proper distinction between immediate and
long-range problems and policies, and that it is always important to devote
attention to both. At the same time, we recognize that the dichotomy is
not absolute; that what is done now affects what happens later on; that
the present merges with the future; and that it is neither practical nor
necessary for the purposes of effective action to forecast exactly at what
point in time the economic climate will undergo the profound change which

I




80

some anticipate, or even whether the profound change will occur at all
in the foreseeable future.
We are particularly wedded to this approach because the core of our
philosophy under the Employment Act is not to wait for a depression or
even a serious recession before taking action, but instead to work constantly toward the maintenance of maximum production and employment.
We concern ourselves with the longer run not because we assert that a
depression is inevitable or even in the offing, but rather because we believe
that the long perspective as well as the short perspective is continually vital
to the maintenance of a healthy economy. While the near-term outlook
is largely determined by forces which are already in being and therefore
leaves much room for forecasting but relatively little room for new policy,
the approach to the longer-term problem should place less emphasis upon
forecasting and relatively more emphasis upon a realization that the United
States is richly enough endowed with resources and brains to make the
longer-range future what we want it to be. This confidence, this commitment, is clearly written into the Employment Act.
It is thus clear that the reasons why the Council extends the discussion
now being undertaken through the year 1955 is not because we now are
ready to predict any profound change in general economic conditions in
any particular month or year between now and 1956. It is rather because
we believe that a period of 3 years ahead is long enough to carry us beyond
narrow preoccupation with the immediate, and short enough so that an
analysis of demand prospects can still be kept fairly concrete. To be sure,
many of our economic problems, for example shortages of certain raw
materials, require an even longer-time perspective for effective treatment.
A long-range economic problem requires either early, preventive action to
avert a danger in the more distant future, or early, positive action to commence solution of a problem which in its very nature takes a long time to
solve. This is particularly true because, in our type of free economy, the
attitudes of people throughout the Nation are no less a controlling fact than
laws upon the statute books. Our economic situation in 1955, and during the
intervening years until then, will depend largely upon the prevalent sentiment now as to whether the maintenance of maximum employment and
production is attainable in our kind of economy, and whether it is worth
the continuous efforts which must be directed toward its attainment. The
Council believes in the worth and practicality of this goal. We believe
also that its attainment depends not so much upon the accuracy or precision
of long-range forecasting, either as to timing or substance, as it does upon
the popular commitment to the goal and the day-by-day evolution of improved analyses and policies, both short-run and long-run.
In the following discussion, we follow closely the methodology set forth
in the Employment Act which we believe to be sound: First, to identify the
employment, production, and purchasing power needs of the economy for
the period under consideration; second, to estimate prospective trends for




Si

the period in the event that policies remain constant; and third, to study
and recommend any changes in private and public economic policies which
may seem helpful to bring prospective trends into line with our national
needs and capabilities.
EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION NEEDS, 1953-1955
To define maximum production and employment in terms of the objectives of the Employment Act, it is necessary to take account of the whole
complex of our economic society—the size of the labor force, the average
length of the workweek, and the productivity potential of all of our physical
and human resources. The estimate involves also some imponderables or
values not subject to quantitative measurement, such as what level of "frictional" unemployment is consistent with maximum employment, or what
balance is to be struck between more leisure and more goods as productivity
increases.
The labor force
The size of the labor force is determined primarily by the expected
growth in the population of working age. It is assumed for our purposes
here that in a high employment period in the near future, the over-all
"participation rate," i. e., the proportion of the noninstitutional population
14 years of age and over in the labor force, will remain practically unchanged
from the past 2 years' level of about 58.8 percent, even though participation
rates for particular groups of workers within this total will change. The
total of 58.8 percent is a little higher than in earlier peacetime high employment years. As shown in table 10, an expansion of the total labor force
from 66l/z million last year to 685/2 million in 1955 is estimated. The labor
force trends shown in the table are based on data from the Census Bureau's
Current Population Survey since 1940 and data from the censuses of 1920
TABLE 10.—Population'and'J.abor force
Projections *
Item

1950

1951

151.7
110.8
64.6

154.4
111.9
65.8

1952

1953

1954

1955

161.3
115.4
67.9

163.2
116.6
68.6

58.8

58.8

Millions of persons
Total population, including armed forces overseas
Noninstitutional population, 14 years of age and over
Labor force, including armed forces 2

157.0
113.1
66.5

159.2
114.3
67.2

Percent
Labor force participation rate

3

58.3

58.8

58.8

58.8

i Projections of population by Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census; all others by Council
of Economic Advisers. See Current Population Reports, Series P-25, No. 58, and P-50, No. 42, for basic
data.
2
14 years of age and over.
8
Labor force as percent of noninstitutional population 14 years of age and over.
NOTE.—Total population figures are for July 1 of each year and are consistent with the 1950 Census.
Noninstitutional population, 14 years of age and over, and labor force data represent current estimates
and projections consistent with the 1940 Census levels. Therefore the series are not exactly comparable
but the differences are relatively small.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




82

to 1940, adjusted for comparability with current estimates. The population estimates represent the medium series of projections.
Under the present defense program, the armed forces during the next
few years are projected to remain at the current level of 3.6 million which
was reached in 1952. And it is assumed for the purposes of this study that
unemployment, which during the past 2 years has been below the 2-million
mark, could rise to as much as 2l/z million by 1955 without presenting a
general unemployment problem. Such an unemployment figure in a considerably larger labor force would not depart so markedly from the
Nation's legislated objective of "maximum employment" as to call for new
counteracting public measures, although it is desirable, in the Council's judgment, to strive consistently to keep unemployment lower than this figure.
These two estimates, then—armed forces and unemployment—point to
the need for about 62J/2 million civilian jobs in 1955, contrasted with 61.0
million for 1952 as a whole. This contemplates a considerable increase in
private nonagricultural employment, and a continuation through 1955 of
the long-run decline in the number of persons engaged in farm work. A
moderate further increase in government employment at the State and local
level can be anticipated.
TABLE 11.—Labor force, employment, and unemployment
Projections l
Item

1950

1951

1952

1953

1954

1955

Millions of persons, 14 years of age and over
Labor force: total
Armed forces
Civilian labor force
Employment
A gricultural . _
Nonagricultural
Civilian government Private
Unemployment -

64.6

65.8

66.5

67.2

67.9

1.5

2.9

3.5

3.6

3.6

3.6

63.1

62.9

63.0

63.6

64.3

65.0

60.0
7.5
52.4
5.8
46.6

[61.0
7.1
54.0
6.1
47.9

61.3
6.8
54.5
6.5
48.0

61.9
6.7
55.2
6.6
48.6

62.2
6.6
55.6
6.7
48.9

62.5
6.5
56.0
6.9
49.1

3.1

1.9

1.7

1.7

2.1

2.5

2.7

3.3

3.8

68.6

Percent
Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force 2

5.0

3.0

2.7

1
Projections by Council of Economic Advisers; total labor force based on projections in Current Population Reports, Series P-50, No. 42.
2
Percent based on unrounded figures for 1950-52.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.

Hours of work
The average number of hours worked each week is assumed to decline
slightly in the private nonagricultural segment of the economy—from 39.7
in 1952 to an estimated 39.5 in 1955, reflecting chiefly increases in paid
vacations and some further reductions in the amount of overtime. In
manufacturing, it is assumed that the basic 40-hour week will be continued.




In agriculture, technological development should continue to make shorter
hours possible, but a declining labor force will make for longer hours. On
balance, it seems reasonable to assume that the farm workweek will show
little if any change during the next 3 years. (See appendix table B-14.)
Productivity
Productivity, in its generalized meaning, is the ratio of output to input.
Here, as is the common practice, the term is restricted to the relationship
beween total output and labor input, so that a rise in productivity is an
increase in total output per man-hour. In these projections, productivity
in the private nonagricultural sector of the economy is assumed to increase
about 2.5 percent this year, and by slightly larger percentages in the next
2 years. This would involve increases which are a shade above the average
gains over the long-run past, in recognition of the extraordinary expansion
and improvement of capital equipment throughout the postwar period, but
which are still somewhat below the average productivity increase of the
last 5 years.
Total needed production
When, as shown in table 12, these estimated productivity increases are
applied to the input of labor as previously projected for the private nonagricultural sector of the economy, there results an estimate of private nonagricultural production needed in 1955. And when this is added to an
estimate of farm and government output, the result is this: A gross national
product of about 375 to 380 billion dollars, calculated in 1952 prices, consistent with high-level production and employment in 1955. If the Nation
should build up steadily to this 1955 level of output, it would mean increments of about 10 to 12 billion dollars annually.
TABLE 12.—Gross national product: 1952 and projections of needed levels, 1953—55
Projections *
Item

1952
1953

Private nonagricultural employment, hours, and productivity:
Employment, millions
Hours worked per week
Total man-hours worked per year, millions
Output per man-hour:
Index, 1952=100
Dollars, 1952 prices

1954

1955

Total gross national product
1
Projections by
2
Compensation
3

49.1
39.5
100, 851

100.0
2.9286

102.5
3. 0018

105.3
3.0838

108.2
3. 1687

290.2
24.2
30.8

301
25
31

311
25
32

320
26
33

345.1

Gross national product: billions of dollars, 1952 prices:
Private nonagricultural
Farm
Government *

48.9
48.6
48.0
39.7
39.7
39.6
99,091 100,330 100,695

» 357

368

379

Council of Economic Advisers.
of general government emplopees.
Preliminary estimates for fourth quarter, 1952, indicate that gross national product has already reached
an annual rate of about 353 billion dollars in average 1952 prices. If the projected growth were to be based
on only the fourth quarter of 1952, the projected gross national product in 1953 would be somewhat higher
than shown. It seems more appropriate, however, to base the projection on the full year 1952, in light of the
fact that, as is emphasized in the text, the projection is a minimum objective, not a forecast.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




84

It should be noted that, throughout the calculation, a rule of moderation
has been followed. We have allowed for an increase of about a million
above recent levels of unemployment, although it would be obviously desirable to hold unemployment to a much lower figure, and we should try to do
so. And the annual productivity gain posited is more modest than some
experts expect, and certainly more modest than that for which it might well
be argued the Nation should strive. In short, the needed levels of employment and production pictured are by no means those of a drum-tight economy, and they probably would not provide as much additional production
as would be needed if substantially greater national security efforts should
become necessary. From the viewpoint of a full-employment policy, they
constitute a minimum standard against which to measure our prospects for
the next 3 years.
Amplifying comment by Mr. Keyserling
The national objective set forth above for our productive growth between
now and 1955 prompts me to make this amplifying comment, in view
of my known commitment to the philosophy of an expanding economy.
I have no reason to believe that my colleagues are not in general accord
with the amplification that I now set forth, and I do not regard it as inconsistent with any portion of this Review. I set it forth singly because it is
a little aside from the main stream of this Review, and yet germane
enough to afford an opportunity in the context of this discussion at this
time to respond to many of the questions presented to me over the years
concerning my reiterated interest in the philosophy of an expanding economy. This amplification, which may be of interest, to some who read this
Review, should not be interpreted to cast any doubt upon my complete
agreement with the Review in its entirety, both as to analysis and conclusions.
From the time of the Korean outbreak, I have had several opportunities
to emphasize that America's productive power and potential constitute the
greatest nonsecret weapon of the free world. While I have favored the
various control and restraint programs (both indirect and direct) designed
to divide up what we have in accord with national priorities in time of
danger, I have constantly pointed out that if there were excessive relative emphasis upon these methods, it could distract us from full attention to the
build-up of our greatest nonsecret weapon. Further, I have felt that any
such misplacement of emphasis would tend to increase friction among the
functional sectors of our economy when unity is of the essence.
The events of the past 2J/2 years have in the main strengthened my
earlier views. The actual productive record of the economy, generating an
expansion of civilian supplies along with the vast increase in defense output,
has far exceeded estimates which were generally regarded as fanciful when
first offered for discussion and appraisal in mid-1950. Yet the issue is still
very much alive. There are some who would give consideration to the
reduction of our primary defense efforts and our international commit-




85

merits, not on a finding that lower targets seem consistent with our world
safety (which would of course justify such action), but rather because they
still grossly undervalue the productive power of the American economy.
Any such undervaluation of our productive potential can lead—and in a
few instances has led—to unwarranted fears about the availability of certain
types of civilian supplies, thus creating some inflationary pressures based
upon false expectancy, and creating some unnecessary dislocations. Today,
with crying needs for our exportable products among millions of free people
throughout the world whose very freedom is imperiled by want, with numerous families in the United States in need of a better standard of living and a
vast majority of the people of the United States well able to benefit by a still
higher standard of living, with the chances possibly 50-50 that the world situation may call for an intensification rather than a slackening of our international efforts, and with the Soviet Union and its satellites pursuing an increasingly relentless course, it would indeed be ironical if any substantial
segment of our own people doubted whether we will be able fully to use our
current productive capacity, instead of realizing that we have the brains
immeasurably to increase our economic and political security in the most
profound sense by drawing the weapon of our ever-increasing productive
ability fully from its sheath.
I have believed since the Korean outbreak, and I now believe even more
firmly, that nothing would contribute so much not only to our national
security and progress, but also to the fullest generation of our moral and
spiritual energies, as an intensified drive to make the whole Nation conscious
of and uniformly engaged in the full utilization of this great nonsecret
weapon. Despite generally "full employment," there is some underutilization of some parts of the labor force; some underutilization of some of our
current productive resources in agriculture and even in industry; some
underutilization of existing technology and retardment in the application
of established science to the practical arts; and some underutilization of
brains and good will. With an effort commensurate to our problems in
a troubled world, it would seem that by 1955 we might lift our national
output even above the target used for the purposes of this Review,
without inflationary strain and without resort to the forced pressures and
controls which would be imperative in a full war economy but which would
be undesirable in a long middle course between war and peace.
It is manifestly not feasible for me to spell out in this brief amplifying
comment the detailed means by which the Nation might move even more
effectively than it has thus far along this already established course. I must
be content here to clarify a permeating philosophy rather than cite a precise
program. Nor do I intend to imply that those in charge of the mobilization program, as well as many leaders throughout the Nation, have not
joined largely in this philosophy. Had they not, the marvelous accomplishments since mid-1950 would have been impossible. But their great




86

and effective labors have been made more difficult at times by some who
desired to cut down our world security efforts on the ground that our
economy could not produce enough to meet them without disaster, and who
then in turn have desired to take it easier on the over-all production front
on the ground that our world security efforts could safely be less than had
originally been thought necessary. Such reasoning draws a vicious circle.
Considerations of our domestic economic well-being must, of course, be
meshed with considerations of world security. But stating this is the beginning of the problem, not its solution.
To avoid possible misunderstanding, it is not asserted that the
375-380 billion dollar target set forth in this Review is a "forecast" of what
our actual output will be in 1955. If we were to have a serious recession or
depression, the 1955 output may be far less. The figures are merely objectives—merely a quantification as to what we mean by maximum production looking forward to 1955. I readily admit that practical objectives
must be kept within the range of the attainable, taking fully into account
other national purposes, and also taking fully into account the current state
of the economy from which we start. But the concept of maximum employment and production under the Employment Act would be impoverished if it hewed to the line of what is likely to happen without effort, or
even what is attainable with slight effort. If the term "forecast" is used
in this connection, the concept involves a forecast not of what we will
automatically accomplish but rather of what we can do and ought to do.
And what we ought to do, within the limits of what we can do, should be
set within the context of the current world situation.
These views are not predicated upon a desire to foist more controls
or "central planning" upon the economy. On the contrary, since the
Korean outbreak, I have insisted constantly that the full release of our
productive energies throughout the Nation—sparked as it only can be by
vision and imagination—is the true alternative to (1) the economic straitjacket which would result from trying to make inadequate production cover
our full needs or (2) the equal danger which would result from failing to
meet our full needs in terms of the world situation.
Nor am I unmindful of the sound requirement that maximum employment and production should not be defined at such high levels as to generate
inflation. The subject of the causes of inflation is too comprehensive for
discussion in this amplifying note. Those who would oversimplify this
matter should observe the price stability which has been maintained recently when unemployment has reached an all-time low point short of
total war, and should observe also the inflationary spurts which have occurred in other recent periods when our resources were by no means being
fully employed. I will not here discuss the momentous question of whether
a slight increase in inflationary pressures would outweigh, under current
world conditions, the gains to be derived from a much larger national
product. Such analysis is unnecessary to my current purpose, because I




8?

believe that our resources are sufficiently plentiful to reach a 1955 national
product as high as or possibly even higher than that set forth in this Review
without inflation, and with the progressive casting off of the direct controls.
In all probability, most of those who might take issue with my belief in the
desirability of a relatively rapid expansion of output would do so, not because they fear inflation, but rather because they fear that a deflation will
result from lack of the brains or will to use fully the greatest potential
blessing to which any nation in the history of the world has ever fallen heir—
the great nonsecret weapon of the United States.
The idea, often expressed by the Council, and in fact by other persons
through the ages, that a free and great people should be able to use all of
what they have the ability to produce seems to me so commonplace and
impregnable that I am concerned about the disposition of some, not including any of my associates, to underestimate our productive power at maximum employment because they are concerned that America's great nonsecret
weapon may become a Frankenstein if used fully. Instead, I believe that
economists and others should be devoting all of their talents toward finding
ways to capitalize fully upon this magnificent asset. In the long run, I
believe that the pace at which we move toward further progress in this
vital matter may well determine the future of freedom. This issue—
whether we shall shrink from or measure up to the challenge of potential
abundance—is perhaps the supreme issue of the Twentieth Century. I
have not issued this challenge: It is written into the Employment Act of.
1946, and underscored by the towering menace of communist aggression.
(End of amplifying comment by Mr. Keyserling.)
DEMAND PROSPECTS FOR THE LONGER RUN
Whether the Nation maintains maximum production and employment
over the long pull depends directly upon sufficient demand in the aggregate to induce enough production, and provide enough jobs, to keep unemployment below the margin of tolerance indicated earlier in this Review.
The economy's rate of actual performance in the future is far more uncertain, of course, than the needs just portrayed. We have and want a free
and flexible economy, in which no one hand is on the throttle, and in which
production is guided by the separate decisions of millions of consumers and
businessmen as well as government. In a free economy, the amount of total
future demand and its components can be estimated and shaped only within
very broad ranges.
Prime assumptions
Any analysis of economic trends 2 or 3 years ahead (in the absence
of policies designed to modify these trends) must be grounded in certain
working assumptions which it is important to make explicit. For the
purposes of this study, as a matter of methodology for estimating demands
in particular sectors, it is assumed:




88

First, that the level of general business activity will be high during the
period in question. This assumption merely extends into the future a
situation which now exists in fact. This approach is defensible as a starting
point for analysis, because we are dealing with an economy now moving
under the momentum of prosperity and not one trying to gain speed after
a stall. The problem is to identify possible elements of weakness which
may arise in a vigorous economy, rather than to search for weakness in a
deteriorating economy where all prospects are discouraging.
This initial assumption is not meant to prejudge the conclusion as to
over-all prospects which will be drawn at the end of the sector-by-sector
discussion; that conclusion might force a revision of the initial assumption.
But for purposes of making a first working estimate of investment and consumption prospects, some initial hypothesis as to the general tone of the
economy is necessary, and the present one is the most tenable;
Second, that there will be no significant change in the degree of international tension. While it could be unlikely that the situation of the last year
and a half will actually continue without variation, an assumption that it
will is the most prudent one available for purposes of the general economic
analysis here undertaken;
Third, since the purpose of this analysis is to suggest later on in this
Review what changes in private and public policies may become appropriate, to postulate new policy actions initially would be to assume at the start
the results of the inquiry. Therefore, we start by assuming current policies.
It is initially assumed, for example, that Federal tax rates will be at levels
set by present laws, which call for the termination of the corporate excess
profits tax in mid-1953, reductions in personal income taxes at the end of
1953, and cuts in excise taxes and the basic levy on corporate earnings in
April 1954; that there will be no increase in Government expenditures for
anti-cyclical purposes; and that present credit policies will remain unaltered.
(It should be noted that, despite the assumption that no additions to the
Federal deficit will be made for specifically anti-cyclical purposes, the
assumption that the tax reductions now provided by law will be carried out
on schedule while present expenditure programs are maintained implies
substantial deficits in both 1954 and 1955.)
Fourth, that there will be no mass changes in consumer expenditures or
business investment of such caliber as might be touched off by unpredictable
or fortuitous events; that is, that endogenous forces will predominate.
Government expenditures
National security. On the basis of present plans, as incorporated in the
Budget of the President for the fiscal year 1954, security expenditures
are scheduled to rise moderately above the rate reached in the second
quarter of 1952. Over half of the increase is scheduled to occur in components of national security expenditures other than the military services,
notably in the Mutual Security Program and in atomic energy. It is antic-




89

CHART 23

MAJOR NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS
Budget expenditures for national security are scheduled to rise moderately
through 1953, and then level off. It is anticipated that a gradual decline
will begin late in 1954.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

I960

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

1952

1954

CALENDAR YEARS
-^ BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS. QUARTERLY ESTIMATES THROUGH SECOND QUARTER OF 1954
DERIVED FROM FISCAL YEAR TOTALS IN THE U.S. GOVERNMENT BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR I9S4.
SOURCES: TREASURY DEPARTMENT, BUREAU OF THE BUDGET, AND
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

ipated that expenditures will reach the peak rate late in calendar 1953,
level off for several quarters, and begin to decline gradually late in calendar
1954. (See chart 23.)
It should be emphasized that these forward estimates are based on
presently planned programs. Even without major changes in the program,
any further "stretching-out" of individual production schedules beyond
that already anticipated, or failure to meet established schedules, would
tend to result in a somewhat lower peak level in expenditures, probably
reached at a somewhat later date. Any increase or decrease in unit costs
from original estimates—and such estimates are usually made conservatively
high when funds are initially obligated—would affect final expenditures.
If these estimates prove to be roughly valid, they indicate that, measured
in terms of new demand in the market, the major economic impact of the
national security program has already occurred. Although total expenditures will continue to be large, the month-to-month, or quarter-to-quarter,
increases will be small, in contrast with the large increases from mid-1950
to the second quarter of 1952. Moreover, business buying of raw material




and component inventories, and recruitment of labor, often precede by
many months the Government expenditure for the finished product. Even
though expenditure data include advance payments on military contracts,
and thus already reflect, in part, these production lead-times, it would seem
that the maximum impact of the security program on materials and labor
may have been reached some months ago.
Nevertheless, present plans indicate that, in the next 2 years at least,
the national security program will continue to be a large and powerful
influence in the United States economy. It will provide an assured and
reasonably stable volume of demand for the products of industry. But
other sources of new demand will be needed to provide the growth in total
demand needed to maintain high employment, in an economy characterized
by a growing and increasingly productive labor force.
Other government expenditures. One of the great reserves of potential
demand is to be found among government expenditures other than for
national security, specifically, for the development and conservation of
natural resources, and for public transportation, education, health and
recreation facilities. In general, these forms of governmental investment
are not endangered by the threat of "overcapacity," or by the fear that
there will not be "markets" for their products or services.
During the next few years under the assumption of no change from
present policies, it is not likely that Federal expenditures for these programs will rise significantly. State and local purchases should increase
more substantially, perhaps reaching the level of 28 billion dollars in
1955, compared with 23 billion in 1952. Greater expansion on the State
and local level must await the solution of difficult financing problems.
Private domestic investment
Plant and equipment, including commercial construction. During the
period between World War II and the Korean outbreak, business invested
large sums in plant and equipment. To this already high level of expenditures there was added, after June 1950, the vast expansion of capacity
called for by the defense program, stimulated by such aids as accelerated
tax amortization. Most of the Government-aided expansion will have been
completed by the end of 1953. But for the Government inducements, much
of it probably would have been spread out over a longer period.
Moreover, studies of the relationship between the stock of capital equipment and the volume of total output during the last four decades indicate
that, as a result of the unusually high rate of investment in the postwar
years, the stock of equipment is now somewhat high relative to output.
This suggests that higher rates of investment, or even a continuation of the
present rate, may be difficult to maintain during the next few years.
These evidences of the possibility of a downturn in business investment
are significant, but they are not conclusive when considered in conjunction with the other determinants of investment plans.
234197—53




7

91

The demands of businessmen and consumers alike are influenced by current earnings, and to some degree by past income, from which they may
have saved funds for spending or investing. But far more than in the case
of the consumer, the expenditures of the businessman reflect expectations
about the future. His long-run investment programs are shaped by his
judgment about long-run market prospects; all his decisions are made
primarily with his eye on tomorrow. Business investment must also take
account of existing plant and the stock of capital goods, and the possibility
that capacity may already be more than ample. But the stock of capital
goods, however large, does not preclude the possibility or the necessity of
further investment in a dynamic economy. Equipment must be replaced
or modernized. It may often be discarded, though still usable, in the search
for means of cutting costs to maintain or improve a firm's competitive
position. New products, and the machines to make them, must be devised
for consumers who soon have enough of the old and are attracted by the
new. In the struggle for profits, plant and equipment are always
expendable.
In making his investment plans, the businessman naturally considers his
financial position. Measured by the ratio of liquid asset holdings to sales
or to current debt, corporations in general are in a more favorable financial
situation than before World War II. (See chart 24.) Though corporate
debt has been mounting—it rose 19.4 billion dollars or 14 percent in 1951
and about 7.5 billion or 5 percent in 1952—corporate savings in the form
of retained profits and depreciation reserves have been higher recently than
in most postwar years. The last-named type of saving has been augmented
by accelerated tax amortization.
The availability of external financing must also be taken into account,
and the possibility that taxes will be raised or lowered. On the first
score, the high rate of private saving, which is likely to increase at least
in the business sector for the reason already noted, will probably be an
abundant source of lendable funds. As for taxes, the Council has assumed
for the purpose of this initial analysis that they will be reduced in accordance
with the provisions of the present law. Even if the cuts do not turn out to
be so large, or are not made so soon as now scheduled, the prospects are
that whatever tax action is taken will tend to stimulate business investment.
Finally, although the outlook for earnings and all the other factors
which are conducive to new investment may be favorable, the quality of
management is the ingredient which finally determines whether or not business will capitalize opportunities. Business management in the United
States has amply demonstrated its resourcefulness in turning new investment potentialities into actual plant and equipment.
How businessmen are now weighing and reacting to the several factors
which influence investment decisions is indicated by a recent survey of
investment intentions, conducted by the Department of Commerce and
the Securities and Exchange Commission. This survey revealed that in-




92

CHART 24

CORPORATE LIQUIDITY
For the period since World War H as a whole, liquid asset holdings
of corporations have risen less than current liabilities. However,
in 1952,the ratio of liquid assets to current liabilities was more
favorable than in 1939.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
100

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
100

(END OF YEAR)

80

80
CURRENT
LIABILITIES

60

60

40

40

20

20

1939

1946

1947

PERCENT
100

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952
PER CENT
100

RATIO OF LIQUID ASSETS TO
CURRENT LIABILITIES

80

80

60

•l.,\

40

r-

k

20

:

60

y

- "

40

*
—

0

20

0

1939

1946

1947

1948

1949

NOTE: DATA ARE FOR ACL U.S. CORPORATIONS EXCLUDING BANKS AND
INSURANCE COMPANIES.

SOURCE: SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.




93

1950

1951

1952

vestment firmly planned for 1953 is only slightly below the level of 1952.
A special survey of large companies found that their budgeted capital expenditures in 1954 are 15 percent below the 1952 rate, and 20 percent below
that rate in 1955. These 1954 and 1955 plans are subject to change.
They could move downward more rapidly in the face of unfavorable conditions; they can move more favorably if businessmen grasp the scope of
the markets waiting to be probed. In addition to these budgeted plans,
the companies are considering a substantial amount of other investment
which may be undertaken if conditions prove auspicious.
Surveys which look so far into the future are naturally subject to many
hazards. But if the economic environment continues to be good, they
are not likely to be biased in the direction of exaggeration. The future
has a way of turning up opportunities which cannot be seen at the present.
It should also be emphasized, however, that generally speaking the businessmen interviewed in the surveys had built their investment plans on the
assumption that the Nation would remain prosperous. A decline in an
important sector of econimic activity might well bring a reconsideration
and postponement of many of these investment plans.
Investment by farmers in machinery and buildings has been at a high
level in the post-World War II period, exceeding depreciation by a substantial amount. Some decline in the rate of farm investment in equipment particularly may occur over the next several years, especially if the
downtrend in farm income is not checked or reversed. However, if farm
prices and incomes remain high, the decline may be quite small.
Conservatively appraised, the prospects are that, under the initial working assumptions set forth at the start of this chapter, total investment in
plant and equipment, in the absence of new policies subsequently to be discussed, will decline but not substantially during the next 3 years.
Housing. An estimate of the demand for housing in the next 3 years
must take into account demographic factors relating to population, marriage and birth rates, physical factors relating to the stock and condition
of existing housing, and monetary factors such as incomes and credit conditions. Effective demand is partly dependent on all of these.
Viewed by themselves, most of the nonmonetary considerations suggest
a decline in the demand for housing in the next few years. The year 1945
ended a long period of low residential construction resulting, first, from
the depression in the 1930Js and, second, from the unavailability of materials and labor during the war. The number of families who were forced
to double up because of lack of housing accommodations was large, and
the number of vacancies was negligible. The backlog of demand was
supplemented, in the immediate postwar years, by a phenomenally large
number of new families resulting from high marriage rates.
The volume of residential construction since the end of the war—nearly
8 million units, farm and nonfarm—together with conversions of existing
housing, has been sufficient to house the net increase in the number of




94

CHART 25

NEW NONFARM HOUSING STARTS
After moving up steadily to an all-time high in 1950, new nonfarm
housing starts receded, but continued on a level that was still
high, considering the competing demands of the defense program.
MILLIONS
1.5

#~+ TOTAL NEW STARTS

1.5

PUBLICLY
FINANCED
„ PRIVATELY
f
FINANCED

1.0

1.0

.5

.5

1946

1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

families and to reduce the ratio of doubling-up from about 8.6 percent in
1946-47 to about 4 percent. This rate is well below the prewar level,
and is probably not substantially above the normal minimum determined
by considerations not closely related to the supply and cost of housing.
That is, the "backlog" of demand has now been largely worked off. The
trend in new nonfarm starts since the end of World War II is shown in
chart 25.
The expected decline in the number of new households formed will have
a pronounced effect upon the demand for housing in the next few years.
The young people reaching marriage age in the next few years will be those
who were born in the mid-1930's, when the birth rate was very low. It is
probable that net household formation will decline from the level of
900,000 in the year ending April 1, 1952, to an average of around 700,000
during the next 3 years. This compares with 1,600,000 in the peak year
1947-48.
One offsetting physical factor is the fact that many of the houses which
have been built since the war are small and inadequate for growing families.
The high birth rate of the last several years will result in increasing pressure
for larger accommodations which, in part, will require the building of new




95

houses regardless of the adequacy of the total housing supply in terms of
numbers of houses. In addition, a net demand for housing will continue
to result from the migration of families. Further, many other houses are
very old, seriously substandard, or located in deteriorated or commercialized
neighborhoods. These are candidates for demolition or conversion to uses
other than for housing.
These nonmonetary factors, which on balance indicate a sliding off of
effective demand, are at least partially offset by certain favorable monetary
factors. Incomes are now much higher than they were before or immediately after the war, and if a generally high level of business activity
continues, as we have assumed, it will mean a continued rise in average
personal incomes. The great majority of American families are housed
less adequately than they would like to be. With a continuation of high
incomes, it can be expected that there will be "trading up" all along the
line, which will require new housing at higher quality levels and frequently
at intermediate levels. Many other families, already respectably housed,
will build new houses to get exactly what they want because they can afford to do so. It is also to be anticipated that builders will continue to
improve the quality of new houses and to offer better values, which should
have a stimulative effect on demand. Moreover, the level of housing construction has been repressed to some extent during the last 2 years by residential real estate credit control (Regulation X and its Government-agency
counterparts). The removal of these controls last September has already
contributed to some pick-up (after adjustment for normal seasonal variation) in new housing starts. On balance, assuming a generally high level
of business activity but the absence of any change in private and public
policies, it seems that private residential construction may be somewhat
below recent levels in the next 3 years, but that the monetary factors just
described would hold the total close to about 1 million nonfarm dwelling
units a year.
Expenditures for conversion of large houses or other buildings into apartments, for rehabilitation of existing units, and for new and reclaimed farm
dwellings are expected to hold at levels of recent years. Expenditures for
additions and alterations may increase somewhat under the pressure of
larger families.
These estimates do not make allowances for large-scale expansion of
either the public housing program or the slum clearance and urban
redevelopment programs. In each of these areas, there is a large reservoir
of work which awaits a more intensive application of public policy to these
tasks. This will be discussed subsequently in this Review.
Inventories. About the only certainty about investment in inventories,
which is ultra-sensitive to the slightest shift in the business weather, is
that it is highly unstable. It is therefore wise to make no long-range
estimate of its size in the future, but simply to note that inventories now




96

appear to be approximately in balance with total sales, and to assume that
they will tend to grow with the total output of the economy, but with many
a short-term fluctuation.
Net foreign investment
Exports from the United States, United States imports, foreign aid
programs and the flow of long-term capital to other countries, are subject
to a multitude of conditions and policy measures, foreign as well as
domestic. Hence the forecasting of trends is especially perilous. Only
one general observation may be hazarded: On the basis of recent developments, and assuming no change in international commercial policies, the
prospects are for only a moderate expansion of exports. (International
economic prospects and problems are discussed separately in chapter V.)
Consumer expenditures
Estimates of the volume of spending by consumers must take three things
into account: the flow of personal income; the level of personal taxes
which determines how much of the total income is spendable, i. e., disposable income; and the percent of disposable income which is spent, i. e.,
the saving ratio.
If business activity is high and employment continues to rise during the
next 3 years, as has been assumed, total personal income will continue to
rise. If Federal tax rates should remain at present levels, the gain in disposable personal income would be somewhat less than proportionate to the
gain in personal income. However, if rates are reduced as called for by
present law, as we have assumed, there would be a substantial immediate
effect, and the full effects of the reduction, which would be felt during most
of 1954 and all of 1955, would be to increase the gain in disposable personal
income, directly and indirectly, by around 10 billion dollars (annual rate).
How much of an increase in consumption expenditures might be expected
in either case depends upon the choices of individuals between spending
and saving.
The total which statisticians call "personal saving"—that is, the difference between total disposable income and total purchases classified as consumption—includes many heterogeneous elements which have little or no
relation! to the man-in-the-street's idea of "saving."
A part of total personal saving is increased equities in homes and in the
physical assets of unincorporated businesses when the saving is automatically balanced by spending, or more properly, investment. Saving includes
also rising equities in insurance reserves. Even if purchasing power can
be extracted from these equities through policy loans or cancellations, most
persons are reluctant to draw upon them excepting in emergencies.
An element in saving which is thought to supply consumers with ready
reserves of purchasing power is additions to liquid asset holdings. While
holdings of these assets have risen since the war and are still rising, it is
doubtful whether they are high enough in the minds of most consumers




97

either to discourage further additions or to make a large portion of present
liquid assets ready candidates for "dissaving." (See chart 26.) The latest
Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that many consumers still are quite
dissatisfied with their current degree of liquidity. Included also in liquid
savings are the funds and securities of unincorporated businesses, which are
either a part of current working capital or which have been accumulated
for future investment in business plant, equipment, and inventories. While
liquid asset holdings have grown since World War II, their purchasing
CHART 26

LIQUID ASSETS AND DISPOSABLE
PERSONAL INCOME
At the end of World War H, liquid assets were unusually high
in relation to disposable income. Over the period since then,
however, income has grown at a faster rate than liquid assets.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
300
280

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
300
280

(RATIO SCALE)

260

260

240

—

220

—

240

DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME**^

X

—

220

4

200 —

200

160

ISO

160

160

140

140

^PERSONAL LIQUID ASSET HOLDINGS'^
100

1
1939

1
40

1
41

(
42

1
43

1
44

1
45

46

47

48

49

INCLUDES CURRENCY, DEMAND AND TIME DEPOSITS, SAVINGS AND LOAN SHARES, AND
U S. GOVERNMENT OBLIGATIONS.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM, AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




50

51

52

power has been reduced by inflation, and the amount of "spare cash"
contained within them, which might any day be exchanged for goods, has
been commensurately reduced.
Personal liquid assets are highly concentrated in ownership. It is estimated that the highest one-tenth of income receivers hold about 39 percent
of all liquid assets (excluding currency), according to the 1952 Federal
Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances. In contrast, only 26 percent of
total liquid assets are divided among the many families in the lower half
of the income scale.
One of the most volatile elements in saving is change in consumer debt
outstanding, an increase in the total being considered a form of dissaving
or negative saving, and a decrease a form of saving. Consumer debt is far
more widely distributed among families in the several income brackets
than are liquid asset holdings; it is a liability that at least partially offsets
the ownership of liquid assets, weakening the financial position of some
families and their willingness to spend. In all cases, it is an imperious
charge on future earnings, requiring repayments which are a kind of compulsory saving.
Since the greater part of consumer debt arises from the buying of durable
goods, such as automobiles and household appliances, the course of the
saving rate may depend heavily on the strength of demand for such goods.
The future market for consumer durables is favorable, but it shows less possibilities for increases than in the years immediately following World War II.
Consumers are better stocked with goods than they were at that time,
and they are carrying a higher burden of debt. Although total consumer debt is not out of line with the prewar relationship to disposable
income, and there is no evidence that the economy is as yet "top-heavy" with
such debt, it seems likely that the rate of increase will slow down sometime
in the not too far distant future. (See chart 27.)
In the postwar period, a rising percentage of families has become financially able to own cars, and many families have moved into the two-car
class. In addition, new car demand has been bolstered by the need to replace the superannuated cars of prewar make. Under these stimuli, production in the period 1948 through 1951 averaged 5.2 million a year. In 1952,
only 4.4 million cars were produced, but this was partly due to metal
shortages.
As discussed in chapter II above, automobile sales in 1953 are expected
to be higher than in 1952. They may approximate the 1948-51 average.
In 1954 and 1955, however, there will be fewer prewar cars, and more postwar cars on the roads. The replacement rate will therefore be lower.
Under these circumstances, it may present a difficult problem of salesmanship and price-income adjustments to expand sales of passenger cars
above the 1953 level.
The potential demand for some other consumer durable goods is suggested by table 13, which shows the degree of "saturation" in the market




99

CHART 27

CONSUMER CREDIT AND DISPOSABLE
PERSONAL INCOME
Total consumer credit, after dropping during the World War II
years, rose sharply thereafter.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

25

25

CONSUMER CREDIT OUTSTANDING

20

20

15

15

10

10

1930

1935

1945

1940
END OF YEAR

1950

AHhough the ratio of outstanding consumer credit to disposable
personal income has increased during the years since World
War II, it is still slightly below the prewar peak.
PERCENT

15

15

AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME U

10

0 I

10

I I I
1930

I

I

I I
1935

I

I

I

I I 1 »
1940

»

I 1 I
1945

_!/ CONSUMER CREDIT OUTSTANDING AT END OF YEAR AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE
PERSONAL INCOME FOR YEAR AS A WHOLE.

SOURCES: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




IOO

I

i

I 1 I
1950

for several products. Some of these, such as dishwashers and home freezers,
show very strong growth trends, and should be of increasing importance in
sustaining the demand for consumer durables. Others, such as refrigerators
and radios, will depend increasingly on the replacement market, rather than
sales to new owners.
It should be emphasized that this evaluation of the demand for consumer
goods, as well as the estimates of demand in other sectors of the economy, is
an initial one, precluding important changes in private and public economic
policies. In its policy discussion later on, the Council will indicate some
changes in policy designed to augment some types of demand so that the
total demand may equate with maximum production.
TABLE 13.—Household appliances in use and degree of saturation, January 1953
Homes equipped with
appliances
Appliance
Number
(millions)
A i r conditioners (room)
Cleaners vacuum (floor)
Dichwashers (electric) - - - Driers, clothes (electric and gas)
Food waste units
Freezers (electric) - .
Irons
Radios
Refrigerators (electric)
Television receivers
Toasters
Washers (electric) .

_

_ _ _

--

--

--

--

0.5
25.1
1.3
1.5
1.4
4.9
37.9
43.7
37.8
19.8
30.0
32:2

Percentage of
wired homes
1.3
59.4
3.0
3.6
3.3
11.5
89.6
96.2
89.2
46.7
70.9
76.2

NOTE.—All figures, except those for radios, are based on 42,306,600 domestic and farm electric customers.
Radios are based on 45,464,000 total homes. Percentages computed from unrounded data.
Sources: McGraw-Hill, National Broadcasting Company, and the various television networks.

To review the consumption prospects: If, as we have assumed, the level of
economic activity should remain high, and if there should be no change in
basic private and public policies (specifically, if taxes are reduced as provided by present law), disposable income should increase considerably. The
saving rate will no doubt fluctuate as it has in the past, but there is no clear
evidence to project an important shift in either direction. The saving rate
could be expected to decline, at least temporarily, with a decline in incomes.
But with generally high and rising incomes, and no change in private and
public policies, as we have assumed, a decline in the saving rate large enough
to provide a substantial offset to declines (or absence of growth) in expenditures elsewhere in the economy does not appear to be likely. One reason for
this is the contractual character of many of the methods of saving, including
payments on home mortgages, insurance policies, and instalment loans, and
the relatively high volume of consumer credit outstanding. On the other
hand, the market for consumer goods appears to be sufficiently buoyant so
that a substantial increase above the relatively high 8.6 percent saving rate in
the last half of 1952 also appears to be unlikely. Consumption expenditures,




jo i

therefore, on these assumptions, would probably keep in step with the gain
in disposable income,:-but a greater than proportionate rise could not be
counted on as a certain source of additional demand.
The composite longer-run outlook
The foregoing preliminary analysis of prospects is not a forecast of what
is going to happen. As indicated earlier, it is merely a first approximation,
designed to provide a starting point for further analysis of the steps needed
to assure optimum economic stability and growth. The foregoing sectorby-sector analysis does not indicate the source of the 10-12 billion dollar
annual increase in demand and in real output required for such stability
and growth between now and 1955. Moreover, when the economy is viewed
as a whole, it is clear that if a substantial deficiency in demand should in
fact occur in one sector, and not be offset elsewhere, the interaction of this
sector upon others, and in turn the effect of the total on each, could produce
a much greater shrinkage in total demand than a sector-by-sector review
suggests.
This analysis might seem to strike a note of pessimism. Yet the Council
believes that, while real problems are visible, the high objective of uninterrupted economic stability and growth is attainable if proper and adequate adjustments in private and public policies are made. We believe
that action taken in time to bolster up limited areas, where the danger of
insufficiency of demand seems most likely, or to develop alternative sources
of demand, can forestall the spread of the danger. And since it is easier
to deal with a limited shortcoming than with one which pervades the entire economy, and certainly easier to act when the economy as a whole has
great momentum forward than to lift it out of a pronounced general decline, there is high promise that the prompt application of sensitive private
and public policies can maintain the forward momentum. They can limit
the deviations from maximum employment and production to the mild
undulations implicit in a flexible and dynamic economy. The quantitative analysis thus far undertaken has been designed to make concrete the
treatment of the following basic problem: What policy adjustments—both
private and public—will enable the Nation to close the moderate gap between the sum total of the trends depicted above and the requirements for
fairly steady growth toward a 375-380 billion dollar economy by 1955?
Separate note by Mr. Clark
Many fluctuations will develop within our free, erratic economy during
the next 3 years, but I am not able to see changes in business conditions
which would bring about a recessionary trend threatening enough to require
new counterdeflationary action by the Government. Therefore, I do not
join in the analysis and policy discussion in chapters III and IV.
Continued Government expenditures for goods and services upon the
planned mobilization scale will, in my opinion, support a fully employed
economy. If business slows down, the policies adopted during the past 20




102

years should bring about an early reversal of the downward trend, as they
did in 1949, without any additional action by Government.
If trouble develops in the economy by 1955, it will be due to conditions,
international or political, which are outside the ordinary processes of the
domestic economy, which cannot be foreseen now, and which will not be
cured by the kind of supporting policies discussed in chapter IV. (End of
separate note by Mr. Clark.)




103

Chapter IV. Needed Policies for Sustained
Prosperity
THE GENERAL NATURE OF THE ADJUSTMENT PROBLEM

T

HE foregoing needs and prospects analysis raises the possibility that,
some time within 2 or 3 years beyond the horizon of the immediate
outlook, the predominant economic risks to be counteracted may be deflationary rather than inflationary. And while the preceding analysis offers
some clues regarding offsets, further interpretation is desirable before coming
to policy issues.

The size of the problem
While the problem ahead has been identified, the discussion thus far has
not measured its size. For there is inherent in the economy one set of forces
which would tend to aggravate a deflationary problem if it first emerged in
one sector. And mostly in consequence of relatively recent changes in our
institutional structure, there is another set of forces which would tend to
cushion the effects.
Cumulative aggravating forces. The first working assumption, upon
which the foregoing analysis of component-by-component prospects has
been based, is that incomes will be generally high, markets healthy, and
business conditions prosperous in the 3-year period ahead. The prospects
for private investment and consumption which have been identified rest
heavily on this assumption. But the total prospect into which this piece-bypiece analysis adds up may challenge somewhat the underlying assumption
itself. For while this first approximation of the adequacy of demand does
not seem to indicate a large deficiency, it does indicate some slackness
in markets, some shortfall from full employment incomes, and an increase in
unemployment to an unacceptably high level. Both reason and experience
tell us that this kind of situation, if left alone, could degenerate into a far
more serious deflationary spiral. Although reflecting investor and consumer
assumptions of high prosperity, when the components of demand fail to add
up to a total which justifies such attitudes, businessmen and consumers
speedily bring their assumptions into line with reality. And if this causes a
contraction of investment and consumption still further below needed levels,
total demand is further weakened, and a down-spiral may be on its way.
This danger could be greatly accentuated by a bunching of whatever declines are in prospect. If moderate declines in national security spending,
plant and equipment expenditures, housing, and other items, should be




104

spaced out over a considerable period, the effect might not be serious. If
such declines should be more or less simultaneous, the result would be more
than additive. One area of weakness would aggravate another.
Reductions in investment tend to bring reductions in employment, incomes, and consumption. Then shrinking profits can compound into
greater losses of income by inducing both investment declines and wage cuts.
Certain kinds of price reductions can be healthy, but prices which go into an
out-of-control tailspin frighten buyers away rather than bring them to
market, and accelerate the collapse. And finally, all of these mechanisms,
and others, can be speeded along their destructive paths by contractions of
credit or the collapse of financial institutions.
Sustaining institutional dampeners and shock-absorbers. The fact that
a variety of forces in the American economy can magnify the impact of
what might otherwise be a moderate or even minor discrepancy in total
demand does not have to be belabored. Certainly it would be foolhardy
to conclude that a cumulative economic decline in the United States is
no longer possible. The risk, however, is much less than it was a generation
ago, and the tools to deal with it are vastly superior.
Since World War II, the United States economy has shown a remarkable
capacity for unleashing the new demand forces needed to sustain a growing
total demand when previous front-runners have fallen back. Much of this
buoyancy—though not so much as sometime ascribed—undoubtedly has
been the work of demands accumulated during the war, and of exceptional
expenditures associated with the international stresses of the postwar period.
Nonetheless, this record of recent resiliency does justify our facing the period
ahead with more confidence than would have been possible in the twenties
or thirties. Specifically, it directs attention to a number of recent institutional changes which, taken as a whole, provide arresters to the kind of
cumulative shrinking of demand just indicated.
As the Council has discussed in earlier Reviews, a number of "built-in
stabilizers," such as unemployment compensation, farm price supports, and
a progressive tax system have become commonplaces of public policy. The
expanded fiscal role of the Federal Government increases the amount of
spendable income which the progressive tax system releases to the private
economy when before-tax incomes fall. And if Federal expenditures can be
counted as a relatively firm element of demand, their higher level makes
their stabilizing influence far greater than it was prewar. Other significant
braking mechanisms have developed in the private economy. The 1949
recession suggested a willingness on the part of consumers, in the face of
moderate declines in income, to resist declines in living standards by cutting
their saving rate rather sharply. Also during the 1949 setback, the increased
strength of organized labor, coupled with more far-sighted business policies,
made for a minimum resort to wage and payroll cutting—two of the swiftest
engines of deflation in the past. In addition, the pronounced business trend
during the postwar period toward longer-run capital planning and budget-




105

ing based on long-run market projections probably has made private investment somewhat less sensitive to short-run market fluctuations.
The resistance of our monetary and credit institutions to deflationary
collapse is far greater than it was only a couple of decades ago. Our securities markets are less susceptible to influence by purely speculative factors,
and the banking system is greatly strengthened against failures and rapid
monetary contraction. While the monetary system often initiated or aggravated recessions in the past, in the future it can be expected to be at least
neutral and perhaps positively stabilizing.
More profound than any of these specialized changes, and in part the
consequence of all of them, there has taken place during this generation
a broader distribution of national income among families and among
functional economic groups. There is still room for debate among economists as to whether this trend has not proceeded far enough, or whether
it has proceeded too far in terms of incentives to reward ability and to
stimulate risk-taking. But there would be rather general agreement that
the current and prospective distribution of income, under our free institutions, is more conducive to a fairly steady rate of economic growth than
the conditions of income distribution which prevailed two or three decades
ago. The concurrence on this point may be almost as important as the
changes in the income structure which have taken place; in fact one of
the happiest omens for the future is the increasing realization of the relationship between mass consumption and mass production on the part of
those who make the basic decisions within the private economy.
Cumulators versus arresting forces: the net effect. While the institutional
changes just indicated have reduced the economy's susceptibility to deflation,
it would be easy to rely on them too heavily. Although their existence
probably has contributed to the climate of business and consumer confidence which has stimulated the emergence of new elements of demand
during the postwar period, they are not essentially recession-preventing or
recession-reversing forces. Their direct effect is only to slow or check a
decline once it starts. Also, this new institutional apparatus does not yet
constitute a rugged enough set of brakes to set any sure limit on a major
downturn. It is only certain to retard a decline. If the basic deficiency
of demand were large and nothing remedial were done, or if the traditional
accelerators should begin to feed on a growing and then rampant deflationary psychology, eventually the stabilizers would prove to be feeble in
proportion to the need, the brakes would wear thin, and "bottom" might
turn out to be almost as far down as it used to be.
Thus, our new institutional safeguards are no substitute for positive
anti-deflation policy. But beside mitigating hardships while their effectiveness lasts, they do—and this is supremely important to successful policymaking—give us time. One of the tragedies of many past business downturns has been the suddenness and sharpness with which recession has
struck. The plunge often was well under way and gathering speed before




106

counter-measures could be devised and made effective. In this respect the
economy is now better off. If the problem ahead should be that hypothesized above, our institutional apparatus should provide a reasonably adequate interval for diagnosis and decision. And the effectiveness and timeliness of private and public policy-making may largely determine whether
the cumulators succeed in magnifying, or the arrestors in minimizing, any
developing weakness in total demand.
The primacy of private adjustments
The problem under study has been identified simply as a possible
shortage of total spending emerging within the next 2 or 3 years. An
analysis of workable offsetting adjustments, however, must be more specific
than this. It scarcely can be content with the principle that any additional demand will do. It is necessary to survey a variety of relatively
specific policy courses, and to decide on grounds of desirability and feasibility what relative emphasis they should be assigned. In doing this, it
will be helpful first to formulate certain broad priorities for guiding policy
choices. Two such matters of general priority will be suggested, one having
to do with the choice between public and private measures, and the other
concerning our comparative needs for investment raising and consumption raising.
A dollar spent by private hands is not, by definition and regardless of circumstance, a more virtuous dollar than one spent out of the public treasury.
However, the country has a general preference for private economic adjustments rather than public policies which expand the economic role of
government. The Council shares this preference, on general grounds
of dynamism, flexibility and free-wheeling. This preference is likely to be
especially pronounced in the period after a large defense acceleration, during
which it has been necessary to operate more elaborate and direct economic
controls than Americans like and when, under the relentless pressure of
national security needs, the Federal budget has run at unprecedentedly high
levels for peacetime or even semi-peacetime conditions. If, on top of this,
an incipient deflationary problem brought immediate and substantial resort
to additional Federal spending programs, the difficulties of readjusting at
any early date to a level of Federal activity more in line with the country's
desires would be correspondingly magnified. Finally, if we adhere to
the present national security program, and if present tax laws are followed,
the outlook already is for deficits in the next 2 or 3 fiscal years which,
although reasonably moderate in comparison with the size and strength
of the economy, are nevertheless a source of legitimate concern.
The present analysis therefore recognizes, for a problem of the scope
projected, a general preference for solutions which rely mainly on private
rather than public policy. It also recognizes, however, the risk of relying
solely on such actions and the necessity of taking stock of what supporting
public policies will be available.
234197—53




8

107

The needed emphasis on consumption
A current or prospective deficiency in total private demand might, depending upon circumstances, call for primary emphasis on either consumption-stimulus or investment-stimulus. The period ahead, if it should have
the characteristics suggested here, will call for the former shading of emphasis. This conclusion, in which many other analysts seem to concur,
does not reflect any "prejudice" against business investment. Consumption
is, of course, the principal objective of economic activity. But conversely,
the rapid economic growth which supports increasing consumption over the
long run also requires high and rising rates of business investment. The emphasis upon consumption is simply a reflection of recent relationships
between the two principal components of private demand, is meant to apply
only to the 3-year period under consideration, and during that period is
believed to reflect the best interests of business itself. It should be noted
that, after mid-1950, the Council placed even more emphasis upon expanding certain types of business investment than did many members of the
business community, and that the Council also placed more stress upon
restraint of consumption than many others did.
Before proceeding to a more detailed analysis of investment-consumption
relationships, two side notes should be inserted. In the first place, in discussing the balance between investment and consumption, the following
paragraphs deliberately by-pass the subject of "investment" in housing.
The latter, so far as the demand for the products of industrial capacity is
concerned, is more properly treated in connection with the consumption side
of the balance. It is separately discussed later on in this Review.
Secondly, the following discussion may seem to overlook the possibility
for demand stimulation in the field of net foreign investment. But even
under the most sanguine assumptions, the scope for adjustment in this
sector is small in comparison with possible demand needs of the domestic
economy. And more important, the United States' international economic
policy, of which our net foreign investment will be partly the resultant,
should not be shaped primarily in the interests of general domestic stability
and economic growth. Regarding these objectives, its direct impact in any
case can be only marginal, although with respect to the Nation's vital objectives of international political stability and free world strength its international economic policies may be all-important. Because these issues
might be distorted and would be unduly submerged in the present analysis,
they are treated separately in chapter V of this Review.
The investment-consumption balance and sustainable business investment
rates. Both consumption and investment can grow continuously in an
expanding economy, if they grow in a balanced relationship with each other.
But there is a limit to how far either investment growth or consumption
growth can outrun the other without pausing for the laggard to catch
up. Eventually, if investment runs ahead for a time, a new balance must
be struck between the newly expanded productive capacity which it creates




108

CHART 28

PERSONAL CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURES
DOLLAFIS
1,500

DC LLARS
1,500

PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES
1952 PRICES
1,400

1,400

""^

-P~*.- ' - ; . - r j';^^|

1,300 —

1,300

,- ~

1,200

,

•-/X'l.'-^
!>> -

1,100
•

,
; -

; .,

' -\*'*'' '!•<•*$>./%
\<
~^-;,~

•
- ^'-- ';.„, .'./-- ^''-", - ^ - r ' ,vS? 1,200
\ - ; ' '. r '-'! ; *; - '•/'•• v:" -, - * / • '%V
- ' " / - /:-::- ' / ' / " . ' A V ;''.:>' '-01

'.

1,100

*' '.; ,? .--,'- ~ ^\:

r^; ^''X .5 •"'*', ' '"' v * ' :K- ''" ;>:> ^£1 I
S J'^J ^|2 *
1
1,000

1,000
-'•'' •'«**'- /,*//,'

f

- ' •

—

0

;;^ i^^J^Sr] ,iSH:i?^-? ^^si^^sS^SsJ^SSifiw
1939

1941

1943

1945

1947

1949

o

1951

PERC ENT

PER CENT
100

too

90

90

\

/
/
/

k
V

CONSUMPTJON EXPENDITURES
AS PERCENT OF
DISPOSABLE INCOME

80

80
^—^
/

70

70

60

60

\
V

\

/
S
+*

CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES
AS
PERCENT OF
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT

50

50

:
1939

-

1941

1943

1945

1947

1949

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONMIC ADVISERS.




109

1951

and consumption expenditures. If, in the absence of such an adjustment, a
weakening in total demand is forestalled temporarily by an additional
step-up in new investment, the underlying problem is only postponed and
deepened.
Certainly it is true that the years since 1945 have witnessed a varying but
unbroken investment boom—a boom, it should be emphasized, which, in
the broadest terms, has been admirable and needed. The Nation entered
this period having suffered a private investment famine, first in the thirties
and then during the war. Capacity for civilian production was thoroughly
inadequate to satisfy the new income levels achieved during the war, and
business proceeded to expand it at a very high rate. Because of the very
fact that this ratio of new investment to the total economy represented the
reduction of a previous shortage as well as growth, it was unlikely that it
could be maintained indefinitely.
And then on top of this postwar recovery in civilian capacity, the postKorean mobilization program has laid on an accelerated rate of defenserelated investment. Meanwhile, although consumption levels since 1945
have been high, total real per capita consumption has increased very little.
In relative terms, as a percentage of disposable income, consumption was
not extraordinarily high in the postwar pre-Korean period, despite the
fact that it too was subject to the additional stimulus of accumulated shortages. (See chart 28.) And as a percentage of total production, consumption held fairly steady in the neighborhood of 69 percent up through
1950, and then, under the joint impact of the security program and a higher
savings rate, tumbled to about 63 percent in 1951 and 1952—the latter at a
time when fixed business investment as a percent of total output remained at
or somewhat above its high postwar pre-Korean rates.
It would be dangerous to try to identify any single ratio between private
investment and consumption that would be uniquely compatible with a
balanced economic growth at some particular annual rate. However, the
rough comparisons just indicated seem to justify a presumption that some
relative gain in consumption sooner or later will be necessary. And various
closer, but still not exact, analyses of the relationships between the economy's
stock of capital equipment and such variables as gross output and the manhours of labor employed seem on balance to confirm this impression.
Stimulating investment via consumption. The net conclusion that the
Council draws is certainly not that, to avoid slack demand during the
period ahead, encouragement of investment is to be avoided. Some additions to investment beyond the prospects outlined earlier are to be hoped
for and, as indicated in the discusssion of policy below, sought by positive
measures. The conclusion is simply that if a large increment of private
demand is needed by 1955, it is most unlikely that the bulk of it can be
achieved in the form of additional private investment. And even if by
some quirk of circumstance it could be, it might well be an unhealthy
adjustment, simply postponing further the day of reckoning.




110

The same considerations lead back to a very familiar point—-one which
recent business surveys have often uncovered: A vigorous growth in consumption may not only be the primary requisite for a successful adjustment
in the economy as a whole; it may also be the most effective means under
present circumstances for stimulating additional investment itself. Particularly under the longer-run capital budgeting practices which many businesses have adopted,, business investment is heavily dependent upon the
prospects for the scope of markets—perhaps even more so, within limits, than
upon the short-run prospects for profit margins. In a very real sense, a
reasonable policy emphasis upon consumption raising may be the best single
course that can be devised for supporting and strengthening investment.
The investment-consumption balance and price-income relations. There
is a price-income side to the consumption-investment story already outlined.
Broadly speaking, the economy may be thought of as including three groups
of income receivers—businesses, consumers, and government. Government,
in turn, gets its income from businesses and consumers, for the most part
via taxes.
A rise in prices relative to wages, other things being equal, increases
before-tax business earnings relative to before-tax personal income. A shift
in this direction tends to favor investment relative to consumption when
the general business outlook is good; conversely, a rise in wages relative to
prices tends to favor consumption—unless there is an offsetting change in
taxes. If business taxes rose at the same time that before-tax business
earnings increased, for example, business would not keep its relative gain
of income from consumers; it would simply serve as a channel for transferring that income to government.
If there is need for an increase in consumption relatively faster than
investment—as it now appears there will be during the next few years—
a variety of income adjustments might support such an adjustment in
expenditures. Some would involve a direct shift of spendable incomes
from government to consumers, via either consumer-oriented tax reductions or increased government transfer payments to individuals. But
another method—and the one which lies within the province of private
price, wage, and other income adjustments—would involve a relative shift
from before-tax business incomes to consumers' incomes, via either wage
and salary increases or consumer price reductions.
If such a shift were made in the absence of parallel tax adjustments, it
would mean, of course, some reduction of after-tax profit margins (although,
as is emphasized below, not necessarily of dollar profits in the long run).
If it were coupled with business tax reductions, it could simply mean a shift
to consumers of income which previously had been going to government.
Table 14 shows that the increases in real disposable personal income in
the postwar period have been relatively small, and suggests the need for
improvement. In this connection it is interesting to note chart 29, which
indicates that during the period over-all, contrary to the common impression,




i i.i

TABLE 14.—Indexes of gross national product, personal consumption expenditures, and per capita
disposable personal income, constant prices *
[1946=100]
Gross
national
product

Year
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952 2

--

Personal
consumption
expenditures

100
103
104
112
121
124

- - -

Per capita
disposable
income

103
104
107
113
112
114

95
98
97
103
103
104

i Indexes based on data in 1952 prices.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; Council of Economic Advisers.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers. (See appendix tables B-2 and
B-10.)

average hourly earnings in manufacturing, adjusted for consumers' price
changes, have not risen faster than the economy's general productivity gains,
but instead apparently have lagged significantly.
CHART 29

CHANGES IN OVER-ALL PRODUCTIVITY
AND MANUFACTURING EARNINGS
Since World War n, average hourly earnings in manufacturing
have not increased as rapidly as output per man-hour for the
economy as a whole.
INDEX, 1946 = 100
125

INDEX, 1946 = 100
125

120

120

115

115

OVER-ALL PRODUCTIVITY •*/
AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS
IN MANUFACTURING'S,
(1952 PRICES) &
X

110

\
. >
| ' v

110

105

105

100

100

95

95

mn
1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

\J TOTAL GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT, 1952 PRICES, PER MAN-HOUR FOR ALL EMPLOYED PERSONS.
Z/ DEFLATED BY THE CONSUMERS' PRICE INDEX.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVfSERS.




112

1952

However, while study of data on corporate profits (see appendix tables
B-34 and B-38) and other business earnings confirms the need for some
relative shift of before-tax income from business to consumers, it raises
doubts as to the extent to which such an adjustment can feasibly be made
in the absence of tax reductions. Before the last half of 1951, after-tax
corporate profits were generally above historical levels. But recently, the
ratios of after-tax profits to sales have for the most part been significantly
below earlier postwar levels. It is not very likely that many businesses
whose after-tax margins currently are below the present average will narrow
them further. On the other hand, a general effort to return these net
margins to their earlier and much higher levels, at a time when a shift
toward consumption is needed, would be unfortunate and self-defeating.
The implications are clear: (a) The room available for general transitional price and wage adjustments may be partially dependent upon business tax adjustments; and (b) in the absence of such tax adjustments, an
opportunity for helpful price and wage adjustments will center mainly
in those industries and firms where present profit margins are relatively,
favorable. Roughly speaking, in the manufacturing sector this opportunity
seems greatest—in terms of product—among durable goods producers,
and—in terms of size—among the largest corporations.
WORKABLE LINES OF POLICY
Private price and wage policies
Turning now to the various lines of policy which are available, it is
logical first to take up private price-wage policy, because it is perhaps best
attuned to the broad preference priorities previously established. Adjustments in price-wage policy afford the greatest amplitude for private action
as an alternative to public compensatory action.
It is possible that the development in business and labor circles of an
effective and coherent price-wage policy can raise real consumption several
billion dollars annually. Such private "policy," it should be noted, is by
definition the province of decision-makers in the so-called "administered
price" sectors of the economy. It would be imprudent to rely solely upon
this answer to the deflationary risk—for one thing because, as the following
analysis suggests, the scope of the opportunity for helpful price and wage
adjustments may in turn depend partly on what happens to business taxes.
Yet the contribution which private price and wage policy can make should
not be overlooked.
Needed wage adjustments. In line with the above analysis, the specific
wage and price considerations of a longer-run character which the Council
wants to suggest may be set down as follows:
In the case of wages: First, in the event of a weakening in demand,
wage cutting should be avoided. While such an adjustment may temporarily ease the situation of an individual firm, it can set of! a dangerous chain
reaction.




"3

Second, during the period ahead, wage adjustments should continue to
do their long-run job of helping to distribute the increased incomes resulting from improved productivity. As was said in the Economic Review
of January 1950, with a growing potential for national output, the only
way to translate this potential into actuality is to distribute more goods.
If the price level is to be kept reasonably stable when the economy is in
balance, then the increasing purchasing power necessary for expanding
markets must come mainly in the form of consumer incomes rising in
accord with improved productivity. And since wages constitute the bulk
of personal income, the preferable general formula—once wages, prices,
and profits are in a workable relationship—is for money wages to increase
with productivity trends in the whole economy.
Third, while this long-run wage policy should be continued and more
firmly established, it would be impractical and undesirable generally to
strive for average wage increases in excess of productivity gains. The
aggressive seeking of large wage increases under conditions of market
weakness or theatening weakness would prompt abnormal industrial strife.
And if won, increases in excess of productivity gains would subject many
businesses to extraordinary cost pressures at a time when these would be
most discouraging to new business activity. Wage policy, by and large,
should stick to the job of helping to maintain the price-income balance and
thereby the consumption-investment balance. In the price-wage sector, it
is primarily the function of prices to help correct the balance. These general principles may have exceptions in some industries or business situations.
Needed price adjustments. The present challenge to managers to develop
self-enlightened merchandising programs which also serve the needs of general stability, is a very real one, and it is not remote. Instead this is one
strand of policy which, in the coming months, can safely anticipate the
problems ahead without any serious risk either to those who make the
venture or to the economy generally.
If a substantial deflation of economic activity should materialize, lower
prices sooner or later would be inevitable. The need is for those in a position
to do so—and in a position where such action will do the most good—to
choose deliberate, anticipatory, and selective price reductions and other
forms of aggressive merchandising. This is a positive means of avoiding
the general economic break which might be the consequence of cautious or
standpat pricing. And this general recommendation can be somewhat
particularized.
First, for a variety of reasons, the suggestion is directed especially at the
manufacturers of consumer goods. Even under present tax rates, opportunities for margin squeezing exist in many consumer lines. This is
evident from profit data, and is suggested by the recent weakening of many
raw materials prices relative to manufacturers' prices. Among consumer
goods, the opportunities for promotional price reductions and for expanding
markets for new and improved products may be especially great in case of




114

consumer durables, although they do not end there. Moreover,, the relatively stable character of distributors' percentage mark-ups tends to result in
even greater absolute reductions at the retail level and thus bring about an
added stimulus to buying.
Second, there is a need for more flexibility and willingness to experiment
on the part of manufacturers. A high degree of conservatism, bred of a
decade and more of sellers' markets—cautiousness in estimating demand
elasticities, in estimating probable operating levels for price-making purposes, in adhering to stereotyped profit margin rules, and in experimenting
with new products—may prove self-defeating. The scope of the demand
for new or lower priced products can never be fully known in advance,
but it can be explored.
Third, as long as the excess profits tax remains in force, for those manufacturers whose marginal tax rates are high and who at the same time
can accept relatively minor reductions in after-tax margins, the tax provides a relatively costless and riskless umbrella under which they can experiment with promotional pricing and products aimed at untapped markets. Moreover, as implied earlier, if and when business taxes are reduced,
it may be a mark of wise management to view the tax savings, not as a
means for boosting margins back to earlier levels, but rather as an opportunity for developing markets via lower prices and product improvements.
To reemphasize, in conclusion, what was stated earlier, reductions in
profit margins during the period ahead need in no sense conflict with a
stable and indeed increasing level of absolute profits. In order to provide
the needed growth in sales volume, a relative increase in the portion of
national income going to disposable personal income seems necessary. In
providing an increasing real volume of sales, margin reductions are far from
being a dampener on profits. Anticipatory price adjustments tend, at the
least, to prevent a fall in total profits with declining sales, and to stimulate
the growth in the economy which is needed to improve dollar profit positions.
Such anticipatory adjustments are far removed from the disorganized downspirals in prices which feed on themselves and contract rather than expand
markets. Appropriately timed price changes should forestall rather than
initiate this process.
Supporting public policies. Besides encouraging helpful private wage
and price adjustments during the next 2 or 3 years, the Federal Government can help to make the economic environment more favorable for
the kind of private adjustments which have been outlined.
First, if healthy wage adjustments are to help support the transition, it
will be important that changes in industrial relations law do nothing to
undermine the collective bargaining position or general morale of labor.
Second, Federal legislation may, to a significant degree, determine the
effectiveness of retail price competition, and, as a result, the extent of the
impact which promotional pricing at the manufacturing level would have
on consumers. To a considerable extent in recent years, it has been the




aggressiveness of chain store, mail order, and department store merchandising which has kept a keen edge on retail competition. It is essential
that the Government undertake a thoughtful review of its antimonopoly and
market regulating policies to guard against any progressive blunting or
weakening of competition in consumer markets.
Private investment policies
Promotional pricing and aggressive merchandising, by increasing sales
and sales prospects, would themselves tend to react favorably on business
investment. In addition, looking ahead toward 1955, private investment
may be strengthened more directly by certain private and Government policies. The need is for positive and energetic search for new and expanding
investment lines, for opportunities in the less developed regions in this
country and abroad, and for the fuller exploitation of potential markets for
existing products and services.
As chapter III has indicated, there are many growth possibilities which
will open up in the next few years to the vigorous enterprise which has characterized the American economy more notably perhaps in the last decade
than ever before. These fast growing lines, for which future growth prospects appear bright, include many newer ones such as man-made fibers
other than rayon, plastics, magnesium, synthetic rubber, antibiotics, air conditioning units, television sets, combination washer-driers and other household equipment, and frozen foods. Many older lines such as aluminum,
gypsum board, rayon, fertilizers, certain acids and other chemicals, and
tractors are also growing rapidly. These promising prospects include, not
only raw materials, capital equipment items, and both durable and nondurable consumer goods, but also a variety of services such as air freight and
passenger business, motor courts, electric power, and telephone service.
Other fast growing activities are quality improvements in established products such as power steering and automatic transmission mechanisms on automobiles, and electronic devices used to control industrial operations. Undoubtedly numerous other industries and products, now barely on the horizon
of economic possibility, will move into the range of active business development within the next few years.
What may private business on its own initiative do to bring about the
fullest realization of private investment opportunities, both for growth and
stabilization purposes?
First, private business can maintain and expand the whole range of its
activities which come under the heading of research and development.
In 1951, some 1.2 billion dollars was spent directly by private industry for
this purpose, with additional large amounts being spent on industrial and
related research through Government. Many of the more progressive firms
devote relatively high percentages of their sales revenues to research and
accord research an important place in managment.
Second, the practice already widespread among business leaders of programming investment several years ahead, often 5 to 10 years, might advan-




116

lageously be adopted more widely. With business generally in a strong
financial position, this would serve to promote growth and stability at the
same time. It permits more orderly financing, more regularized purchasing
programs, and sets a condition for more stable and longer-term wage and
other agreements with labor.
Third, more careful surveys might be made of the markets for present
and possible new products and services. This would provide a firmer underpinning for both research and development and long-range investment
planning. Again, many firms undertake this kind of analysis, but it could
well be done more generally.
Fourth, existing business firms, especially those looking to the establishment of new plants or branches, as well as persons contemplating the
formation of altogether new firms, would do well to examine carefully the
prospects for their particular operation in some of the less developed areas
of the country. Relatively rapid growth in population and incomes in the
Southwest and the Far West, for example, mean better market prospects.
In the old South, the momentum of the industrial development which has
gained strength in recent years, plus the rapid increase in income, point
to this part of the country as a desirable location for many types of business,
operating at wage rates compatible with those in other areas. In the older
industrial areas of the Northeast, especially New England, most strenuous
private efforts are being made, and will have to continue to be made, to
move from the older textile and shoe industries toward new and rapidly
growing lines such as electronics, research services, electrical and machinery
lines, among others.
While first reliance should be placed upon privately initiated action
to strengthen investment, there are many Government measures which
may be taken to encourage private investment, and which do not add
much if anything to Government expenditures. First, basic research and
experimentation carried out by Government can provide the technical
basis for private investments. For example, technical and economic
research in synthetic liquid fuels has reached the point where private
investors are now actively interested in the establishment of synthetic
liquid fuel plants. Second, credit guarantees of various sorts on the part
of Government, such as in housing, provide a stimulus to private investment. As noted later, the terms on which such credit is guaranteed may
be altered to encourage investment. Third, in certain instances, the
extension of certain socially desirable Government regulations may, as
a by-product, induce private investment. For example, State and city
governments may require through ordinances that both municipal and
industrial water pollution control measures be taken. Fourth, properly
timed tax reductions, discussed subsequently in this Review, can be a potent
force for maintaining investment—particularly under present circumstances, those which expand consumer markets.
The smaller business segment of the economy might be aided by a further




117

development of the program of the Small Defense Plants Administration,
which already has done good work in helping small business to carry its
share of the defense prograrti, and by a strengthening of the various technical
services offered business by the Department of Commerce.
More important than these specific governmental measures is the influence
which the Government exerts upon the general business climate. That
climate is the product of all these specific measures taken together, but it
is something else besides. It resides in ever increasing realization that
the objectives of business and of Government are mutual and compatible,
that neither can succeed in the long run if the other fails, and that the
instrumentalities for a working relationship between the two need to be
continually improved. This problem can by no means be solved, although
it may be reduced, simply by bringing businessmen, workers, or farmers
into the Government; for when this is done, they become part of the
Government and not a part of the private business community. The
most important need, as the Council has frequently urged, is for a process
of consultation between Government officials and private operators, based
not upon a confusion of their respective and clearly different functions,
but rather upon realization that each has much to contribute to the functioning of the other. The exploratory machinery thus far established at
various levels of the Government for this purpose has been of considerable
use, but improved machinery is necessary. More important than blueprints, however, is the need that those on all sides of the table take this
effort more seriously and pursue it more diligently. In the final analysis,
it is the only middle way between the danger of excessive economic instability
and the danger of excessively centralized authority—quite aside from the
fact that the former evil produces the latter.
Credit policy
Measures of general credit policy, which are generally thought of as
instruments of stabilization, are highly regarded by some theorists as means
of curbing inflation—assuming that the measures are applied vigorously
enough; but they are held in rather low repute as antideflationary devices.
The black mark put in the record because of their poor performance in the
J930's has not yet been erased. However, the first reputation is not unclouded, and the second is perhaps unjust.
General credit policy attempts to regulate the availability (and therefore necessarily the cost) of lendable funds, a steady yet appropriately
flexible supply of which is essential to production in a growing economy.
The first objective of credit policy is to assist production; stabilization is
an associated purpose. This does not mean, however, that stabilization is
not a highly important objective; it merely suggests that credit policy must
be used with great discretion as an instrument of stabilization and must be
heavily accompanied by other measures.
The prime role of credit in production is, of course, not to create demand,
but to implement it; its job is to facilitate rather than generate. It is possible




118

for credit policy to achieve a victory over inflation by withholding funds
from those desiring to buy, although such action may thwart the first objective of the credit mechanism. At the other extreme, in a deflationary
situation, it is hardly to be expected that credit policy alone can arouse business from recession by making funds available to finance demands which do
not exist.
It would seem, then, that the actions of general credit policy most effective in maintaining prosperity might be those taken, first, while the level
of business activity is still high, or, second, at the very first signs of a recessionary development. The first situation requires delicate balance between
restrictive actions which prevent speculative excesses, and the avoidance
of extreme measures which might hamper production, as by holding
interest rates at a level discouragingly high for long-range investment
programs. The second situation requires the prompt liberalizing of credit
while private demand is still strong enough to grasp the opportunity.
Much success in uncovering latent demand, or in making borrowing
feasible and safe for larger numbers of persons, has marked the policies of
reducing down payments, extending maturities, and the repayment of loans
through amortization, for which the Federal Government should be credited
with much of the leadership. Examples of this leadership are to be found
in the housing and farm credit programs. The latter, in addition to pioneering new credit terms, have more effectively mobilized and channeled
credit into agricultural uses, thereby cutting interest rates and other borrowing costs.
Furthermore, the insurance or guarantee of residential mortgage loans
by the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Administration,
and the guarantees by Government procurement agencies of loans to businesses with defense contracts under the Defense Production Act, represent
another method of making credit more widely available, especially to the
small borrower, and indeed benefiting borrower and lender alike.
It should be noted that, in about all of the examples cited, the improved
loan services are offered to borrowers by privately owned institutions.
Very likely, considerably more could be done by these means to stabilize
borrowing and private demand, and to stimulate business in the event of
another recession. Some further liberalization of terms might be possible
under the present programs, and consideration might be given to the feasibility of extending the insurance principle, with some lengthening of maturities, to consumers' loans for the purchase of durable goods (beyond
what is permitted under Title I of the Federal Housing Act) and to loans
to small businesses.
Tax policy
In the discussion in chapter II of short-run policy issues, it was stated that
general economic considerations favor the continuation of present tax rates.
To lower taxes in 1953 would not only increase the budget deficit, but would
make it more difficult to reduce taxes later on, when the economy will be




in the transition to a lower level of defense spending and could benefit most
from tax reduction.
As individual taxpayers, we always welcome tax reductions at the earliest
possible moment. But as members of the community, we should understand that the benefits of lower taxes sometimes prove illusory. In one set
of economic circumstances, tax reduction will encourage larger total production, with more goods and services available for consumption and business investment. Under other conditions, the result may simply be more
dollars competing for substantially the same supply of goods and services.
Apart from issues as to timing, there are important questions regarding
the form which tax reduction should take. The executive departments and
the Congress will be concerned with the problem of how tax reduction may be
combined with basic improvements in the Federal tax system. For a time
it looked as though the years immediately following World War II would
provide the long awaited opportunity for an overhauling of the tax system,
and several comprehensive studies were issued in the late war years with
this objective in mind. In 1945, however, and again in 1948, tax reductions
were made but there was no concerted effort to fit the tax reductions into an
over-all plan for an improved tax structure. The present situation may be
compared to that of the late war years, because of the indications that the
next major revenue legislation will be a tax reduction measure. For important practical reasons, proposals for tax reforms meet with less resistance
when they are combined with reductions for most taxpayers. If the pattern
of tax reduction laid down in the present law is accepted without careful
examination, the country would lose an opportunity to effect needed structural changes, some of which are long overdue.
Economic effects of taxation. The Council is particularly concerned that
tax policy be used most effectively for the promotion of a high and stable
economy. Yet we recognize that revenue programs must take into account
a number of competing and sometimes conflicting objectives. Taxes are
needed to supply funds to the Government, and the extent to which they
exceed or fall short of expenditures determines changes in the public debt.
The fairness of the distribution of the tax load is always an important factor
to be considered, and also the ability of the Government to administer the
revenue laws and the ease with which taxpayers can comply with them. All
these considerations have a direct and important bearing upon the usefulness of tax policy as an economic instrument.
Taxes affect economic activity in two ways: (1) by changing the amount
of money that taxpayers have at their disposal; and (2) by altering the
complex of motivations that guide taxpayers' decisions with respect to
spending, saving, investing, and producing. In the preceding analysis of
adjustments for maintaining economic prosperity, great stress was laid
upon the need for measures to stimulate larger consumer spending. Is
tax policy an effective instrument for this purpose?
Although almost any kind of tax reduction would contribute to larger




120

consumer spending, some kinds would contribute more than others. For
example, a reduction in personal income taxes will ordinarily stimulate
consumption more than a reduction of the same amount in corporate taxes.
In the case of the personal income tax, the full amount of the reduction
is placed almost immediately at the disposal of consumers. In the case
of corporate taxes, the tax savings first accrue to corporations, which then
decide whether to use the funds to increase dividends, reduce prices, raise
wages, or add to retained earnings. As has already been indicated, it
will be important over the next few years for corporations, by price reductions and other means, to channel into the support and expansion of markets the bulk of whatever tax reductions do occur. But it would be hazardous even to guess what proportion of a corporate tax reduction actually
would reach the hands of consumers, or how quickly. It should not be
overlooked that lower personal taxes, through higher consumer spending,
indirectly channel funds into the hands of business.
A reduction in excise taxes also merits priority as a means of making additional purchasing power available to consumers. When goods are in ample
supply, excise reductions will be followed in most cases by equivalent price
reductions. Thus, consumers would be enabled to step up their spending,
or saving, by approximately the amount of the tax reduction. Even if
some part of the tax reduction first showed up in higher profits, some of the
profit increase would eventually filter through to consumers.
Estate and gift taxes, on the other hand, probably have little effect on
consumption. As a matter of equity, it is often proposed that these taxes
be increased. This might be done at the same time that other taxes are
being reduced.
The objective of stimulating consumption will be better served if tax
reduction is distributed as much as possible in favor of consumer groups who
are heavy spenders. This is usually interpreted to mean that the reduction should go more to low income groups than to high income groups, since
the former spend a higher proportion of their earnings. Changes in the
rates and exemptions for the personal income taxes may easily be designed
so as to conform with this pattern, and excise reductions will usually benefit
low income groups relatively more than others.
While favoring, during the period under consideration, reductions in
those taxes which have the greatest repressive effects on consumer spending,
the Council realizes that some taxes probably will need to be adjusted because of their adverse effects on incentives and investment funds, or for
other reasons. Large corporations subject to the excess profits tax pay to
the Federal Government either 82 or 70 percent of any increases in their
earnings; conversely, the Government absorbs either 82 or 70 percent of
reductions in earnings. Such high rates are tolerable during an emergency
period of limited duration; they have no place as a permanent feature of
a tax system which is designed to spur initiative and productive efficiency.
Similarly, the high surtax rates paid by upper-bracket individual taxpayers




121

may also, in some circumstances, adversely affect investment incentives.
Other proposals meriting analysis include those for granting special
tax concessions in order to encourage specific types of economic activity
or to strengthen particular taxpayer groups. An example is the proposal
to liberalize the treatment of depreciation deductions, on the ground that
this would stimulate plant modernization and expansion, or the proposal
to reduce taxes on income from foreign investments in order to encourage
more investment abroad. Many tax recommendations are focused on the
special tax problems of small business.
Such proposals, while deserving careful consideration, should be studied
in the framework of the total tax program. Whatever their separate merits,
their combined effect might be to make serious inroads on the tax base
and make higher rates necessary in areas not granted favored tax treatment.
Moreover, we must be careful that they do not conflict with the continuing
objective of improving the tax structure in order to remove unjustified
advantages to a few at the expense of everybody else.
Social security programs and other transfer payments
The incomes of many old, needy, handicapped, unemployed, and underemployed persons, who make up the bulk of the low income groups, are
heavily dependent upon transfer payments by governments, i. e., expenditures which are not made for currently produced services or goods. The
long-run expansion of protection in this sector of the community, represents
one of the Nation's broad purposes. It also represents the strengthening
of groups whose needs require that they spend virtually all of their income
for consumption.
The total transfer payments to the public made by the Federal Government, including social insurance, public assistance, veterans' benefits, and
interest payments on the public debt, came to about 17 billion dollars in
1952, or 7 percent of total personal income. Not counting the interest payments, the remainder of some 12 billion dollars was paid to the aged, unemployed, indigents, veterans, and others who spend most of it promptly.
State and local transfer payments increased this amount by 3 billion
dollars. Many of these transfer payment programs fall into the "built-in
stabilizer" class—payments under them would expand more or less automatically in the event of a downturn. Improvement or expansion of these
programs can properly be included in the present roster of positive adjustment policies.
The label of "fixed income groups" when it is applied to transfer payment recipients is, as table 15 indicates, something of a misnomer. "Lagging income groups" would be more accurate. Since 1940, the index of
average income of groups receiving public transfer payments has risen, but
less than the index of average earnings of fully employed groups. While
average payments to public assistance recipients and unemployment insurance payments, generally speaking, have kept abreast or ahead of increases




122

TABLE 15.—Indexes of per capita social security benefits and per capita earnings of selected groups,
and consumers* prices
[1940=1001
Item

1943

Earnings per full-time employee:
Farm 1
Manufacturing
... _
Government

1951

-

_ ._ . _

_

330
176
175

334
216
215

376
250
235

92
127
100
101

100
149
100
104

106
164
118
111

181
149
122
117

118

141

134

131
159

180
197

196
223

200
181

132
128
110
114

Disability payments per beneficiary, veterans' program . . _

185

100

. _ .

170

164
135

..

139

262

. ._ _ . _

Old-age retirement payments per beneficiary:
Old-age and survivors insurance
. ._Railroad retirement
Federal civil service
State and local government retirement

Public assistance payments per recipient:
Old-age assistance .
Aid to dependent children per family
Aid to the blind
".
General assistance per case

1949

123

Consumers' prices

Unemployment payments per beneficiary:
State unemployment insurance
Railroad unemployment insurance

1946

174
192
145
163

221
229
182
208

220
234
189
194

* Aggregate net incomes of farm operators plus wages of hired laborers divided by average farm employment.
NOTE.—Unemployment payments are based on average weekly figures, railroad unemployment on
average daily, public assistance on December average; all other payments or earnings are based on annual
averages.
Sources: Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce, and Federal Security Agency.

in the cost of living, the retirement and survivor programs have not. Even
more important than these trends, from the viewpoint both of family need
and strengthening purchasing power, is the low absolute level of income
which characterizes these groups. The average monthly payment to a single
retired worker receiving old-age and survivors insurance is about $40, to a
retired worker and his wife $70, to a surviving aged widow $36, and to a
young widow with two children $94. The average weekly unemployment
insurance payment is about $24, and average monthly payments for oldage assistance are about $45. By contrast, average weekly earnings in all
manufacturing industries are about $70 per worker.
While the present social security system represents a major bulwark
against social and economic hazards, and one which has been partially
strengthened against the tide of inflation in recent years, there obviously
is large scope for needed improvement. In the case of unemployment insurance, extension of coverage, raising of weekly benefit amounts, or
increasing the number of weeks for which insurance payments could be
made, are improvements in the unemployment insurance system often suggested during recent years which would increase payments, and hence
consumer expenditures, in event of a recession.
There is also a less obvious automatic antirecession aspect to old-age
insurance payments. In the event of a downturn, some of the 1.4 million
persons entitled to such payments but not receiving them because they
have well-paid employment would undoubtedly leave their jobs and apply




123

for benefits. Half a billion dollars of payments might be added in this
event, or possibly twice this amount in a severe recession. Even without
such a recession-induced expansion, it is estimated that under high employment conditions old-age and survivors insurance payments will rise from
about 2.9 billion dollars in 1953 to 3.3 billion dollars in 1954. In addition,
the provision of disability benefits and of hospitalization benefits for the
insured old people and other beneficiaries would act to increase consumer
expenditures.
Federally supported public assistance payments and "general assistance,"
the catch-all category now entirely financed by States and localities, provide
minimum income for those needy persons and their dependents not covered
by other programs, and in some cases supplement old-age insurance payments. Although the number of persons receiving public assistance is expected to decrease during the years ahead as more and more of the burden
is taken over by old-age insurance, still in a general recession it would undoubtedly be necessary to increase transfer payments made through these
programs.
Agricultural policies
The Council has frequently noted that, despite long-term gains which
have raised agriculture out of its forlorn position in our economy, the
sound objective of "parity for agriculture" has not yet been achieved.
This is particularly true now because agriculture has not shared proportionately in the great and continuing economic advance during the past year or
so. The "farm problem" in the critical degree that it existed for a decade
or longer after World War I, is not yet with us and never again should be.
But there are already signs that, regardless of whether one believes that farm
price supports should be higher or lower or different, many vigorous things
will need to be done on a broad front to enable the farm population to have
a standard of living and a degree of opportunity closer to that of other groups
than it has thus far been.
The problem is particularly acute for 1.7 million farm families who have
long been living at seriously depressed levels, some of them tenants, many
trying to work very poor land, and all of them especially subject to such
problems as inability to get credit, unfamiliarity with newer farm methods,
and lack of needed equipment. Basically for human reasons, but also because of the desirable general economic effect of raising the purchasing
power of one needy group, efforts to improve productivity and incomes of
the low income farm families should be strengthened.
The issue is a very complex one. It involves not only price and income
policy, but also questions such as export markets for farm products, and
the still broader question of the evolving pattern of relationship between
the part of our human and other resources devoted to agriculture and those
devoted to other pursuits. A shift in this pattern is certainly taking place
as a long-range trend, and attention should be given as to how it may




124

be accomplished without undue hardship. More generally, the improvement of living conditions in many of the farm areas depends upon developmental programs supported by public funds, and also upon industrial
development, because the shift from agriculture to industry need not be
identical with the geographical shift of population. Some things different
from those now being done may be required to deal with the farm problem.
But whatever they are, they will offer abundant opportunity to contribute
both to general economic stability in the next 2 or 3 years, and to long-run
improvement in the economic position of farmers.
Housing policies
As noted previously, expenditures on new housing construction in the
absence of new private and public policies may be lower in 1955 than in
1952, chiefly because of the progressively smaller number of new households
expected to be formed between now and 1955. This drop in housing might
be moderate if economic conditions in general remain brisk. However,
it could be large. The continuing active desire to move to the suburbs, plus
the high proportion of old, less advantageously located houses, especially
in the presence of high incomes generally, indicate a large latent replacement demand for housing which can be made effective during the coming
years. Further preparation and progress in this segment of the economy
are essential. Whatever additional amount of housing may result will fall
well within the Nation's needs.
First, emphasis in policies and programs to maintain a sufficient level
of housing demand should be given to private actions. Reduction in sales
prices or improvements in quality would undoubtedly broaden the market
for new housing. Cost-reduction innovations, such as the development
of more efficient building techniques, new materials, and improved financing arrangements, are important avenues to lower prices. Such innovations require constant research. Moreover, it would be in the builders'
interest to pass the benefits of increased efficiency along to the consumer
in the form of price reductions. More attractive mortgage terms, especially
lower down payments and longer maturities, are another method for increasing sales. In addition to the market for new homes, a large demand
exists for additions and alterations in existing houses, to take care of
numerous growing families. Demand from this source will probably increase, and it should be served actively. Financing could be assisted by
increased use of open end mortgages, which provide for more economical
financing of improvements.
Second, these private actions can be supported and facilitated by Government assistance of various indirect types which do not involve much
increase in Government outlays. Government can assist industry in accomplishing cost and price reductions by supporting housing research projects directed toward reducing construction costs, improving quality, and
solving financing problems. The volume of housing construction is most




125

sensitive to mortgage credit terms, over which during the past two decades
the Government has had an increasing degree of influence. There is evidence that the easing of terms on Government-assisted mortgage credit in
1949 was a factor in the early resumption of activity in the housing industry
during a general though brief business recession. With the recent relaxation of Regulation X, terms now available for FHA- insured and VA-guaranteed loans are, with minor exceptions, as liberal as permitted by law. Thus,
having already in a sense "used up" this instrument for stimulating demand,
any substantial further liberalization of Government-aided mortgage credit
would require new legislation. To make further liberalization of terms
actually effective, it would probably be necessary for the Government to
stand ready to purchase such mortgages to the extent that private funds
were not available. This could be done by extending and enlarging the
authority of the Federal National Mortgage Association to purchase and
make advance commitments to purchase privately originated mortgages.
Another method is direct lending of Government funds to home purchasers,
such as that now done on a limited scale by the Veterans Administration.
Also, extension of the loan insurance principle to new forms of financing,
and to higher quality (and cost) housing, would provide a means of
tapping private funds for housing investment at more liberal terms. It
should be noted, however, that Government credit aids cannot by themselves alone directly create housing demand unless individuals actively wish
to buy more houses. Credit aid is a favoring but passive condition within
which private decision and action are encouraged. If a downward tendency commences to spiral steeply, such credit aid may have limited effect.
But with no such spiral development, or if action can be timed in the earliest
phases of a downward tendency, credit easing and assistance can be important in maintaining housing demand.
Third, there is a basic need for a large expansion of the locally operated
low-rent housing and slum clearance program, assisted by Federal contributions. No need has more general recognition, and no need has been
more carefully analyzed by repeated congressional studies and more fully
supported by general enabling legislation.
The provision of decent housing for those who now live in urban and
rural slums is not primarily an antirecessionary measure. It is an essential
part of the fulfillment of an American standard of living which is well within
our current productive capacity. Basically, in accord with fundamental
congressional policy already established, the slum clearance and low-rent
housing program should be conducted on a long-range basis, in sufficient
volume to liquidate the preponderance of bad housing within a decade.
To bring it up to this level would so many times multiply the recent and
current rate of construction in this field, that the question of accelerating
this program merely to maintain economic stability and growth is largely
academic. And for much the same reason, any argument that this program
should be held at its current low levels until the signs of economic recession




126

appear is without foundation. Nonetheless, the purely economic argument
for the expansion of this program is also powerful. There are few programs the expansion of which would so thoroughly unite the ultimate
objective of defensible living standards for the whole American population
with the intermediate objective of economic stability and growth.
The problem of an adequate supply of low-rent housing and the problem of urban redevelopment and slum clearance are inseparably connected.
Both have been unduly retarded; and it is hard to say which retardment
has been the primary cause and which the primary effect. Decaying residential areas at the core of our cities cannot be cleared until decent housing
is provided for their residents at costs within their means. And without
the clearance of these areas, low-rent housing cannot gain the general
popular support required for its success, nor can a balanced program of
municipal redevelopment be carried forward successfully.
The proposition that for a time we may experience a decrease in the
new rate of family formation is of real but limited significance in this connection. Population growth is important, but it has not been the chief impetus to our unrivaled material progress. That impetus has come from
the irrepressible urge to lift the general standard of living, which has no
final frontiers. And these frontiers are not even in sight with respect to
housing, one of the most precious of all commodities in its effect upon
family life, where for millions of families the absolute standard and the rate
of progress has lagged far behind what we have accomplished in other fields.
In few fields of economic enterprise can we look for so large an addition to
the expansion of useful economic activity as in the case of improving and
enlarging the housing supply under the impact of a sufficiently broad and
comprehensive program—a balanced program serving all income groups
with a good standard of housing.
Public developmental and service programs
In a strong, growing economy the main role of public development activities is to contribute toward providing such basic services as health,
education, transportation, resources conservation, and public welfare, without which neither growth nor stability can be sustained. The several levels
of government share in these responsibilities. In most instances, private
individuals and organizations are already doing a significant part of the job.
Development and welfare needs. Needs for developmental and welfare
outlays are large when viewed against recent expenditures, or against
standards of service accepted as desirable. Chart 30 shows in constant
dollars the public expenditures since 1939 in a number of development
programs. It also presents several alternative patterns of expenditures
for 1955, based on different assumptions.
The highway system of the country is deteriorated and inadequate. Although road use has increased rapidly for several decades, constant dollar
highway expenditures per vehicle-mile are now far less than in any year oij




127

the 1920's or 1930's. Recent surveys indicate that more than one-third
of the backbone interstate highway system of 38,000 miles is in need of complete reconstruction; more than two-thirds of the Federal-aid system of
about 600,000 miles needs improvement; and about one-half the mileage
in non-Federal rural roads requires work. Some 30 billion dollars would
have to be spent to bring the Federal-aid highways to adequate standards,
while large additional amounts might well be used to improve non-Federal
roads. Adding to this the amounts which will be needed over the next
decade to replace highways that will wear out, to accommodate increased
traffic, and for maintenance, a total of possibly 7-8 billion dollars of highway construction expenditures a year for 10 years appears to be necessary
if we are to have really adequate roads and streets a decade hence. Recent
expenditures for new highway construction have run from 2.4 billion dollars to 2.7 billion a year, while the estimate for 1953 is 3.0 billion.
The problem of getting more schools, and more and better qualified
teachers, is beginning slowly to yield results, as public opinion increasingly
makes itself felt. But much greater expenditures, well beyond those now
planned, will be required to place the educational system on a firm and
adequate basis by the end of the decade. To take care of increased enrollments, to provide for normal replacements, and to reduce the backlog
of need, some 600,000 public elementary and secondary classrooms, costing
more than 18 billion dollars, will be needed by 1958 when the higher birthrates of recent years will be fully felt. Additional expenditures for nonpublic schools, and for both public and private colleges and universities, would
lift the total needed construction considerably. In 1952, educational construction expenditures came to about 2 billion dollars, and they are expected
to increase by nearly 10 percent in 1953. This is still well below the amount
which would have to be spent if the needs are to be met by 1960 or so. Increasing the number and competence of teachers is largely a matter of raising salaries. Teachers' salaries have not kept pace with the rise in incomes
of other professions, nor with the rise in earnings generally.
Similarly in the health field, needs are great for hospitals and other
facilities, and for health personnel. The President's Commission on the
Health Needs of the Nation recently estimated that about 900,000 additional hospital beds of all types are now needed to provide adequate care.
To provide these and adequately to meet needs which will accumulate in the
next 10 years would cost about 18 billion dollars, an average of about 1.8
billion dollars a year. In 1952, an estimated 866 million dollars was spent
on hospital construction. Expenditures are expected to fall during the
next 3 years unless there is substantial increase in the amount of Federal
funds for hospital construction. Public health centers are needed in many
communities. The shortage of doctors, dentists, nurses, and sanitary personnel remains critical. The President's Commission has estimated that
the Nation can now expect to have at least 22,000 fewer doctors, 17,000
fewer dentists, and 50,000 fewer nurses by 1960 than it will need.




128

CHART

30

PUBLIC OUTLAYS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION
SELECTED DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS, DECEMBER 1952 PRICES
2
4
6

1939

NATURAL RESOURCES
HEALTH INSTITUTIONS, WATER, AND SEWER

1943

1948

1950

PROJECTIONS
1953

.^,:^^^:^.^

:&x&<&>&^

BASED ON PERCENT OF 1939 GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT SPENT FOR DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
ASSUMES FAIRLY RAPID PROGRESS IN MEETING WIDELY APPROVED STANDARDS.
& THOUGHT TO BE WITHIN THE RANGE OF FEASIBLE INCREASE.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, AND
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




129

CHART 31

INCREASE IN DEMAND FOR SELECTED RAW
MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS, 1950 to 1975
ESTIMATED PERCENTAGE INCREASE

400

ALUMINUM

300

—

ELECTRIC ENERGY

200 —

FERTILIZERS
NATURAL GAS
PETROLEUM, SULFUR
RUBBER
FRESH WATER

100 -

COAL
IRON ORE
FOOD PRODUCTS
FOREST PRODUCTS
1975
SOURCE: PRESIDENT'S MATERIALS POLICY COMMISSION.

Demands placed upon natural resources and raw materials are expected
to be very large during the next quarter of a century, as has been pointed
out in the reports of two recent Presidential commissions which have studied
long-range problems of water resources and raw materials. The need for
many resources or materials in 1975 is expected greatly to exceed the level
of use in 1950. (See chart 31.) During the next few years, with a highly
active economy, demand for these resources and other resources and raw
materials is expected to rise proportionately.
The outlook is for increasing unit costs for many raw materials, especially
metals and minerals. The problem is not one of running out of supplies
altogether; rather, it is one of slowly and inexorably increasing costs of
development and production. This sets the main problem, which is to
diminish and circumvent the cost increases by means of various technological
and economic measures. These include new discoveries, cost-reducing
techniques of mining and production, the aggressive search for cheaper




130

and more plentiful substitute materials, the fuller development of world
sources, and strong programs of conservation at every stage in the production
of goods using scarce raw materials.
The severity of this outlook is softened somewhat by the considerable
potentials which still exist in this country, and in many other countries of the
free world, for increasing supplies of various resources and raw materials.
In this country, for example, there still are enormous reserves of coal.
It is estimated that there are about 80 million kilowatts of undeveloped
hydroelectric power. Certain developments, such as the St. Lawrence
project, can produce large amounts of low-cost power5 along with other
benefits. To supplement the diminishing reserves of high-grade iron ore
are large reserves of taconite, which, with sufficient capital investment, can
be made to yield large amounts of iron ore usable in blast furnaces.
The trend of increasing productivity in agriculture seems to be continuing,
so that increased output of most farm products continues to be achieved
even though each year sees a diminution in the number of persons at work
in agriculture. New land is available for development, although frequently
at increasing cost, by means of irrigation, land drainage, and flood control.
Increasing productivity rests primarily upon more farm mechanization,
more and better fertilizers, and all manner of other improvements which
agricultural research increasingly is making available.
Financing and planning problems. The most pervasive limitation to a
rapid increase in public development expenditures is the lack of willingness
or capacity of governments to raise or otherwise allocate funds to this purpose. Any large increase in Federal financing, at least in the next 2 years,
is checked by the competing requirements of defense and by the prospect for
a budget deficit. Indeed, a determined effort to cut Federal expenditures
could mean less Federal spending on development, although the pressures
behind these programs combined with an increasing recognition of needs
indicate a level or slightly advancing amount of spending.
The financial position and outlook for State and local governments apparently will permit a substantial increase in both operating and capital
outlays during the next few years. Furthermore, evidence indicates a willingness on the part of States and localities to increase their bonded indebtedness. The increasing resort to public and quasi-public authorities for
such facilities as toll roads makes it possible to avoid constitutional debt
ceilings. Tax yields at the local level may be expected to increase over the
next few years, as property reassessments move upward in a lagging response
to the inflation of recent years. State governments will gain revenue in
pace with increases in income payments, vehicle travel, volume of business,
and other elements depending on their revenue sources. Perhaps 2 to 3
billion dollars of additional capital outlays will be made by States and
localities in 1955, while additional sums will be available for teachers'
salaries, public health services, highway patrols, and the like.




In the event of an economic recession, State and local development
expenditures would be expected to fall, or at least rise more slowly after
some lag. Federal expenditures could more readily be increased, since
the Federal Government is a more powerful instrument for antirecession
financing. Not too much should be claimed, however, for expanding developmental expenditures for purposes of offsetting contraction forces in a
mild or short recession. To be sure, certain types of public construction
programs can be stepped up promptly. These include the simpler public
buildings, smaller schools, street improvements, small-scale rural conservation works, and a few others. But the heavy engineering-type projects, such
as multiple-purpose dams, divided lane highways, and the large complex
building projects such as hospitals and public housing developments, present
numerous obstacles to both rapid acceleration and deceleration. Their
timing can be speeded up slightly, but their main anticyclical effects would
be felt only in a severe and extended depression.
There should be full speed ahead with preparatory measures so that
development projects to the extent feasible may be accelerated promptly as
part of a total antirecession economic strategy. Advance planning in
most public development programs now seems to be in fairly good shape,
although development agencies at all governmental levels should review
continuously the status of their preparation. Particular emphasis might
well be given to those kinds of projects likely to be most helpful in time of
recession, noting the speed with which they can be put into action, the
amount and type of employment they provide, their location, the kinds of
equipment and materials they require, the possible financing obstacles, and
finally the speed with which they can be decelerated. Of course, all such
projects should fall within the range of the truly needed and defensible.
Policies and programs directed toward reducing the overhang of needs
in these primarily public development lines are essential, not only for anticyclical purposes, but also as a condition of continued economic growth.
Scientific leadership and a skilled intelligent labor force in the years ahead
depend on decisions for better schools today. Having enough raw materials in 1960 or 1975 depends on the geological mapping, the river basin
planning, the minerals research, the forest and soil conservation, the multiple-purpose dams, and many other programs which have to be undertaken
well before that time. More efficient highway transportation in future
vears is predicated on increasing programs in intervening years. Furthermore, the timing of these programs and improvements should not be delayed any longer than absolutely necessary; otherwise the human and
natural resources base for future economic growth simply will not be there.
In 1955 and in following years, when the Federal budget outlook is
expected to be more favorable, the major public development projects can
be increased more in line with needs and long-term relationships with
total national product. As always, the scrutiny should be close so that
public funds are spent on the most desirable particular projects and activities.




132

Programs which have greatest effects in inducing private economic activities,
and self-liquidating programs, should be stressed. Workable arrangements
for cooperation with State and local governments and with private groups
in the planning, financing, and execution of programs are to be sought.
Two MATTERS OF EMPHASIS
The effort in the foregoing pages has been to examine, as dispassionately
as possible, the probable nature and scope of the adjustments which may
be needed as the economy moves away from the focus upon defense which
has dominated the past 2 years. In summary, the thesis has been that (1)
even under moderate assumptions and favorable evaluations of specific
demand prospects, the chances nevertheless are that we may run into a
problem of deflation and possible recession within the next 2 or 3 years
unless it is anticipated by policy measures; (2) the initial size of the problem
should not be particularly threatening or its advent precipitous; and (3) in
terms of private and public policies which are available for dealing with
the problem, it should be an altogether manageable one, provided countermeasures are not too timid or badly timed. With these measures, the
uninterrupted maintenance of maximum employment and production from
now through 1955 is a sound and attainable objective.
In the concluding paragraphs of this Review, it is appropriate to underscore two points which already are partly explicit and partly implicit in the
preceding analysis. The first is, once again, the matter of timing; the second
involves the role of business decision-making in the next few years.
Anticipatory adjustments
It is easier to prevent or forestall a depression than to stop or reverse one.
This is generally true, and it is peculiarly applicable to the problem at hand.
We seem likely to approach the years ahead with both business and consumers in a frame of mind which should ease the necessary adjustments.
This pyschology will not be the frothy, short-lived sentiment associated with
old-fashioned boom-and-bust cycles. Rather, the business and consumer
expectations should be the steadier, more solid sort which have grown out of
the conviction, developed over the last dozen years, that a high level of prosperity is an economic good which can and will be maintained. Such expectations lend real support to the idea of momentum in a high-level economy,
and should reduce the margin of additional demand which new programs
and policies may need to bring forth. Any expectations, however, are a very
fragile fabric on which to rest the fortunes of an economy. No matter how
habit forming continuing prosperity has been, it may take very little in the
way of an adverse turn to demoralize sellers and buyers alike. In this lies the
importance of adjustments which prevent any adverse turn from taking on
frightening aspects; by so doing, they will minimize the total amount of
adjustment necessary.
The need for adjustments which anticipate, rather than react, is especially
evident in the present instance because of the degree of reliance which it is




133

hoped can be placed upon private price and wage policies. In this area,
as has already been emphasized, the risk is particularly grave that a mechanism of constructive realignment may be transformed, by the alchemy of
deflation, into an element of disruption. In no field is it more important
that constructive adjustments anticipate any general weakening of markets.
It should be recognized that the preference for adjustments which prevent rather than counteract deflations is not equally applicable in all policy
sectors. In the case of many governmental policies, especially in such
fields as tax policy, it often places a heavier burden on our abilities to
forecast general economic developments than the complexities and uncertainties of economic analysis justify. This fact has two implications. First,
it emphasizes the importance, within the Government, of maintaining at all
times the most current and most sharply focused body of economic intelligence available, and of keeping current a set of alternative policy programs
for meeting various eventualities. Second, it heightens the importance of
private policy adjustments as anticipators and minimizers of deflationary
danger.
The responsibility of business
During the postwar period to date, American business has contributed
more to and received more from the American economy than in any
comparable interval of the past. Many businessmen in these years since
World War II have lengthened the scope of their decision-making to encompass a longer reach of the future, and have broadened it to include a
keener awareness of the dependency of their own enterprises upon the
maintenance of stable prosperity in the economy as a whole. This is a
praiseworthy development, and the Council often has noted it. But it also
has been a relatively facile accomplishment up to now; the times themselves
have been conducive to this kind of business decision-making.
For the period behind us has been one in which the economy has demanded and pressed for rapid business expansion, and in which high
profits have been desirable to help finance and encourage such expansion.
It has not thus far been very difficult to see the prospects for strong and
growing markets, particularly with internationally needed Government
spending usually on the increase; to make investments to satisfy such
markets, particularly with Government inducements; to sell in sellers'
markets; or to recognize the desirability of rising consumer incomes, when
in a pinch a higher wage could usually be passed on in a higher price.
The period ahead may be of a very different character; it is likely to test
the fiber of our new longer-viewed and broader-gauged business thinking
much more sternly than any other situation since World War II. And, as
it happens, our reliance upon business leadership will be unusually heavy.
Government, in view of the heavy demands of recent years, will be little
disposed toward fiscal expansion or hasty action. The success of the adjustment—at least if it is an early success—will be very largely up to business.
And it will be up to business at precisely a time when many of the older




134

habits of business investing, price making, and collective bargaining behavior are apt to be more at variance with obviously desirable policy than
in any other period since the war.
Business will need to keep its judgment of markets within the framework
of a prosperous, growing economy in a period when that prospect is less
predictable than it has been for some time, and to invest accordingly; to see
the problem of market maintenance both at its collective bargaining tables
and in its approach to tax legislation; to grasp the tools of price and
product improvements as market cultivators; and to revise downward the
notions of desirable profit margins which have become conventional during
the postwar years.
This is a big order, but it may hold the key, not only to uninterrupted
prosperity for the economy, but also to long-run profit maximization for
business itself. In view of the structure and patterns of influence within
the business community, the burden upon the leaders of our larger industrial corporations and of the major business organizations will be a peculiarly
heavy one. The smoothness with which a transition away from defense
is negotiated may depend largely on how wisely these men rise to the sobering
challenge. The Council is optimistic that their response will measure up.




135

Chapter V.

International Economic
Adjustments
INTRODUCTION

T

HE PROBLEM of financing imports from the United States has troubled much of the world since World War I, and has become especially
acute since the end of World War II. Because of the persistent inadequacy
of foreign dollar earnings to provide for the level of United States exports
which this country and others believe essential to the economic well-being
and political security of the community of free nations, the Council deems
it important to consider in some detail the complex of economic, political,
and social problems which has been described loosely as "the dollar
shortage."
But first it should be pointed out that the term "the dollar shortage" does
not convey accurately the full meaning of the problem. In the first place,
other countries in the free world are confronted not only with an inability to
earn enough dollars to import enough goods from the United States; they
are also confronted with an inability to achieve a high and varied enough
level of trade with one another. Although the predominant role of the
United States in the free world economy makes the solution of the "dollar
shortage" a crucial issue, it is important not to oversimplify the issue by
assuming that there is solely a "dollar problem," or by assuming that if the
economic relationship between the United States and these other nations is
effectively straightened out, all the other maladjustments will automatically
disappear.
Furthermore, the term "the dollar shortage," by its emphasis upon a unit
of currency, perhaps conveys an excessive stress upon monetary problems in
the technical sense which masks the underlying resource and production
problems throughout the free world. The inability of various nations within
the free world currently to meet their economic problem satisfactorily is
basically a reflection of the fact that their current productive resources will
not support three minimum purposes of any economy, i. e., a sufficiently high
level of capital formation to lay the foundation for progress, a sufficiently
high level of consumption to prevent deprivation or acute political stress,
and a sufficiently high level of defense investment to maintain a modicum
of national security. Inadequate trade, while aggravated by many technical factors, is basically a by-product of this central shortcoming. A country
cannot import enough goods to supplement deficiencies in its domestic pro-




136

duction when it cannot produce enough at home to have a surplus for
export, at competitive prices.
It follows, if one takes a long enough time perspective, that the main way
in which a national entity can solve the foregoing insufficiencies on a permanent basis is to bring its productive power up to the level required to serve
the three great purposes indicated above, through its own production and
through the international interchange of goods on the basis of relative
efficiencies.
Among the nations of the free world, there are two main types of reasons
for the insufficiency of production which is at the root of their difficulties.
In the economically advanced nations, Western Europe and Japan, for
example, these difficulties may be classified as somewhat abnormal. They
result in large part from the heavy drain of two world wars, and from the
need to assume a new defense program before they could restore the damage
visited upon them by World War II. In the so-called underdeveloped
countries, the insufficiency of production results from reasons which are
fairly well described by the very term "underdeveloped." And because
the two types of situations are fundamentally different, they call for differing
solutions, both internally and in the relationships of these nations with one
another and with the United States.
The reason why the United States has concerned itself with this problem
is largely that, particularly in view of the communist threat acutely felt
since the end of World War II, we have had an enormous interest in the
strengthening of the free nations at a more rapid rate than they could
achieve through their own productive output and through the volume of
international trade which this productive output would support. In the
earliest stages of this problem, we in the United States recognized that the
only temporary solution was to enlarge the availability of goods to these
countries by devoting to their immediate use part of what we produced
without exacting repayment in the goods that they produced. Stated
simply, this has been the main rationale of our aid programs.
However, it has always been our purpose, and likewise the purpose of
these other free nations, that these aid programs should gradually be reduced and finally terminated, through increased production in these other
countries which would enlarge their supply of goods for home consumption
and also enlarge their capacity to pay for imports with exports. Viewed
in this light, the purposes and priorities which should guide our foreign
economic policy are reasonably clear. For a time, we cannot afford in
our own self-interest to taper off what goes under the name of assistance
so rapidly as to prevent the fuller fruition of the great productive gains in
these other free countries—gains which have resulted in part from this
assistance since the end of World War II, but primarily from their own
hard efforts. Of course, we must constantly screen this assistance to make
sure that it provides an incentive rather than an alternative to the continued exercise of these hard domestic efforts in the other free countries.




137

We should be realistic about the type of assistance, whether military or
economic, which will contribute most toward this end. Meanwhile, we
should reach out vigorously for more permanent solutions. These more
permanent solutions should come, not through a reduction of our exports
to these other countries, but rather through an increasing ability of these
other countries to pay for the goods we send them through their own export of goods, either directly or indirectly. A part of this problem relates
to the reduction of barriers against imports into the United States, although
as will be pointed out, this in itself is not an adequate remedy compared
with the central remedy of expanding production in these countries. And
because the United States is now and will remain a creditor nation, we are
also interested that insofar as feasible private investment will increasingly
supplant the need for public investment of United States' capital abroad.
The expression "trade, not aid" is designed to cover this whole complex
of objectives in a general phrase. But the simplicity and appeal of this
expression should put us on our guard against oversimplification. It does
not mean that the United States can help sufficiently in the build-up of
international economic arrangements by pursuing a narrowly selfish course,
or by thinking that we can get benefits without paying the cost. The
build-up of world trade will involve some inconveniences to some sectors
of our domestic economy, though these inconveniences will be a minor
price to pay for improved world conditions, and far less costly than the
aid which thus far has proved temporarily necessary.
The essence of the problem ahead is how swiftly and realistically the
shift may be made from aid to trade without imperiling the progress thus
far made in free world revival and reconstruction, and with prime attention
to the transcendently important objective of strengthening the free world
as a whole—strengthening it not only in a purely economic or military sense,
but also in the more important aspect of mutual trust based upon true adjustment to one another's problems. While we in the United States must
conserve our own strength, and while we join with the other free nations in
their desire for greater financial independence, we cannot safely afford to
avoid the palpable fact that our own economic position is unique, and that,
because we have so much, we have the most to gain by maintaining a predominantly free world and the most to lose if the balance of strength should
shift over to the totalitarians.
THE SIZE OF THE PROBLEM
The United States export surplus of goods and services provides a first
approximation to the size of the inability of other nations thus far to match
what they import from us with exports drawn out of their own production,
i. e., their "dollar shortage." Since United States exports of military goods
represent an extraordinary movement associated with the immediate buildup of defensive strength, the measure should exclude exports financed by
military aid. Also, since gifts of money (private remittances) sent by




138

individuals resident in the United States to friends and relatives abroad are
a means of financing a part of our exports, they also should be deducted, as
should pension payments and other such government remittances. The
measure of the inadequacy of foreign means for financing United States
exports that thus emerges is equal to our export surplus of goods and services minus (1) military aid, and (2) "unilateral transfers" other than aid.
Data for the years 1947 through 1952 are summarized in table 16.
TABLE 16.—.
-Measure of the insufficiency

of foreign dollar earnings

[Billions of dollars]
Equals:
Less:
net
Equals:
Exports imports surplus of
goods and
of goods of goods exports Private
services
U. S.
and
of goods
and
and
and
military requiring
other
services * services 1
dollar
aid
services remit-2
financtances
ing
T ace*

Period

1947

1948
1949
1950
1951 _.
19528

..
_

Annual rates:
1950: First half .
Second half
1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half 3
Second half

_

19.8
17.0
16.0
14.4
20.2
20.4

8.3
10.3
9.6
12.1
15.1
15 4

11.5
6.7
6.4
2.3
5.2
5.0

0.7

13.6
15 3
19.3
21.1
21.3
19.5

10.5
13 8
15.7
14.4
15.4
15.4

3.1
15
3.6
6.7
5.8
4.2

.6
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5

.7
.6
.6
.5
.5

0.1
.4

.2
.6
1.5
2.4

10.7
5.6
5.6
1.1
3.2
2.2

.2
.9
1.4
1.5
2.0
2.7

2.3
.1
1.7
4.7
3.4
1.0

1 Includes income on investment.
2 Other remittances consist of Government unilateral transfers, other than aid, including pension payments to persons living abroad.
s Estimates based on incomplete data: second half by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

This measure is arbitrary in certain respects. First, since foreign countries have limited their dollar imports through import restrictions and
currency controls, the measure understates the inadequacy of foreign dollar
earnings. Second, measuring the dollar insufficiency solely in terms of
United States trade ignores the fact that other countries besides the United
States also conduct their trade in dollars. Finally, the operation of economies of receiving countries is influenced by the amount of nonmilitary aid
which we provide. Their demands for United States exports are therefore
affected: some may be increased, others reduced. That is, our financing
of the foreign dollar insufficiency tends to influence its size.
In former days, this deficiency was met by foreign countries through
sales of gold to the United States or by long-term American foreign investments. The amount of gold that is now available to foreign countries
is only of modest proportions. Our long-term foreign investments, which
have averaged about a billion dollars a year since the end of the war, are
now made mainly in other parts of the dollar area, such as Canada and
the dollar area parts of Latin America, and as a result the nondollar area
derives relatively little direct benefit from such investment flows.




'39

As may be observed in table 17, the net export surplus requiring dollar
financing declined steadily from 1947 through the first half of 1950. The
improvement in the dollar position that occurred from 1947 through the
first half of 1950 resulted from the recovery of foreign production, which
made possible a decline in United States exports, and also from the improvement in the competitive position of foreign goods in world markets
after the 1949 devaluations.
TABLE 17.—Means of financing the insufficiency

of foreign dollar earnings

[Billions'of dollars]
Means of financing
Net surplus of
U.S.
goods and U.S.
Governservices Govern- Liquidament
tion of
requiring ment
gold and loans and
' dollar
other
dollar
financing economic assets l
"capital
aid

Period

United
States
private
investment J

outflow

1947
1948.
1949
1950
1951
1952 •

10.7
5.6
5.6
1.1
3.2
2.2

_

Annual rates:
1950: First half
Second half
1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half
Second half

2

Errors
and
omissions

__ . _

_._

1.8
3.7
5.0
3.5
3.0
1.9

31.9

1.2
.1
-3.6
-.4
-.8

<7.0
.9
.6
.2
.2
.6

1.0
.9
.6
1.3
1.1
.9

-1.0
-1.0
-.8
-.2
-.5
-.5

2.3
.1
1.7
4.7
3.4
1.0

4.0
3.0
3.0
2.8
2.0
1.8

-2.2
-5.0
-2.1
1.2
(8)
-1.6

.2
.1
.3

.4
2.2
1.1
1.0
1.5
.2

-.1
-.2
-.7
-.4
-.9
.0

(«)

.7
.6

1 Includes net sales of gold to the United States and net liquidation of foreign assets, including those held
by international institutions.
2
U. S. Government loans and capital outflow include subscriptions to the capital of the International
B ank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. United States private
investment includes purchases of obligations of the International Bank.
8
Consists of net increase in gold and dollar holdings of the International Bank and the International
Monetary Fund of 2.5 billion dollars, and liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries in the
amount of 4.4 billion dollars.
* Includes subscription to the capital of the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund
of 83.1 billion dollars.
Less than 50 million dollars.
• Estimates based on incomplete data; second half by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

The fact, however, that foreign countries were still dependent on economic aid, had only small holdings of gold and dollar assets and continued to
maintain extensive controls over their imports of goods from the United
States, indicates the far from satisfactory situation that existed in mid-1950.
At the beginning of that year, foreign countries as a group, excluding the
USSR and Canada, held gold and dollar assets amounting to 13.9 billion
dollars (in addition to their drawing rights in the International Monetary
Fund). This represented a decline of 4.4 billion, or 24 percent, from the
abnormally low level in June 1945 of 18.3 billion dollars. Moreover, not
only had foreigners lost reserves but, in addition, the reserves remaining
to them had declined in dollar purchasing power with the increase in prices
which had meanwhile occurred in the United States.




140

After the start of hostilities in June 1950, the world's hectic attempt to
expand production and accumulate inventories brought inflationary price
rises, especially in the case of raw materials. Higher prices and larger
quantities caused the volume of United States imports to rise more rapidly
than exports and thereby caused a sharp decline in the net export surplus
requiring financing. Economic aid was larger than the net export surplus
during 1950 and the first half of 1951, and consequently the rest of the free
world was able to rebuild somewhat its gold and dollar reserves.
For several months after early 1951, there was an increase in the deficiency of dollar earnings again as the level of our export surplus doubled
in response to the post-Korean boom abroad, to increased levels of defense
production throughout the free world, and to a decline in United States imports. In 1952, however, a new advance in United States purchases of
goods and services together with the decline in United States commodity
exports, caused by import restrictions and the drawing down of inventories
abroad, brought foreign dollar accounts more nearly into balance.
Throughout the postwar period, the impact of insufficient dollar earnings
has been felt with differing degrees of severity by different countries
and regions. The deterioration in foreign dollar reserves between mid1951 and early 1952 was suffered mostly by the sterling area and certain
Latin American countries.
THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
Before possible solutions other than aid can be appraised, it is necessary
to gain some insight into the reasons for the inadequacy of dollar earnings,
which, as has been stressed above, is basically an inadequacy of productive
resources and of production. War has been a powerful factor in destroying
and then retarding productive growth. It also necessitated the sale of
foreign assets and the incurring of foreign debt by the European countries
which formerly relied on income from foreign investments to pay for a
substantial part of imports. The rearmament effort caused by threat of
Soviet aggression has increased the demand for imports and reduced the
supply of exports. Moreover, the decline in trade with the Soviet Bloc
has made it necessary for Western Europe and Japan to turn to sources
of supply in the dollar area. The failure of the production of food and
raw materials in the rest of the free world to keep pace with population
increases and the growth of industrial output has induced an extraordinary
demand for food produced in the dollar area, and has caused relative
price changes which have adversely affected industrialized countries. The
lag of food production behind population growth has put pressure on the
already intolerably low levels of consumption of underdeveloped countries.
The relatively greater degree of inflation abroad than in the United States
since the war has been a symptom of these composite shortages. Meanwhile, in seeking to balance accounts, other countries have entered into bi-




141

lateral settlements and currency controls which have distorted trade patterns, so that purchases are often no longer made in the cheapest market.
Another basic factor is the dynamic character and size of the United
States economy. Rapid technological change yields a large volume of new
and improved products that are in strong world-wide demand. The size
of the internal market gives producers greater assurance of covering the
costs associated with new products than is usually the case in countries having smaller domestic markets. Thus foreign producers of manufactured
goods have had to meet strong competition in their own markets, as well as
in the markets of other countries and in the United States itself. Moreover,
restrictions upon imports imposed by the United States, in limiting the access
of foreign producers to the American market, have curtailed their ability to
earn dollars. Structural changes, such as the shift to a net earnings position
on United States shipping account under the stimulus of Government subsidies, and the substitution of synthetics for such imported materials as silk
and rubber, have also worked to reduce dollar earnings.
The intensity of the problem, moreover, varies with changes in the level
of economic activity in the United States. A decline of 1 or 2 percent in
the volume of industrial production tends to cause a much larger decline in
United States imports of goods and services and thereby in dollar earnings.
It is difficult for us in this country to comprehend the importance of foreign
trade to the level of income, employment, and purchasing power in economies where imports and exports amount to as much as 20 or 30 percent of
total output. Variations in imports, which are to us insignificant, can represent a calamitous drop in the exports and production of other countries.
The problem which inadequate dollar earnings symbolize thus has roots
in not-easily-reversible historical developments, and in technological and
marketing advantages possessed by the United States, as well as in the more
temporary difficulties of postwar reconstruction and financial stabilization.
An evaluation of the above factors can perhaps best be made by discussing
(1) the adequacy of United States demand for foreign goods and services
and (2) the adequacy of foreign supply of exports at competitive prices.
The following paragraphs consider each side of the problem in turn.
UNITED STATES DEMAND FOR IMPORTS
Chart 32 depicts the declining relationship between the volume of
United States commodity imports and industrial production. The relative
decline in imports appeared first in the mid-1930Js, and then was intensified during the war. Since the end of the war in 1945, the increase in the
quantity of United States imports has been sizable, amounting to more than
25 percent. But in relation to industrial production, the level of imports
is far below that of the 1920's and 1930's.
Factors operating to curtail United States imports
Two factors probably account for the major part of the precipitous drop
in the quantity of imports after 1929. First, the sharp decline in income,




142

CHART 32

U.,5. IMPORTS AND INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTKDN
Afte r the mid-1930's, increases in the volume of U. S. imports
did not keep pace with the growth in industrial production.
INDEX 1935-39 = 100

INDEX, I935-3J = IOO
)

250

250

/\

200

INDUSTRIAL ^ . _ /
PRODUCTION ^^S

/I

200

1 X\ /
|/
V

j
m

150
QUANTITY OF
IMPORTS

7
'

r*~s*

100

50

150

j
I

100

v'

1 1 1 1 i t 1
l<320
1925

1 1

\/

1 1 1 1 1 I 1 i i
1930
1935

I ! 1 1 1 I 1 1 1 ! 1 I 1 1
1940
1945
1950

50

SOURCE S : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.

prices, and production in this country, with the deepening of the depression,
curtailed demand for all goods including imports. Purchases of raw materials abroad declined because the demand for the finished product had contracted; purchases of imported luxuries dropped because fewer people could
afford them.
Second, in 1930, the passage of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act raised the
level of import duties beyond anything previously experienced. From
1930 to 1934, when the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act was passed, the
ratio of customs receipts to the value of dutiable imports (the ad valorem
burden of import duties) varied between 53 and 60 percent, in contrast
to 36 percent under the Fordney-McGumber Tariff.
After 1939, the low volume of United States imports can be explained
primarily by the fact that the extension of hostilities first in Europe, then
in the Far East, made foreign goods less and less available to the United
States. Even after the conclusion of hostilities, the war damage to productive facilities throughout the world kept availabilities low.
In addition, over the past decade or so, import quotas have been levied
against the entry of certain agricultural commodities in order to make
effective domestic price support programs; the "Buy American" Act has
virtually eliminated Federal Government purchases of foreign goods if




domestically produced substitutes are available. These developments have
all operated to curtail the volume of United States imports.
Still another influence has been technological change in this country,
the introduction of substitutes, and the fact that the raw material component
of consumption is relatively less as products become more highly processed.
Although tariffs have been continuously reduced through an extension
of reciprocal trade agreements since 1934, they still act as substantial
deterrents in the case of many commodities. In addition, other devices
have been introduced which operate to restrict the volume of imports,
such as the nature of the operation of food and drug inspection. Some part
of the low level of United States imports in relation to industrial production in recent years is explained by the uncertainties of other countries as
to the permanence of economic stability here and as to the extent and
duration of access to the United States market resulting from volatile
United States trade regulations. The Defense Production Act of 1950,
as amended, directs the Secretary of Agriculture to determine the degree
to which imports of specified goods may be permitted entry without
interfering with domestic marketing or production programs, or resulting
in unnecessary expenditures under price support programs. Under this
authority major dairy products have been made subject to quota as
have been rice, peanuts, and flaxseed.
Some foreign countries state that uncertainties with respect to customs
procedure and tariff classification are as great a barrier to imports as are
the tariffs themselves. Some imports have been subject to unexpected
costs that have meant the difference between profit and loss. Many of
these difficulties arise from the complexities of tariff classification under
the Tariff Act of 1930. A simplification of tariff classification would
encourage foreign producers, especially of new products, to try to tap
the American market. In addition, a simplification of customs administrative laws would help to decrease the delay in customs handling of
imports and thereby encourage new exports to the United States.
The "escape clause" amendment to the Reciprocal Trade Agreements
Act enables domestic producers to seek increased tariff or quota protection
under certain broad conditions. The threat of such restrictions has undoubtedly caused foreign producers, who might otherwise have sought a
market for their product in this country, to refrain from undertaking the
marketing expenditures necessary to introduce their product to American
consumers. Any United States policy which gives promise of being stable,
and removes the threat of suddenly imposed barriers to imports, would be
likely by itself to be followed by a gradually increasing volume.
It seems likely, however, that existing restrictions do not fully explain the
recent low level of imports, and an elimination of these import restrictions
in their various forms, even were it feasible, would not fully enable the free
world to earn sufficient dollars to import in accord with its needs. A
large reduction of import barriers would be followed by large increases




144

in imports of certain commodities, and a decline in their price to a level
below that of the cost of production in this country. But with the adaptability, inventiveness, and productivity of American industry, it seems likely
that in many cases the increased competition in the domestic market would
be successfully countered. Especially would this be true in the field of
manufactured products, which have been the chief goal of tariff protection.
The size of the domestic market will continue to provide United States
producers with a tremendous advantage in world trade by way of cost,
diversity of product, and ability to introduce new techniques so long
as foreign markets continue to be compartmentalized by trade restrictions
or limited by lack of economic development. The strength of competition
within the domestic market further provides the motivating force toward
a high degree of adaptability and change. The very fact of a more rapid
rate of change in the American economy probably explains a large part
of the consistently high level of foreign demand for American goods.
Thus, it does not appear that the insufficiency of dollar earnings can be
entirely, or even primarily, explained in terms of United States import barriers, or that it would disappear with a substantial reduction in import barriers. Yet a very real contribution would be made by a reduction of United
States import restrictions. In addition, such a move would be an act of good
faith on the part of this country, indicating that the United States is willing
to do its part. And an expansion of United States imports, even by an
amount small in terms of the total volume of United States production, could
represent a significant increase in the exports and output of foreign countries.
Moreover, an increase in United States imports would make possible a reduction in foreign aid, and could increase real living standards in this country.
Reduction of import barriers could not, of course, be achieved without
cost. Some individuals may be harmed thereby, although efforts should
be made to lessen such dislocations or to compensate for them by expansion of employment in other lines. But that part of the world's dollar
earning problem which stems from the curtailment of United States demand
for foreign products imposed by unnecessary import barriers is the responsibility of the United States, and can only be remedied by action here.
It is now desirable to turn attention to the even more fundamental aspect
of the problem, the productive ability—or inability—of other free countries
to satisfy their own needs, including their need to export enough to pay for
their necessary imports.
FOREIGN SUPPLY OF EXPORTABLE GOODS
Industrialized areas
Since the end of World War II the world-wide dollar earnings problem
has been felt most acutely by the countries of Western Europe. In every
year except 1950 and 1952, Western Europe was forced to sell gold or
draw on dollar balances in order to settle accounts with this country, despite
economic aid. The problems of Japan are very similar in nature, and,




although they have remained submerged beneath a large inflow of dollars
from expenditures associated with the Korean war, they may eventually
become even more acute.
Despite adverse developments, since the initiation of the Marshall Plan
the volume of European production has expanded remarkably. Although
it was conceived as a 4-year program, after 2 years of operation one of
the goals of the Marshall Plan—the achievement of prewar levels of output
and consumption—had been gained. Since then, the necessity for defense
production and curtailment of trade with the Soviet Bloc have tended to
obscure the very real progress that has been made. But the contribution
which Western Europe is today making to the combined defense efforts
of the free world is traceable in part to the success of the Marshall Plan
in restoring production capacity.
It is well known that most Western European countries are extremely
dependent on imports for food and raw materials. Imports are equivalent
to as much as 35 percent of the total output of certain countries. The
40 percent increase in the volume of industrial production which occurred
between 1948 and the first half of 1952 was accompanied by an expansion
of the volume of imports of 32 percent. Meanwhile, however, total exports
expanded 70 percent in quantity, while exports to the United States expanded about 85 percent in volume.
TABLE 18.—Indexes of industrial production and exports of Western Europe and
United States imports of manufactured goods
[1938=100]

Volume of exports
Industrial
production i

Period

1950: First quarter _ __
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter _ . _

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter

To United
States

100
113
125
137

_
_.
_ _ . .

.

. _ _ _ _ .

__

.

_ _ . . _ _ _ _ _

_

83
101
131
148

92
83
158
192

124
122
151
163

119
123
120
136

116
119
127
155

110
115
168
226

130
145
152
180

135
140
130
142

142
151
145
153

212
208
177
179

172
172
154
160

140
138
129

1948
1949
1950
1951

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

Total

Volume
of U. S.
imports o 1
manufactured
goods

146
136
133

182
175
179

168
178
182

1

Not adjusted for seasonal variation.
Sources: Organization for European Economic Cooperation, Mutual Security Agency, and Department
of Commerce.

In terms of advances above prewar levels, the recovery of production,
and especially of exports to the United States between 1948 and 1952, is
equally noteworthy. As table 18 indicates, by the beginning of 1950 the
volume of exports to the United States had reached the prewar level, and
by the end of 1950 was more than twice as high. By comparison, import




146

volume was only 12 percent greater than prewar. Production and exports
were able to be increased as much as they were, while imports were held
down, only because of consumer sacrifices. Since 1948, the percent of total
available resources devoted to private consumption has declined somewhat,
with increases in the absolute and relative amounts of resources devoted
to defense production.
The achievement of individual countries in exporting to the United
States has been varied. The exports of nearly all countries were swollen
in 1951 because of abnormally large shipments of such short-supply commodities as steel and chemicals to the United States, which in 1952 declined as shortages in this country disappeared. In terms of advances
above the 1938 level (which was abnormally low), according to the estimates contained in table 19, Germany and the Netherlands have had most
success in expanding exports to the United States. Until mid-1951, the
estimated index of the quantity of exports from France to this country was
above that of all Western European countries combined, largely because of
the extraordinarily high exports of steel and industrial alcohol to the United
States. In late 1951, however, while the demand of the United States for
foreign steel and industrial alcohol declined, internal inflation in France
tended to divert export-type goods to the domestic market, with a resulting
sharp decline in the volume of French exports to the United States. Through
1951, the exports of the United Kingdom to the dollar area were prevented
from keeping pace with those of Western Europe as a whole by strong demand in other sterling area countries, in many cases supported by domestic
inflation. There is some evidence to indicate that as 1952 progressed,
after declining sterling area reserves had forced sharp import restrictions
on all members, exports of the United Kingdom to the United States and
Canada were increasing in volume and value.
TABLE 19.—Indexes of volume of exports of certain Western European countries to
the United States *
[1938=100]
Western European exports to the United States

*

Period
Total 2

1950* First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter _
Fourth quarter.
1952: First quarter
Second quarter _
Third quarter

_
"___
_

France

Western BelgiumGerLuxemmany
burg

Netherlands

110
115
168
226

- -

_.

United
Kingdom

_ _

111
121
186
203

63
84
122
237

72
79
161
280

124
115
115
187

67
109
240
223

212
208
177
179

175
183
157
140

255
222
211
182

254
298
307
261

193
165
135
126

224
285
216
270

182
175
179

198
178
157

139
118
114

247
234
269

120
111
129

237
318
346

1 Indexes computed by deflating the value of exports to the United States by the export unit value
index of the individual country.
2
Includes OEEC countries other than those listed in this table.
Source: Organization for European Economic Cooperation.




147-

Although Western Europe as a whole succeeded in achieving a substantial
volume of shipments to the United States in recent years (though these have
not increased proportionally to the growth of the American economy), it
might have been able to provide even a larger quantity of exports, had not
inflation either in certain European markets or in other foreign markets
made sales elsewhere easier and profitable.
That part of the world's insufficiency of dollar earnings which stems from
deep-rooted productive insufficiency or from internal policies which aggravate the restriction of their exports in general, and especially their exports
to the dollar area, can be remedied mainly and in the long run only by
these countries themselves. Thus, insofar as open or suppressed inflation
has prevented an expansion of the exports of industrialized countries, they
alone can take effective action. Similarly, only they in the long run can
remedy the competitive disadvantage under which their producers may
operate in world markets because their economies are less well equipped
technologically, less adaptable to change, and limited by small markets.
However, the United States can and has encouraged the development of
larger markets, especially through its support for trade liberalization measures such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the European
Payments Union, through customs unions, and the European Coal and
Steel Community known as the Schuman Plan. Through our programs
and policies the United States has also sought to promote increasing interest
in appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, increased productivity, and the
elimination of harmful business practices. Individual business firms and
labor organizations in this country, working in cooperation with the Mutual
Security Agency, have also assisted in raising European productivity through
an interchange of technological knowledge with visiting groups both here
and abroad.
Food and raw material producing areas
Those countries which are predominantly producers of food and raw
materials have suffered a dollar problem which is quite different in its
nature and its effects from that of Western Europe. The difference is the
result of two factors. First, these countries are in general less economically
developed than Western Europe and Japan, and consequently their levels
of production and consumption are very low. They are, moreover, extremely desirous of increasing their production, and in aiding them to
apply more modern techniques, the Point Four program has played an
important role. Developing countries typically would be long-term foreign
borrowers with an excess of imports financed by long-term lending. Such
a deficiency would be a normal one and would continue as long as they
remain underdeveloped. In pursuit of economic development, these countries are engaged in long-term programs involving both large expenditures
and the purchase from abroad of capital goods, whose source of supply has
been chiefly the United States. One part of their demand for dollars, then,




148

is in connection with the maintenance of their planned rate of economic
development. In general, their programs have called for a steady rate of
dollar expenditures for the purchase of machinery and equipment, but the
flow of dollar investments to these countries has been small.
Second, the prices of primary products, food and industrial raw materials,
fluctuate far more than prices of manufactured goods. Their dollar receipts from current exports, therefore, have been subject to marked fluctuations. This instability in dollar and other foreign exchange receipts is
largely explained by the fact that supplies of raw materials cannot be expanded or contracted to accord with sudden changes in demand. Shifts
in demand are consequently reflected in prices to a much larger degree than
is the case with manufactured goods. This instability is the greater, the
more dependent the economy is on the production of one or a few commodities for its income. The smaller the foreign exchange reserves of the
raw material producing countries, the more complete is the transmission of
this instability to manufacturing countries. As was pointed out above,
only if foreign countries have adequate gold and foreign exchange reserves can they absorb the effects of temporary variations in their export
receipts. To acquire adequate reserves, they must husband foreign exchange receipts during periods of high earnings, and draw upon them during periods of low income.
Thus, in the case of the economically underdeveloped countries, the
insufficiency of dollar earnings is largely a reflection of the fact of their
underdevelopment. Provided that they are able to progress with their
development programs, their economies will become more diversified, they
will become less dependent on the production of a few commodities, and
their aggregate income will thereby become more stable. And if industrialized countries, especially the United States, succeed in maintaining
a high and stable level of economic activity, the demand for raw materials
will also be high. Under such conditions, with reserves sizable enough
to enable the raw material producers to sustain temporary declines in
their export receipts, and with appropriate internal policies to neutralize
partially the effects of excessive rises, the injurious effects of price changes
can be minimized. Meanwhile, however, while they are in the process
of development, they are very much in need of investment funds and
technical knowledge from abroad. Continuation and expansion of activities
under the Point Four program can be of tremendous aid in bringing about
a sizable increase in their volume of production.
CONCLUSIONS REGARDING INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY
The United States has marked advantages in world trade. Yet there are
real prospects that other countries will in due course under appropriate policies be able to earn sufficient dollars to pay for what they import and thus
to reduce and finally eliminate the need for aid.
The main part of this task lies in these countries' hands in the long run.




This requires the avoidance of internal inflation, the development of greater
volume and efficiency in production, and the broadening of free-trade areas
so that maximum economies in production may be realized. Marketwidening arrangements of the type illustrated by the European Goal and
Steel Community offer much hope. It is possible that fewer restrictions
on the free operation of the market mechanism would contribute to the
solution, by enabling countries to produce those commodities in which they
are relatively most efficient, and to buy where the goods they need are
cheapest. As the European countries succeed in producing an expanding
volume of exports at competitive prices, the size of the problem will diminish.
It seems probable that a major opportunity for balancing dollar accounts
of industrialized countries may lie in their expanded exports to raw material
producing countries, as United States purchases from these countries increase. If producers of manufactured goods can compete with United
States producers in the markets of developing countries, their payments
problems will lessen with the expansion of world trade following on
development.
An expanded volume of world trade sufficient to enable foreign countries
to build up their gold and dollar reserves, would have the additional advantage of helping to stabilize the demand for United States exports. With
present reserves, any temporary decline in dollar earnings forces an almost
immediate curtailment of foreign buying in the United States. Possession
of sufficient reserves abroad would, through stabilizing the United States
exports, prevent the domestic effects of a temporary movement such as
an inventory cycle from being accelerated by a decline in the volume of
exports, as well as avoiding the impact which any sudden cessation of
purchases from the United States inevitably has upon the economies of
the countries concerned.
The United States, with the largest single market in the world, and with
a dynamic and highly progressive production system, also has an important
role to play. An expansion of long-term investments in underdeveloped
areas would help finance the foreign demand for our goods, while expanding the supply of raw materials in which we are deficient. These investments
together with the Point Four program can contribute in an important way to
balanced economic development, which in the longer run should assist in the
solution of the world's dollar earning problem through an expansion and
diversification of production and trade of these areas. By maintaining a
steady rate of economic growth, we shall help to stabilize the demand for
many raw materials, thus helping to stabilize raw material prices and foreign
dollar earnings and facilitating the growth of adequate foreign gold and
dollar reserves.
In the field of trade policy, we can make a very significant contribution.
We should eliminate as many import quotas as possible. Where import
quotas are essential to the carrying-out of important domestic programs, we
should make them as liberal as possible. The "Buy American" requirement




150

with respect to foreign purchases by the Federal Government should also be
liberalized or eliminated. We should also reduce tariffs and simplify our
trade-restricting and uncertainty-breeding customs procedures, so that
foreign producers will have increased incentives to use mass selling techniques in our market.
This combination of improved volume and efficiency abroad, increased
United States foreign investment, and reduced trade barriers should gradually enable the world to earn the dollars it needs to pay for its imports
from the dollar area. In the meantime, we must continue to readjust, but
not to scuttle, those programs of transition from conditions at the end of
World War II to conditions in the years ahead when the peace and prosperity of the free world may be more firmly founded upon more permanent
measures.
And finally, economic stability and adherence to a permanent full employment policy in the United States will prove profoundly important.
Price stability here relieves other economies from the severe impact of sharp
changes in the American price level. And a permanent full employment
policy in this country relieves other countries of the fear of seeking to
enter excessively volatile markets, and of the fear that economic reverses
here would cause abrupt shifts in our attitude toward imports.







Appendix A
The Nation's Economic Accounts
CONTENTS
Page

The Nation's economic accounts
Statistical tables relating to the Nation's economic accounts:
A-l. The Nation's economic accounts, calendar years 1951-52.
A-2. Consumer account, calendar years 1951-52
A-3. Business account, calendar years 1951-52
A-4. International account, calendar years 1951-52
A-5. Government account (Federal, State, and local), calendar
years 1951-52
A-6. Reconciliation of Federal Government expenditures on
income and product account with conventional budget
and consolidated cash statement, calendar years 1951-52.
A—7. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts on income
and product account with conventional budget and
consolidated cash statement, calendar years 1951-52. .




'53

155
158
159
159
160
161

162
162




The Nation's Economic Accounts
The Nation's economic accounts, presented in tables A-l to A-5, are
designed to show the major economic developments of the last 2 years, and
to throw light on the process of change and adjustment within the economy.
However, the accounts are more nearly like snapshots taken at intervals
than like a moving picture which shows the process of change. The causal
elements must be inferred from a succession of static pictures.
It is in the nature of the accounting concepts used that, for the economy
as a whole, total income received and total output (or expenditure) are
always equal: the sum of the components of income, such as rents, wages,
profits, and interest, must equal the value of the output of goods and
services. Thus, in the Nation's economic accounts, receipts and expenditures add to the same total, which is the gross national output or expenditure. It follows that if the receipts of any one sector of the economy exceed
the expenditures of that sector, this will be balanced by an excess of expenditure over receipts in another sector. This balance is shown in the third
column of table A-1. An alternative presentation of the balance of private
and public saving and offsets to saving is shown in appendix table B-l 1.
So much for the static relations. If we think of the process of change,
it becomes evident that, while income and expenditure for the economy
as a whole are equal for any period, the expenditure of one period may
differ from the income of the preceding period. This results from the fact
that collectively all the economic units may wish to buy more than current
output (i. e., they may be trying to spend more than their current income),
thereby stimulating increases in prices, production, or both, or they may
be trying to reduce spending below the level of income and output, which
tends to bring prices down, to reduce production, and to cause unintended
inventory accumulation. Only by rare coincidence will the aggregates
of countless individual, business, and government decisions to spend or save
match up so that the desire to save by some is exactly counterbalanced by
plans to spend more than income by others. When this does happen, the
economy remains stabilized at a given level of output and prices. When it
does not happen, forces will be set in motion which operate to change
either the physical volume of activity, or the price level, or both. It
follows that, if there is to be steady expansion of the economy at stable
prices, total spending in each succeeding period must rise somewhat above
the income of the preceding period.
The economic forces and developments that were discussed in Chapter I of
this Review are reflected in the national account figures presented in the




155

tables of this appendix. Accordingly, no statement of these forces and
developments is included here.
The estimates included in the Nation's economic accounts are all taken
from the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce. The National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business,
1951, has complete statistics from 1929 to 1950, as well as much explanatory material. Revised estimates for 1949-51 can be found in the Survey of
Current Business, July 1952. Many of these estimates are reproduced in
tables in Appendix B of this Review. Some notes on the four accounts contained in the accompanying tables follow:
Consumer account

The consumer account, table A-2, summarizes the more detailed statistics
on personal income and consumption contained in appendix tables B-4,
B-7, and B-9. It should be noted that, whereas personal income includes
the income of unincorporated businesses and farms, only expenditures for
consumption purposes are included in this account. Investments of both
corporate and noncorporate businesses are included in the business account.
Residential construction, whether for owner-occupancy or for rental purposes,
is also included with business investment, while the actual or imputed rent
of dwellings is included in consumer expenditure. Gifts to residents of foreign countries are also part of consumer expenditure.
Business account

In the business account, table A-3, receipts of business include the undistributed profits of corporations after adjustment for inventory valuation,
plus the capital consumption allowances of both corporate and noncorporate
enterprises and institutions, and depreciation on residences. Depreciation
allowances must be added to receipts since investment is on a gross basis,
that is, before deduction for depreciation. As mentioned above, business
investment includes additions to plant and equipment and inventories of
both corporate and noncorporate enterprises, as well as residential construction for owner-occupancy. Additional information relating to business
is contained in appendix tables B-5, B-20, B-21, B-34, and B-39.
International account

Net foreign investment, table A-4, represents the excess of United States
current receipts over current payments arising from transactions in goods
and services (including investment income) and unilateral transfers such as
private remittances or Government grants. Expenditures for these unilateral transfers are included in consumer expenditures and Government
expenditures for goods and services, and exports which arise from them are
included in the current receipts component of net foreign investment.
Consequently, the payments involved in the transfers themselves must be
included in the current payment component of net foreign investment in
order to avoid double counting. (See also appendix tables B-40 through
B-46.)




156

Government account
In table A-5, government receipts and expenditures are shown on an
income and product account basis, rather than on either a cash or a conventional budget basis, so as to be consistent with the receipts and expenditure accounts of the other sectors and with the gross national product total.
Government transfer payments, such as social security and veterans' benefits,
and interest charges represent income to the recipients, but are not included
in the gross national product. Therefore, these payments are subtracted
from both receipts and expenditures.
The income and product accounts of the government are on a consolidated basis, just as the cash accounts are, but they depart from the latter
because of the timing of the items included in each and because of conceptual differences. (See appendix table B-33 for government cash receipts
from and payments to the public.) The income and product accounts of
the government are designed to be in accord with the accrual records
maintained by private business. Thus, business taxes, especially those on
corporate profits, are recorded on an accrual rather than a collections
basis, and government expenditures for goods are corrected for the lag
between deliveries and payments therefor. All capital transactions, such
as receipts from the sale of government property and changes in loans and
investments of government credit agencies, are excluded from the income
and product accounts although such transactions are included in both the
cash and conventional budgets. A reconciliation of Federal Government
receipts and expenditures as reported in the Nation's economic accounts
with receipts and expenditures in the conventional administrative budget
and consolidated cash statements is presented in tables A-6 and A-7. For a
description of the differences between the conventional budget and the
cash statements, see Special Analysis A, the Budget of the United States
Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1954.




»57

TABLE A—1.— The Nation's economic accounts, calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]

1951

Economic group

Consumers:
Disposable personal income
Personal consumption expenditures
Personal net saving (+) Business:
Gross retained earnings
Gross private domestic investment
_ _
Excess of investment ( — )

Excess
of reEx- ceipts
ExRe- pendi- (+)or Re- pendiex- ceipts tures
ceipts tures
penditures
(-)
225.0

Equals: Net receipts

58.5
.2

53.1

—13 4

-16.7

—.7

1.3

-.2

—1 3

+.7

94.2

86.8

91.5

16.9

17.0

16.9

69.9

74.5

77.3

79.5

93.2

95.6

16.9

17.0

16,9

62.6

Equals: Purchases of goods and
services

76.2

78.7

Surplus (+) or deficit (— ) on
income and product account _
Gross national product

+20.6

36.4
49.6

—25.5

218.0

+16.9

36.2

33.0

Total government expendituresLess: Transfers, interest, and
subsidies (net)

Statistical discrepancy

238.6
214.0

+17.0

1952, second half 1

Excess
Excess
of reof receipts
Ex- ceipts
(+)or Re- pendi- (+)or
ex- ceipts tures
expendipenditures
tures
(-)
(-)

231.0

208.0

International:
Net foreign investment
Excess of receipts (+) or
investment ( — )
Government (Federal, State, and
local):
Tax and nontax receipts or
accruals
Less: Transfers, interest, and
subsidies (net)

1952, first half

+7.3
+1.4

1.4

329.2

329.2

-1.4

—1 6
—.5

—.5

341.2

341.2

-3.2
349.1

-3.2
349 1

i Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce (except as
noted).




158

TABLE A-2.—Consumer account, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
1952

1951

Receipts or expenditures

Total *

Personal income:
Salaries, wages, and other labor income
__ ... _ _ .
Farm proprietors' income
Business and professional income 2
___ - Rental income
Dividends and personal interest income
_
_
Transfer payments
Total personal income

__

First
half

Second
halfi

170.7
15.6
26.2
8.9
20.4
12.4

_

185.8
15.2
27.7
9.9
21.4
12.9

268.3

263.7

273.0

26.1
3.0

Total tax and nontax payments

178.6
15.1
27.1
9.4
21.0
12.5

254.1

- _

Less: Personal tax and nontax payments:
Federal
State and local
__

182.2
15.2
27.3
9.7
21.2
12.7

30.2
3.3

29.4
3.2

30.8
3.4

29.1

32.7

34.3

234.8
216.0

231.0
214.0

238.6
218.0

+17.0

Equals: Personal net saving

33.5

225.0
208.0

Equals: Disposable personal income __ _3
Less: Personal consumption expenditures

+18.8

+16 9

+20. 6

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Includes adjustment for inventory valuation. Beginning in 1952, excludes contributions of self-employed
persons for social insurance.
3 For detail, see appendix table B-4.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table A-l.
TABLE A—3.—Business account, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
1952

1951

Receipts or investment

Total i

Receipts:
Corporate profits before tax
Less: Corporate tax liability 2
Dividend payments

First
half

Second
half i

42.9
24.2
9.0

-

Equals: Gross retained earnings
Expenditures:
New construction.
Residential (nonfarm)
__
Other private construction
Plus: Producers' durable equipment
Change in inventories

__

__
.__

Equals: Total gross private domestic investment 6

41. 1
23.8
9.2

40.5
23.5
9.3

9.6
24.6
— 1.3

7.9
27.9
.6
1

8.2
27.2
.8

7.7
28.6
.3
— 2

33.0

Equals: Corporate undistributed profits
__ _ _
Plus: Capital consumption allowances 3
Corporate inventory valuation adjustment 4
Excess of wage accruals over disbursements

40.8
23.6
9.3

36.3

36.2

36.4

23.3
11.0
12.3
24.9
10.3

23.4
11.1
12.4
25.8
2. 1

23.6
11.0
12.6
25.7
.4

23.2
11.2
12.1
26.0
3.8

(5)

(5)

58.5

51.4

49.6

53.1

-25.5

Excess of investment ( — )

-15.1

— 13.4

-16.7

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes.
Includes capital consumption allowances on noncorporate capital, including residences,.
* The adjustment measures the excess of the value of the change in the volume of nonfarm business inventories valued at average prices during the period over the change in the book value.
* Less than 50 million dollars.
6
For additional detail, see appendix table B-5.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table A-l.
2
3




'59

TABLE A~4.—International ^account, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, annual ratesj
1952

Item

1951
Total i

First
half

Second
hain

20.2
15.1

19.5
15.4

5.0

5.8

4.1

4.4
.4

4.1
.4

4.6
.4

.2

Equals: Net foreign investment

21.3
15.4

4.5
.4

Equals: Surplus of exports of goods and services
Less: Net unilateral transfers: 2
Government *
Private
- -

20.4
15.4

5.2

Exports of goods and services
Less: Imports of goods and services

.3

1.3

—.7

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Net unilateral transfers are included with Government or private expenditures for goods and services.
For example, remittances (gifts) made by American citizens to relatives or charitable groups abroad are
included with consumer expenditures. Government aid in the form of grants is included in Government
purchases of goods and services. Thus, net unilateral transfers must be deducted from the export surplus to avoid double counting.
« For further detail, see appendix table B-42.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table A-l.




160

TABLE A-5.—Government account (Federal, State, and local), calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
1952

Receipts or expenditures

1951

Total i
Federal Government:
Receipts:
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals 8
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments .
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments
__
Subsidies less current surplus of Government
enterprises
.-_

Second
half

_.

70.0

71.7

13.4

13.2

13.7

2.4

2.4

2.2

2.6

1.3

.9

1.2

.7

54.2

53.4

54.7

57 8

70 9

69 6

72 3

13 2

13 4

13 2

13.7

24

24

22

13

.9

12

2.6
.7

40.9

54.2

53.0

55.2

(3)

+.4

—.4

20.7
2.4
.8
3.2

22.0
2.4
.8
34

21.5
2.2
.8
34

22.5
2.6
.8
3.4

21 8

21.1

22.5

24.1
32
.8

Equals: Purchases of goods and services
Surplus (+) or deficit (— ) on income and product account

70.9

13.2

20.7

Expenditures:
Total expenditures
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments
Subsidies less current surplus of Government
enterprises

66.1

49.2

Equals: Net receipts

25.9
34
.8

25.8
3.4
.8

26.0
3.4
.8

+8.3

State and local governments:
Receipts:
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals *
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments- ..
Current surplus of government enterprises..
Less: Transfers and net interest payments
Equals: Net receipts
Expenditures:
Total expenditures
Less: Transfers and net interest payments
Plus: Current surplus of government enterprisesEquals: Purchases of goods and services

21.7

Surplus (+) or deficit (— ) on income and product account

_

Total government:
Receipts:4
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals 2_
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments
_
Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises
Equals: Net receipts

First
half

-1.0

23.3
—1.5

23.1
-2.0

23.4
-1.0

Equals: Purchases of goods and services

93.0

91.5

94.2

16.4
.5

16.8
.1

16.6
.4

17.0
—.1

69.9

..

Expenditures: 4
Total expenditures
Less:
t fc Transfers and net interest payments
_
Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises

86.8

76.1

74.5

77.3

79.5"*

94.4

93 2

95.6

16.4

16.8
.1

16.6
.4

17.0
—.1

.5
62.6

Surplus (+) or deficit (— ) on income and product account

77.5

76.2

78.7

+7.3

-1.5

-1.6

-1.4

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2
Includes personal tax and nontax receipts, indirect business tax and nontax accruals, corporate profits
tax accruals (including excess profits tax accruals), and contributions for social insurance.
3
Less than 50 million dollars.
< Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State
and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to
eliminate this duplication.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix table A-l.




161

TABLE A—6.—Reconciliation of Federal Government expenditures on income and product account
with conventional budget and consolidated cash statement, calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars]
Item

1951

19521

Federal expenditures on income and product account:
Purchases of goods and services (net)
Transfer payments
Net interest paid by Federal Government
Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises
Grants-in-aid to State and local governments

40.9
8.6
4.6
1.3
2.4

Total Federal expenditures on income and product account
Less:
Adjustment for Government advances and prepayments to business and changes in
accounts receivable from the Government on books of business corporations
Excess of transfer payments in national income and product account over budgetary
transfer payments
Plus:
Excess of net checking account expenditures of Government corporations over
amounts included in national income and product account
Excess of budgetary transfers to trust accounts over amounts included in national
income and product account
Budgetary interest expenditures not included in national income and product account
Miscellaneous capital transactions and loans excluded from national income and
product account
Government sales deducted from purchases of goods and services_

64.2
8.8
4.6

57.8

___

70.9

2.4

.6
4. 5
1.2

1.5

.6

.8

1.5

1.7

.4
.4

.5
.4

Equals: Conventional budget expenditures
Less:
Noncash budget expenditures:
Net accruals of interest payments on savings bonds and Treasury bills
Interest payments to trust fund accounts and Government corporations
Budgetary transfers to trust accounts
Payroll deductions for Government employees' retirement
Plus:
Cash trust account expenditures
Clearing account for outstanding checks
._

56.8

71.4

.7
1.1
.9
.4

.7
1.0
1.2
.4

4.3
.1

4.9
.1

Equals: Consolidated cash expenditures

58.0

730

.„

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce. Statistics on budgetary and trust account expenditures based on
Daily Statement of the United States Treasury and Treasury Bulletin.
TABLE A-7.—Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts on income and product account with
conventional budget and consolidated cash statement, calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars]
Item

1951

Federal receipts on income and product account:
Personal tax and nontax liabilities
Corporate profits tax accruals
Indirect business tax and nontax liabilities—
Contributions for social insurance

19521

26.1
23.4
9.5
7.1

30.2
22.9
10.4
7.4

Total Federal receipts on income and product account..
Less:
Excess of income and profits tax accruals over budgetary receipts
Excess of contributions for social insurance included in national income and product
account over amounts included in budgetary receipts:
Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund
Unemployment Trust Fund
Government Life Insurance Fund and Federal employees' retirement funds
Plus: Budgetary other receipts not included in national income and product account

66.1

70.9

7.8

.6

3.3
1.5
1.4
1.3

3.8
1.4
1.3
1.7

Equals: Conventional budget receipts (net)

53.5

65.5

Less: Noncash budget receipts
Plus: Cash trust account receipts
Equals: Consolidated cash receipts
1

.2
6.1

_.
'9.3

71.4

Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce. Statistics on budgetary and trust account receipts based on Daily
Statement of the United States Treasury and Treasury Bulletin."




Appendix B
Statistical Tables Relating to Employment,
Production, and Purchasing Power
CONTENTS
National income or expenditure:
B-l. Gross national product or expenditure, 1929-52
B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in 1952 prices, 1929-52
B-3. Gross national product or expenditure in 1939 prices, 1929-52
B-4. Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-52
B-5. Gross private domestic investment, 1929-52
B-6. National income by distributive shares, 1929-52
B-7. Personal income, 1929-52
B-8. Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-52
B-9. Disposition of personal income, 1929-52
B-10. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and 1952
prices, 1929-52
B—11. Sources and uses of gross saving, 1929-52
Employment and wages:
B-l 2. Labor force, employment, and unemployment, 1929-52
B-l 3. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments,
1929-52
B-l4. Average weekly hours in selected industries, 1929-52
B-l 5. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries, 1929-52
_. . .
B-l 6. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929—52
Production and business activity:
B-l 7. Indexes of industrial and agricultural production, 1929-52
B-18. New construction activity, 1929-52
B-l 9. New nonfarm housing starts, by source of funds and by type of structure, 1929-52
B-20. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1939 and 1945-53 .
B-21. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade, 1939—52
B-22. Sales, stocks, orders, and receipts, selected department stores, 1939-52.
Prices:
B-23. Wholesale price index, 1929-52
B-24. Consumers' price index, 1929-52
B-25. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, and parity
ratio, 1929-52
B-26. Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and
foreign countries, selected dates since June 1950




163

Page
165
166
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
190
191
192

Page
Credit, money supply, and Federal finance:
B-27. Consumer credit outstanding, 1929-52
B-28. Loans and investments of all commercial banks, 1929-52
B-29. Deposits and currency, 1929-52
B-30. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations, 1939-52
B-31 .U.S. Government debt—volume and kind of obligations, 1929-52
B-32. Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-52
B-33. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public, calendar
years, 1943-52
Corporate profits and finance:
B-34. Profits before and after tax, all private corporations, 1929-52
B-35. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations, 1939-52
B-36. Relation of profits before and after taxes^to stockholders' equity,
private manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1947-50
average and 1951-52
B—37. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales, private manufacturing
corporations, by industry group, 1947-50 average and 1951-52
B-38. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity and
to sales, all private manufacturing corporations, by asset size class,
1947-50 average and 1951-52
B-39. Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1946- 52
International transactions:
B-40. International transactions of the United States, 1949-52
B-41. United States exports and imports of goods and services, by area,
1949-52
B—42. U. S. Government grants, other unilateral transfers, and loans to
foreign countries, 1949-52
B-43. United States merchandise exports, including reexports, by area,
1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-52
B-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports, by economic class, 1936—38 quarterly average
and 1947-52
B—45. United States general merchandise imports, by area, 1936—38 quarterly average and 1947-52
B—46. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise
imports for consumption, by economic class, 1936-38 quarterly
average and 1947-52
Summary:
B-47. Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 1951 and during
1952




164

193
194
195
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213

NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE
TABLE B-1.—Gross national product or expenditure, 1929—52
[Billions of dollars]
Government purchases of
goods and services

Gross private domestic
investment 2

Period

PerTotal sonal
gross conna- sumptional tion
prod- exuct penditures!

New construction

1
1929

"to O<

11
v£

'c3

1 tf
§1

as -a

*I
fe'3

"S^

3d

I

fc
0

3 K>

£>.£
.S-§
&®
b&>
S fl

§g -Si
1 ga
fc
*»

Net
foreign
investment

Federal 3

n3

3
o

2

H

^
o'S

!t3°
e fc
5

£
A
O

i
1

CQ

5

()

7.2

(5)
5
( 5)
(5)
(5)
()

7.8
7.7
6.6
5.9
6.8

(«)
5
(5)
()
(•)
3.9

7.0
6.9
7.0
7.5
7.9

103.8

78.8 15.8

7.8

2.8

5.0

6.4

1.6

0.8

8.5

1.3 ( )

1930 .
1931
1932....
1933
1934

90.9
75.9
58.3
55.8
64.9

70.8 10.2
61.2 5.4
49.2
.9
46.3 1.3
51.9 2.8

5.6
3.6
1.7
1.1
1.4

1.4
1.2
.5
.3
.4

4.2
2.4
1.2
.8
1.0

4.9
3.2
1.8
1.8
2.5

-.3
-1.4
-2.6
-1.6
-1.1

.7
.2
.2
.2
.4

9.2
9.2
8.1
8.0
9.8

1.4
1.5
1.5
2.0
3.0

1935
1936.
1937
1938
1939

72.2
82.5
90.2
84.7
91.3

56.2 6.1
62.5 8.3
67.1 11.4
64.5 6.3
67.5 9.9

1.9
2.8
3.7
3.3
4.9

.7
1.1
1.4
1.5
2.7

1.2
1.7
2.3
1.8
2.2

3.4
.9
4.5
1.0
5.4
2.3
4.0 -1.0
.4
4.6

-.1
-.1
.1
1.1
.9

9.9
11.7
11.6
12.8
13.1

2.9
4.8
4.6
5.3
5.2

(5)
(5)
(5)
(5)
(s)
(8)
s
(5)
(5)
()
1.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

101.4
126.4
161.6
194.3
213.7

72.1 13.9
82.3 18.3
91.2 10.9
102.2 5.7
111.6 7.7

5.6
6.8
4.0
2.5
2.8

3.0
3.4
1.8
1.0
.8

2.6
3.4
2.2
1.5
2.0

6.1
7.7
4.9
4.1
5.7

2.3
3.9
2.1
-.9
-.8

1.5
1.1
-.2
-2.2
-2.1

13.9
24.7
59.7
88.6
96.5

6.2
16.9
52.0
81.2
89.0

2.2
13.8
49.4
79.7
87.5

4.0
3.2
2.7
1.5
1.6

7.8
7.8
7.7
7.4
7.5

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

215.2
211.1
233. 3
259.0
258.2

123.1
146.9
165.6
177.9
180. 6

10.7
28.7
30.2
42.7
33.5

3.9
10.3
13.9
17.7
17.2

1.1
4.0
6.3
8.6
8.3

2.8
6.3
7.6
9.1
9.0

7.5 -.7
6.1
12.3
17.1 -.8
19.9
5.0
18.7 -2.5

-1.4
4.6
8.9
1.9
.5

82.8
30.9
28.6
36.6
43.6

74.8
20.9
15.8
21.0
25.4

73.8
18.5
12.0
15.5
18.9

1.0
2.5
3.8
5 6
6.6

8.0
10.0
12.8
15.6
18.2

1950
1951 . --_
1952 •

284.2
329.2
345.1

194.3 50.3 22.9 12.6 10.3 22.0
208.0 58.5 23.3 11.0 12.3 24.9
216.0 51.4 23.4 11.1 12.4 25.8

1950: First half
Second half
1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half 8
Second half
1950: First quarter....
Second quarterThird quarter...
Fourth quarter .
1951: First quarter....
Second quarter.
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter .
1952: First quarter....
Second quarter .
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter •

270.6 187.1 44.5 21.5 11.8 9.7 20.0
297.8 201.4 56.2 24.2 13.4 10.8 24.1
324.4 207.5 62.5 24.1 11.8 12.2 25.1
334.0 208.4 54.6 22.4 10.1 12.3 24.8
341.2 214.0 49.6 23.6 11.0 12.6 25.7
349.1 218.0 53.1 23.2 11.2 12.1 26.0
263.5 184.9 39.0 20.8 11.2 9.6 18.5
277.8 189.3 50.0 22.2 12.4 9.8 21.4
291.3 203.5 50.8 24.3 13.7 10.6 24.4
304.2 199.4 61.6 24.2 13.1 11.1 23.8
319.6 210.5 59.8 24.7 12.8 11.9 24.8
329.3 204.5 65.2 23.5 10.9 12.6 25.4
330.9 206.4 56.2 22.4 9.9 12.5 24.9
337.1 210.5 52.9 22.4 10.3 12.1 24.7
339.7 213.2 50.0 23.7 11.0 12.7 25.7
342.6 214.9 49.3 23.6 11.0 12.6 25.7
343.0 215.0 51.7 23.0 10.9 12.2 25.0
355.2 221.0 54.5 23.5 11.5 12.0 27.0

..

5.5
10.3
2.1

-2.3 41.9 22.2 18.3 3.9 19.7
.2 62.6 40.9 36.7 4.2 21.7
.3 77.5 54.2 48.9 5.3 23.3

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
3.1
7.8
13.3
7.4
.4
3.8
6!4
2.1
13.6
10.3
16.3
8.9
5.8
.6
.1
3.7
4.0

-1.6 40.7 21.4
-3.0 43.0 23.0
J A
55.8 34.6
1.8 69.2 47.2
1.3 76.2 53.0
-.7 78.7 55.2
-1.7 41.3 21.9
-1.6 40.1 20.8
-3.2 40.1 20.5
-2.7 45.9 25.5
-2.7 51.9 30.8
-.2 59.8 38.3
1.1 67.3 45.5
2.6 71.2 48.9
2.2 74.4 51.2
.4 78.0 54.9
-1.6 77.9 54.8
.2 79.5 55.7

16.8
19.6
31.0
42.4
48.0
49.8
16.6
17.1
17.2
22.1
27.3
34.6
41.1
43.8
46.0
49.9
49.2
50.5

4.6
3.3
36
4.8
5.2
5.4
5.3
3.8
3.3
3.3
3.5
3.7
4.5
5.1
5.2
5.1
5.6
5.3

19.4
20.0
21.4
22.0
23.1
23.4
19.4
19.3
19.7
20.4
21.1
21.6
21.7
22.3
23.2
23.0
23.1
23.8

1
See appendix table B-4 for detail.
2 See appendix table B-5 for more detail and explanation of components.
3
Net of Government sales, which have been deducted from national security expenditures.
4
For 1947-52 "national security" expenditures include the following: military services, international
security and foreign relations, development and control of atomic energy, promotion of merchant marine,
promotion of defense production and economic stabilization, and civil defense. (See The Budget of the
United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June SO, 1954, for items included in these classifications.) Prior to 1947, the expenditures are based on items formerly classified as "war" by the Bureau
of the Budget and Treasury Department. For all years, the expenditures exclude Government sales and
have been adjusted to the concept of purchases of goods and services.
«Not available.
8
Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers,
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Pepartment of Commerce (except as noted).




165

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product or expenditure in 1952 prices, 1929-52 l
[Billions of dollars, 1952 prices]
Personal consumption
expenditures

Gross private domestic investment

Total
New construction
gross
national
Nonproduct Total Dur- du- Serv- Total
Resiable rable
dengoods goods ices
Total tial Other
(nonfarm)

Period

Producers'
durable
equipment

Change
in
business
inventories

1929

172.5 121. 6

16.7

63.4

41.5

33.7

19.2 ( 4 )

(4)

11.3

3.2

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

155.9
144.1
122.1
120.5
134.3

114.2
110.2
100.5
99.3
105.2

13.3
11.0
8.2
7.9
9.2

60.4
59.9
54.8
54.5
58.7

40.5
39.3
37.5
36.9
37.3

22.9
14.0
3.0
3.7
7.5

14.3
10.1
5.6
3.7
4.3 (4)

8
8

(4)
4
(4 )
(4 )
(4)
()

9.0
6.2
3.7
3.8
4.9

-.4
-2.3
-6.3
-3.8
-1.7

146.6
167.5
175. 4
168.1
184.0

111.9
123.4
127.6
125.6
132.8

11.3
13.8
14.5
12.0
13.8

62.3
69.4
71.7
72.8
76.9

38.3
40.2
41.4
40.8
42.1

14.3
20.0
24.4
13.9
22.2

5.7
8.2
9.8
8.6
12.8

4
(4 )
(4 )
(4)
()
7.0

(4)
(4)
4
(4)
()
5.8

6.7
8.9
10.2
7.4
8.6

1.9
2.9
4.4
-2.1
.8

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

202.1
234.9
266.5
300.2
323.7

140.6
151.5
149.3
153.2
159.5

16.0
18.5
11.8
10.3
9.6

80.9
87.5
90.0
92.8
97.1

43.7
45.5
47.5
50.1
52.8

30.2 14.2
37.5 •16.0
20.4
8.7
11.6 4.9
13.7
5.1

7.5
7.9
3.9
2.0
1.5

6.7
8.1
4.8
2.9
3.6

11.2
13.5
8.3
6.9
9.6

4.8
8.0
3.4
2

-i!o

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 .

314.1
278.8
278.3
287.5
288.6

170.0
188.7
193.6
197.0
202.4

11.0
21.4
25.5
26.0
26.6

104.3
109.3
107.9
108.4
110.5

54.7
58.0
60.2
62.6
65.3

17.0
43.4
41.3
48.8
39.2

6.8
15.8
17.9
20.8
20.5

1.9
6.1
8.0
9.9
9.7

4.9
9.7
9.9
10.9
10.8

12.4
18.4
22.1
23.6
21.4

-2.1
9.2
1.3
4.4
-2.7

32.0 112.5
27.5 114.3
25.8 118.9

68.4
70.3
71.4

56.0
60.2
51.4

25.5
24.1
23.4

13.9
11.3
11.1

11.6
12.8
12.4

24.6
25.4
25.8

5.9
10.7
2.1

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

..
.. -

1950
1951
1952s

-.

311.0 212.9
337.1 212.1
345.1 216.0

..

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950: First half . .
Second half

302.5 209.4
319.6 216.7

29.6 112.4
34.2 113.3

67.5
69.2

51.4
60.8

24.8
26.2

13.5
14.4

11.3
11.8

22.9
26.2

3.7
8.4

1951: First half
Second half

333.8 212.8
340.8 211.5

29.5 113.3
25.6 115.4

70.0
70.5

64.6
56.0

25.1 . 12.2
23.2 10.4

12.8
12.8

25.7
25.2

13. 8
7.6

1952: First half 5
Second half

342.8 214.8
347.4 217.3

25.7 118.1
25.8 119.8

71.0
71.8

49.8
52.8

24.0
22.9

11.1
11.1

12.9
11.8

25.8
26.0

.0
4.0

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

295.2
309.8
314.7
324.4

207.7
211.1
220.4
213.0

29.2
29.9
37.2
31.3

11L9
112.8
114.3
112.3

66.6
68.4
68.9
69.4

45.5
57.3
55.6
66.0

24.4
25.2
26.4
26.0

13.1
13.9
14.7
14.0

11.3
11.3
11.7
12.0

21.3
24.5
27.1
25.3

—.2
7.6
2.1
14.7

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter.

329.2
338.3
339.6
342.1

216.4
209.1
210.7
212.3

32.1
26.9
25.9
25.4

114.6
112.0
114.5
116.2

69.7
70.2
70.3
70.7

62.0
67.3
57.8
54.1

25.8
24.4
23.2
23.1

13.3
11.2
10.2
10.5

12.5
13.2
13.0
12.6

25.5
25.9
25.4
24.9

10.7
17.0
9.2
6.1

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter «

342.6
343.1
341. 5
353.2

214.6
215.0
214.5
220.1

25.1
26.3
24.4
27.1

118.6
117.6
118.5
121. 0

70.9
71.1
71.6
72.0

50.4
49.1
51.5
54.2

24.2
23.8
22.7
23.1

11.1
11.1
10.8
11.4

13.1
12.7
11.9
11.7

25.8
25.7
25.0
26.9

.4
-.4
3.8
4.2

.. .

See footnotes at end of table.




166

TABLE B~2.—Gross national product or expenditure in 1952 prices > 1929-52 l—Continued
[Billions of dollars, 1952 prices]
Government purchases of goods and services
Net
foreign
investment

Period

Federal 2
Total

Other

2.9

(4)

(4)

14.5

-!9
-1.0
-1.4
-.6

19.3
20.8
19.6
18.9
22.2

3.2
3.5
3.7
5.0
6.8

(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
4
()

(4)
(4)
4
(4 )
(4 )
()

16.1
17.3
15.9
13.9
15.4

-2.0
-2.1
-1.7
.5
.1

22.4
26.2
25.1
28.1
28.9

6.6
10.7
9.9
11.7
11.5

4
(4 )
(4 )
()
(4)
2.7

4
(4 )
(4)
()
(4)
8.8

15.8
15.5
15.2
16.4
17.4

.8
-.7
-2.6
-6.9
-7.3

30.5
46.6
99.4
142.3
157.8

13.6
30.5
84.7
128.9
144.7

4.8
24.9
80.5
126.5
142.3

8.8
5.6
4.2
2.4
2.4

16.9
16.1
14.7
13.4
13.1

-7.0
3.4
7.8
-.6
-2.0

134.0
43.3
35.6
42.3
49.0

120.8
28.3
18.9
24.2
28.6

119.2
25.0
14.4
17.8
21.3

1.6
3.3
4.5
6.4
7.3

13.2
15.0
16.7
18.1
20.4

-3.4
1.0
.3

1929

45.5
63.8
77.5

24.1
41.7
54.2

19.8
37.4
48.9

4.3
4.3
5.3

21.4
22.1
23.3

-0.2

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948.
1949

_

_

-_
.
1

_

_.

State
and
local

National
security 3

Total

..

__
_ .

1950
1951
19525

17.4

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950: First half
Second half

— 3. 6
-3.5

45.2
45.6

23.8
24.3

18.8
20.8

5.0
3.6

21.4
21.2

1951: First half
Second half

-.8
2.8

57.1
70.6

35.4
48.1

31.7
43.3

3.7
4.8

21.7
22.5

1.6
-1.0

76.6
78.2

53.4
54.8

48.3
49.4

5.2
5.4

23.2
23.4

-3.9
-3.2
-4.1
-2.9

45.9
44.6
42.8
48.3

24.4
23.2
21.6
27.0

18.5
19.1
18.1
23.4

5.9
4.1
3.5
3.6

21.5
21.4
21.2
21.3

-2.2
.7
2.3
3.3

53.0
61.2
68.8
72.4

31.6
39.2
46.5
49.7

28.0
35.4
42.0
44.6

3.6
3.8
4.5
5.1

21.4
22.0
22.3
22.7

2.5
.8
-2.0
.0

.75.1
78.2
77.5
78.9

51.9
55.0
54.4
55.3

46.7
49.9
48.8
50.1

5.2
5.1
5.6
5.2

23.2
23.2
23.1
23.6

1952: First half
..
Second half 5
1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

.

1

-

__ _

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
_
Third quarter
Fourth quarter. _
1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter _
Fourth quarter5

_

_

___,
_

_ .

1
These estimates represent a rough conversion of the Department of Commerce series in 1939 prices.
(See appendix table B-3.) This was done by major components, using the implicit price indexes converted to a 1952 base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components,
this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II, and for the
series on "change in business inventories."
2
Net of Government sales, which have been deducted from national security expenditures.
8
See appendix table B-l, footnote 4.
4
Not available.
• Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Council of Economic Advisers.




167

TABLE B—3.—Gross national product or expenditure in 1939 prices, 1929-52 1
[Billions of dollars, 1939 prices]
Personal consumption
expenditures
Period

Government
purchases of goods
and services

Gross private domestic
investment

Total
gross
naProtional
New ducprodDu- Non- Servcon- ers'
duuct Total rable rable ices Total struc- dugoods goods
rable
tion equipment

Change
in
business
inventories

Net
Gross
forprieign
vate
inprod
vestState
ment Total Fed- and uct 2
eral local

1929

85.9

62.2

8.0

29.1

25.1

14.9

7.4

1.5

0.8

7.9

1.3

6.6

81.5

1930
1931.
1932
1933
1934

78.1
72.3
61.9
61.5
67.9

58.6
56.6
51.8
51.1
54.0

6.4
5.3
3.9
3.8
4.4

27.7
27.5
25.2
24.9
27.0

24.5
23.9
22.7
22.4
22.6

10.1
5.9
1.1
1.6
3.5

5.4
3.8
2.1
1.5
1.7

4.8
3.3
1.9
2.0
2.7

-.2
-1.1
-3.0
-1.8
-.8

8.7
9.4
8.9
8.7
10.1

1.5
1.6
1.7
2.3
3.1

7.3
7.8
7.2
6.4
7.0

73.5
67.7
57.4
56.5
62.0

1935 ...
1936
1937
1938
1939 . _.

73.9
83.9
87.9
84.0
91.3

57.2
62.8
65.0
63.9
67.5

5.4
6.6
7.0
5.7
6.7

28.6
31.8
32.9
33. 4
35.3

23.2
24.4
25.1
24.8
25.5

6.7
9.3
11.4
6.3
9.9

2.2
3.1
3.8
3.3
4.9

3.6
4.8
5.5
3.9
4.6

.9
1.4
2.1
-1.0
.4

.6
.3
.2
.1
.3
i
-'.2
.1
1.0
.9

10.1
11.9
11.4
12.7
13.1

3.0
4.9
4.4
5.3
5.2

7.1
7.1
6.9
7.4
7.9

67.6
76.4
80.9
76.4
83.7

100.0
115.5
129.7
145.7
156.9

71.3
76.6
75.8
78.0
81.1

7.7
8.9
5.7
5.0
4.6

37.1
40.1
41.3
42.6
44.5

26.5
27.6
28.8
30.4
32.0

13.7
17.1
9.3
5.4
6.6

5.4
6.1
3.3
1.9
2.0

6.0
7.2
4.4
3.6
5.1

2.3
1.2
3.8
>.7
A
1.6
-.1 -2!l
-.5 -2.2

13.8
21.1
45.0
64.3
71.3

6.1
13.8
38.3
58.2
65.4

7.7
7.3
6.7
6.1
6.0

92.1
106.2
116.5
125.3
133.0

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

_.. 153. 4 86.3
138.4 95.7
... 138.4 98.3
143. 5 100.3
144.0 103. 2

5.3
10.4
12.3
12.6
12.9

47.9
50.2
49.5
49.7
50.7

33.2
35.2
36.4
38.0
39.6

8.3
20.3
19.3
22.7
18.0

2.6
6.0
6.9
8.0
7.9

6.7
9.9
11.8
12.6
11.4

-1.0 -1.8
4.4
2.7
.6
4.8
2.1
1.4
-1.3
.6

60.6
19.6
16.1
19.2
22.2

54.6
12.8
8.5
10.9
12.9

6.0
6.8
7.6
8.2
9.3

129.7
125.6
128.6
133. 7
133.7

1950
1951
1952

154. 8 108.5
167.3 108.4
170.8 110.2

15.4
13.3
12.4

51.6
52.4
54.6

41.5
42.6
43.3

25.8
28.0
23.8

9.8
9.2
9.0

13.1
13.6
13.8

.0
2.0
1.7

20.6
28.9
35.0

10.9
18.9
24.4

9.7
10.1
10.6

144.3
154.0
156.4

6.1
IW?

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

2.8
5.1
1.0

1
See Survey of Current Business, January 1951, and the National Income Supplement to the Survey of
Current Business, 1951, for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in 1939 prices.
» Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.




168

TABLE B-4.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]

Period

Total
Durable goods
Services
Nondurable goods
personal
conAutosumpmotion
Total biles Other Total Foodi Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other
ings
exing 2
and
pendiparts
tures

1929

78.8

9.4

3.2

6.1

37.7

19.7

9.2

8.9

31.7

11.4

20.2

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9

7.3
5.6
3.7
3.5
4.3

2.2
1.6
.9
1.0
1.4

5.1
4.0
2.8
2.5
2.9

34.1
29.0
22.7
22.3
26.7

18.1
14.8
11.4
11.5
14.3

7.9
6.8
5.0
4.6
5.6

8.1 29.5
7.4 26.6
6.4 22.8
6.2 20.6
6.9 20.9

11.0
10.2
9.0
7.8
7.5

18.5
16.4
13.8
12.7
13.4

1935
1936 .
1937
1938
1939

56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

5.2
6.4
7.0
5.8
6.7

1.9
2.3
2.4
1.6
2.1

3.3
4.1
4.6
4.1
4.6

29.4
32.9
35.2
34.0
35.3

16.3
18.5
20.0
19.0
19.3

5.9
6.5
6.7
6.6
7.0

7.2
7.9
8.6
8.4
8.9

21.7
23.3
24.9
24.7
25.5

7.6
7.9
8.4
8.7
8.9

14.1
15.4
16.5
16.0
16.5

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

7.9
9.8
7.1
6.8
7.1

2.7
3.3
.7
.8
.9

5.1
6.4
6.4
6.0
6.2

37.6
44.0
52.9
61.0
67.1

20.7
24.4
30.5
35.3
38.9

7.4
8.8
11.0
13.7
15.3

9.5
10.8
11.4
11.9
12.9

26.6
28.5
31.2
34.4
37.4

9.2
9.9
10.6
11.1
11.7

17.4
18.7
20.6
23.3
25.7

1945
1946. .
1947
1948
1949

123.1
146.9
IPS. 6
177.9
180.6

8.5
16.6
21.4
22.9
23.8

1.1
4.2
6.6
7.5
9.4

7.4
12.4
14.8
15.4
14.5

74.9
85.8
95.1
100.9
99.2

43.0
50.3
56.6
59.7
58.9

17.1
18.6
19.1
20.1
19.0

14.8
16.9
19.4
21.1
21.4

39.7
44.5
49.1
54.1
57.5

12.2
13.0
14.6
16.5
18.1

27.5
31.4
34.5
37.7
39.4

1950
1951
1952*

194.3
208.0
216.0

29.2
27.1
25.8

12.3
10.7
10.3

16.9
16.4
15.4

102.8
113. 5
118.9

61.4
69.2
72.7

18.9
20.3
20.6

22.5
24.1
25.7

62.4
67.3
71.4

19.9
21.8
23.4

42.5
45.6
48.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

_

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950: First half
Second half

187.1
201.4

26.4
32.0

10.8
13.7

15.6
18.2

99.8
105.8

59.5
63.2

18.4
19.6

21.9
23.0

61.0
63.8

19.4
20.3

41.5
43.4

1951: First half .
Second half

207.5
208.4

28.8
25.4

11.8
9.7

17.1
15.7

112.3
114.7

68.4
70.0

20.2
20.4

23.8
24.4

66.4
68.3

21.2
22.2

45.1
46.0

1952: First half
Second half *

214.0
218. 0

25.8
25.7

10.4
10.2

15.4
15.5

117.9
120.0

72.0
73.2

20.3
20.8

25.6
25.9

70.4
72.4

23.0
23.7

47.4
48.6

184.9
189.3
203.5
_ 199.4

26.0
26.7
34.2
29.7

10.3
11.3
14.3
13.1

15.7
15.4
19.9
16.6

98.7
100.8
106. 2
105.3

59.0
60.0
63.4
63.0

18.1
18.6
19.7
19.4

21.6
22.2
23.1
22.9

60.1
61.8
63.1
64.4

19.2
19.7
20.1
20.5

40 9
42.1
43.0
43.9

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter ...
Fourth quarter..

210.5
204.5
206.4
210.5

31.3
26.3
25.5
25.3

12.6
11.0
9.9
9.5

18.8
15.4
15.6
15.8

113.3
111.3
113.2
116.2

68.5
68.2
69.5
70.4

?0.7
19.7
20.0
20.7

24.1
23.4
23.7
25.1

65.9
66.9
67.6
69.0

21.0
21.5
22.0
22.5

44.9
45.3
45.6
46.5

1952: First quarter .. . .
Second quarter
Third quarter 4
Fourth quarter . .

213.2
214.9
215.0
221.0

25.2
26.4
24.2
27.2

9.6
11.3
8.8
11.6

15.6
15.1
15.4
15.6

118.0
117.8
118.9
121.0

71.8
72.3
73.2
73.3

20.6
20.0
20.3
21.3

25.6
25.5
25.4
26.4

70.0
70.8
71.9
72.8

22.9
23.2
23.5
23.9

47.1
47.6
48.4
48.9

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

' Includes alcoholic beverages.
* Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel.
3
Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings.
4
Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




169

TABLE B—5.—Gross private domestic investment, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Total Nonfarm producers' Farm equipment and Resigross plant and equipment
construction
dential
private
condostrucCon- tion
mestic
Coninvest- Total i Equip- struc- TotaH Equip- struc- (nonment 2 tion 1 3
ment tion f arm) i s
ment

Period

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951 9
1952

.-.

15.8
10.2
5.4
.9
1.3
2.8
6.1
8.3
11.4
6 3

9.8
7.6
4 6
2.5
2.3
3.1
3.8
5.2
6.6
4 7

5.6
4.3
2 8
1.6
1.6
2.2
2.9
3.9
4.7
34

4.2
3.4
18
1.0
.7
.9
1.0
1.3
1.9
14

13.9
18.3
10.9
5.7
7.7
10.7
28.7
30.2
42.7
33.5
50.3
58.5
51.4

7.4
9.3
5.8
4.6
6.3
8.7
15.5
20.3
23.4
21.7
25.4
29.6
31.0

5.3
6.6
4. 1
3.5
4.7
6.3
10.7
14.6
16.7
15.3
18.4
20.8
22.0

9.9

—

_-

5.7

4.0

0.3
.2
1
(8)
8
()

1.1
.9
5
.3
.3
.4
.6
.8
1.0
8

0.8
.7
4
.3
.3
.3
.5
.6
.8
6

1.7

.8

.6

.2

2.1
2.7
1.7
1.1
1.6
2.4
4.8
5.7
6.7
6.4
7.0
8.8
9.0

1.0
1.3
1.0
.9
1.2
1.4
2.4
3.8
4.6
4.7
5.4
5.9
5.5

.8
1.0
.7
.6
.9
1.1
1.6
2.5
3.2
3.4
3.6
4.1
3.8

.2
.3
.3
.3
.3
.3
.9
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.8
1.8
1.7

.1
.2
.2
.2

Net change in
Other business inventories
private
construc- Total Non- Farm
tion 6
farm 7

2.8
1.4
12
.5
.3
.4
.7
1.1
1.4
15

0.5
.5
4
.2
.1
.1
.1
.1
.2
2

2.7

.2

3.0
3.4
1.8
1.0
.8
1.1
4.0
6.3
8.6
8.3
12.6
11.0
11.1

.2
.3
.1
(8)

(8)
—1 7
-2.6
-1.3
.2
.4
2.1
1.8
—1 1

.3

.1

.2
.6
.7
1.0
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.7

2.3
3.9
2. 1
-.9
-.8
-.7
6.1
-.8
5.0
-2.5
5.5
10.3
2.0

2.0
3.4
.8
-.5
-.3
-.6
6.3
1.4
3.7
-1.6
4.6
9.4
1.4

.2
.5
1.3
-.4
-.5
-.1
-.2
-2.2
1.3
-.9
.9
.9
.6

.4

1.8

-0.3
-.2
3
(8)
-.3
-1.3
.5
-1.1
.5
.i

1,6
-.3
—1 4
-2.6
-1.6
-1.1
.9
1.0
2.3
—1 0

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950:
First half __
Second half
1951:
First half __.
Second half
1952:
First half
Second half fl
1950:
First quarter
Second quarterThird quarter. ._
Fourth quarter.
1951:
First quarter
Second quarter..
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter.
1952:
First quarter
Second quarter..
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter 9

44.5
56.2

23.0
27.7

16.6
20.2

6.4
7.4

5.1
5.6

3.4
3.8

1.8
1.8

11.8
13.4

1.5
1.6

3.1
7.8

2.6
6.5

.4
1.4

62.5
54.6

29.3
30.0

20.6
21.1

8.6
8.8

6.2
5.5

4.4
3.7

1.8
1.8

11.8
10.1

1.8
1.6

13.3
7.4

12.1
6.7

1.2
.6

49.6
53.1

31.0
31.1

21.8
22.3

9.2
8.8

5.6
5.4

4.0
3.7

1.7
1.7

11.0
11.2

1.7
1.6

.4
3.8

3! 2

.8
.6

39.0
50.0
50.8
61.6

21.8
24.3
27.6
27.8

15.4
17.8
20.4
20.1

6.4
6.5
7.2
7.7

4.8
5.4
5.8
5.5

3.1
3. 6
4.0
3.7

1.7
1.8
1.8
1.8

11.2
12.4
13.7
13.1

1.5
1.5
1.5
1.6

-.2
6.4
2.1
13.6

-.1
5.4
.8
12.2

-.1
.0
.3
.4

59.8
65.2
56.2
52.9

29.1
29.5
30.0
29.9

20.7
20.6
21.0
21.2

8.4
8.9
9.0
8.7

5.9
6.6
5.7
5.3

4.1
4.8
3.9
3.5

1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

12.8
10.9
9.9
10.3

1.7
1.9
1.7
1.6

10.3
16.3
8.9
5.8

9.0
15.2
8.2
5.2

.3
1.1
.7
.6

50.0
49.3
51.7
54.5

31.0
31.0
30.1
32.0

21.7
21.8
21.3
23.3

9.3
9.2
8.8
8.7

5.7
5.6
5.4
5.4

4.0
3.9
3.7
3.7

1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7

11.0
11.0
10.9
11.5

1.7
1.7
1.6
1.6

.6
.1
3.7
4.0

-.1
-.8
3.0
3.4

.7
.9
.7
.6

1 Items for 1945 and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years, nor with figures shown in
appendix tableB-18. Items for nonfarm producers' plant and equipment for all years are not comparable
with those shown in appendix table B-20, principally because the latter exclude certain equipment and
construction outlays charged to current expense.
2
Total producers' durable equipment less "farm machinery and equipment" and farmers' purchases of
tractors and business motor vehicles. These figures assume that farmers purchase 85 and 15 percent,
respectively, of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes.
3 Industrial buildings, public utilities, gas- and oil-well drilling, warehouses, office and loft buildings,
stores, restaurants, and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to 1946 only.
4 Farm construction (residential and nonresidential) plus "farm machinery and equipment" and farmers'
purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. (See footnote 2.)
5
Includes construction of hotels, tourist cabins, motor courts, and dormitories since 1946 only.
6
Includes religious, educational, social and recreational, hospital and institutional, miscellaneous nonresidential, and all other private.
7
After revaluation adjustment.
8
Less than 50 million dollars.
' Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




170

TABLE B-6.—National income by distributive shares, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Business and proCorporate profits
fessional income
and inventory
and inventory
valuation
valuation
adjustment
Inadjustment
Total Comcome Rental inpennaof come
In- Net
InIntional sation
inof emof
come ven- farm
Cor- ven- terest
in- 1 ploypro- pertory
of
tory prieporate valucome ees 2
uninTotal corpo- valu- tors sons Total profits ation
ation
before adrated adtax 3
enter- justjustment
prises ment

Period

87.4

50.8

8.3

8.1

0.1

5.7

5.8

75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6

46.5
39.5
30.8
29.3
34.1

7.0
5.3
3.2
2.9
4.3

6.3
4.7
2.9
3.4
4.3

.8
.6
.3

3.9
2.9
1.7
2.3
2.3

6.6
4.8
3.6
1.6
2.5 -2.0
2.0 -2.0
2.1
1.1

56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5

37.1
42.7
47.7
44.7
47.8

5.0
6.1
6.6
6.3
6.8

5.0
6.2
6.7
6.1
6.9

2.3
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.5

3.0
4.9
6.2
4.3
5.8

81.3
103.8
137.1
169.7
183.8

51.8
64.3
84.9
109.2
121.2

7.7
9.6
12.6
15.0
17.2

7.8
10.2
12.9
15.1
17.2

-.2
1
-.6
-.4
-.2
-.1

4.9
3.9
5.6
4.4
4.5
4.9
6.9
10.5
11.8
11.8

3.6
4.3
5.4
6.1
6.5

182.7
180. 3
198.7
223.5
216.3

123. 0
117.1
128.0
140.2
139.9

18.7
20.6
19.8
22.1
21.6

18.8 -.1
22.4 -1.8
21.3 -1.5
22.5 -.4
.6
21.0

12.5
14.8
15.6
17.7
12.8

1950
1951
1952«

239.2
277.6
291.2

153.4
178.9
190.3

23.7
26.2
27.7

24.9 -1.2
26.6 -.4
27.7
(4)

13.3
15.6
15.2

1950: First half
Second half. _ _ _ .

225. 1
253.3

145.4
161.4

22.6
24.6

23.0 -.4
26.8 -2.2

12.3
14.4

8.0
8.4

1951: First half
Second half

272.2
282.9

175.6
182.2

26.1
26.3

27.6 -1.5
25.6
.8

14.8
16.4

1952: First half 8
Second half

287.4
295.0

186.7
193.9

27.4
28.0

27.4
28.0

1950: First quarter _
Second quarter
Third quarter. .
Fourth quarter

218.9
231.3
247.2
259.4

142.0
148. 7
1 57. 4
165.4

22.1
23.2
24.6
24.7

1951: First quarter __
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

269.6
274.8
280.2
285.6

172.9
178.2
181.0
183.4

26.2
26.0
26.0
26.6

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter 5
Fourth quarter

288.0
286.9
5289.5
300.5

186.5
186.9
190.3
197.5

27.3
27.6
27.5
28.5

1929

_

.-

1930
1931
1932
1933
.1934

_
.-

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939 .
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

.

_ _ _ _ _ _

.

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

. - _ -

10.3

9.8

0.5

6.5

3.3
3.3
-.8 2.4
-3.0
1.0
.2 -2.1
1.7 -.6

6.2
5.9
5.4
5.0
4.8

2

-.7
(4)
1.0
-.7

4.5
4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2

9.2
14.6
19.9
24.3
24.0

9.3 -.1
17.2 -2.6
21.1 -1.2
25.1 -.8
24.3 -.3

4.1
4.1
3.9
3.4
3.1

6.3
6.6
7.1
7.5
7.7

19.2
18.3
24.7
31.7
29.2

19.7 -.6
23.5 -5.2
30.5 -5.8
33.8 -2.1
27.1
2.1

3.0
2.9
3.5
4.3
5.0

8.2
8.9
9.7

34.8
41.6
41.4

39.6 -4.8
42.9 -1.3
.6
40.8

5.8
6.4
7.0

31.2
38.4

32.8 -1.7
46.4 -7.9

5.6
6.0

8.5
9.2

41.0
42.2

46.7 -5.8
3.1
39.0

6.4
6.6

15.1
15.2

9.4
9.9

42.0
40.8

41.1
40.5

.8
.3

6.8
7.2

22.3 -.2
23.7 -.5
26.7 -2.1
26.9 -2.2

12.4
12.2
13.9
14.8

8.0
7.9
8.3
8.5

28.8
33.5
37.0
39.8

30.2
35.5
44.3
48.4

-1.4
-2.0
-7.2
-8.6

5.5
5.7
5.9
6.2

29.0 -2.8
26.2 -.2
25.2
.8
25.9
.7
2
27.5
27.3
.'3
27.4
.1
28.5 (4)

15.1
14.4
15.8
17.0

8.5
8.5
9.1
9.4

40.7
41.2
41.9
42.5

50.1 -9.4
43.3 -2.1
3.2
38.6
39.5
3.0

6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6

-.1
1.7
.6
(4)

6.7
6.9
7.1
7.2

-!i
-.1
-.1
4

( .2
)

3.2
5.7
6.2
3.3
6.5

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

(4)
(*)

15.4
14.8
15.2
15.3

9.4 42.7
42.7
39.5
9.5 41.2
9.8 539.6 839.0
10.0 42.0
42.0

1
National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product
in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption
of 2durable capital goods, and indirect business taxes.
Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income (see appendix table B-7), and employer and
employee contributions for social insurance (see appendix table B-8).
3
See appendix table B-34 for corporate tax liability (Federal and State income and excess profits taxes)
and corporate profits after tax.
* Less than 50 million dollars.
8 Estimates based on incomplete data; corporate profits and total national income for third quarter and
all items for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




171

TABLE B-7.—Personal income, 7929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Total
personal
income

Period

Salaries,
wages,
and other
labor
income 1

Proprie- Dividends
tors'
and
Transfer
personal payments
and
interest3
rental 2
income
income

Nonagricultural
personal
income 4

Agricultural
income

1929

85.1

50.5

19.7

13.3

1.5

76.8

8.3

1930 _
1931
1932
1933
1934

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

46.3
39.2
30.5
29.0
33.8

15.7
11.8
7.4
7.2
8.7

12.6
11.1
9.1
8.2
8.6

1.5
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.2

70.0
60.1
46.2
43.0
49.5

6.2
4.7
3.1
3.6
3.7

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

36.8
42.1
45.9
42.8
45.7

12.1
12.6
15.4
14.0
14.7

8.6
10.1
10.3
8.7
9.2

2.4
3.5
2.4
2.8
3.0

53.4
62.8
66.5
62.1
66.3

6.5
5.6
7.5
6.2
6.3

1940.-1941
1942
1943
1944,--

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9

49.5
61.5
81.4
104.5
116.2

16.3
20.8
28.4
32.8
35.5

9.4
9.9
9.7
10.0
10.6

3.1
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.6

71.5
86.1
109.4
135.2
150.5

6.8
9.2
13.3
15.1
15.4

1945
1946
1947..1948
1949

171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.9

116.9
111.1
122.3
134.9
134.2

37.5
42.0
42.4
47.3
42.1

11.4
13.2
14.5
16.0
17.1

6.2
11.4
11.8
11.3
12.4

155.7
158.8
170.8
187.1
188.7

16.2
18.9
20.2
22.4
17.2

1950 _
1951. _.
19525

226.3
254.1
268.3

146.5
170.7
182.2

45.2
50.6
52.2

19.5
20.4
21.2

15.1
12.4
12.7

208.5
233. 6
247.8

17.8
20.5
20.6

1935
1936 -.
1937
1938..1939.--

_

_

. _

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950: First half.
Second half

218.4
234.2

138.8
154.0

43.0
47.4

18.2
20.8

18.4
12.0

201.8
215.4

16.6
18.9

1951: First half
Second half

249.0
259. 0

167.4
173.9

49.4
52.0

20.0
20.8

12.4
12.4

229.7
237.6

19.4
21.5

1952: First half
Second half •

263.7
273.0

178.6
185.8

51.6
52.8

21.0
21.4

12.5
12.9

243. 2
252.4

20.6
20.6

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter- _ _

217.8
219.0
229.0
239.5

135.4
142.1
150.3
157.8

42.6
43.4
46.8
48.0

18.0
18.5
20.0
21.7

21.8
15.0
11.9
12.0

201.0
202. 5
210.7
220.0

16.8
16.5
18.3
19.5

1951 : First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter. _ _

246.2
251.9
256.1
262.0

164.6
170.1
172.2
175.6

49.7
49.0
50.8
53.1

19.7
20.3
20.6
20.9

12.2
12.5
12.5
12.4

226.6
232.8
235.3
239.8

19.6
19.1
20.8
22.2

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter «._

263.0
264.4
268.9
277.0

178.1
179.0
182.4
189.1

51.7
51.6
52.2
53.5

20.5
21.5
21.4
21.5

12.5
12.5
12.9
12.9

242.6
243.7
248.4
256.4

20.4
20.7
20.5
20.6

1 Differs from "compensation of employees" in appendix table B-6, in that it excludes employer and
employee contributions to social insurance and includes the excess of wage disbursements over wage accruals. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income—compensation for injuries, employer
contributions to private pension and welfare funds, pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty
(pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries), directors' fees, jury and witness
fees, compensation of prison inmates, Government payments to enemy prisoners of war, marriage fees to
justices of the peace, and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims.
2 Beginning in 1952, excludes contributions of self-employed persons for social insurance, thus differing
from total proprietors' and rental income included in appendix table B-6.
3
See appendix table B-34 for dividend payments.
4
Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises,
farm wages, agricultural net rents, agricultural net interest, and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations.
6 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




172

TABLE B~8.—Relation of national income and personal income, 7929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Less:

Plus:

CorpoExcess
rate
of
profits ContriNational and in- butions wage
achi come
vento
social cruals
tory
over
valu- insurdisation
ance burseadjustments
ment

Period

Government
transfer
payments

Net
interest
paid
by
government

Dividends

Busi- Equals:
Perness
sonal
trans- income
fer
payments

1929

87.4

10.3

0.2

0.9

1.0

5.8

0.6

85.1

1930
19311932
1933
1934

75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6

6.6
1.6
-2.0
-2.0
1.1

.3
.3
.3
.3
.3

1.0
2.0
1.4
1.5
1.6

1.0
1.1
.1
.2
.2

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

.5
.6
.7
.7
.6

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

1935
1936
1937—
1938
1939—

56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5

3.0
4.9
6.2
4.3
5.8

.3
.6
1.8
2.0
2.1

1.8
2.9
1.9
2.4
2.5

.1
.1
.2
.2
.2

2.9
4.6
4.7
3.2
3.8

.6
.6
.6
.4
.5

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

1940—
1941
19421943
1944

81.3
103.8
137.1
169.7
183.8

9.2
14.6
19.9
24.3
24.0

2.3
2.8
3.5
4.5
5.2

0.2
-.2

2.7
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.1

1.3
1.3
1.5
2.1
2.8

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165 9

1945
19461947
19481949

182.7
180.3
198.7
223.5
216.3

19.2
18.3
24.7
31.7
29.2

6.1
6.0
5.7
5.2
5.7

0)
0)
0)
(')
0)

5.6
10.9
11.1
10.5
11.6

3.7
4.4
4.4
4.5
4.6

4.7
5.8
6.6
7.2
7.5

.5
.6
.7
.7
.8

171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.9

239.2
277.6
291.2

34.8
41.6
41.4

6.9
8.2
8.6

0)
0)
-.1

14.3
11.5
11.8

4.7
4.9
5.0

9.0
9.0
9.3

.8
.9
.9

226.3
254.1
268.3

_.

1950
1951- _
19522

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
17.6
11.0

4.7
4.8

8.0
10.0

.8
.9

218.4
234.2

11.4
11.6

4.8
5.0

8.8
9.2

.9
.9

249.0
259.0

0)

11.6
12.0

5.0
5.0

9.2
9.3

.9
.9

263. 7
273.0

0)
0)
0)

21.0
14.2
11.0
11.1

4.7
4.7
4.8
4.8

7.8
8.1
9.3
10.7

.8
.8
.9

:9

217. 8
219.0
229.0
239.5

.1

11.3
11.6
11.6
11.5

4.8
4.9
4.9
5.0

8.6
9.0
9.2
9.3

.9
.9
.9
.9

246.2
251.9
256.1
262. 0

.1

11.7
11.6
12.0
12.0

5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0

8.9
9.6
9.3
9.3

.9
.9
.9
.9

263.0
264.4
268.9
277.0

1950: First half—
Second half

225.1
253.3

31.2
38.4

6.6
7.1

1951: First half
Second half

272.2
282.9

41.0
42.2

8.2
8.2

287.4
295. 0

42.0
40.8

8.4
8.6

1950: First quarter..
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

218.9
231.3
247.2
259.4

28.8
33.5
37.0
39.8

6.6
6.7
6.9
7.3

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

269.6
274.8
280.2
285.6

40.7
41.2
41.9
42.5

8.1
8.2
8.1
8.3

-.2
.8
-.6

288.0
286.9
2 289. 5
300.5

42.7
41.2
239.6
42.0

8.5
8.4
8.6
8.7

0)

1952: First half
Second half 2

_.

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter 2. .

0)
0)
0)
-.2

-.4

0)

1 Less than 50 million dollars.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data; corporate profits and total national income for third quarter and all
items for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




'73

TABLE B—9.—Disposition of personal income, 1929-52

Less:
Personal Personal
tax and
income
nontax
payments

Period

Less:
Equals: Personal Equals:
DisposconPersonal
able
net
personal sumption saving
income expenditures

Net
saving as
percent
of disposable
personal
income

Billions of dollars
1929

85 1

2.6

82.5

78.8

3.7

4.5

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

2.5
1.9
1.5
1.5
1.6

73.7
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9

2.9
1.8
-1.4
-1.2
-.2

3.9
2.9
-2.9
-2.7
-.4

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

1.9
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.4

58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2

56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

1.8
3.6
3.9
1.0
2.7

3.1
5.4
5.5
1.5
3.8

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9

2.6
3.3
6.0
17.8
18.9

75.7
92.0
116.7
132.4
147.0

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

3.7
9.8
25.6
30.2
35.4

4.9
10.7
21.9
22.8
24.1

1945
1946 _ .
1947
1948 . 1949

171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.9

20.9
18.8
21.5
21.1
18.6

151.1
158.9
169.5
188.4
187.2

123.1
146.9
165.6
177.9
180.6

28.0
12.0
3.9
10.5
6.7

18.5
7.6
2.3
5.6
3.6

1950
1951
19521

226.3
254.1
268.3

20.8
29.1
33.5

205.5
225.0
234.8

194.3
208.0
216.0

11.2
17.0
18.8

5.5
7.6
8.0

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

.
_

.

_

-. ..
_

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

.
-.
_

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950: First half
Second half

218.4
234.2

1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half
Second half i

_
_.

1950: First quarter
Second quarter. _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter.

_
__.

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter _
Fourth quarter
1952: First quarter
Second quarter .
Third quarter J
Fourth quarter

..

_.

187.1
201.4

11.7
10.8

5.9
5.1

249.0
259.0

28.4
29.7

220.6
229.3

207.5
208.4

13.1
20.9

5.9
9.1

32.7
34.3

231.0
238.6

214.0
218.0

16.9
20.6

7.3
8.6

217.8
219.0
229.0
239.5

_ _____

198.8
212.2

263.7
273.0

_.

19.6
22.0

19.3
19.8
20.6
23.5

198.5
199.1
208.5
216.0

184.9
189.3
203.5
199.4

13.6
9.8
4.9
16.6

6.9
4.9
2.4
7.7

246.2
251.9
256.1
262.0

28.2
28.7
29.0
30.4

218.0
223.2
227.1
231.5

210.5
204.5
206.4
210.5

7.5
18.7
20.7
21.1

3.4
8.4
9.1
9.1

263.0
264.4
268.9
277.0

32.5
32.9
33.6
35.0

230.5
231.5
235.3
242.0

213.2
214.9
215.0
221.0

17.3
16.5
20.3
21.0

7.5
7.1
8.6
8.7

i Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




174

TABLE B—10.— Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and 1952 prices, 1929-52
Total disposable personal
income (billions of dollars)

Per capita disposable personal income (dollars)

Period
Current
prices

1952 prices 1

Current
prices

Population
(thousands) *

1952 prices »

1929

82.5

127.3

677

1,045

121, 881

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

73.7
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6

118.9
113.5
97.6
97.0
104.7

598
507
383
360
408

965
914
782
773
828

123, 188
124, 149
124, 949
125, 690
126, 485

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2

115.5
130.6
135.2
127.4
138.2

455
516
551
504
536

906
1,020
1,048
981
1, 055

127, 362
128, 181
128, 961
129, 969
131, 028

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

75.7
92.0
116. 7
132.4
147.0

147. 6
169. 4
191.0
198.5
210.0

573
690
866
968
1,062

1,117
1,271
1,417
1,451
1, 517

132, 114
133,377
134, 831
136, 719
138, 390

151. 1
158.9
169.5
188.4
187.2

208.7
204.2
198.2
208.6
209.9

1,080
1,124
1,176
1, 285
1,255

1,492
1,445
1,375
1,423
1,407

139, 934
141, 398
144, 129
146, 621
149, 149

205.5
225.0
234.8

225.1
229.4
234.8

1,355
1,458
1,496

1,484
1,486
1, 496

151, 677
154,360
156, 981

...

_..

-

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

19523

-

_-

.

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950: First half
Second half

198.8
212.2

222.4
228.2

1, 315
1,392

1,471
1,497

151, 132
152, 428

1951- First half
Second half

220.6
229.3

226.0
232.6

1, 435
1,478

1,470
1,499

153, 703
155, 093

1952: First half s
Second half

231.0
238.6

231.9
237.9

1, 477
1,512

1,483
1,507

156, 371
157, 768

1950' First quarter
Second quarter _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

198. 5
199.1
208.5
216.0

223.0
222.0
225.9
230.8

1,316
1,315
1,371
1,414

1,479
1,466
1,485
1,511

150, 850
151, 385
152, 058
152, 766

1951: First quarter
Second quarter..
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

218.0
223.2
227.1
231. 5

224.0
228.2
231. 7
233.4

1,421
1,449
1,468
1,489

1,460
1,482
,498
,501

153, 399
154, 016
154, 722
155, 442

1952: First quarter.
.
Second quarter
Third quarter 3
Fourth quarter _

230.5
231.5
235.3
242.0

232.1
231.5
234.8
241.0

1,477
1,478
1,495
1,531

,487
,478
,492
,525

156,064
156, 669
157, 370
158, 100

1
Dollar estimates in current prices divided by an over-all implicit price index for personal consumption
expenditures. This price index is based on Department of Commerce data shifted from a 1939 base.
2
Provisional intercensal estimates of the population of continental United States including armed forces
overseas, taking into account the final 1950 census total population count. Annual data are as of July 1;
quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period.
3
Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




175

TABLE B—11.—Sources and uses of gross saving, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Government surplus
or deficit (— on
income and product
transactions

Gross private saving
Period
Total

Gross StatisPertical
busisonal
Total
ness
saving saving discrepancy

State
Federal and
local

Gross investment

Gross
private Net fordomes- eign inTotal tic in- vestment
vestment

1929

15.5

3.7

11.9

-0.1

1.1

1.2

-0.1

16.6

15.8

0.8

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

11.2
8.4
2.8
2.7
5.6

2.9
1.8
-1.4
-1.2
-.2

9.0
5.3
2.7
2.7
5.0

-.7
1.2
1.4
1.2
.9

-.3
-2.8
-1.7
-1.3
-2.4

.3
-2.1
-1.5
-1.3
-2.8

-.7
-.2
0)
.5

10.9
5.6
1.1
1.5
3.2

10.2
5.4
.9
1.3
2.8

.7
.2
.2
.2
.4

7.9
11.1
10.8
8.9
12.7

1.8
3.6
3.9
1.0
2.7

6.5
6.7
7.9
8.0
8.6

-.3
.9
-1.0
-.1
1.4

-1.8
-2.9
.7
-1.5
-1.9

-2.5
-3.5
-.2
-2.0
-2.2

.7
.6
.9
.5
.3

6.1
8.2
11,5
7.4
10.8

6.1
8.3
11.4
6.3
9.9

-.1
-.1
.1
1.1
.9

16.0
23.0
41.8
47.4
57.0

3.7
9.8
25.6
30.2
35.4

10.7
11.6
13.9
16.3
17.5

1.6
1.6
2.3
.9
4.0

— 5
-3! 5
-31.2
-43.9
-51.4

-1.4
-4.9
-32.9
-46.4
-54.0

.9
1.4
1.8
2.5
2.6

15.5
19.5
10.7
3.5
5.6

13.9
18.3
10.9
5.7
7.7

1.5
1.1
-.2
-2.2
-2.1

48.5
28.7
25.3
36.4
37.0

28.0
12.0
3.9
10.5
6.7

15.7
15.0
21.1
29.1
30.2

4.9
1.7
.3
-3.2
.2

-39.2
4.6
13.7
8.2
-3.1

-41.8
2.6
12.9
8.5
-2.0

2.6
2.0
.9
-.3
-1.0

9.3
33.3
39.1
44.6
34.0

10.7
28.7
30.2
42.7
33.5

-1.4
4.6
8.9
1.9
.5

39.6
51.4
53.2

11.2
17.0
18.8

29.0
33.0
36.3

-.7
1.4
-2.0

8.5
7.3
-15

9.7
8.3
0)

-1.2
-1.0
-1.5

48.0
58.7
51.7

50.3
58.5
51.4

-2.3
.2
.3

1935
1936
1937
1938

..
.

-.
-

1939--.
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

..
-

-.

1950
1951

19522

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950:

First half
Second half

42.2
36.8

11.7
10.8

28.8
29.2

1.8
-3.2

.6
16.3

2.4
17.0

-1.8
-.7

42.8
53.2

44.5
56.2

-1.6
-3.0

First half
Second half .. .

45.8
57.0

13.1
20.9

29.5
36.4

3.2
-.4

15.2
-.6

16.2
.4

-1.0
-1.0

61.0
56.4

62.5
54.6

-1.4
1.8

First half
Second half 2

52.6
53.9

16.9
20.6

36.2
36.4

-.5
-3.2

-1.6
-1.4

.4
-.4

-2.0
-1.0

51.0
52.4

49.6
53.1

1.3
-.7

First quarter
Second quarter. __
Third quarter
Fourth quarter...

42.5
41.9
30.2
43.5

13.6
9.8
4.9
16.6

27.5
30.0
29.3
29.2

1.4
2.1
-4.0
-2.3

-5.1
6.4
17.3
15.3

-3.3
8.0
17.9
16.1

-1.8
-1.7
—. 6
-.8

37.3
48.4
47.6
58.9

39.0
50.0
50.8
61.6

-1.7
-1.6
-3.2
-2.7

First quarter
Second quarter...
Third quarter
Fourth quarter...

35.4
56.2
57.4
56.5

7.5
18.7
20.7
21.1

27.2
31.8
36.7
36.2

.7
5.7
.0
-.8

21.7
8.8
-.1
-1.1

22.4
10.0
1.1
-.2

-.7
-1.2
-1.2
-.9

57.1
65.0
57.3
55.5

59.8
65.2
56.2
52.9

-2.7
-.2
1.1
2.6

First quarter
Second quarter...
Third quarter 2...
Fourth quarter 2..

51.6
53.5
52.7
55.1

17.3
16.5
20.3
21.0

35.9
36.4
35.6
37.3

-1.6
.6
-3.2
-3.2

.5
-3.8
-2.5
-.4

2.6
-1.9
-1.5
.6

-2.1
-1.8
-1.0
-1.0

52.2
49.7
50.1
54.7

50.0
49.3
51.7
54.5

2.2
.4
-1.6
.2

1951:

1952:
1950:

1951:

1952:

1 Less than 50 million dollars.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data; third and fourth quarters by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because'of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except aslnoted).




176

EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES
TABLE B-12.—Labor force, employment, and unemployment, 1929-52
Total
labor
force
Armed
(includ- forces i Total
ing
civilian
armed
labor
forces) *
force

Period

Civilian labor force
Employment *

Total

Agri- Nonagricultural cultural

Unemployment

Unemployment
as percent of
total
civilian
labor
force

Thousands of persons, 14 years of age and over
Monthly average:
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945—.
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952

49, 440

.-

50, 080
- 50, 680
51, 250
51, 840
52, 490
53, 140
53, 740
54, 320
54, 950
55,600
56, 030
57, 380
60,230
64, 410
-.
65, 890
65, 140
60,820
61.608
62, 748
63, 571
64, 599
65. 832
?
66, 500

1951: First half
64,948
Second half
66,717
1952: First half
65, 794
3 67, 200
Second half
1950: June
66, 177
63,759
1951: January
February __
_. 63, 868
March
64, 956
April
_ ._ 64, 577
May
65, 728
66,800
June - . . _67. 477
July
August
67, 371
September
66, 396
October
66, 662
November. _
66, 422
65, 973
December
1952: January
_ 65, 091
February
65, 228
March
65, 006
April
65, 260
May
66, 298
67,884
Juno
July.
August
September
October
November
(4)
December
(4)

8
8

260
260
260,
250
250
260
270
300
320
340
370
390
1,470
3,820
8,870
11,260
11,280
3.300
1,440
1,306
1,466
1, 500
2,948
3 3, 500

49, 180
49, 820
50, 420
51, 000
51, 590
52, 230
52, 870
53, 440
54,000
54, 610
55,230
55, 640
55, 910
56, 410
55, 540
54,630
53,860
57, 520
60,168
61, 442
62, 105
63, 099
62. 884
62, 962

47,630
45, 480
42, 400
38, 940
38, 760
40, 890
42, 260
44, 410
46,300
44, 220
45,750
47, 520
50,350
53,750
54, 470
53,960
52, 820
55, 250
58, 027
59, 378
58, 710
59, 957
61, 005
61, 291

10,450
10, 340
10,290
10, 170
10, 090
9,900
10,110
10,000
9,820
9,690
9,610
9,540
9,100
9,250
9,080
8,950
8,580
8,320
8,266
7,973
8,026
7,507
7,054
6,805

37, 180
35, 140
32, 110
28,770
28, 670
30, 990
32, 150
34, 410
36, 480
34, 530
36, 140
37, 980
41, 250
44, 500
45, 390
45, 010
44, 240
46, 930
49, 761
51,405
50,684
52, 450
63, 951
54,486

1,550
4,340
8,020
12,060
12,830
11, 340
10, 610
9,030
7,700
10, 390
9,480
8,120
5,560
2,660
1,070
670
1,040
2,270
2,142
2,064
3,395
3,142
1,879
1,672

3.2
8.7
15.9
23.6
24.9
21.7
20.1
16.9
14.3
19.0
17.2
14.6
9.9
4.7
1.9
1.2
1.9
3.9
3.6
3.4
5.5

2,694
3,204
3, 453
3 3, 600
1,311
2,245
2,555
2,631
2,788
2,925
3, 017
3,095
3,163
3,210
3,210
3,258
3,285
3,311
3.390
3,488
3,516
3, 520
3,494

62,254
63, 513
62, 341
63,584
64,866
61, 514
61, 313
62, 325
61, 789
62, 803
63,783
64, 382
64, 208
63, 186
63, 452
63,164
62, 688
61. 780
61,838
61, 518
61, 744
62, 778
64,390
64, 176
63, 958
63,698
63, 146
63, 646
62, 878

60, 189
61, 820
60,512
62, 070
61, 482
59, 010
58, 905
60, 179
60,044
61, 193
61, 803
62, 526
62,630
61,580
61,836
61, 336
61, 014
59, 726
59, 752
59, 714
60, 132
61, 176
62, 572
62.234
62, 354
62, 260
61, 862
62,228
61, 480

6,744
7,365
6,634
6,976
9,046
6,018
5,930
6,393
6,645
7,440
8,035
7,908
7,688
7,526
7,668
7,022
6,378
6,186
6,064
6,012
6,412
6,960
8,170
7,598
6,964
7,548
7,274
6,774
5,696

63, 446
54, 455
53, 878
55,094
52, 436
52, 993
52, 976
53, 785
53,400
53, 753
53,768
54,618
54, 942
54,054
54, 168
54, 314
54, 636
53, 540
53, 688
53, 702
53, 720
54, 216
54, 402
54, 636
55,390
54, 712
54, 588
55, 454
55,784

2,065
1,693
1,829
1,514
3,384
2,503
2,407
2,147
1,744
1,609
1,980
1,856
1,578
1,606
1,616
1,828
1,674
2,054
2,086
1,804
1,612
1,602
1,818
1,942
1,604
1,438
1,284
1,418
1,398

3.3
2.7
2.9
2.4
5.2
4.1
3.9
3.4
2.8
2.6
3.1
2.9
2.6
2.5
2.5
2.9
2.7
3.3
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.6
2.8
3.0
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.2
2.2

8
81
0)
4
()

50
3.0
2.7

' Data for 1940-52 exclude about 150,000 members of the armed forces who were outside the continental
United States in 1940 and who were therefore not enumerated in the 1940 census. This figure is deducted
by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with 1940 data.
* Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation,
illness, bnd weather, temporary lay-off, and industrial disputes.
3 Estimates of armed forces based on a statement in the Budget Message of the President, January 1953
Total labor force, including armed forces, rounded to the nearest half-million.
«Not available.
NOTE.—Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month.
Detail will not necessarily odd to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Labor (1929-39) and Department of Commerce (1940-52), except as noted.




177

TABLE B-13.—Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-52 l
[Thousands of employees]

Period

Monthly average:
1929
1930
1931 .
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937..
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952*
1951: First half
Second half.__
1952: First half 4
Second half _.
1950: June
1951: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1952: January
February
March
April
May _
June
July
August. 4
September ...
October 4
November 4...

Total
wage
and
salary
workers

Maimfactur ing

Total

NonDur- duraable
ble
goods goods

31,041 10, 534
(3)
29, 143 9,401
(3)
8,021
26, 383
6,797
23, 377
7,258
23, 466
(3)
25, 699
8,346
(3)
26, 792
8,907 X3)
9,653 !.(•)'
28, 802
30, 718 110, 6061
28, 902 19,253
30, 287 10, 078 4,683
32, 031 10, 780 5,337
36, 164 12, 974 6,945
39, 697 15, 051 8,804
42, 042 17, 381 11, 077
41, 480 17, 111 10, 858
40, 069 15, 302 9,079
41,412 14, 461 7,739
43, 371 15, 247 8,373
44, 201 15, 286 8,315
43, 006 14, 146 7,465
44, 124 14, 884 8,008
46, 401 15, 931 8,926
46, 662 15, 906 8,985
45, 880 15, 925 8,927
46, 922 15, 938 8,925
46, 122 15, 727 8,943
47, 309 16, 120 9,035
43, 945 14, 666 7,964
45, 246 15,784 8,742
45,390 15, 978 8,877
45, 850 16, 022 8,969
45, 998 15, 955 9,003
46, 226 15, 853 8,975
46, 567 15, 956 8,998
46, 432 15, 813 8,839
46, 724 16, 008 8,878
46, 956 16, 039 8,913
46, 902 15,965 8,942
46, 852 15, 890 8,976
47, 663 15, 913 9,000
45, 913 15, 776 8,946
45, 899 15, 859 9,010
46, 001 15, 869 9,035
46, 299 15, 795 9,054
46, 329 15,654 8,991
46, 292 15, 410 8,621
46,006 15, 162 8,301
47, 124 16, 028 8,916
47, 727 16, 389 9,190
47, 826 16, 493 9,336
47, 862 16, 529 9,433

§

'r«
or

(3)
(3)
(33)
C3 )
()
C3)
C3)
C3)
»(3)
(3)

5,394
5,443
6,028
6,247
6,304
6,253
6,222
6,722
6,874
6,970
6,681
6,876
7,005
6,921
6,997
7,013
6,784
7,085
6,702
7,042
7,101
7,053
6,952
6,878
6,958
6,974
7,130
7,126
7,023
6,914
6,913
6,830
6,849
6,834
6,741
6,663
6,789
6,861
7,112
7,199
7,157
7,096

Aiming

GovTransernCon- portament,
tion
tract
FiServ- (Fedconand Trade 2 nance ice 2 eral,
struc- public
State,
tion utiliand
ties
local)

1,078 1,497 3,907 6,401
1,000 1,372 3,675 6,064
864 1,214 3,243 5,531
722
970 2,804 4,907
735
809 2,659 4,999
862 2,736 5,552
874
f912 2,771 5,692
888
937 1, 145 2,956 6,076
1,006 11, 112 3,114 6,543
882 1,055 2,840 6,453
845 1,150 2,912 6,612
916 1,294 3,013 6,940
947 1,790 3,248 7,416
983 2,170 3,433 7,333
917 1,567 3,619 7,189
883 1,094 3,798 7,260
826 1, 132 3,872 7,522
852 1,661 4,023 8,602
943 1,982 4,122 9,196
981 2,165 4,151 9,491
932 2,156 3,979 9,438
904 2,318 4,010 9,524
920 2,569 4,144 9,804
875 2,552 4,161 9,855
923 2,432 4,116 9,650
916 2,707 4,173 9,958
886 2,420 4,121 9,748
862 2,710 4,208 9,983
946 2,414 4,023 9,411
932 2,281 4,072 9,592
930 2,228 4,082 9,554
924 2,326 4,112 9,713
911 2,471 4,132 9,627
915 2,598 4,137 9,683
927 2,686 4,161 9,732
906 2,754 4,176 9,667
922 2,809 4,190 9,641
917 2,768 4,178 9,781
917 2,761 4,166 9,893
917 2,633 4,165 10, 109
916 2,518 4,161 10, 660
909 2,316 4,103 9,720
902 2,308 4,111 9,643
904 2,296 4,118 9,668
896 2,416 4,096 9, 845
893 2,522 4,131 9,773
814 2,663 4,168 9,838
784 2,722 4,140 9,792
897 2,781 4,208 9,784
885 2,761 4,224 9,960
870 2,699 4,240 10, 094
875 2,586 4,230 10, 285

1,431
1,398
1,333
1,270
1,225
1,247
1,262
1,313
1,355
1,347
1,382
1,419
1,462
1,440
1,401
1,374
1,394
1,586
1,641
1,716
1,763
1,812
1,883
1,959
1,859
1,906
1,942
1,979
1,827
1,831
1,839
1,854
1,865
1,874
1,893
1,908
1,914
1,898
1,898
1,907
1,912
1,909
1,919
1,937
1,952
1,958
1,977
1,993
1,993
1,971
1,969
1,970

3,127
3,084
2,913
2, 682f
2,614
2,784
2,883
3,060
3,233
3,196
3,321
3,477
3,705
3,857
3,919
3,934
4,055
4,621
4,786
4,799
4,782
4,761
4,759
4,765
4,729
4,788
4,733
4,803
4,826
4,666
4,657
4,682
4,745
4,789
4,835
4,852
4,839
4,831
4,770
4,734
4,702
4,671
4,667
4,681
4,748
4,796
4,837
4,855
4,844
4,825
4,766
4,724

3,066
3,149
3,264
3,225
3,167
3,298
3,477
3,662
3,749
3,876
3,987
4,192
4,622
5,431
6,049
6,026
5,967
5,607
5,454
5,613
5,811
5,910
6,390
6,589
6,246
6,535
6,544
6,643
5,832
6,088
6,122
6,217
6,292
6,377
6,377
6,356
6,401
6,544
6,532
6,497
6,881
6,509
6,490
6,528
6,551
6,602
6,585
6,558
6,589
6,712
6,695
6,663

1
Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked
during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes
proprietors, self-employed persons, domestic servants, and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable
with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of
Commerce (appendix table B-12) which include proprietors, self-employed persons, and domestic servants,
which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes, bad weather,
or temporary lay-offs, and which are based on an enumeration of population, whereas the estimates in this
table are based on reports from employing establishments.
2
Data for the trade and service divisions, beginning with 1939, are not strictly comparable with data shown
for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service
division.
3
Not available.
< Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies
and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through 1947, and have been carried forward from 1947
benchmark levels, thereby providing consistent series.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Labor.




178

TABLE B—14.—Average weekly hours in selected industries, 1929-52
Manufacturing

Retail
trade
Bitumi- Build- Class I
(except Hotels
ing
nous
Tele- Whole- eating (yearconrailsale
Noncoal
and
phone trade
Total Durable durable mining struc- roads
drink- round)
goods goods
tion
ing
places)

Period

Monthly average:

C)

0)

38.4

C)
0)
32.6
34.8
33.9

0)
0)
41.9
40.0
35.1

33.5
28.3
27.2
29.5
27.0

36.6
39.2
38.6
35.6
37.7

37.3
41.0
40.0
35.0
38.0

36.1
37.7
37.4
36.1
37.4

26.4
28.8
27.9
23.5
27.1

38.1
40.6
42.9
44.9
45.2

39.3
42.1
45.1
46.6
46.6

37.0
38.9
40.3
42.5
43.1

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949.

43.4
40.4
40.4
40.1
39.2

44.1
40.2
40.6
40.5
39.5

1950
1951

40.5
40.7
40.6

1951: First half
Second half...

C)
0)
0)
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
(')
0)
C1)
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)
0)

0)
0)
0)
(0
0)
C)
0)
0)
0)
0)
(0
0)
0)
0)

44.8

0)
0)

28.9

43.1
41.1
38.9
38.8
40.4

30.1
32.8
33.4
32.1
32.6

41.1
42.5
43.2
42.5
43.4

0)
0)
38.8
38.9
39.1

28.1
31.1
32.9
36.6
43.4

33.1
34.8
36.4
38.4
39.6

44.0
45.6
46.9
48.7
49.1

39.5
40.1
40.5
41.9
42.3

42.3
40.5
40.1
39.6
38.8

42.3
41.6
40.7
38.0
32.6

39.0
38.1
37.6
337.3
36.7

48.5
45.9
46.3
46.1
43.5

(2)
39.4
37.4
39.2
38.5

0)
0)

41.0
40.9
40.7

0)
0)
40.3
40.3
40.4

0)
(0
45.2
44.3
44.2

41.2
41.7
41,4

39.7
39.5
39.6

35.0
35.2
33.5

36.3
37.3
38.1

40.8
41.0
0)

38.9
39.1
38.5

40.7
40.7
40.6

40.5
40.1
39.8

43.9
43.2
42.6

40.9
40.6

41.8
41.5

39.8
39 3

34.6
35.8

36.6
37.8

41.3
40.6

39.0
39.2

40.6
40.8

40. 0
40.2

43.3
43.1

1952: First half 4
Second half ._

40.4
40.9

41.4
41.4

39.2
40.1

33.3
33.8

37.8
38.6

40.8
0)

38.0
39.0

40.4
40.7

39.8
39.7

42.7
42.5

1950: June .

40.5

41.3

39.5

34.7

37.0

41.9

39.1

40.6

40.9

43.8

1951: January
February
March
April

41.0
40.9
41.1
41.0
40.7
40.7
40.2
40.3
40.6
40.5
40.5
41.2

41.5
41.6
41.9
42.0
41.8
41.8
40.9
41.3
41.6
41.7
41.5
42.2

40.2
40.0
40.0
39.7
39.3
39.4
39.3
39.1
39.4
38.9
39.2
39.9

37.6
34.1
33.6
33.9
33.3
34.8
32.7
34.9
36.5
36.3
36.2
38.4

36.7
35.3
35.8
36.8
37.5
37.7
38.1
38.2
38.2
38.5
36.4
37.7

42.1
41.1
41.9
40.6
41.0
41.1
40.1
42.1
39.1
42.0
40.8
39.5

38.9
39.2
38.9
38.7
39.0
39.4
39.8
39.2
39.4
39.1
39.2
38.8

40.8
40.6
40.6
40.6
40.6
40.7
40.7
40.7
40.9
40.8
40.8
41.1

40.3
40.1
39.7
39.9
39.8
40.4
40.8
40.8
40.0
39.8
39.4
40.1

43.4
43.2
43.3
43.3
43.4
43.4
43.4
43.3
42.9
42.9
43.1
43.2

40.8
40.7
40.7
39.8
40.2
40.5
39.9
40.6
41.3
41.4
41.2

41.8
41.7
41.7
40.8
41.1
41.2
40.2
41.0
42.0
42.2
41.8

39.5
39.5
39.3
38.4
39.0
39.5
39.5
40.0
40.3
40.3
40.3

38.5
35.9
35.4
29.9
31.8
28.5
28.1
36.2
39.2
32.8
0)

37.5
37.9
36.9
37.6
37.9
38.7
38.4
38.5
38.7
38.7

41.6
42.7
40.2
41.3
39.8
39.5
39.7
40.0
40.9

38.7
38.5
38.5
34.9
38.7
39.0
39.3
39.0
39.0
38.9
0)

40.7
40.4
40.4
40.1
40.4
40.5
40.6
40.6
40.8
40.8
0)

39.8
39.8
39.8
39.7
39.6
40.1
40.4
40.4
39.6
39.3
0)

42.8
42.8
42.5
42.8
42.6
42.6
42.4
42.6
42.3
42.6

1929

44.2

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

42.1
40.5
38.3
38.1
34.6

1935
1936
1937.
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

_ ..

._

_

1952*

May

June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1952: January _
February
March-__
April
Mav

June
July
August
September 4 - _
October*
November 4. .
1
2

0)

8

0)
0)
0)
0)

8
0)
(!)

0)
0)
0)
0)
C)
0)

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)
0)
0)
(0

8

0)

Not available.
Average for year not available because new series was started in April 1945. Beginning with June 1949
data relate to nonsupervisory employees only.
3
Not strictly comparable with previous data.
4
Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly-rated employees in railroads, construction workers in building construction, and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries.
Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly
data are used.
The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable
with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on employment.
Source: Department of Labor.




179

TABLE B—15.—Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries, 1929-52
Retail
trade
Bitumi- Build- Class I
(except Hotels
Tele- Whole- eating (yearnous ing con- railsale
and
coal
Dura- Nonstrucphone trade
drink- round) i
ble durable mining tion roads
ing
goods goods
places)

Manufacturing
Period
Total

Monthly average:
1929

$0.566

1930
1931
1932
1933
. ...
1934..
_._

.552
.515
.446
.442
.532

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

.550
.556
.624
.627
.633

1940 -._
1941
1942
1943-.
1944

-.

(2)

$0.636

(')

0)

$0. 497
.472
.556

8

(2)
(2)
$0.420
.427
.515

.684
.647
.520
.501
.673

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
$0.795

.644
.651
.600
.595
.602

.577
.586
.674
.686
.698

.530
.529
.577
.584
.582

.745
.794
.856
.878
.886

.815
.824
.903
.908
.932

.651
.659
.676
.712
.714

$0.681

i
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)
$0.774
.816
.822

(2)

i

(2)

(2)

(2)
2
(2)
(2)
()
(2)

(2)

2

i)
(

)
8 (81 (( ))
2
2

(2)
(2)
2
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)
2

8

(2)
(2)

2

.958
1.010
1.148
1.252
1.319

.717
.751
.824
.897
.938

.904
1.015
1.171
1.278
1.325

1.379
1.240
1.401
1.478
1.681
1.636
1.898 « 1. 848
1.941
1. 935

.942
1.116
1.170
1.309
1.419

()
1.124
1.197
1. 248
1.345

$1. 268
1.359
1.414

$1. 009
1.088
1.137

$0.650
.709
.743

1.537
1.678
1.763

1.378
1.481
1.538

2.010
2.212
2.259

2.031
2.201
2.312

1. 549
5 1. 702
(2)

1.398
1.491
1.581

1.483
1.585
1.667

1.176
1.253
1.307

.771
.819
.864

1.575
1.614

1.655
1.702

1.466
1.495

2.193
2.235

2.166
2.232

1.658
1.746

1.458
1.522

1.569
1.601

1.244
1.262

.807
.832

1.652
1.687

1.740
1.791

1.529
1.549

2.236
2.287

2.278
2.353

1.780
(2)

1.551
1.617

1.650
1.687

1.292
1.324

.858
.872

1950- June

1.453

1.522

1.365

2. 015

1.995

1.532

1.386

1.476

1.175

.761

1951* January

1.555
1.561
1.571
1. 578
1 586
1.599
1. 598
1.596
1.613
1. 615
1.626
1.636

1.630
1.639
1.654
1.659
1. 665
1.681
1.682
1.684
1.707
1.705
1.712
1.723

1.456
1.458
1.460
1.465
1.474
1.484
1.488
1. 481
1.489
.491
.507
.515

2.038
2.219
2.222
2.231
2.218
2.232
2.254
2.213
2.236
2.221
2.240
2.247

2.135
2.157
2.163
2.167
2.182
2.194
2. 195
2.207
2.236
2.239
2.260
2. 253

1.559
1.622
1.657
1.687
1.698
1.723
1.741
1.723
1.760
1.732
1. 750
1.771

1.450
1.469
1.453
1.450
1. 451
1.475
1.490
1.501
1.522
1. 533
1.552
1.532

.555
.567
.567
.575
.571
.581
.586
.585
.605
.604
.606
.620

1. 237
1.236
1.233
1.249
1.252
1.256
1.262
1. 259
1.270
1.267
1.267
1.245

.804
.811
.801
.806
.807
.812
.817
.815
.834
.837
.840
.852

1952: January
February
March . . _
April
May
June
July . .
August
September 8. _
October 8
November 6 ..

1.640
1.644
.656
.655
.658
.658
.648
.669
.696
.705
1.715

1.726
1.731
1.746
1.742
1.746
1.747
1.733
1.768
1.811
1.819
1.824

.520
.522
.530
.529
.531
.540
.545
.542
.545
.549
.563

2.244
2.236
2.239
2.230
2.209
2.256
2.258
2.225
2.261
2.335
(2)

2.276
2.285
2.292
2.285
2.270
2.261
2.294
2. 327
2.356
2.384
(2)

1.781
1.796
1.779
1.759
1.773
1.792
1.810
1.824
1.830

1.542
1.554
1.540
1.545
1.566
1.559
1.585
1.591
1.613
1.637
(2)

.632
.637
.649
.658
.657
1.669
1.670
1.678
1.690
1.698

1.287
1.281
1.279
1.284
1.305
1.318
1.314
1.312
1.324
1.334
(2)

.852
.855
.856
.858
.863
.862
.866
.868
.872
.875
(2)

.661
.729
.853
.961
1.019

.724
.808
.947
1.059
1.117

.602
.640
.723
.803
.861

1.023
1.086
1, 237
1.350
1.401

1.111
1.156
1.292
1.410
1.469

1.465
1.594
1.668

1951: First half
Second half...
1952: First half 8
Second half ..

1945
1946
1947
1948.1949

-.
. -.

1950
1951
1952 «

February
March
April
May
June
July _..
August
September
October
November
December

.883
.993
1.059
1.139
1.186

(2)

8

.827
.820
.843
.870
.911
8

()

8

(0

()

8
8

8
8
()
2

(2)
(2)

*
8 Money payments only; additional value of board, room, uniforms, and tips not included.
8 Not available.
Not available. Series beginning April 1945 includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning
with June 1949, data relate to nonsupervisory employees.
4
Not strictly comparable with previous data.
»
8 Preliminary average; does not include any retroactive wage payments.
Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly-rated employees in railroads, construction workers in building construction, and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where
monthly data are used.
The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable
with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Source: Department of Labor.




180

TABLE B—16.—Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 7929-52
M anuf acturing
Period
Total

Monthly average:
1929
1930
1931
1932
_._
1933
1934 _-.
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939 .
19401941
1942._.
__.
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952 •
1951: First half
Second half...
1952: First half
Second half 81950: June....
...
1951: January
February
March.
__
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1952: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September •_ .
October*
November 6 _.

$25. 03
23.25
20.87
17.05
16.73
18.40
20.13
21.78
24.05
22.30
23.86
25.20
29.58
36.65
43.14
46.08
44.39
43.82
49.97
54.14
54.92
59.33
64.88
67.79
64.42
65.45
66.82
68.96
58.85
63.76
63.84
64.57
64.70
64.55
65. 08
64.24
64.32
65.49
65.41
65.85
67.40
66.91
66.91
67.40
65.87
66.65
67.15
65.76
67.76
70.04
70.59
70.66

Bitumi- Buildnous ing con- Class I TelerailNonDuracoal
strucroads phone
durable mining
tion
ble
goods
goods

$27. 22
24.77
21.28
16.21
16.43
18.87
21.52
24.04
26.91
24.01
26.50
28.44
34.04
42.73
49.30
52.07
49.05
46.49
52.46
57.11
58.03
63.32
69.97
73.02
69.11
70.70
71.99
74.24
62.86
67.65
68.18
69.30
69.68
69.60
70.27
68.79
69.55
71.01
71.10
71.05
72.71
72.15
72.18
72.81
71.07
71.76
71.98
69.67
72.49
76.06
76.76
76.24

$22. 93
21.84
20.50
17.57
16.89
18.05
19.11
19.94
21.53
21.05
21.78
22.27
24.92
29.13
34.12
37.12
38.29
41.14
46.96
50.61
51.41
54.71
58.50
60.90
58.30
58.76
59.92
62.08
53.92
58.53
58.32
58.40
58.16
57.93
58.47
58.48
57.91
58.67
58.00
59.07
60.45
60.04
60.12
60.13
58.71
59.71
60.83
61.03
61.68
62.26
62.42
62.99

$25. 72
$ 28. 49
(2)
22.21
27.76
(2)
2
17.69
26.76
(2)
23.34
13.91
(2)
23.09
14.47
()
24.32
18.10 $22. 97
24.51
19.58
26.76
28.01
27.01
22.71
23.84
29.20
30.14
20.80
30.26
29.19
30.99
23.88
30.39
31.55
24.71
31.70
30.86
34.25
35.14
35.02
38.65
41.80
41.62
48.13
43.68
46.06
51.27
52.18
52.25
45.69
53.73
51.22
56.24
58.03
66.59
63.30
54.17
60.34
72.12 <68.85
63.28
61.73
70.95
70.35
63.20
73.73
82.10 « 69. 78
77.86
75.76
88.18
(2)
75.69
68.44
79.37
80.09
70.88
84.46
74.52
72. 75
86.00
77.25
90.80
(2)
69.92
73.82
64.19
78.35
76.63
65.63
76.14
75.67
66.66
74.66
77.44
69.43
75. 63
68.49
79.75
69.62
73.86
81.83
77.67
70.82
82.71
69.81
83.63
73.71
77.23
72.54
84.31
85.42
81.61
68.82
80.62
86.20
72.74
81.09
71.40
82.26
86.28
69.95
84.94
85.35
86.39
74.09
86.60
76.69
80.27
79.26
71.52
84.57
85.92
66.68
72.65
70.25
86.03
70.78
87.50
64.30
70.78
63.45
71.86
88.09
89.59
80.55
72.96
88.63
91.18
74.85
76.59
92.26
(2)
(2)

8

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

$29.81
31.53
31.94
32.44
32.74
33.97
36.30
38.39

(3)
44.04
44.77
48.92
51.78
54.38
58. 30
60.88
56.89
59.72
59.02
63.11
54.19
56.41
57.58
56.52
56.12
56.59
58.12
59.30
58.84
59.97
59.94
60.84
59.44
59.68
59.83
59.29
53.92
60.60
60.80
62.29
62.05
62.91
63.68
(2)

Retail
trade
(except
Whole- eating Hotels
sale
(yearand
trade drink- round) '
ing
places)

C2)
(2)
C22)
(2)
(2)
()
C22)
()
C )
2

(2)

(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

8

2

(2)
(2)
C3)

( )
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

8

8
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
C2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

2

()

(2)

(2)

$51.99
55. 58
57.55
60.36
64.51
67.61
63.79
65.37
66.70
68.70
59.93
63.44
63.62
63.62
63.95
63.78
64.35
64.55
64.51
65.64
65.44
65. 52
66.58
66.42
66.13
66.62
66.49
66.94
67.59
67.80
68.13
68.95
69.28
C2)

$40. 66
43.85
45.93
47.63
50. 25
51.95
49.80
50.66
51.43
52.57
48.06
49.85
49.56
48.95
49.84
49.83
50.74
51.49
51.37
50. 80
50.43
49.92
49.92
51.22
50.98
50.90
50.97
51.68
52.85
53.09
53.00
52.43
52.43
(2)

(2)

(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

$29. 36
31.41
32.84
33.85
35.38
36.83
34.96
35.91
36.61
37.09
33.33
34.89
35.04
34.68
34. 90
35.02
35.24
35.46
35.29
35.78
35. 91
36.20
36.81
36.47
36.59
36.38
36.72
36.76
36.72
36.72
36.98
36.89
37.28
(2)

1 Money payments only; additional value of board, room, uniforms, and tips not included.
2
Not available.
» Not available. Series beginning April 1945 includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning
with June 1949, data relate to nonsupervisory employees.
4
Not strictly comparable with previous data.
• Preliminary average does not include any retroactive wage payments.
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly-rated employees in railroads, construction workers in building construction, and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where
monthly data are used.
The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable
with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Source: Department of Labor.




181

PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY
TABLE B—17.—Indexes of industrial and agricultural production, 1929-52
11935-39=100]
Industrial production
Period i

Manufactures
Minerals

Total
Total

Durable

Agricultural production -

Nondurable

110

110

132

93

107

97

91
75
58
69
75

90
74
57
68
74

98
67
41
54
65

84
79
70
79
81

93
80
67
76
80

9f>
104
101
93
79

- -

87
103
113
89
109

87
104
113
87
109

83
108
122
78
109

90
100
106
95
109

86
99
112
97
106

96
85
108
105
106

.

125
162
199
239
235

126
168
212
258
252

139
201
279
360
353

115
142
158
176
171

117
125
129
132
140

110
114
128
125
130

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

203
170
187
192
176

214
177
194
198
183

274
192
220
225
202

166
165
172
177
168

137
134
149
155
135

129
133
128
138
137

1950 1951 3
1952

200
220
219

209
229
229

237
273
279

187
194
189

148
164
161

136
139
144

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933 _
1934

- - -

1935
1936
1937-.
1938
1939 1940-.
1941
1942-.
1943
1944 _

- -

_-

.

-

Adjusted for seasonal variation
1951: First half
Second half
1952' First half 3
Second half
1950: June
1951: January
February
March..
April
- -

May

_.
-_

June
_ -- --July
- _
August
September _ ___ _ _ _
October _
November
December
1952: January
February
._
March
.
April
May
. __ __
June
July
August
September
October
...
November 3
December

222
217
216
222
199
221
221
222
223
222
221
212
217
218
218
219
218
221
222
221
216
211
204
193
215
227
229
233
234

232
226
226
232
208
231
232
234
234
233
231
222
226
228
226
228
228
931
232
231
225
224
214
202
225
236
241
243
245

274
273
276
282
237
268
271
277
279
276
274
265
267
271
274
277
282
282
284
285
277
277
247
230
267
289
298
300
305

199
189
186
192
184
201
201
199
198
198
197
187
193
192
188
188
185
189
190
188
183
181
186
179
191
194
195
197
197

162
166
159
164
151
164
158
158
164
165
165
156
165
167
174
170
163
167
167
164
166
140
147
142
156
175
164
175
171

(4)
(*)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
4
(4 )
(4)
(4)
(4)
()
(4)
(4)
(4)
4
(4)
( 4)
()
(4)

8)
(
4

4
(4)
( 4)
()
(4)
(4)
4
(4)
( 4)
()

1 For industrial production, average of monthly indexes is used for year or half-year.
Index of volume of farm production for human use.
3 Estimates based on incomplete data.
4
Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production, only an annual index has been
computed.
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Agriculture.
2




182

TABLE B-18.—Neiv construction activity, 1929-52
[Value put in place, millions of dollars]
Private construction
Total
new
construction

Total
private *

1929

10, 793

8,307

3,625

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

8,741
6,427
3,538
2,879
3,720

5,883
3,768
1,676
1,231
1,509

2,075
1,565
630
470
625

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

4,232
6,497
6,999
6,980
8,198

1,999
2,981
3,903
3,560
4,389

1940
1941
1942
1M3
1944

8,682
11, 957
14, 075
- - 8,301
5, 259

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952

Period

Resi- Nonresidendential
tial
build- building
ing
(non- (nonfarm) farm)

Public construction

Military
and
naval

Nonresidential
building

Other
private 2

Total
public

2,694

1,988

2,486

19

659

1,266

542

2,003
1,099
502
406
456

1,805
1,104
544
355
428

2,858
2,659
1,862
1,648
2,211

29
40
34
36
47

660
612
415
230
363

1,516
1,355
958
847
1,000

653
652
455
535
801

1,010
1,565
1,875
1,990
2,680

472
713
1,085
764
786

517
703
943
806
923

2,233
3,516
3,096
3,420
3,809

37
29
37
62
125

328
701
550
672
970

845
1,362
1,226
1,421
1,381

1,023
1,424
1,283
1,265
1,333

5,054
6,206
3,415
1,979
2,186

2,985
3,510
1,715
885
815

1,025
1,482
635
233
351

1,044
1,214
1,065
861
1,020

3,628
5,751
10, 660
6,322
3,073

385
1,620
5,016
2,550
837

615
1,646
3,685
2,010
1,361

1,302
1,066
734
446
362

1,326
1,419
1,225
1,316
513

5,633
12, 000
16, 689
21, 678
22, 789

3,235
9,638
13, 256
16, 853
16, 384

1,100
4,015
6,310
8,580
8,267

1,020
3,341
3,142
3,621
3,228

1,115
2,282
3,804
4,652
4,889

2,398
2,362
3,433
4,825
6,405

690
188
204
158
137

937
354
599
1,301
2,068

398
895
1, 451
1,774
2,131

373
925
1,179
1,592
2,069

28, 749
30, 893
32, 329

21, 610
21, 684
21, 785

12, 600
10, 973
11, 101

5,233 7,139
177
5,559 9,209
887
5,734 10, 544
1,346
adjusted annual rates

2,402
3,471
4,061

2,381
2,400
2,700

2,179
2,451
2,437

1951: First half
31, 550
Second half— 30, 236

22, 578
20, 790

11, 850
10, 096

5,224
5,080

5,504
5, 614

8,972
9,446

754
1,020

3,342
3,600

2,438
2,362

2,438
2,464

1952: First half
32, 608
Second half --- 32, 050

21, 792
21, 778

10, 970
11, 232

5,050
4,850

5, 772
5,696

10, 816
10, 272

1,426
1,266

4,058
4,064

2,762
2,638

2,570
2,304

1950* June

28, 668

21, 696

12, 864

3,528

5,304

6,972

108

2,292

2,388

2,184

1951- January
30, 828
February
31, 584
March
32, 856
April
32, 340
May
31, 140
June
30, 552
July
29, 964
August
29, 892
September
29, 928
October. _ ._ 30, 276
November
30,480
December
30, 876

22, 572
23, 520
23, 616
22, 848
21, 720
21, 192
20, 988
20, 688
20,664
20, 784
20, 808
20, 808

12, 408
13, 044
12,900
11, 904
10, 644
10, 200
10, 008
9,744
9,852
10, 260
10, 368
10, 344

4,716
5,004
5,220
5,424
5,544
5,436
5,424
5,364
5,196
4,908
4,800
4,788

5,448
5,472
5,496
5,520
5,532
5,556
5,556
5,580
5,616
5,616
5,640
5, 676

8,256
8,064
9,240
9,492
9,420
9,360
8,976
9,204
9,264
9,492
9,672
10, 068

456
552
780
888
900
948
924
960
936
1,008
1,104
1,188

3,120
3,096
3,312
3,456
3,528
3,540
3,372
3,444
3,492
3,576
3,804
3,912

2,304
2,172
2,736
2,604
2,436
2,376
2,352
2,484
2,448
2,424
2,160
2,304

2,376
2,244
2,412
2,544
2,556
2,496
2,328
2,316
2, 388
2,484
2,604
2,664

-

3,777
5,152
4,950
Seasonally

High- Other
way public 3

5,052 5,772 10, 152 1,344 3,900 2,208
1952: January. .. 30, 996 20, 844 10, 020
2,700
February
5,172
2,676
1,344
3,924
3,000
5,760 10, 944
32, 676 21, 732 10, 800
1,464
3,972 2,940
2,604
March
_. 34, 020 23, 040 12, 120
5,184
5, 736 10, 980
5,112
2,952
2,556
April
5, 736 11,064
1,440
4,116
33, 348 22, 284 11, 436
4,992 5,760 10, 836
2, 496
1, 488 4,152
2,700
May
. 32, 412 21, 576 10, 824
1,476
2,388
4,788 5,868 10, 920
4,284 2,772
32, 196 21, 276 10, 620
June
4, 788
1,308
2,664
2,280
5,868 10, 272
4, 020
July
31, 680 21,408 10, 752
1,284
2,256
4,824
August
31,608 21, 468 10, 824
5,820 10, 140
3,960 2,640
September
1,200
4,020 2,820
2,280
31,848 21, 528 10, 932 4,848 5, 748 10, 320
2,316
4,836 5,604 10, 176
1,176
3,948 2,736
October
31, 920 21, 744 11, 304
2,316
November
5,544 10, 236 1,236 4,200 2,484
32,388 22, 152 11, 676 4,932
4,872
1,392
5,592 10, 488
2,376
4,236 2,484
December -_._ 32, 856 22, 368 11, 904
1 Excludes construction expenditures for petroleum and natural gas-well drilling, and therefore does not
agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product.
2
Includes public utility, farm, and other private construction not separately shown.
s Includes residential, sewer and water, miscellaneous public service enterprises, conservation and development, and all other public construction not separately shown.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Department of Labor.




183

TABLE B-19.—New nor/farm housing starts, by source of funds nnd by type of structure, 1929—52 *
Units in
Total Privately Publicly
nonfarm financed financed
units
units
units

Period

1-family
structures

2-family
structures *

Multifamily
structures 3

19298 .

509, 000

509,000

316, 000

51, 000

142, 000

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

330,000
254, 000
134,000
93,000
126,000
221, 000
319, 000
336, 000
406, 000
515, 000

330, 000
254, 000
134,000
93,000
126,000
215, 700
304, 200
332, 400
399, 300
458, 400

5,300
14,800
3,600
6,700
56,600

227, 000
187,000
118,000
76, 000
109, 000
183, 000
244, 000
267, 000
317, 000
399, 000

29, 000
22, 000
7,000
5,000
5,000
8,000
14,000
16, 000
18,000
29, 000

74, 000
45, 000
9,000
12, 000
12, 000
30, 000
61, 000
53, 000
71, 000
87,000

602,600
706, 100
356, 000
191, 000
141, 800

529,600
619,500
301, 200
183, 700
138, 700

73, 000
86,600
54, 800
7, 300
3,100

485, 700
603, 500
292, 800
143, 600
117, 700

37, 300
34, 300
20, 100
17, 800
10,600

79, 600
68, 300
43, 100
29, 600
13, 500

209, 300
670, 500
849,000
931,600
1, 025, 100

208, 100
662,500
845,600
913, 500
988, 800

1,200
8,060
3,400
18,100
36, 300

184, 600
590, 000
740, 200
766, 600
794, 300

8.800
24, 300
33, 900
46,900
36, 500

15,900
56, 200
74, 900
118, 100
194, 300

43, 800 1, 154, 100
900, 100
71, 200

44, 800
40, 400

Total
units,
seasonally adjusted
annual
rates «

197, 100
150, 800

- -

-

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946 _ .
1947
1948
1949

_.

. -

1950
1951

1,396,000 1, 352, 200
1, 091, 300 1,020,100

Totals for period, not adjusted for seasonal variation
1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half

590,000
501, 300
_.

.

-

529, 100
491, 000

60,900
10, 300

469, 800
430, 300

21, 600
18,800

98, 600
52, 200

565, 800

521, 700

44,100

461, 700

23, 200

80, 900

1950: June

144, 300

143, 400

900

124, 900

4,100

15, 300

1951: January
February. .
March
...
April
May
June
_- - July
August
Sfipt.fimhp,r
October
November
December

85, 900
80, 600
93, 800
96, 200
101, 000
132, 500
90,500
89, 100
96,400
90,000
74,500
60,800

82,200
76, 500
90, 200
92,300
97,600
90,300
86,800
88,300
95,300
88,900
72, 200
59,500

3,700
4,100
3,600
3,900
3,400
42, 200
3,700
800
1,100
1,100
2,300
1,300

71,100
67, 300
78, 400
82, 900
85, 900
84, 200
76, 000
77, 600
81,600
79,500
64, 000
51,600

3,400
3,400
4,600
3,900
3,000
3,300
3,400
3,100
3,800
3,500
2,600
2,400

11, 400
9,900
10, 800
9,400
12, 100
45, 000
11, 100
8,400
11, 000
7,000
7,900
6,800

1952: January
February.
March
April
May .
June
July
August .
September.
October8..
November •

64, 900
77,700
103,900
106, 200
109,600
103, 500
102, 600
99, 100
100,800
101, 000
86,000

61,500
74, 300
91, 100
97,000
100,900
96, 900
101, 100
97,400
99,300
100,000
82,800

3,400
3,400
12, 800
9,200
8,700
6,600
1,500
1,700
1,500
1,000
3,200

54, 000
65,700
79,600
85,700
89,700
87,000
90,500
85, 800
86,500

3,000
3,400
4,300
4,400
4,300
3,800
3,500
4,000
4,700
(7)
(0

7,900
8,600
20,000
16, 100
15, 600
12, 700
8,600
9,300
9,600

.
.

_

8

8

1, 040, 000
1, 073, 000
1, 037, 000
1, 122, 000
1, 156, 000
1, 160, 000

These estimates are based on building permit records which have been adjusted for lapsed permits and
cluded.
2
Includes units in 1- and 2-family structures with stores.
8
Includes units hi multifamily structures with stores.
< Sea
in dete
Production c m e n m e n s o
rouco
sec.
. or meo
o compung seasonay a u s e annua
rates, see special release of August 28, 1952, by the Department of Labor.
8 The number of starts for each of the years 1920-28 were as follows: 247,000; 449,000; 716,000; 871,000; 893,000;
)38
)37,000; 849,000; 810,000.
Estimates based on incomplete data.
7
Not available.
Source: Department of Labor.




184

TABLE B-20.—Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1939 and 1945-53
[Billions of dollars]
Manufacturing
Period

Total *
Total

Dura- Non- Mining
ble
durable
goods goods

Railroad

Other

Public
utilities

Commercial
and
other a

5.51

1950
1951
1952 3
1953*

-

0.76

1.19

0.33

0.28

0.36

0.52

2.08

3.98
6.79
8.70
9.13
7.15

1.59
3.11
3.41
3.48
2.59

2.39
3.68
5.30
5.65
4.56

.38
.43
.69
.88
.79

.55
.58
.89
1.32
1.35

.57
.92
1.30
1.28
.89

.50
.79
1.54
2.54
3.12

2.70
5.33
7.49
6.90
5.98

20.60
26.33
26.86
26.27

.

1.94

8.69
14.85
20.61
22.06
19.28

1939 . .
1945 .
1946
1947
1948 .
1949

Transportation

7.49
11.13
12.45
11.91

3.14
5.17
5.87
5.33

4.36
5.96
6.58
6.58

.71
.91
.85
.87

1.11
1.47
1.40
1.12

1.21
1.49
1.39
1.38

3.31
3.86
3.96
4.02

6.78
7.47
6.80
6.97

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950' First half
Second half

18.83
22.18

6.56
8.30

(5)
(fi)

(8)
(8)

.71
.71

1.05
1.17

1.07
1.36

3.10
3.47

6.35
7.17

1951- First half
Second half _ _

25.35
27.18

10.27
11.87

(fi)
(8)

(8)
(8)

.89
.93

1.40
1.53

1.48
1.50

3.78
3.91

7.53
7.44

1952- First half 3
Second half

27.40
26.99

12.42
12.66

(8)
(8)

(8)
(8)

.90
.82

1.53
1.27

1.41
1.39

4.06
3.85

7.06
6.99

1950: First quarter. _ _ __
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

18.42
19.23
21.04
23.30

6.34
6.78
7.68
8.92

(8)
(8)
(5)
(•)

8
(8)
(6)
(8)
()

.73
.68
.67
.75

.96
1.13
1.19
1.15

1.06
1.08
1.30
1.43

3.12
3.07
3.24
3.70

6.21
6.49
6.97
7.35

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

24.29
26.40
27. 07
27.30

9.46
11.08
11.72
12.02

(8)
(8)
(8)
(8)

8
(5)
(8)
()
(8)

.82
.95
.93
.93

1.28
1.53
1.46
1.60

1.45
.50
.50
.50

3.70
3.86
3.97
3.85

7.57
7.48
7.49
7.40

1952" First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

27.43
27.37
25.72
28. 27

12.04
12.80
11.92
13.40

.93
.87
.79
.86

1.57
1.48
1.20
1.35

.47
.35
.25
1.53

4.14
3.99
3.70
4.00

7.27
6.85
6.87
7.12

28.68

13.47

8 8
()
8
(8>
()

.95

1.32

1.24

4.37

7.33

1953: First quarter

3

8

.

(*)
8
8

1

Excludes agriculture and outlays charged to current account.
2 Commercial and other includes trade, service, finance, communication, and construction.
3
Estimates for fourth quarter of 1952 and first quarter of 1953 are based on anticipated capital expenditures
reported by business in November 1952.
* Estimates for 1953 are based on anticipated capital expenditures as reported by business in October 1952.
8
Not available on a seasonally adjusted basis.
NOTE.—These figures do not agree with those shown in column 2 of appendix table B-5 and included in
the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce, principally because the latter cover
certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. The above series is not available for
years prior to 1939 and for 1940 to 1944.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce.




185

TABLE B—21.—Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade, 1030-52
[Adjusted for seasonal variation]
Total manufacturing and trade

Millions of Ratio Millions of Ratio
dollars
dollars
of inof invenventories
tories InIn3
to 4 ven- Sales 3 to 4
ven- Sales sales
sales
tories'
tories2

Period

1939

...-

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

-

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

20, 051 10, 802

1.77 11, 465 5,112

Wholesale trade

Retail

Millions of Ratio
dollars
of inventories
Into
ven- Sales 3 sales 4
tories2

Millions of Ratio
dollars
of inventories
Into
ven- Sales 3 sales *
tories-9

1.34 5, 534 3,503

1.53

3,865
4,606
4,768
5, 270
5,851

1.49
1.48
1.76
1.42
1.32

4,476
5,993
7,272
7,931
7,354

.91 7,948 6,503
.90 11, 852 8,541
1.01 14, 060 9,967
.99 15, 828 10, 877
1.08 15, 311 10, 893

1.21
1.13
1.27
1.40
1.43

1.56 9,653 8,139
1.76 10, 266 8,934

1.04 18, 652 11, 974
1.16 19, 892 12,748

1.37
1.60

2.11 3,052 2,187

5,859
8,172
10, 430
12, 820
13, 782

2.06
1.78
1.77
1.51
1.45

3,238
4,044
3,781
3,684
3,912

2,410
3,033
3,426
3,830
4,152

1.30
1.20
1.19
.97
.94

30, 893 23, 852
42, 942 27, 150
50,605 33, 156
55, 647 36, 438
52, 264 34, 664

1.30 18, 390 12, 873
1.33 24, 498 12, 617
1.43 28,920 15, 917
1.47 31, 734 17, 630
1.56 28, 973 16, 416

1.48
1.66
1.71
1.72
1.86

4,555
6,592
7,625
8,085
7,980

62, 423 39, 425
73, 197 44, 016

1.40 34, 118 19, 312
1.59 43, 039 22, 335

-. 22, 176 12, 134
28, 780 15,811
- - .. 31, 091 18, 623
31, 343 21, 920
31, 059 23, 785

__-- .

Manufacturing

-- _

1.72 12, 819
1.58 16, 960
1.66 19, 287
1.40 20,098
1.33 19,507

6,119
7,776
8,023
7,561
7,640

New series
- 74, 059 44, 454
74,800 45, 550

1.59 43, 039 22, 335
1.62 43,600 23, 100

1.76 10, 266 8,934
1.87 10,200 8.800

1.16 20, 754 13, 185
1.14 21,000 13, 650

1.60
1.50

1951: First half
Second half. .

72, 041 45, 288
74, 059 43, 662

1.50 39, 684 22, 953
1.68 43, 039 21, 791

1.60 10, 648 9,030
1.92 10, 266 8,804

1.14 21, 709 13, 304
1.20 20,754 13, 066

1.58
1.62

1952: First half 5
Second half

72, 913 44, 958
74,800 46, 100

1.64 42, 892 22, 816
1.60 43,600 23, 350

1.89 9,896 8, 681
1.85 10, 200 8,950

1.16 20, 125 13, 461
1.12 21,000 13, 800

1.52
1.48

1951: January
February. _
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

65, 009 46, 771
_._ 66, 089 45, 854
67, 831 45, 224
69, 969 44, 513
71, 226 45, 584
72, 041 43, 779
73,263 43, 044
73, 731 43,888
73, 662 42, 429
73, 677 45, 180
__ 73,883 44, 637
74, 059 42, 794

.37 35, 008 22, 964
.43 35,504 22, 778
.48 36, 362 23, 064
.55 37, 805 22,836
.55 38, 773 23,746
.64 39, 684 22, 329
.69 40, 652 21,788
.68 41, 532 22,007
.74 42, 067 20,892
.63 42, 437 22, 726
.65 42, 692 22, 373
.73 43,039 20,962

1.50 9,849
1.55 10, 017
1.56 10, 285
1.62 10, 507
1.61 10, 697
1.76 .10, 648
1.84 10, 798
1.87 10, 566
2.00 10, 482
1.86 10, 445
1.90 10, 373
2.04 10, 266

9,780
9,217
8,998
8,792
8,859
8,537
8,460
8,807
8,545
9,224
9,025
8,765

1.00 20, 152 14, 027
1.08 20, 568 13, 859
1.13 21, 184 13, 162
1.18 21, 657 12,885
1.20 21, 756 12, 979
1.25 21, 709 12, 913
1.27 21, 813 12, 796
1.21 21, 633 13, 074
1.23 21, 113 12, 992
1.13 20, 795 13, 230
1.15 20,818 13,239
1.18 20,754 13, 067

1.40
1.47
1.59
1.66
1.67
1.68
1.70
1.66
1.64
1.58
1.57
1.59

73, 996 44, 792
1952: January
73, 829 45, 866
February
73, 620 43, 431
March
73, 876 45, 748
April
May
_. . . 73, 074 45, 533
72, 913 44, 381
June
72, 765 44, 455
July..
72, 714 43, 612
August
73, 437 46, 276
September. .
74, 189 48, 304
October. 5
74, 656 46, 272
November

.65 43, 077 22, 634
.61 43, 168 23,506
.70 43,237 22, 085
.61 43, 402 23, 538
.61 43, 144 23, 247
.64 42, 892 21, 888
.64 42, 748 21, 858
.67 43, 107 21, 898
.58 43, 224 23,663
.53 43, 415 24,728
.61 43, 512 23,510

1.90 10, 238
1.84 10, 036
1.96 10, 062
1.84 9,997
1.86 9,861
1.96 9,896
1.96 9,890
1.96 9,862
1.82 9,932
1.75 10, 122
1.85 10, 178

9,004
8,954
8,326
8,862
8,448
8,493
8,949
8,371
9, 055
9,389
8,771

1.14 20, 681 13, 154
1.13 20, 625 13, 406
1.21 20, 321 13,020
1.13 20, 477 13, 348
1.18 20, 069 13,838
1.16 20, 125 14,000
1.10 20, 127 13, 648
1.18 19, 745 13, 343
1.09 20, 281 13, 558
1.07 20, 652 14, 187
1.16 20,966 13, 991

1.58
1.54
1.57
1.53
1.46
1.44
1.48
1.49
1.48
1.44
1.49

1951
1952 8

._

1 A new series on retail sales and inventories beginning in 1951 has been substituted for the series previously published. These estimates are based on a change in the method of estimation adopted by the
Bureau of Census. Retail estimates are shown in this table on the previously published basis 1939-51 and
on the new basis 1951 to date. For a description of the retail sales and inventories series on the new basis,
see Survey of Current Business, September and November 1952.
2 Book value, end of period.
3
Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month.
4
For annual and semiannual periods, 24- and 12-month weighted average at end-of-month inventories
to average monthly sales; for monthly data, ratio of average end of current and previous months inventories to sales for month.
6
Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of "change in business inventories" included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than
all business, and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation.
Source: Department of Commerce.




186

TABLE B-22.—Sales, stocks, orders, and receipts, selected department stores,1 1939-52
[Not adjusted for seasonal variation]
Reported data (millions of
dollars) 1
Period

Outstanding
orders
(end of
month)

Derived data (millions of dollars) 2
orReceipts New(to(total for ders for
tal
month)
month)

Ratios

OutOutstanding standing
orders
orders
to sales to stocks

Sales
(total for
month)

Stocks
(end of
month)

139

369

141

(3)

2.8

147
169
194
221
246

379
450
643
546
574

115
206
280
563
596

148
179
197
220
244

3

()
184
208
242
256

2.7
2.8
3.5
2.6
2.4

0.8
1.3
1.5
2.7
2.5

0.3
.5
.4
1.0
1.0

276
345
365
381
361

604
767
887
979
925

775
964
588
494
373

277
373
366
386
358

291
354
364
363
358

2.3
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.7

3.0
3.0
.7
.4
.1

1.3
1.3
.7
.5
.4

376
391
364

1,012
1,201
1,099

495
459
440

391
388
388

401
377
401

2.8
3.2
3,1

.4
.3
.2

.5
.4
.4

1951: First half
Second half

353
429

1,230
1,172

499
420

377
399

370
384

3.5
3.0

1.4
1.1

.4
.4

1952: First half
Second half *.„

346
386

1,070
1,134

360
536

347
437

363
447

3.1
3.0

1.1
1.4

.3
.4

1950: June

345

891

387

263

390

2.6

1.1

.4

1951: January
February
March
April

365
310
376
339
371
354
280
341
376
426
484
666

1,077
1,179
1,300
1,347
1,291
1,187
1,139
1,182
1,207
1,247
1,249
1,008

706
699
503
360
314
410
476
429
446
447
404
319

401
412
497
386
315
250
232
384
401
466
486
425

656
405
301
243
269
346
298
337
418
467
443
340

3.0
3.8
3.4
4.0
3.4
3.4
4.1
3.4
3.2
2.9
2.6
1.6

1.9
2.3
1.3
1.1
.8
1.2
1.7
1.3
1.2
1.0
.8
.5

.7
.6
.4
.3
.2
.3
.4
.4
.4
.4
.3
.3

320
299
348
373
382
353
289
343
387
448
462

995
1,052
1,119
1,137
1,102
1,017
997
1,040
1,131
1,230
1,273

402
416
365
293
273
410
520
539
592
573
458

307
356
415
391
347
268
269
386
478
547
505

390
370
364
319
327
405
379
405
531
528
390

3.1
3.5
3.2
3.0
2.9
2.9
3.4
3.0
2.9
2.7
2.8

1.3
1.4
1.0
.8
.7
1.2
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.0

.4
.4
.3
.3
.2
.4
.5
.5
.5
.5
.4

Monthly average:
1939

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952 <

.
- .
__
_

May
June
July
August
September
October
_ _
November
December
1952: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November

(3)

Stocks
to sales

(3)

(3)

1
The reported data are not estimates for all department stores in the United States. They are the actual
dollar amounts reported by a group of department stores located in various cities throughout the country.
In3 1951, sales by these stores accounted for about 50 percent of estimated total department store sales.
Receipts of goods are derived from the reported figures on sales and stocks. New orders are derived from
receipts and reported figures on outstanding orders.
3

Not available.
. 4 Averages based on data through November.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,




187

PRICES
TABLE B-23.—Wholesale price index, 1929-52
[1947-49 = 100]
All commodities other than farm products
and foods
All
commodities

Period

Monthly average:
1929

Farm
products

Processed
foods

Total

Textile Chemi- Rubber Lumber
cals
prodand
and
and
ucts
wood
allied
prodand
products
apparel products
ucts

61.9

58.6

0)

65.5

0)

(')

(')

0)

56.1
47.4
42.1
42.8
48.7

49.3
36.2
26.9
28.7
36.5

(0

60.9
53.6
50.2
50.9
56.0

0)
(0
0)
0)
(0

0)
(0
0)

(')
0)
0)
0)
(')

(j)

52.0
52.5
56.1
51.1
50.1

44.0
45.2
48.3
38.3
36.5

55.7
56.9
61.0
58.4
58.1

0)
(')
0)

51.1
56.8
64.2
67.0
67.6

37.8
46.0
59.2
68.5
68.9

59.4
63.7
68.3
69.3
70.4

68.8
78.7
96.4
104.4
99.2

71.6
83.2
100.0
107.3
92.8

8
98.2

106.1
95.7

71.3
78.3
95.3
103.4
101.3

0)
0)
0)
(0
0)
0)
100.1
104.4
95.5

103.1
114.8
111.6

97.5
113.4
107.1

99.8
111.4
108.8

105.0
115.9
113.2

1951: First half _
Second half

115.9
113.7

115.7
111.0

111.8
111.0

1952: First half 3
Second half

112.1
111.2

108.3
105.8

1950: June -

100.2

1951: January
February.
March
April.
May
June
July . .
August
September
October
November
December

115.0
116.5
116.5
116.3
115.9
115.1
114.2
113.7
113.4
113.7
113.6
113.6
113.0
112.5
112.3
111.8
111.6
111.2
111.8
112.2
111.8
111.1
110.7
109.6

110.0
107.8
108.2
108.7
107.9
107.2
110.2
109.9
106.6
104.9
103.6
'99.6

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936.1937
1938
1939

.
_

„_

._

.

-._

1940
1941 _
1942
1943
1944

.. .

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951 8
1952

1952: January . _
February
March
April
May
June _ _
July
August .
September..
October
November2 ._
December

_

_
...

__ __

8
8
80)
8
0)
0)
0)
0)
<»)

0
»)
')
i)

8
8
(0
8
101.4

8
0)
0)
0)
0)
(i)
C1)
0)
(')

i
(0

8
0)
C1)
(9
(')
0)
(0
0)

103.8
94.8

0)
0)
99.0
102.1
98.9

(0
0)
93.7
107.2
99.2

99.2
110.6
99.8

96.3
110.0
104.5

120.5
148.0
134.0

113.9
123.9
120.3

116.9
114.8

114.9
106.3

111.5
108.6

151.5
144.5

126.0
121.8

109.0
108.6

113.5
112.9

100.7
98.9

105.2
103.8

140.6
127.4

120.4
120.1

94.5

96.8

102.2

93.3

92.1

109.5

112.4

112.3
117.2
117.6
117.5
115.7
113.9
111.1
110.4
109.9
111.5
112.0
111.3

110.2
112.9
112.0
111.8
112.3
111.3
110.7
111.2
110.9
111.6
111.0
110.7

116.6
117.2
117.3
117.1
116.8
116.2
115.7
114.9
114.8
114.6
114.5
114.6

114.6
115.7
115.9
115.5
114.8
112.9
111.6
108.5
105.9
103.9
103.9
104.0

111.4
112.6
111.8
111.5
111.3
110.2
108.8
108.5
108.7
108.8
108.6
108.4

153.0
152.5
152.3
151.5
151.3
148.3
144.3
144.3
144.7
144.7
144.6
144.3

125.5
126.4
126.6
126.6
126.1
124.6
123.5
122.3
121.6
121.7
121.1
120.3

110.1
109.5
109.2
108.0
108.6
108.5
110.0
110.5
110.3
108.5
107.7
104.3

114.3
114.2
113.8
113.3
113.0
112.6
112.5
113.0
113.2
113.0
112.8
112.9

103.3
102.1
100.6
99.9
99.3
99.0
98.9
99.1
99.5
99.2
98.6
98.3

106.7
105.9
105.4
104.8
104.3
104.3
104.2
104.0
104.0
103.9
103.5
103.3

144.1
143.1
142.0
140.6
140.4
133.4
130.0
127.8
126.3
126.0
126.4
127.7

120.1
120.3
120.5
120.9
120.7
119.9
120.2
120.5
120.4
120.2
119.7
119.7

1
2

Not available.
Preliminary.
Source: Department of Labor.




8

8

188

(1

TABLE B-23.—Wholesale price index, 1929-52—Continued
[1947-49-100]
All commodities other than farm products and foods (continued)
Hides,
skins,
and
leather
products

Period

Monthly average:
1929

Fuel,
power,
and
lighting
materials

Pulp,
paper,
and
allied
products

FurnMetals Machin- iture
and
and
ery and other
metal motive houseprodprodhold
ucts
ucts
durables

59.3

70.2

0)

(')

54.4
46.8
39.7
44.0
47.1

66.5
57.2
59.5
56.1
62.0

8
8
0)

(')

48.7
51.9
56.9
50.5
52.0

62.2
64.5
65.7
64.7
61.8

0)
0)
C1)
0)
0)

54.8
58.9
64.0
63.9
63.4

60.7
64.5
66.4
68.4
70.3

64.2
74.6
101.0
102.1
96.9

71.1
76.2
90.9
107.1
101.9

L

102.9
98.5

0)
0)
91.3
103.9
104.8

104.6
120.3
97.2

103.0
106.7
106.6

100.9
119.6
116.5

1951: First halfSecond halt--

126.6
114.0

106.7
106.8

1952: First half 2
Second half .

97.4
97.1

106.7
106.4

1950' June
1951: January
February- -.
March
April
May
June
July
August
September. __
October
November_December—

99.1
127.3
127.7
126.9
126.5
126.2
124.7
122.3
118.0
118.0
113. 6
107.0
105.1

1952: January
February- _ .
March
April
May
June
July
August
September- _
October
November3
December ~

102.2
99.5
98.0
94.1
94.7
95.9
96.2
96.5
96.5
96.6
97.6
99.0

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

_

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

_._

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

_

1950
1951
1952*

1
C)
0)

8
8
8
0)
0)
0)
0)

8
0)
0)

!J

8
C)
8
8
0)
0)
C)

L

C1)

(J)

0)

8

0)

8

0)
0)
C)
0)
0)
0)
0) •
0)

3

0
')
0
C1)
0)

8
8
0

?
C
1

0

8
0)
(')
(')
0)

(')
0)

0)
0)

8
0)
0)

(J
(1
(1
0)

0)
0)

0)
0)
0)

(J)

\\

\8
0)
C)
0)

100.9
106.6

95.6
101.4
103.1

93.9
101.7
104.4

98.0
100.4
101.6

0)
0)
100.8
103.1
98.1

110.3
122.8
123.0

108.6
119.0
121.5

105.3
114.1
112.0

106.9
113.6
113.6

102.4
108.1
110.6

96.6
104.9
108.3

120.1
119.1

123.4
122.3

118.2
119.8

114.9
113.2

113.6
113.5

108.4
107.8

103.7
106.2

117.5
115.6

122.2
123.8

121. 5
121. 4

112.0
111.9

113.0
114.2

110.4
110.8

109.6
107.0

102.4

95.9

108.8

106.3

103.1

105.4

101.4

96.9

106.4
107.4
107.3
106.5
106.2
106.3
106.5
106.3
106.7
106.8
106.9
107.4

120.1
120. 5
120.3
119.7
119.8
120.2
120.2
119.5
119.4
118.8
118.4
118.4

124.0
123.7
123.2
123. 3
123.2
122.7
122.3
122.2
122.1
122.4
122.5
122.5

117.3
117.7
118.6
118.6
118.6
118.6
118.8
118.9
119.4
120.2
120.5
120.7

114.2
114.6
115.1
115.4
115.3
115.0
114.4
113.5
113.1
112.8
112.7
112.7

113.6
113.7
113.7
113.7
113.6
113.6
113.6
113.6
113.6
113.6
113.6
112.8

108.
108.
108.
108.
108.
108.4
107.9
107.8
107.8
107.5
107.5
108.1

102.6
103.9
104.2
105.7
103.0
102.8
103.7
102.6
105.1
106.9
108.9
109.8

107.4
107.2
107.4
106.3
106.0
105.9
106.0
105.8
106.2
106.6
106.7
107.1

118.2
118.3
117.7
117.4
116.9
116.7
115.3
115.6
115.6
115.5
115.5
115.8

122.4
122.6
122.6
122.5
121.8
121.1
121.9
124.1
124.6
124.1
123.9
124.0

120.8
122.0
121.8
121.6
121.6
121.3
121.4
121.4
121.5
121.3
121.4
121.4

112.3
112.4
111.9
112.1
111.7
111.6
111.8
111.5
112.0
112.0
112.1
112.2

112.9
112.9
112.9
112.8
112.9
113.8
113.8
113.8
113.8
114.4
114.5
114.6

108.1
110.8
110. 8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8

111.1
111.4
109.2
109.5
108.4
108.1
105.5
108.9
108.3
108.4
105.7
105.2

1
Not available.
* Preliminary.
Source: Department of Labor.




(')
i)
i)
i)

Non- Tobacco
metal- manulic
factures Miscelminerand
als— bottled laneous
struc- bevertural
ages

189

(')

TABLE B-24.—Consumers' price index, 1929-52
For moderate-income families in large cities
[1935-39=100]

Food Apparel

Rent

Fuel,
electricity,
and refrigeration

122.5

132.5

115.3

141.4

112.5

111.7

104.6

119.4
108.7
97.6
92.4
95.7

126.0
103.9
86.5
84.1
93.7

112.7
102.6
90.8
87.9
96.1

137.5
130.3
116.9
100.7
94.4

111.4
108.9
103.4
100.0
101.4

108.9
98.0
85.4
84.2
92.8

105.1
104.1
101.7
98.4
97.9

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

98.1
99.1
102.7
100.8
99.4

100.4
101.3
105 3
97.8
95.2

96.8
97.6
102.8
102.2
100.5

94.2
96.4
100.9
104.1
104.3

100.7
100.2
100.2
99.9
99.0

94.8
96.3
104.3
103.3
101.3

98.1
98.7
101.0
101.5
100.7

1940
1941
1942
1943,
1944

100.2
105.2
116.6
123.7
125.7

96.6
105 5
123.9
138.0
136 1

101.7
106.3
124.2
129.7
138.8

104.6
106.4
108 8
108.7
109.1

99.7
102.2
105.4
107.7
109.8

100.5
107 3
122.2
125.6
136.4

101.1
104.0
110.9
115.8
121.3

128.6
139.5
159.6
171.9
170.2

139.1
159 6
193.8
210.2
201.9

145. 9
160.2
185.8
198.0
190.1

109.5
110.1
113.6
121.2
126.4

110.3
112.4
121.1
133.9
137.5

145.8
159 2
184. 4
195.8
189.0

124.1
128.8
139.9
149.9
154.6

171.9
185.6
189.7

204 5
227.4
231 4

187.7
204.5
202.5

131.0
136.2
141.6

140.6
144.1
146. 3

190 2
210.9
205 8

156.5
165.4
172.2

1951: First half
Second half

184.2
187.1

225 7
229.1

202.5
206.5

134.7
137.8

143.8
144.5

210 8
211.0

164 0
166.8

1952: First half
Second half 1

188.7
190 9

230.0
232 8

203.2
201 6

140.7
142 7

145.0
147 7

206.9
204 6

170.9
173 8

All
items

Period

Monthly average:
1929
1930...
1931
1932
1933
1934

1945
1946
1947.
1948
1949

_

._
.

__

__ .

1950
1951
19521

Housefurnishings

Miscellaneous

170.2

203.1

184.6

130.9

139.1

184.8

154.6

1951: January 15
February 15
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15 ,
September 15
October 15
November 15 _
December 15

181.5
183.8
184.5
184 6
185.4
185.2
185.5
185.5
186 6
187.4
188.6
189.1

221 9
226.0
226 2
225 7
227.4
226 9
227.7
227 0
227 3
229.2
231.4
232.2

198.5
202.0
203.1
203 6
204.0
204.0
203. 3
203.6
209 0
208.9
207.6
206.8

133. 2
134.0
134.7
135 1
135. 4
135 7
136.2
136.8
137 5
138.2
138.9
139.2

143.3
143.9
144.2
144.0
143.6
143.6
144.0
144.2
144.4
144.6
144.8
144. 9

207 4
209.7
210.7
211 8
212.6
212 5
212.4
210. 8
211 1
210.4
210 8
210.2

162 1
163.2
164.3
164 6
165.0
164.8
165.0
165.4
166 0
166.6
168.4
169.1

1952: January 15
February 15
March 15
April 15
May 15,.
June 15
July 15
Auprust 15
September 15
October 15
November 15
December 15

189.1
187.9
188.0
188.7
189.0
189 6
190.8
191.1
190.8
190.9
191.1

232.4
227 5
227.6
230 0
230 8
231 5
234.9
235.5
233 2
232.4
232.3
3
228 4

204.6
204.3
203. 5
202 7
202.3
202 0
201.4
201.1
202 3
202.1
201.3

139.7
140.2
140.5
140 8
141.3
141 6
141.9
142.3
142 4
143.0
143.9

145. 0
145.3
145.3
145 3
144.6
144 8
146.4
147.3
147 6
148.4
149.0

209.1
208.6
207.6
206 2
205.4
204 4
204.2
204.2
205 0
204.6
204.9

169. 6
170.2
170.7
171.1
171.4
172 5
173.0
173.2
173.8
174.4
174.7

(2)

(2)

1950: June

..

__ _ _

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

1 Averages based on data through November 15, except for food which is through December 15.
2
Not available,
s Estimated.
Source: Department of Labor.




190

TABLE B-25.—Indexes oj prices received and prices paid by farmer-s, and parity ratio, 1929-52
[1910-14=100]
Prices
received
by farmers

Parity index
(prices paid,
interest,
taxes, and
wage rates)

1929

148

160

92

1930
1931
1932
1933_
1934

125
87
65
70

151
130
112
109
120

83
67
58
64
75

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

109
114
122
97
95

124
124
131
124
122

92
93
78
78

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

100
123
158
2192
2196

124
132
151
170
182

81
93
105
113
108

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

2206
2234

189
207
239
259
250

109
113
115
110
100

1950
1951
1952

256
302

255
281
286

100
107
101

1951: First half
Second half...

306

279
283

110
105

1952: First half
Second half. _ _

292
284

284

101
100

272
276
280
283
282
282
282
282
282
283
284
284

110
113
111
109
108
107
104
104
103
105
106
107

Period

Monthly average:

275
285
249

1950: June

247

1951: January 15
February 15-__
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15.
Octoberl5..._
November 15..
December 15__

300
313
311
309
305
301
294
292
291
296
301
305

1952: January 15
February 15.__
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15.
October 15
November 15_.
December 15. _

300
289
288
290
293
292
295
295
288
282
277

1
2

Parity
ratio l

97

289
286
287
285
282
281
281

105
100
100
100
101
102
103
103
101
100
99

Ratio of prices received by farmers to parity index.
Includes wartime subsidy payments paid on beef cattle, sheep, lambs, milk, and butterfat between
October 1943 and June 1946.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




TABLE B-26.—Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign
countries, selected dates since June 1950
[June 1950=100]
Cost of living

Wholesale prices
Country

January
1952

Latest
data

Date

January
1952

Latest
data

Date

United States

113

»109

December 1952 1...

111

112

November 1952

Africa and Near East:
Algeria
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Lebanon
Morocco
Tunisia
Union of South Africa. .

134
120
124
119
137
132
141
132
126

122
104
129
104
207
119
138
129
133

June 1952
October 1952
November 1952
November 1952. ...
September 1952
October 1952
August 1952
September 1952
October 1952

(a)
114
111
118
128
116
(2)
124
113

(2)
102
115
114
191
111
(2)
132
118

October 1952
November 1952
November 1952
September 1952
October 1952
(2)
September 1952
October 1952

161
131
135
147
127

157
118
124
136
126

November 1952
November 1952
November 1952
November 1952
October 1952

3117'

3118

136
113

135
111

November 1952
November 1952
Fourth quarter 1952
November 1952
October 1952

136
124
115
127
133
115
139
144
116
115
131

125 July 1952
124 September 1952
113 October 1952
120 September 1952—
137 December 1952
121 October 1952
139 September 1952—
140 October 1952
112 October 1952
111 October 1952
127 November 1952

122
3112
111
111
124
100
110
123
108
103
116

122
3120
116
111
130
100
109
127
108
105
121

October 1952
Third quarter 1952
October 1952
October 1952
November 1952
October 1952
September 1952
September 1952
November 1952
September 1952
November 1952

(2)
October 1952
August 1952
November 1952
(2)
November 1952
October 1952
October 1952
September 1952...
June 1952
(2)
October 1952
October 1952

172
118
138
107
113
112
(2)
102
124
140
(2)
115
99

188
133
166
106
116
111
(2)
100
132
142
277
119
98

August 1952
October 1952
October 1952
November 1952
June 1952
November 1952
(2)
October 1952
October 1952
July 1952
July 1952
October 1952
October 1952

3136
106
129
134
3119
108
110

3145
111
148
136
3122
107
122

Third quarter 1952
October 1952
August 1952
August 1952
Third quarter 1952
November 1952
September 1952

115
123

112
123

Western European countries:
Austria
Belgium.
_ _.
Denmark..
France
Germany (Federal Republic) .
Greece
Ireland. __
.
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal.
SpainSweden
Switzerland...
Turkey
United Kingdom
Latin America:
Argentina
Brazil...
Chile
Costa RicaCuba
Dominican Republic .
El SalvadorGuatemala
Mexico
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Peru
Venezuela

(2)
139
146
95
(2)
110
109
101
133
142
(2)
130
107

(')
150
175
88
(2)
112
102
104
129
136
(2)
130
106

Pacific and Far East:
Australia
India..
Indochina
Japan
New Zealand
Philippines
Thailand.

131
108
138
156
125
104
111

142
96
148
151
126
111
115

October 1952 _
November 1952....
August 1952
October 1952
April 1952
November 1952—
September 1952—

Other:
Canada
Finland-

113
154

105
140

October 1952
October 1952

150
115

151
113

1
Preliminary.
2
Not available.
1

Data are for quarter. Base period is second quarter 1950.

NOTE.—The components of the indexes are not always the same for each country.
Source: International Monetary Fund.




192

November 1952
October 1952

CREDIT, MONEY SUPPLY, AND FEDERAL FINANCE
TABLE B-27.—Consumer credit outstanding, 1929-52
[Millions of dollars]

Instalment credit

End of period

Total
consumer
credit
outstanding

Sale credit
Total
instalment
credit

Automobile
sale
credit

Total

Other
Isale
credit

Loans

1

Other
Charge
accounts consumer
credit 2

1929

6,252

3,158

2, 515

1,318

1,197

643

1,749

1,345

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

5,570
4,636
3,493
3,439
3,846

2,688
2,204
1,518
1,588
1,860

2,032
1,595
999
1,122
1,317

928
637
322
459
576

1.104
958
677
663
741

656
609
519
466
543

1,611
1,381
1,114
1,081
1,203

1,271
1.051
861
770
783

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939 ..

4,773
5,933
6,513
6,128
7,031

2,622
3,518
3,960
3,595
4,424

1,805
2,436
2,752
2,313
2,792

940
1,289
1,384
970
1,267

865
1,147
1,368
1,343
1, 525

817
1,082
1,208
1,282
1,632

1,292
1,419
1,459
1,487
1,544

859
996
1,094
1,046
1.063

1940
1941
1942
1943 .
1944

8,163
8,826
5,692
4,600
4,976

5,417
5,887
3,048
2,001
2,061

3,450
3,744
1,617
882
891

1, 729
1,942
482
175
200

1,721
1,802
1,135
707
691

1,967
2,143
1,431
1,119
1,170

1,650
1,764
1,513
1,498
1,758

1,096
1,175
1,131
1,101
1,157

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

5,627
8.677
11, 862
14, 366
16, 809

2,364
4,000
6,434
8,600
10, 890

942
1,648
3,086
4,528
6,240

227
544
1,151
1,961
3,144

715
1,104
1,935
2,567
3,096

1,422
2,352
3,348
4,072
4,650

1,981
3,054
3,612
3,854
3,909

1,282
1,623
1.816
1,912
2,010

1950
1951
19523

20, 097
20,644
23, 700

13, 459
13, 510
16,400

7,904
7,546
9,300

4,126
4,039
5,100

3,778
3,507
4,200

5,555
5,964
7,100

4,239
4,587
4,600

2,399
2,547
2,700

1950' June

17, 651

12, 105

6,995

3,790

3,205

5,110

3,392

2,154

1951: January
February
March __ _ .
April
May
June— July
August
September
OctoberNovember
December

19, 937
19, 533
19. 379
19, 126
19,207
19, 256
19, 132
19, 262
19, 362
19, 585
19, 989
20,644

13, 252
13, 073
12. 976
12, 904
12, 920
12,955
12, 903
13, 045
13, 167
13, 196
13, 271
13, 510

7,694
7,521
7,368
7,270
7,248
7,234
7,173
7.247
7,327
7,355
7,400
7,546

4,056
3,990
3,946
3,934
3,980
4,041
4,061
4,138
4,175
4,134
4,100
4,039

3,638
3,531
3,422
3, 336
3,268
3,193
3,112
3,109
3,152
3,221
3,300
3,507

5,558
5,552
5,608
5,634
5,672
5,721
5,730
5.798
5,840
5,841
5,871
5,964

4,248
4,010
3,938
3,744
3,793
3,804
3,743
3,724
3,696
3,868
4,190
4,587

2,437
2,450
2,465
2,478
2,494
2,497
2,486
2,493
2,499
2,521
2,528
2,547

1952: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
Decembers

20, 126
19, 717
19, 565
19. 788
20, 293
20, 961
21, 213
21,433
21, 657
22, 288
22, 798
23, 700

13, 314
13, 185
13, 156
13,319
13,806
14, 409
14, 745
14, 939
15, 193
15, 572
15,883
16, 400

7,322
7,158
7,047
7,099
7,421
7,820
8,039
8,149
8,339
8,653
8,910
9,300

3,962
3,927
3,891
3,946
4,171
4,446
4,597
4,634
4,708
4,882
5,034
5,100

3,360
3,231
3,156
3,153
3,250
3,374
3,442
3,515
3,631
3,771
3,876
4,200

5, 992
6,027
6,109
6,220
6,385
6,589
6,706
6,790
6,854
6,919
6,973
7,100

4,253
3,967
3,855
3,913
3.921
3,980
3,891
3,902
3,848
4,075
4,246
4,600

2,559
2,565
2,554
2,556
2,566
2,572
2,577
2,592
2,616
2,641
2,669
2,700

1
2

Includes repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration.
Includes loans by pawnbrokers, service credit, and unclassified single-payment loans under $3,000 made
by3 commercial banks.
Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




'93

TABLE B-28.—Loans and investments of all commercial banks, 1929—52 1
[Billions of dollars]
Total
loans
and
investments

End of period 2

Investments

Loans

Total 3

Commercial
and industrial loans 4

Total

U. S. GovOther
ernment
obligations securities

1929— June «

49.4

35.7

(<9

13.7

4.9

8.7

1930—Junes
1931 — June 8
1932—June 5
1933—June 5
1934—June 5

48.9
44.9
36.1
30.4
32.7

34.5
29.2
21.8
16.3
15.7

(6)
6
(6)
()
(6)
(6)

14.4
15.7
14.3
14.0
17.0

5.0
6.0
6.2
7.5
10.3

9.4
9.7
8.1
6.5
6.7

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

36.1
39.6
38.4
38.7
40.7

15.2
16.4
17.2
16.4
17.2

(6)
(6)
(6)

5.7
6.4

20.9
23.1
21.2
22.3
23.4

13.8
15.3
14.2
15.1
16.3

7.1
7.9
7.0
7.2
7.1

43.9
50.7
67.4
85.1
105.5

18.8
21.7
19.2
19.1
21.6

7.3
9.3
7.9
7.9
8.0

25.1
29.0
48.2
66.0
83.9

17.8
21.8
41.4
59.8
77.6

7.4
7.2
6.8
6.1
6.3

124.0
114.0
116.3
114.3
120.2

26.1
31.1
38.1
42.5
43.0

9.6
14.2
18.2
18.9
17.1

97.9
82.9
78.2
71.8
77.2

90.6
74.8
69.2
62.6
67.0

7.3
8.1
9.0
9.2
10.2

126.7
132.6
142.1

52.2
57.7
64.4

21.9
25.9
27.7

74.4
74.9
77.7

62.0
61.5
63.5

12.4
13.3
14.2

121.8

44.8

16.9

77.0

65.8

11.2

125.1
125.0
125.7
125.4
125.1
126.0
126.1
127.0
128.6
130.5
131.9
132.6

52.7
53.5
54.4
54.4
54.5
54.8
54.6
55.2
56.0
56.8
57.3
57.7

22.3
23.1
23.7
23.6
23.5
23.7
23.4
23.9
24.5
25.0
25.3
25.9

72.4
71.5
71.3
71.0
70.6
71.2
71.5
71.9
72.6
73.7
74.6
74.9

60.0
59.1
58.8
58.5
58.1
58.5
58.7
59.1
59.7
60.9
61.6
61.5

12.4
12.4
12.6
12.6
12.5
12.7
12.8
12.7
12.9
12.9
13.0
13.3

132.8
132.2
132.5
132.3
133.1
134.4
136. 8
136.6
137.1
139.4
141.7
142.1

57.5
57.6
57.8
58.2
58.5
59.2
59.7
60.2
61.2
62.4
63.5
64.4

25.6
25.6
25.8
25.2
24.9
25.3
25.1
25.4
26.1
26.8
27.4
27.7

75.3
74.7
74.7
74.1
74.5
75.2
77.0
76.3
75.9
77.0
78.2
77.7

62.0
61.3
61.1
60.5
60.7
61.2
62.9
62.0
61.6
62.9
64.0
63.5

13.3
13.4
13.6
13.7
13.8
14.0
14.1
14.4
14.3
14.2
14,2
14.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

- -

_

__.

1950
1951
19527
1950: June

_ _
__

1951: January
February
March
April
_ .
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
Dficembfir
1952: January
February
March .
April
May
June
July
August
September
October __
November..
December 7

___

.

1 Excludes mutual savings banks.
2 June and December figures are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the
month.
3
Data are shown net. Includes commercial and industrial loans, agricultural loans, loans on securities,
real estate loans, loans to banks, and "other loans," some of which represent consumer credit.
< Beginning with 1948, data are shown gross; i. e., before deduction of valuation reserves, instead of net
as for previous years. Prior to June 1947 and for months other than June and December, data are estimated
on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks.
fi June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to 1935 for U. S. Government obligations and other securities.
e Not available.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Eeserve System (except as noted).




194

TABLE B-29.—Deposits and currency, 1929-52
[Millions of dollars]

Total
deposits
and
currency

End of period *

U.S.
Government
deposits 2

Total excluding U. S. Government deposits
(privately held money supply) 3

Total

Currency
outside
banks

Demand
deposits
adjusted 4

Time
deposits
adjusted *

54, 742

187

54, 555

3,557

22, 809

28, 189

53, 572
48, 379
45, 370
42, 551
48, 106

324
518
516
1,019
1,836

53, 248
47, 861
44, 854
41, 532
46, 270

3,605
4,470
4,669
4,782
4,655

20, 967
17, 412
15, 728
15,035
18, 459

28, 676
25, 979
24, 457
21, 715
23, 156

52, 726
57, 595
56, 781
59, 878
64, 733

1,453
1,235
966
1,812
1,480

51, 273
56,360
55, 815
58, 066
63, 253

4,917
5,516
5,638
5,775
6,401

22, 115
25, 483
23, 959
25, 986
29, 793

24, 241
25, 361
26, 218
26, 305
27, 059

1940...
1941
1942
1943
1944

71, 129
79, 098
100, 500
123,391
151, 428

1,121
2,762
9,201
11, 003
21, 203

70, 008
76, 336
91, 299
112, 388
130, 225

7,325
9,615
13, 946
18, 837
23, 505

34, 945
38, 992
48, 922
60, 803
66, 930

27, 738
27, 729
28, 431
32, 748
39, 790

1945
1946 .
1947
1948 .
1949

176, 378
167, 500
172, 330
172, 693
173, 851

25, 585
3,496
2,322
3,574
4,070

150, 793
164, 004
170, 008
169, 119
169, 781

26, 490
26, 730
26, 476
26, 079
25, 415

75, 851
83,314
87, 121
85, 520
85, 750

48, 452
53, 960
56, 411
57, 520
58, 616

1950 _.
1951
19528

180, 574
189, 846
200, 400

3,657
3,862
5,600

176, 917
185, 984
194, 800

25, 398
26,303
27,900

92, 272
98, 234
101, 300

59, 247
61, 447
65, 600

1950: June

174, 715

4,751

169, 964

25, 185

85, 040

59, 739

1951: January
February
_
March__
April
May
June_July.
August
September. _ _
October
November. _
December

178, 800
178, 900
179, 900
179, 800
179, 100
181,333
180, 800
181, 600
183, 800
185, 800
187, 100
189, 846

3,600
4,700
7,400
6,500
5,400
6,649
5,000
4,600
5,900
4,200
4,400
3,862

175, 200
174, 200
172, 500
173,300
173, 700
174, 684
175, 800
177, 000
177, 900
181, 600
182, 700
185. 984

24, 600
24, 600
24, 400
24, 600
24, 900
25, 776
25, 100
25, 300
25, 400
25, 700
25, 800
26, 303

91, 600
90, 600
89, 000
89, 500
89, 500
88, 960
90, 700
91, 400
92, 000
95, 000
96, 300
98, 234

59, 000
59, 000
59, 100
59, 200
59, 300
59, 948
60, 100
60, 400
60, 500
60, 900
60, 600
61, 447

188, 200
188, 000
188, 700
188, 700
189, 300
191, 358
193, 400
193, 100
194, 100
196, 100
198, 900
200,400

3,000
4,600
5,800
4,900
4,900
6,454
7,600
6,900
6,700
5,900
7,300
5,600

185, 200
183, 400
182, 900
183, 800
184, 400
184, 904
185, 800
186, 200
187, 400
190, 200
191, 600
194, 800

25, 600
25, 600
25, 700
25, 900
26, 000
26, 474
26, 200
26,300
26, 600
26, 700
27, 400
27,900

97, 900
95, 700
94, 800
95, 100
95, 300
94, 754
95, 700
95, 800
96, 400
98, 600
99, 400
101, 300

61, 700
62, 000
62, 500
62, 800
63, 000
63, 676
63, 800
64, 100
64, 500
64, 900
64, 800
65,600

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

_ .
.

_ _

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

1952: January... _ _
February .
March
April
May
June
July
August
September.. _
October
November8
December _.

_

_-_

_

1 June and December figures are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the
month.
2 Includes U. S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve banks and commercial and savings banks, and,
beginning with 1938, includes U. S. Treasurer's time deposits, open account.
3 Includes deposits and currency held by State and local governments.
4
Includes demand deposits, other than interbank and U. S. Government, less cash items in process of
collection.
«Includes deposits in commercial banks, mutual savings banks, and Postal Savings System, but excludes
interbank deposits.
6
Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.

NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




195

TABLE B-30.—Estimated ownership of Federal obligations, 1939-52
[Billions of dollars—par values i]

Gross public debt and guaranteed issues 2
Held by others

Held by

rti.s.

End of period
Total

Government
investment
accounts

State
ComTotal
held by and local mercial
govern- banks *
3
others
ments

Nonbank
private
Federal corporaIndiReserve tions and viduals 6
banks
associations 5

1939

47.6

6.5

41.1

0.4

15.9

2.5

12.2

10.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

50.9
64.3
112.5
170.1
232.1

7.6
9.5
12.2
16.9
21.7

43.3

54.7
100.2
153.2
210.5

.5
.7
1.0
2.1
4.3

17.3
21.4
41.1
59.9
77.7

2.2
2.3
6.2
11.5
18.8

12.8
16.8
28.2
42.0
56.4

10.6
13.6
23.7
37.6
53.3

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

278.7
259.5
257.0
252.9
257.2

27.0
30.9
34.4
37.3
39.4

251.6
228.6
222.6
215.5
217.8

6.5
6.3
7.3
7.9
8.1

90.8
74.5
68.7
62.5
66.8

24.3
23.3
22.6
23.3
18.9

65.7
60.1
58.4
56.4
57.9

64.3
64.2
65.7
65.5
66.1

1950
1951 7
1952

256.7
259.5
267.4

39.2
42.3
45.9

217.5
217.2
221.5

8.8
9.6
11.0

61.8
61.6
63.3

20.8
23.8
24.7

60.9
58.6
58.7

65.2
63.6
63,8

1951: March
.Tun ft
September
December

255.0
255.3
257.4
259.5

39.8
41.0
42.0
42.3

215.2
214.3
215.4
217.2

9.1
9.4
9.5
9.6

57.8
58.4
59.5
61.6

22.9
23.0
23.7
23.8

60.3
59.2
58.9
58.6

65.2
64.4
63.8
63.6

1952: January
February
March
April
May . ._
June
July
August
September
October
November77
December

259.8
260.4
258.1
258.3
260.0
259.2
263.1
263.2
262.7
265.0
267.5
267.4

42.7
42.9
43.0
43.2
43.7
44.3
44.6
45.0
45.1
45.1
45.6
45.9

217.1
217.5
215.1
215.1
216.2
214.8
218.5
218.2
217.7
219.9
221.9
221.5

9.9
10.0
10.1
10.2
10.2
10.4
10.7
10.8
10.9
10.9
10.9
11.0

62.1
61.2
60.1
60.5
61.0
61.1
62.7
61.8
61.5
63.0
64.0
63.3

22.7
22.5
22.5
22.4
22.3
22.9
22.9
23.1
23.7
23.5
23.8
24.7

58.6
59.5
57.8
57.9
58.8
57.0
58.2
58.5
57.8
58.6
59.4
58.7

63.7
64.3
64.5
64.1
63.9
63.5
64.0
63.9
63.8
63.9
63.8
63.8

* United States savings bonds, series A-D, E, F, and J, are included at current redemption values.
2
Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury.
3 Includes trust, sinking, and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies, and
Territories and possessions.
4
Includes commercial banks, trust companies, and stock savings banks in the United States and in
Territories and possessions; figures exclude securities held in trust departments.
8
Includes insurance companies, mutual savings banks, savings and loan associations, nonprofit institutions, corporate pension trust funds, dealers and brokers, and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December 1946, the foreign accounts include investments
by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in
special noninterest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June 30,1947, includes
holdings of Federal land banks.
9
Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts.
7
Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers,
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Treasury Department (except as noted).




196

TABLE B-31.—U. S. Government debt—volume and kind of obligations, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Interest-bearing public debt
Gross
public Marketable public
issues
debt and
guaranteed
Short- Treasury
issues *
term
bonds
issues 2

End of period

Nonmarketable public issues
United
States
savings
bonds

Treasury
tax and
savings
notes

Investment
bonds »

Special
issues *

1929

16.3

3.3

11.3

0.6

1930
1931
1932 _..
1933
1934

16.0
17.8
20.8
24.0
31.5

2.9
2.8
6.9
7.5
11.1

11.3
13.6
13.4
14.7
15.4

.8
.4
.4
.4
.6

35.1
39.1
41.9
44.4
47.6

14.2
12.5
12.5
9.8
7.7

14.3
19.5
20.5
24.0
26.9

0.2
.5
1.0
1.4
2.2

50.9
64.3
112.5
170.1
232.1

7.5
8.0
27.0
47.1
69.9

28.0
33.4
49.3
67.9
91.6

3.2
6.1
15.0
27.4
40.4

2.5
6.4
8.6
9.8

5.4
7.0
9.0
12.7
16.3

278.7
259.5
257.0
252.9
257.2

78.2
57.1
47.7
45.9
50.2

120.4
119.3
117.9
111.4
104.8

48.2
49.8
52.1
55.1
56.7

8.2
5.7
5.4
4.6
7.6

1.6
1.0
1.0

20.0
24.6
29.0
31.7
33.9

256.7
259.5
267.4

58.3
65.6
68.7

94.0
76.9
79.8

58.0
57.6
57.9

8.6
7.5
5.8

1.0
13.0
13.4

33.7
35.9
39.2

256.1
256.0
255.0
254.7
255.1
255.3
255.7
256.7
257.4
258.3
259.6
259.5

57.4
57.4
57.4
57.4
57.4
68.9
60.3
60.8
61.9
63.5
64.5
65.6

94.0
94.0
94.0
80.5
80.6
78.8
78.8
78.8
78.1
78.1
78.1
76.9

68.0
57.8
57.8
57.7
67.6
67.6
57.6
67.5
67.5
67.5
57.6
57.6

8.7
8.7
8.3
8.1
8.2
7.8
7.9
8.0
7.8
7.7
7.7
7.5

1.0
1.0
1.0
14.5
14.5
14.5
13.5
13.5
13.5
13.0
13.0
13.0

34.0
33.9
33.5
33.6
34.0
34.7
34.7
35.1
35.6
35.6
35.9
35.9

259.8
260.4
258.1
258.3
260.0
259.2
263.1
263.2
262.7
265.0
267.5
267.4

65.6
65.6
64.4
64.8
65.6
64.6
64.4
64.2
64.0
66.9
68.9
68.7

76.9
76.9
76.8
76.8
76.8
75.7
79.9
79.8
79.8
79.8
79.8
79.8

57.7
57.7
67.7
57.6
57.6
57.7
57.7
57.8
67.8
57.8
57.9
57.9

7.5
8.0
6.9
7.1
7.5
6.6
6.4
6.3
6.0
6.0
6.1
5.8

13.0
13.0
13.0
12.5
12.5
14.0
14.1
14.1
14.1
13.4
13.4
13.4

36.2
36.4
36.5
36.7
37.2
37.7
37.9
38.3
38.4
38.4
38.8
39.2

.

_

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941 . _
1942.
1943
1944 _

_

1945
1946 ...
1947.
1948
1949 ...

.

_ ..
_

__

1950
1951
1952

1951: January
_
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1952: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

_ --

-

- -

.7
.6
2.2
3.2
4.2

1
Total includes non-interest-bearing debt, fully guaranteed securities (except those held by the Treasury),
Postal Savings bonds, prewar bonds, adjusted service bonds, depositary bonds, and Armed Forces Leave
bonds, not shown separately.
2 Includes bills, certificates of indebtedness, and notes.
*Includes Series A bonds and, beginning in April 1951, Series B convertible bonds.
* Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held 6.8 billion dollars of public
marketable and nonmarketable issues on December 31,1952.
Source: Treasury Department.




197

TABLE B-32.—Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-52
[Percent per annum]
U. S. Government
security yields
Period

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

3-month 9-12
Treasury month
bills i
issues 2
(<)

Average of
rates
Corporate charged by
Aaa
banks on
bonds
Taxable (Moody's) short-term
loans— sebonds 3
lected cities

(•)

CO

4.73

5

(*)
1.402
.879
.515
.256

-

()
(')
(»)
(5)
(5)

(6)
8

(•)
(«)

4.55
4.58
5.01
4.49
4.00

.137
.143
.447
.053
.023

(5)

8
8

(6)
(<0
(6)
(6)
(6)

3.60
3.24
3.26
3.19
3.01

()
(6)

Prime
Federal
com- Bankers Reserve
mercial
accepBank
paper
tances,
4-6
90 days discount
rate
months

(7)

5.85

5.03

5.16

8
8
()

3.59
2.64
2.73
1.73
1.02

2.48
1.57
1.28
.63
.25

3.04
2.11

(7)
f7)
(7)
(7)

.13
.16
.43
.44
.44

1.50
1.50
1.33
1.00
1.00

7

2.82
2.56
1.54

2.1

.76
.75
.94
.81
.59

1940
1941
1942
1943 .
1944

.014
.103
.326
.373
.375

0)
(5)
(5)
.75
.79

(6)
(6)
2.46
2.47
2.48

2.84
2.77
2.83
2.73
2.72

2.1
2.0
2.2
2.6
2.4

.56
.54
.66
.69
.73

.44
.44
.44
.44
.44

1.00
1.00
U.OO

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 _.

.375
.375
.594
1.040
1.102

.81
.82
.88
1.14
1.14

2.37
2.19
2.25
2.44
2.31

2.62
2.53
2.61
2.82
2.66

2.2
2.1
2.1
2.5
2.7

.75
.81
1.03
1.44
1.48

.44
.61
.87
1.11
1.12

81.00
81.00

1.218
1.552
1.766

1.26
1.73
1.81

2.32
2.57
2.68

2.62
2.86
2.96

2.7
3.1

1.45
2.17
2.33

1.15
1.60
1.75

1.59
1.75
1.75

1950: First half
Second half

1.142
1.293

1.17
1.36

2.28
2.36

2.60
2.65

2.64
2.74

1.31
1.59

1.06
1.24

1.50
1.68

1951: First half
Second half

1.466
1.638

1.73
1.72

2.52
2.62

2.80
2.92

3.04
3.16

2.08
2.26

1.57
1.64

1.75
1.75

1952: First half
Second half

1.659
1.876

1.69
1.92

2.66
2.70

2.95
2.97

3.48

2.35
2.31

1.75
1.75

1.75
1.75

1950: First quarter
Second quarter. _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter. _

1.118
1.166
1. 233
1.353

1.14
1.19
1.27
1.44

2.24
2.31
2.34
2.38

2.58
2.61
2.63
2.67

2.60
2.68
2.63
2.84

1.31
1.31
1.47
1.71

1.06
1.06
1.18
1.31

1.50
1.50
1.61
1.75

1951: First quarter
Second quarter _ _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter ._

1.400
1.532
1.628
1.649

1.62
1.84
.72
.73

2.42
2.61
2.59
2.66

2.70
2.90
2.89
2.95

3.02
3.07
3.06
3.27

1.96
2.20
2.25
2.26

1.51
1.63
1.63
1.65

1.75
1.75
1.75
1.75

1952: First quarter
Second quarter _ _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter. _

1.640
1.678
1.829
1.924

.71
.67
.93
1.92

2.72
2.61
2.67
2.73

2.96
2.93
2.95
2.99

3.45
3.51
3.49

2.38
2.32
2.31
2.31

1.75
1.75
1.75
1.75

1.75
1.75
1.75
1.75

1935, _
1936
1937
1938
1939

1950 .1951
1952 _

_

_ _
-

81.00
81.00

1.00
1.34
1.50

1
Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax-exempt prior to March 1, 1941, and fully taxable
thereafter. Series includes issues with maturities of more than 3 months in period 1934-37.
2 Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues.
315 years and over prior to April 1952; 12 years and over beginning in April 1952.
4
Treasury bills were first issued in December 1929 and were issued irregularly in 1930.
8
Not available before August 1942.
6
Bonds in this classification were first issued in March 1941.
7 Not available on same basis as for 1939 on.
8
From October 30, 1942, to April 24, 1946, a preferential rate of 0.50 percent was in effect for advances
secured by Government securities maturing or callable in 1 year or less.

NOTE.—Yields and rates computed for New York City, except for average of rates charged on short-term
loans.
Sources: Treasury Department, Moody's Investors Service, and Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.




198

TABLE B-33.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public, calendar years, 1943—52
[Billions of dollars]
Total
Calendar year

1943
1944 .
1945 .
1946
1947
1948
1949 . _ _ .

Cash
Cash
payreceipts ments

State and local J

Federal

Excess of
Excess of
Excess of
Cash receipts Cash re- Cash receipts
receipts Cash
(+)or receipts pay(+)or ceipts 2 pay- 2 (+)or
ments
payments
paypayments (—)
ments (—)
ments (—)

47.4
57.9
_
.

1950
1951 . _ _
1952 4

96.1
102.0

-48.7
-44.0

37.9
48.1

89.0
94.8

-51.1
-46.7

9.6
9.8

7.1
7.2

+2.5
+2.6

59.8
53.0
57.5
60.0
57.9

93.9
51.0
51.0
52.3
60.2

-34.1
+2.0
+6.6
+7.8
-2.3

49.4
41.4
44.3
44.9
41.3

86.1
41.4
38.6
36.9
42.6

-36.7
(3)
+5.7
+8.0
-1.3

10.3
11.6
13.2
15.1
16.6

7.8
9.6
12.4
15.4
17.6

+2.6
+2.0
+.9
-.3
-1.0

60.8
78.9
92.3

61.4
78.7
95.4

-.6
+.2
-3.1

42.4
59.3
71.4

42.0
58.0
73.0

+.4
+1.2
-1.6

18.4
19.7
20.9

19.4
20.7
22.4

-1.0
-1.0
-1.5

Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce, adjusted to a cash
2

Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments
since they are included in Federal payments.
3
Less than 50 million dollars.
< Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Treasury Department, Department of Commerce, and Council of Eonomic Advisers.




199

CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE
TABLE B-34.—Profits before and after tax, all private corporations, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

Total

Dividend
payments

Undistributed
profits

_
-

.

__

_ .

_

_

5.8

2.5
-1.3
-3.4
-.4
1.0

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

.0
.4
.5
.0
.5

2.3
4.3
4.7
2.3
5.0

2.9
4.6
4.7
3.2
3.8

9.3
17.2
21.1
25.1
24.3

2.9
7.8
11.7
14.4
13.5

6.4
9.4
9.4
10.6
10.8

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

2.4
4.9
5.1
6.2
6.1

11.2
9.6
11.9
13.0
10.8

8.5
13.9
18.5
20.7
16.3

4.7
5.8
6.6
7.2
7.5

3.8
8.1
12.0
13.5
8.8

39.6
42.9
40.8

._

8.4

.8
.5
.4
.5
.7

19.7
23.5
30.5
33.8
27.1

_

1.4

3.3
-.8
-3.0
.2
1.7
3.2
5.7
6.2
3.3
6.5

-

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952 »

Corporate
tax
liability '

9.8

1929

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

Corporate profits after tax

Corporate
profits
before
tax

Period

18.4
24.2
23.6

21.2
18.7
17.2

9.0
9.0
9.3

12.3
9.6
7.9

2.6

-3.0
-5.4
-6.0
-2.4
-1.6
(2)

-.6
-.3
-.9
1.2

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1950* First half
Second half

32.8
46.4

15.2
21.6

17.6
24.8

8.0
10.0

9.6
14.8

1951: First half
Second half

46.7
39.0

26.4
22.0

20.2
17.1

8.8
9.2

11.4
7.8

1952- First half 3
Second half

__

41.1
40.5

23.8
23.5

17.4
17.0

9.2
9.3

8.2
7.7

1950* First quarter
Second quarter _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

__

30.2
35.5
44.3
48.4

14.0
16.5
20.6
22.5

16.2
19.0
23.7
26.0

7.8
8.1
9.3
10.7

8.4
10.9
14.4
15.3

1951' First quarter
Second quarter .
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

.

50.1
43.3
38.6
39.5

28.4
24.5
21.8
22.2

21.7
18.8
16.9
17.3

8.6
9.0
9.2
9.3

13.1
9.8
7.7
8.0

42.7
39.5
39.0
42.0

24.7
22.9
22.6
24.4

18.1
16.6
16.4
17.6

8.9
9.6
9.3
9.3

9.2
7.0
7.1
8.3

1952* First quarter
Second quarter .
Third quarter*
Fourth quarter *

i Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes.
»Minus 8 million dollars.
• Estimates based on incomplete data; third and fourth'quarters by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table B-6 for
profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




2OO

TABLE B—35.—Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations, 1939—52
[Millions of dollars]
Durable goods industries
(106 corporations) 1
Period

Nondurable goods industries
(94 corporations) 1

Profits

Profits

Sales

Sales
Before taxes After taxes

Before taxes After taxes

1939

6,743

733

597

3,878

478

402

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

8,746
12, 802
15, 371
20, 641
22,090

1,227
2,176
2,330
2,391
2,192

830
982
783
755
726

4,295
5,540
6,470
7,671
8,331

622
989
1,079
1,302
1,346

446
541
441
509
532

18, 162
12, 376
19, 484
23, 566
23, 885

1,290
608
2,311
3,105
3,191

574
295
1,354
1,835
1,887

8,438
8,997
11,385
13, 441
12, 853

1,139
1,430
1,793
2,212
1,847

558
911
1,170
1,477
1,213

29, 341
33, 696

5,192
5,374

2,542
2,000

14, 777
17, 371

2,702
3,184

1,513
1,411

.

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949...
1960
1951

-

-

Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation
2

1951 First half _ 2
Second half

17, 121
16, 575

2,787
2,587

1,007
993

8,637
8,735

1,669
1,514

710
702

1952: First half

16, 815

2,253

839

8,551

1,304

601

8,362
8,759
8,003
8,572

1,382
1,405
1,191
1,396

510
497
428
565

4,349
4,288
4,294
4,441

855
814
773
741

368
342
334
368

8,425
8,390
7,866

1,234
1,019
865

501
338
375

4,335
4,216
4,361

705
599
642

314
287
308

1951: First quarter 2 2
Second quarter
Third quarter 2 2
Fourth quarter
1952: First quarter. .
Second quarter
Third quarter 3

_.

1
See Federal Reserve Bulletin, June 1949, and subsequent issues, for similar data for the following industry
groups: primary metals and products, machinery, automobiles and equipment, foods and kindred products,
chemicals and allied products, and petroleum refining.
2
Certain Federal income tax accruals for the first 6 months of 1951, required by subsequent increases
in Federal income tax rates and charged by many companies against third quarter profits, have been redistributed to the first and second quarters.
3 Preliminary estimates.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published
reports of various industrial corporations.




201

TABLE B—36.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity, private manufacturing corporations., by industry group, 1947—50 average and 1951—52
Ratio of profits (annual rate) to stockholders' equity
average Year
All private manufacturing
corporations

Food
Tobacco manufactures
Textile-mill products
Apparel and finished textiles
Lumber and wood products
Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing (except
newspapers)
Chemicals and allied products
Petroleum refining
Products of petroleum and coal (except petroleum refining)
Rubber products
Leather and leather products _ _
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary nonferrous metal industries
Primary iron and steel industries. __
Fabricated metal products
Machinery (except electrical).
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except
motor vehicles)
Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including ordnance) .

First Second Third
First Second Third
quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter
Before Federal taxes

24.6
23.2
20.3
24.6
20.7
27.4
24.7
27.0

27.3
17.4
21.4
20.1
9.0
23.2
25.1
34.5

32.0
19.7
20.3
33.9
16.6
31.2
34.6
42.8

29.7
17.3
20.4
26.5
8.3
29.0
29.0
41.7

24.9
18.1
22.4
12.0
7.6
20.2
20.7
31.5

23.6
14.0
17.7
10.9
7.3
14.0
19.6
28.7

22.0
16.6
19.1
9.3
9.3
16.8
20.1
22.8

20.7
20.3
21.9
10.6
11.5
17.8
18.6
22.8

21.1
30.4
22.2

19.8
38.4
23.3

24.3
30.5
23.1

21.6
28.7
22.9

21.7
27.2
20.6

21.0
24.2
16.1

19.7
24.2
17.1

26.8
36.9
10.7
33.5
28.2
33.5
30.9
32.0
37.9

25.4
43.2
17.1
38.1
32.4
35.8
38.0
35.1
47.7

33.0
41.2
13.5
40.9
33.2
36.8
33.8
35.1
34.8

27.2
30.8
13.6
34.7
24 .4
31.0
27.4
28.2
30.2

15.9
28.9
8.5
21.9
27.7
26.2
23.2
31.7
36.8

22.7
29.7
12.1
27.5
22.0
7.5
22.3
32.7
33.4

25.0
27.4
17.1
29.8
17.5
12.1
22.0
24.2
31.0

22.2
39.6

18.8
45.6

24.1
43.7

18.7
34.1

28.1
37.3

32.8
46.5

29.7
26.2

31.3

33.5

33.5

30.0

28.2

29.1

29.4

22.7

30.9

23.3

16.5

15.5

14.9

17.5

14.8
13.6
12.1
14.5
12.0
17.1
14.3
16.2

11.8
8.0
9.4
7.9
2.8
11.8
11.1
13.5

14.3
9.1
9.5
14.1
6.0
15.4
17.3
17.8

13.3
8.4
10.0
10.5
2.3
14.2
12.4
16.7

10.0
8.2
8.8
3.5
1.8
10.3
9.1
12.1

10.1
5.9
7.3
4.0
1.8
8.0
7.4
11.4

10.0
7.7
7.7
3.2
3.4
8.9
9.0
9.5

9.9
9.4
9.0
4.7
5.0
9.8
8.4
10.1

13.4
15.9
U5.1

9.9
12.0
14.7

9.4
15.9
14.6

12.8
12.8
15.2

9.9
9.4
14.7

10.9
11.1
13.6

10.2
10.6
13.0

9.4
10.5
12.3

(2)
12.8
10.4
15.2
12.5
12.9
15.3
14.5
17.8

12.2
14.4
2.0
13.8
13.4
12.1
13.2
12.7
13.7

12.2
18.6
4.2
16.5
16.0
14.0
17.6
15.4
17.9

14.9
15.5
2.6
17.2
15.0
14.3
14.4
15.1
13.5

11.5
11.9
4.3
13.3
10.7
9.1
11.1
10.6
8.9

6.0
9.6
2.6
8.4
13.0
9.7
9.9
12.2
13.4

8.9
10.8
5.6
12.6
11.3
5.5
10.4
12.5
11.4

13.5
11.2
8.1
13.6
9.3
6.3
10.5
10.2
12.0

6.6
21.7

9.5
14.2

8.7
16.9

11.0
17.1

7.8
10.7

10.9
12.9

12.5
15.4

11.9
11.4

14.6

12.9

15.0

14.5

10.7

10.6

11.1

11.2

11.4

9.9

14.4

9.7

7.0

6.5

6.1

7.3

Food
Tobacco manufactures
Textile-mill products
Apparel and finished textiles.
1,/nmber and wood products
Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
_ __
Printing and publishing (except
newspapers)
22.8
26.6
Chemicals and allied products
Petrol p.n m refining
120.3
Products of petroleum and coal (exop,pt petrolp.um refining)
(2)
Rubber products
23.0
Leather and leather products
18.1
Stone, clay, and glass products
„_
26.1
Primary nonferrous metal industries20.5
Primary iron and steel industries
22.7
Fabricated metal products
26.0
Machinery (except electrical)
24.7
Electrical machinery. _ .
31.6
Transportation equipment (except
motor vehicles)
12.5
Motor vehicles and parts
40.7
Instruments; photographic and optical goods; watches and clocks
24.8
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including ordnance) _ _
20.1
All private manufacturing
corporations

1952

1951

Industry group

'36

After Federal taxes

1 Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined.
2 Not available separately for this period.
NOTE.—These series are based on a new sample, beginning with the third quarter of 1951. To provide
continuity, the first and second quarters of 1951 have been adjusted to the new basis. However, the 1947-50
averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with the 1951 and 1952 data. For
explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States
Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




202

TABLE B-37.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales•, private manufacturing corporations,
by industry group, 1947-50 average and 1951-52
Profits in cents per dollar of sales
Industry group

1951

All private manufacturing corporations
-11.1
6.1
Food
Tobacco manufactures
8.1
Textile-mill products
11.3
Apparel and finished textiles
5.4
Lumber and wood products
_ . 14.8
Furniture and fixtures
8.6
Paper and allied products
14.4
Printing and publishing (except news8.5
papers)
15.2
Chemicals and allied products
Petroleum and refining
'14.8
Products of petroleum and coal (except
petroleum refining)
__
Rubber products
8.6
Leather and leather products
5.9
Stone, clay, and glass products
_ _. 15.2
Primary nonferrous metal industries... 14.5
Primary iron and steel industries
12.7
Fabricated metal products
11.3
12.1
Machinery (except electrical)
Electrical machinery
_ __ _ _ _ _ _
11.3
Transportation equipment (except
Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical
goods; watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including ordnance)
All private manufacturing corporations

1952

947-50
verage Year First Second Third First Second Third
quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter
Before Federal taxes
11.2
4.3
8.7
8.6
2.1
10.8
7.7
16.8

12.4
4.8
8.9
12.3
3.5
13.8
9.3
18.8

11.7
4.4
8.2
10.5
2.0
12.6
8.3
18.6

10.5
4.4
8.8
5.6
1.8
9.7
7.1
15.9

9.9
3.6
7.2
4.9
1.7
7.3
6.3
15.1

9.2
4.1
7.5
4.3
2.2
8.1
6.0
12.9

8.9
5.0
8.2
4.8
2.6
8.4
6.0
12.9

7.8
16.5
16.8

7.3
19.0
16.6

8.6
15.9
17.2

8.0
16.0
17.1

8.0
15.1
15.1

7.9
13.7
12.7

7.4
14.2
13.4

10.9
11.6
3.2
17.4
16.4
16.0
11.7
13.8
13.9

11.1
13.0
4.6
18.7
17.0
16.6
13.5
14.8
15.2

12.6
12.2
4.0
19.2
18.0
16.7
12.2
14.2
12.3

10.7
9.8
4.0
17.7
15.1
15.4
10.8
12.8
11.8

7.3
9.7
2.7
13.2
15.5
13.2
9.5
13.3
12.6

9.2
9.6
3.8
15.7
13.3
4.8
9.1
13.2
11.5

10.0
9.1
5.3
16.2
10.8
7.6
8.5
10.8
10.6

6.4
13.9

7.5
13.2

7.6
13.7

7.9
13.5

12.2

13.0

14.8

10.4

13.4

14.7

15.8

15.3

14.5

12.7

12.7

12.6

9.3

8.4

10.6

8.6

7.0

6.2

6.2

6.8

6.7
3.6
4.8
6.6
3.1
9.2
5.0
8.6

4.8
2.0
3.8
3.4
.6
5.5
3.4
6.6

5.6
2.2
4.2
5.1
1.3
6.8
4.7
7.8

5.2
2.1
4.0
4.2
.5
6.1
3.6
7.5

4.2
2.0
3.5
1.6
.4
4.9
3.1
6.1

4.2
1.5
3.0
1.8
.4
4.2
2.3
6.0

4.2
1.9
3.0
1.5
.8
4.3
2.7
5.4

4.3
2.3
3.4
2.1
1.1
4.6
2.7
5.7

3.5
7.9
10.4

4.5
6.6
11.3

3.7
5.2
11.0

4.0
6.2
10.0

3.8
6.0
10.2

3.5
6.1
9.6

5.3
5.6
1.1
8.1
8.4
6.5
6.2
6.5
5.7

5.7
4.6
.8
8.1
8.1
6.5
5.2
6.1
4.8

4.5
3.8
1.3
6.8
6.6
4.5
4.4
4.8
3.5

2.8
3.2
.8
5.0
7.3
4.9
4.1
5.1
4.6

3.6
3.5
1.8
7.2
6.8
3.5
4.3
5.1
3.9

5.4
3.7
2.5
7.4
5.7
3.9
4.1
4.6
4.1

3.5
5.1

3.6
5.3

2.8
3.8

2.9
4.5

2.8
4.9

2.8
4.6

7.1

6.6

5.1

4.8

4.8

4.8

4.9

3.6

3.0

2.6

2.6

2.9

After Federal taxes

Food
Tobacco manufactures
-_ _.
Textile-mill products .
__ _
Apparel and finished textiles
Lumber and wood products _ _ _ _
Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products _ _
Printing and publishing (except newspapers)
3.7
5.0
Chemicals and allied products
6.5
9.1
Petroleum and refining- _ __ _
Ul.O 11.1
Products of petroleum and coal (except
petroleum refining) _
5.0
Rubber products
4.5
4.8
Leather and leather products
.6
3.4
Stone, clay, and glass products
7.1
8.9
Primary nonferrous metal industries. .
7.8
8.8
Primary iron and steel industries
7.2
5.8
Fabricated metal products
6.6
5.0
Machinery (except electrical)
7.1 5.5
Electrical machinery
5.0
6.3
Transportation equipment (except
3.2
motor vehicles)
_
3.4
Motor vehicles and parts
7.4
4.7
Instruments; photographic and optical
6.1
goods; watches and clocks _ _ -_
7.9
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including ordnance)
5.3
3.7
1
2

Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined.
Not available separately for this period.
NOTE.—These series are based on a new sample, beginning with the third quarter of 1951. To provide
continuity, the first and second quarters of 1951 have been adjusted to the new basis. However, the 1947-50
averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with the 1951 and 1952 data.
For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see&uarterly Financial Reports for United States
Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




203

TABLE B-38.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders* equity and to sales, all
private manufacturing corporations, by asset size class, 1947-50 average and 1951-52

1947-50
average

Asset size class
(thousands of dollars)

1951

Year

1952

First Second Third First Second Third
quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter

Ratio of profits before Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders'
equity
All asset sizes

24.6

_ __

Under 250
250 to 999

---

1 000 to 4 999
5*000 to 99 999

100,000 and over

-

27.3

32.0

29.7

24.9

23.6

22.0

20.7

16.7
22.7
24.2
25.2
24.9

17.3
22.0
25.4
28.4
28.8

23.8
27.3
33.1
34.4
32.2

22.5
26.3
30.3
31.8
29.9

15.1
19.9
21.3
25.1
26.9

15.7
17.3
20.7
23.3
25.7

20.3
19.7
20.2
22.2
22.6

22.1
18.8
19.1
20.8
21.2

Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales
11.1

250 to 999
1000 to 4 999
5 000 to 99,999

100 000 and over

11.2

12.4

11.7

10.5

9.9

9.2

8.9

4.4
7.4
9.0
11.3
13.2

All asset sizes
Under 250

3.6
6.1
8.1
11.7
14.7

4.8
7.3
9.9
13.4
15.5

4.7
7.1
9.1
12.5
14.8

3.3
5.8
7.1
8.8
14.0

3.4
5.2
6.9
9.8
13.1

4.4
5.8
6.7
9.4
11.6

4.6
5.6
6.5
8.9
11.1

Ratio of profits after Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders'
equity
14.8

All asset sizes
Under 250
250 to 999

1000 to 4 999
5 000 to 99 999

100 000 and over

-

11.8

14.3

13.3

10.0

10.1

10.0

9.9

9.8
13.1
14.1
14.9
15.3

8.6
9.2
10.6
11.8
13.0

13.7
13.1
15.6
15.0
14.4

13.2
11.7
13.2
13.7
13.8

7.4
7.9
8.0
9.7
11.1

8.9
6.9
7.9
9.3
11.5

12.3
8.6
8.0
9.2
11.0

13.0
8.4
8.2
9.1
10.8

Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales
All asset sizes
Under 250
250 to 999

1 000 to 4 999
5 000 to 99 999

-

100,000 and over

6.7
2.6
4.3
5.2
6.7
8.1

4.8

5.6

5.2

4.2

4.2

4.2

4.3

1.8
2.5
3.4
4.9
6.6

2.8
3.5
4.7
5.8
6.9

2.8
3.2
4.0
5.4
6.8

1.6
2.3
2.7
4.1
5.8

1.9
2.0
2.6
3.9
5.8

2.7
2.5
2.6
3.9
5.6

2.7
2.5
2.8
3.9
5.7

NOTE.—These series are based on a new sample, beginning with the third quarter of 1951. To provide
continuity, the first and second quarters of 1951 have been adjusted to the new basis. However, the 1947-50
averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with the 1951 and 1952 data.
For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States
Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




204

TABLE B*-39.—Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1946—52 1
[Billions of dollars]
Source or use of funds

1946

Uses:
Plant and equipment outlays
Inventories (change in book value) 4
Change hi customer net receivables
Cash and U. 8. Government securities. ._
Other current assets

12.7
11.2
.8
-4.7
—.7

17.1
7.1
3.0
1.2
—.1

19.1
4.2
2.9
1.0

(5)

16.4
-3.6
2.1
3.4
—.2

16.9
8.0
4.0
4.7
.3

22 2
10.2
.2
2.9
.4

1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

19522

23.0

(3)

2.5
1.5

(3)

19.3

28.3

27 2

18 1

33 9

35 9

27.0

Sources:
Internal:
Ketained profits and depletion allowances.—
__. . _ _
Depreciation allowances

7.6
4.3

11.6
5.2

12.8
6.2

8.0
7,2

11.6
7.8

9.0
8.8

7.5
10.0

Total internal sources. _

11.9

16.8

19.0

15.2

19.4

17.8

17.5

-1.6
2.1

2.3
1.0

.8
.3

-2.3
.3

7.4
15

5.6
.8

-.5
2.0

4.3
2.3

3.2
4.4

1.7
5.9

-1.2
4.9

3.3
3.7

5.0
6.4

1.5
7.0

Total uses

.

External:
Change in Federal income-tax liability-Other current liabilities
Change hi bank loans and mortgage
loans
Net new issues
Total external sources

7.1

Discrepancy (uses less sources) _ . . _ .

..

10.9

8.7

1.7

15.9

17.8

9.5

19.0

Total sources

27.7

27 7

16.9

35 3

35 6

27.0

.3

.6

—.5

1.2

-1.4

.3

.0

1
3

Excludes banks and insurance companies.
Estimates based on incomplete data, and rounded to the nearest half-billion dollars.
3 Less than 500 million dollars.
4
Keceivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately.
« Less than 50 million dollars.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial
data.




205

INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS
TABLE B-40.—International transactions of the United States, 1949-52
[Millions of dollars]
1952

1949

Type of transaction

1950

1951

Total *

Exports of goods and services:
Recorded goods _ _
Other goods 2
Total goods
Services
Income on investments

12, 051

second
quarter

Third
quarter

Fourth
quarter i

4,017

150

3,965
123

3,308
99

3,650
150

4 167

4 088

3 407

3 800

10, 272

15, 030

14, 940

12 337
2,232
1,405

10 658
2,024
1,743

15 485
2,741
1,992

15 462
2 986
1,942

286

__

First
quarter

386

455

522

%

721

422

775
454

740
466

750
600

Total exports __

15, 974

14, 425

20, 218

20, 390

5,310

5,317

4,613

5,150

Imports of goods and services:
Recorded goods
Other goods 2

6 622

8 845

10 964

10 539

2 779

2 532

183

2 628

757

2 600

Total goods
Services..
Income on investfnfvnts

7,066
2,184
353

9,315
2,376

11 668
2,988

11 296
3,739

397

2,844
914
109

2,690
1,071
99

2 800

398

2,962
804
89

9 603

12 128

15 054

15 432

3 855

3 867

3 860

3 850

5,429
—158

1,427

—84

4,066
—249

4,401
—235

1,238

1,337

—93

776
—59

1,050

5,271

48

3,817
—247
1,594

4,166
—753
1.545

1,205

—83

1,244
—139

717
—331

1,052

1,343
—352
1,306

1,000
—200

6,371

2,297

5,164

4,958

1,455

1,450

753

1,300

57 —3, 629

-442

—845

382

-404

-723

-100

4,501
163

4,360
627

820
140

1,234
210

1,176
197

1,130
80
100

444

Total imports
Surplus of exports of goods and
services:
Recorded goods
Other goods 2
Total goods
Services
Income on investments

._

Total surplus of exports
Means of financing surplus of exports
of goods and services:
Liquidation of gold and dollar
assets by foreign countries and
by international institutions. __
U. S. Government sources (net):3
Grants and other unilateral
transfers
Long- and short-term loans..
U. S. private sources (net):
Remittances
______
Long- and short-term capital
Total means of financing. _
Errors and omissions

5,321
647

470

437

4,120
164

704

—33
ooo

216

345

158

367

522

481

412

376

96

94

86

609

1,317

1,066

859

235

519

15

7,156

2,453

5,700

5,377

1,673

1,653

751

—785

—156

—536

—419

—218

—203

200

950
100

—50

500

2

90
1,300

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United
States customs area, and other adjustments.
s For detail, see appendix table B-42.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




206

TABLE B-41.—United States exports and imports of goods and services^ by area, 1949-52
[Billions o Jdollars, annual rates]
1952
Area

Exports of goods and services: 2
O EEC countries 3
OEEC dependencies 3
Other Europe 5
Canada
Latin- American republics
Other 6. _

1949

1950

1951

First Second Third Fourth
Total i quarter quarter quarter quarter i

5.39
.90
.21
2.59
3.66
3.21

4.43
.58
.18
2.73
3.92
2.59

6.52
.68
.33
3.48
5.15
4.06

(4)
(4)
(«)
4
(4)
( 4)
()

7.27
.76
.01
3.35
5.33
4.52

6.88
.79
.01
4.24
5.03
4.32

3.83
4.40
3.95

15.97

14.43

20.22

20.39

21.24

21.27

18.45

2.22
.71
.18
2.01
2.94
1.54

2.69
.89
.23
2.44
3.56
2.32

3.51
1.16
.24
2.78
4.12
3.25

(4)
(4)
4
(4)
(3)
(4)
()

3.73
1.42
.04
2.59
4.32
3.32

4.11
1.33
.05
2.91
4.04
3.03

4.13

(4)
(4)

3.20
4.17
2.99

(4)
(4)

9.60

12.13

15.05

15.43

15.42

15.47

15.44

15.40

Surplus of exports of goods and services: 2
OEEC countries 3
_
OEEC dependencies 3
Other Europe 8 __ _ _ _
Canada _
Latin- American republics
Other 0

3.17
.19
.03
.59
.72
1 67

1.73
-.31
—.04
.29
.36
.27

3.01
-.48
.09
.70
1.03
.81

(4)
(4)
(4)

3.54
-.66
-.03
.76
1.01
1.20

2.77
-.54
-.04
1.33
.99
1.29

1.47
-.26
-.02

(4)
(4)

Total surplus of exports

6.37

2.30

5.16

4.96

5.82

5.80

3.01

Exports of goods and services to sterling area 7
__
Imports of goods and services from
sterling area.

2.52

1.95

3.17

(4)

3.75

2.68

2.21

(4)

1.73

2.27

2.91

(4)

2.87

2.96

2.46

(4)

Surplus of exports to sterling
area 7.

.79

—.32

.26

(4)

.88

-.28

—.25

(4)

Total exports
Imports of goods and services: J
OEEC countries 3
OEEC dependencies 3
Other Europe 5 __
Canada
Latin-American republics _
Other •
Total imports

(4)
4

( )
(4)

5.60

.64
.03

.90
.05

.63
.23
.96

(4)
(4)
(4
4

()
(4)

(4)

20.60

(4)
(4)

(4)
4

()
(4)
(4)

5.20

ADDENDUM

1
2

Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Includes income on investments.
3 "OEEC" countries are those which are members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. They are the countries which participated in the European Recovery Program prior to its termination. Beginning with 1952, the data also include Finland, Spain, and Yugoslavia.
4
Not available.
6 Beginning with 1952, excludes Finland, Spain, and Yugoslavia.
6
Includes international institutions.
7
In 1950-52, includes "special category" exports sold for cash, but excludes all transactions under the
Mutual Defense Assistance Program.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




SO?

TABLE B-42.—U. S. Government grants, other unilateral transfers, and loans to foreign countries,

1949-52
[Millions of dollars]

1952
Type of aid

Unilateral payments:
Military aid programs:
Mutual Security and Mutual Defense
Greek-Turkish aid
China aid
Economic aid programs:
Mutual Security, EGA, and
Mutual Defense
Europe
Other areas .__ _ .
Army Civilian Supply 8
Philippine
Rehabilitation
Act.—
_
International Refugee Organization and other international relief agencies
Other
Other transfers

1949

1950

1951

171
44

516
62
5

1,481
8
2

3,822
3,730
92
1,082

2,833
2,719
114
500

2,643
2,490
153
336

203

166

12

104
31
128

84
28
101

39
48
109

Total unilateral payments.
Less: Unilateral receipts

5,585
264

4,295
175

4,678
177

Equals: Net unilateral payments

5,321

4,120

4,501

428
163

163
193

30

28
22
6

(2)

642

603

(8)

2

26
20
12

First Second Third Fourth
Total i quarter quarter quarter quarter^

m

Long-term loans and investments:
EGA and Mutual Security programs
Export-Import Bank
Surplus property credits, including ship sales
Raw-material credits to occupied
areas
United Nations building loan
Other
-..
Total long-term loans and investments
Less: Repayments _. __ _ _
Equals: Net long-term loans
and investments
Short- term loans (net)
Total net unilateral payments,
loans and investments.

407

8

8
8
()

343
308
35
24

520
478
42
36

475
441
34
34

(2)

1

1

2

(')
(')

(2)

21
20
32

16
60
36

3
44
36

8

848
28

1, 311
77

1,197
21

(2)
«

4,360

820

1,234

1,176

1,130

209
222

8

111
80

130
107

32
247

8

13
6

8

2
12

2
10

2
11

2

205
64

249
62

292
127

8
8

8
8
8
8

()
(')

679
205

414
287

450
310

474

127

140

573

141

187

165

173

37

23

54

—1

23

4,284

4,664

4,987

960

1,444

1,373

(2)

32

5,968

2

80

1,210

i Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers,
a Not available.
* After 1949, includes disbursements in Germany administered by EGA from funds appropriated under
the Army civilian supply program.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




208

TABLE B-43.—United States merchandise exports, including reexports', by area, 1936-38 quarterly
average and 1947—52
Other
Total exports in- Canada Western
Hemicluding
reexports
sphere

Period

OEECt
countries

Other
Europe

AusAsia 2 tralia and Africa
Oceania

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948 .. ._
1949.
1950 '
19513
1952'

742
3,835
3,163
3,013
2,569
3,758
« 3, 735

115
528
486
490
499
647
0)

136
1,017
841
725
691
943
(8)

282
1,324
1,046
1,019
698
955
(8)

31
118
49
41
34
69
(8)

122
562
507
534
360
545
CO

1950: First quarter 3 3
Second quarter _
Third quarter 3 3
Fourth quarter

2,365
2,510
2,451
2,949

389
519
505
583

614
647
706
796

724
728
583
756

31
33
37
34

1951: First quarter5 3
Second quarter _
Third quarter 3
Fourth quarter 3

3,345
4,020
3,688
3,979

623
756
605
603

866
958
978
969

813
1,027
869
1,111

4,017
3,965
3,308
4
3, 650

623
756
675
(•)

989
932
795
(8)

1,049
788
564
8
<)

__

1952: First quarter 3 3
Second quarter3 _ ._ _.
Third quarter
Fourth quarter 8

23
80
38
49
33
61

32
205
196
155
86
145
(fi)

381
367
332
361

32
34
30
38

78
85
78
102

64
81
63
69

469
549
517
644

44
45
68
88

120
155
173
132

51
49
31
(8)

647
577
404
8
()

74
56
40

176
153
115
8
()

(8)

(5)

Percentage of total
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947 .
1948
1949 3
1950 3_
1951

100
100
100
100
100
100

15.5
13.8
15.4
16.3
19.4
17.2

18.3
26.5
26.6
24.1
26.9
25.1

38.0
34.5
33.1
33.8
27.2
25.4

4.2
3.1
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.8

16.4
14.7
16.0
17.7
14.0
14.5

3.1
2.1
1.2
1.6
1.3
1.6

4.3
5.3
6.2
5.1
3.3
3.9

1950: First quarter 3 3
Second quarter
Third quarter 3 3
Fourth quarter

100
100
100
100

16.4
20.7
20.6
19.8

26.0
25.8
28.8
27.0

30.6
29.0
23.8
25.6

1.3
1.3
1.5
1.2

16.1
14.6
13.5
12.2

1.4
1.4
1.2
1.3

3.3
3.4
3.2
3.5

1951: First quarter 3 3
Second quarter _.
Third quarter 3 3
Fourth quarter

100
100
100
100

18.6
18.8
16.4
15.2

25.9
23.8
26.5
24.4

24.3
25.5
23.6
27.9

1.9
2.0
1.7
1.7

14.0
13.7
14.0
16.2

1.3
1.1
1.8
2.2

3.6
3.9
4.7
3.3

1952: First quarter 3 3
Second quarter
Third quarter 3_ _ _

100
100
100

15.5
19.1
20.4

24.7
23.5
24.1

26.2
19.9
17.1

1.3
1.2
.9

16.1
14.5
12.2

1.8
1.4
1.2

4.4
3.9
3.5

i" OEEC countries" are those which are members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. They are the countries which participated in the European Recovery Program prior to its termination. Turkey is included with OEEC countries and excluded from Asia. Exports from Germany are
included with those of OEEC countries and, in the postwar period, relate almost wholly to exports from the
three western zones.
2
3 Excludes Turkey, which is included with OEEC countries.

Data by area exclude, while total exports include, "special category" exports. For this reason, exports
by area will not add to total exports hi these periods. " Special category" exports are those of military or
potential military significance, and are not published in this area classification for security reasons. See
Foreign Trade Statistics Notes, January 1952, Bureau of the Census, for further detail.
< Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
«Not available.
NOTE.—Data in this table cover all merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign
countries, including, in postwar years, both commercial transactions and goods financed by the United States
through the various aid and relief programs and the Mutual Security Program. Shipments to United States
armed forces abroad for their own use are excluded.
Detail will not necessary add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote 3.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




209

TABLE B—44.—Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports,
by economic class, 1936-38 quarterly average and 1947—52
[1936-38=100]
Total
Crude
domestic materials
exports

Period

Crude
foodstuffs *

Manufactured
foodstuffs i

Semimanufactures

Finished
manufactures

Quantity indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38.
1947
1948 1949
1950
1951
1952

100
275
214
219
193
247
2246

100
123
100
126
128
142
(3)

100
397
362
435
287
475
(3)

100
478
350
297
237
264
(3)

100
203
144
150
127
153
(3)

181
194
184
209

125
143
112
128

284
270
264
325

213
250
224
230

121
126
125
135

207
220
220
251

1951: First quarter.
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

223
258
243
264

112
126
117
220

456
583
434
422

242
263
265
266

131
157
165
160

279
319
304
291

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

263
260
218
2241

157
112
87
(3)

550
458
290
(3)

266
252
207
(3)

162
166
131
(3)

310
341
305

1950: First quarter
Second quarter.
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

_

_ __

(3)

(3)

100
332
257
250
225
298

Unit value indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949
__.
1950
1951... ___
1952
1950: First quarter
Second quarter.. _ _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1951: First quarter...
Second quarter _ _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter ..
1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter. ,.
Fourth quarter .

100
188
200
186
180
206
2206

__ _ _ _ _

_ _

100
195
223
212
220
260
(3)

100
248
255
225
193
215
(3)

100
218
223
177
151
189
(3)

100
169
184
174
170
209
(3)

177
175
180
191

206
212
226
245

196
190
192
196

151
142
162
169

164
166
168
184

179
175
177
187

202
210
206
204

263
275
249
246

203
219
221
219

188
206
194
183

203
212
211
211

195
201
200
200

207
207
205
2205

255
244
240
(3)

230
250
233
(3)

178
173
182
(3)

208
207
205
(3)

201
201
200

(3)

(3)

100
182
193
184
179
199

1
Export indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs in some periods, particularly those of unit value
during 1950, are influenced by sales of large quantities of food products at prices considerably below market
quotations. Such exports include sales from Government-owned surplus and shipments on which subsidies were paid by the Department of Agriculture.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data: fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
3 Not available.
NOTE.—The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value
changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in
the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics, including
changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




2IO

TABLE B—45.—United States general merchandise imports, by area, 1936-38 quarterly average
and 1947-52
Other OEEC
Total
general Canada Western counHemiimports
tries *
sphere

Period

Other
Europe

Asia 2

Australia
and
Oceania

Africa

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38 .. _ .
1947
1948
1949 .
_ _ _ _ _
1950
1951
1952 _

622
1,439
1,781
1,656
2,213
2,742
32,635

88
282
398
388
490
569
(4)

143
568
627
611
776
888
(*)

152
174
244
211
315
478
(4)

1950: First quarter
Second Quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

1,889
1,931
2,388
2,645

404
478
504
575

727
645
912
819

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter _

3,036
2,981
2,497
2,452

529
586
553
608

2,779
2,628
2,532
3 2, 600

560
596
580
4
()

1952: First quarter
Second quarter.. .
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

30
45
49
35
47
52

183
249
324
296
409
496
(«)

10
39
41
31
52
113
(4)

240
243
322
455

45
45
49
50

302
363
418
555

49
52
47
60

122
103
136
132

1,085
895
739
831

515
515
457
426

63
57
40
46

592
544
482
364

83
184
120
64

169
201
106
113

943
842
895
(4)

454
440
431
4
()

46
43
44

501
473
419
(4)

60
80
49

214
154
113

<«)

(4)

(4)

(4)

(4)

17
82
98
84
123
147

Percentage of total
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947.
1948
1949 _
1950
1951

100
100
100
100
100
100

14.1
19.6
22.3
23.4
22.1
20.8

23.0
39.5
35.2
36.9
35.1
32.4

24.4
12.1
13.7
12.7
14.2
17.4

4.8
3.1
2.8
2.1
2.1
1.9

29.4
17.3
18.2
17.9
18.5
18.1

1.6
2.7
2.3
1.9
2.3
4.1

2.7
5.7
5.5
5.1
5.6
5.4

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

100
100
100
100

21.4
24.8
21.1
21.7

38.5
33.4
38.2
31.0

12.7
12.6
13.5
17.2

2.4
2.3
2.1
1.9

16.0
18.8
17.5
21.0

2.6
2.7
2.0
2.3

6.5
5.3
5.7
5.0

1951: First quarter _
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

100
100
100
100

17.4
19.7
22.1
24.8

35.7
30.0
29.6
33.9

17.0
17.3
18.3
17.4

2.1
1.9
1.6
1.9

19.5
18.2
19.3
14.8

2.7
6.2
4.8
2.6

5.6
6.7
4.2
4.6

1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter

100
100
100

20.2
22.7
22.9

34.0
32.0
35.4

16.3
16.7
17.0

1.7
1.6
1.7

18.0
18.0
16.6

2.2
3.0
1.9

7.7
5.9
4.5

_

_

* "OEEC countries" are those which are members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. They are the contries which participated in the European Recovery Program prior to its termination.
Turkey is included with OEEC countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany are included
with those of OEEC countries and, in the postwar period, relate almost wholly to imports from the three
western zones.
2 Excludes Turkey, which is included with OEEC countries.
3 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
4
Not available.
NOTE,—Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign
countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising
channels, plus entries into bonded customs warehouses.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




211

TABLE B-46.—Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption, by economic class, 7936—38 quarterly average and 1947—52
[1936-38=100]
Total imports for
consumption

Period

Crude ma- Crude food- Manufac- Semi-manu- Finished
manutured
terials
stuffs
factures
factures
foodstuffs
Quantity indexes

Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949
.I960
1951
1952

100
108
123
120
146
144
1149

---

(2)

100
96
109
119
113
119

(2)

100
83
91
97
117
122

(2)

100
130
149
143
219
200

(2)

100
84
103
101
125
134

137
136
154
158

_

1952* First quarter
Second quarter __
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

152
140
155
161

121
94
125
111

98
113
143
113

189
213
220
247

107
119
125
147

163
147
131
136

161
144
137
125

149
109
92
126

127
129
121
111

227
215
182
178

140
139
126
131

151
147
145
U54

1950* First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1951* First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

(2)

100
129
139
125
152
142

154
153
138
2
()

137
103
106

121
139
139

191
195
200

138
146
149

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

Unit value indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
_

100
213
235
224
243
305
1289

1950' First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

223
229
248
270

185
194
215
255

410
433
485
491

199
199
203
210

176
179
197
220

245
248
253
262

295
313
312
299

302
340
316
288

508
521
516
505

214
224
225
221

234
242
250
249

278
288
313
307

300
292
284
1280

288
265
239

508
520
520

216
222
225

253
249
247

303
291
288

1951* First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1952: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

__
..

100
180
203
195
214
312
0)

(2)

(2)

(2)

100
311
343
330
454
512

(2)

(2)

100
208
212
202
203
221

(2)

(2)

100
191
217
198
193
244

(2)

(2)

100
245
266
258
252
296

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Not available.
NOTE.—The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes
in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average
prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics, including changes in
average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




212

SUMMARY
TABLE B-47. Changes in selected economic series since 7939 and 1951 and during 1952
Percentage
change 1

1939=100

Source:
Appendix
table
No.

1952,
first

1952

Economic series
1951
Total «

.
B-l Gross national product
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investment
Government purchases of goods and
services
B-2 Gross national product in 1952 prices
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investmentGovernment purchases of goods and
services
-- B-6 National income
Compensation of employees
- -B-9 Personal income
Disposable personal income
Personal ne t saving
B-10 Per capita disposable personal income:
Current prices
1952 prices
-B-12 Labor force including armed forces
Civilian labor force
Employment _ Agricultural
Nonagricultural
Unemployment
_
B-16 Average gross weekly earnings:
Manufacturing
Durable goods
Nondurable goods _
Building construction
B-17 Industrial production
Durable manufactures
Nondurable manufactures
-Minerals
Agricultural production
_
_
B-18 New construction
Private
Residential (nonfarm)
_ __ __
Public
Business expenditures for new plant and
B-20
equipment1 total
Manufacturing
B-23 Wholesale price index: All commodities
Farm products
Processed foods
Other than farm products and foods
B-24 Consumers' price index: All items
Food
Apparel
Rent
Housefurnishings
Prices received by farmers
B-25
Parity index (prices paid, interest", taxes,
and wage rates)
B-27 Consumer credit outstanding
Instalment credit
. _ _ _.
B-28 Loans and investments of all commercial
banks* total
Loans
Investments in U. S. Government obligations _ .
B-31 Gross public debt and guaranteed issues
B-34 Corporate profits before tax
Corporate profits after tax
Dividend payments
Undistributed profits
B-43 Merchandise exports, including reexportsB-45 General merchandise imports

First
half

Second
half a

1951 to half, to
19522
1952,

second
half 2

382
323
536

+4.8
+3.8
-12.1

582

601

186
162
224

189
164
238

+23.8
+2.4
+1.8
-14.6

268
402
398
370
334
696

265
396
391
363
329
626

271
407
406
376
340
763

+21.5
+4.9
+6.4
+5.6
+4.4
+10.6

272
141
118
114
133
73
149
20

279
142
120
114
134
71
151
18

276
141
118
113
132
69
149
19

282
143
121
115
136
73
152
16

+2.6
+.7

•£?
+.5

-3.5
+1.0
-11.0

+2.4
+1.6
+2.1
+2.0
+2.6
+5.2
+2.3
-17.2

272
264
269
270
202
250
178
155
131
377
494
409
242

284
276
280
290
201
256
173
152
136
394
496
414
277

280
272
275
283
198
253
171
150
3
()
398
497
409
284

289
280
285
299
204
259
176
155
3
()
391
496
419
270

+4.5
+4.4
+4.1
+7.4
-.5
+2.2
-2.6
-1.8
+3.6
+4.6
+.5
+1.2
+14.5

+3.2
+3.1
+3.6
+5.6
+2.8
+2.2
+3.2
+3.1
(3)
-1.7
-.1
+2.4
-5.0

478
574
229
311
(3)
199
187
239
203
131
208
318

487
642
223
293
(3)
195
191
243
201
136
203
303

497
640
224
297
(3)
195
190
242
202
135
204
307

490
653
222
290
(3)
194
192
245
201
137
202
299

230
294
305

234
337
371

236
298
326

233
337
371

+2.0
+11.9
-2.8
-5.6
-2.3
-2.3
+2.2
+1.8
-1.0
+4.0
-2.4
-4.6
+1.8
+14.8
+21.4

-1.5
+1.9
-.8
-2.3
—.4
-.5
+1.2
+1.2
-.8
+1.4
-1.1
-2.7
-1.4
+13.1
+13.8

326
335

349
374

330
344

349
374

+5.7
+8.8

377
545
660
374
237
800
«506
<441

390
562
628
344
245
658
«503
4424

375
545
632
348
242
683
4538
4435

390
562
623
340
245
642
4469
4413

+7.2
+11.6
+3.3
+3.0
-4.9
80
+3.3
-17.7
-.6
-3.9

361
308
591

378
320
519

374
317
501

478
183
160
271

592
188
163
232

221
383
374
350
321
630

+2.3
+1.9
+7.1
+3.3
+1.3
+1.2
+6.0
+2.1
+2.6
+3.9
+3.5
+3.3
+21.9

+3.8
+3.2
-1.5
-2.3
+1-1
61
-12.8
-5.1

i Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed
from the indexes shown here.
4
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
» Not available.
1935-38 average=100.




213

Index to the Annual Economic Review
Including references to charts and text tables in the Annual Economic
Review and the Economic Report of the President

(Ror additional tabular material, see Appendixes A and B]
Agriculture:
Paee
Developments in 1952
58
Policies
124
Prices
40, 58
Price supports
105
Production, United States
58
Chart 1.—Growth in production since 1929
2
Production, abroad
141, 148, 149
Allocations of scarce materials (see also Materials)
73, 74, 77
Aluminum (see Materials)
73
Automobiles: production, sales, and employment
57, 72, 99
Banks. (See Credit.)
Business
financing
54-56
Capacity expansion
71, 91, 110
Chart 22.—Expansion in major industries
73
Conservation. (See Natural resource development; Materials.)
Construction (see also Housing; Investment)
53,64
Chart 16.—Business investment
55
Chart 25.—New nonfarm housing starts
95
Chart 30.—Public outlays for new construction
129
Consumer expenditures
72, 97
Developments in 1952
48-51
ChartS.—Improvement in living standards since 1929
5
Chart 14.—Personal income, spending, and saving
50
Chart 28.—Personal consumption expenditures
109
Table 13.—Household appliances in use and degree of saturation,
January 1953
101
Table 14.—Indexes of gross national product, personal consumption
expenditures, and per capita disposable personal income, constant prices
112
Outlook
72,97-102
Consumers' prices
39-40, 74
Chart 8.—Consumers' prices
40
Chart 10.—Comparison of wholesale and consumers' prices
42
Controlled Materials Plan
73
Copper (see also Materials)
74
Corporate
finance
54-56
Chart 17.—Sources and uses of corporate funds
56
Chart 24.—Corporate liquidity
93
Corporate profits
3




214

Credit:
Business
54—56
Consumer
51,99
Developments in 1952
45-46
Chart 12.—Bank loans and investments
46
Chart 15.—Consumer credit
.
52
Chart 24.—Corporate liquidity
93
Chart 27.—Consumer credit and disposable personal income
100
Policy
—
47
Debt. (See Consumer credit; Government finance.)
Defense. (See Security.)
Defense Production Act, extension of
76-77
Deficits (see also Government
finance)
71,78
Demand, deficiency
102-107
Demand, longer-run prospects
88—103
Education
128
Chart 30.—Public outlays for new construction
129
Electric power:
Chart 3.—Improvement in living standards since 1929
5
Chart 22.—Expansion in major industries
73
Employment (see also Manpower; Unemployment; Projections)
37-39
Chart 2.—National output and labor input
3
Chart 7.—Civilian labor force
38
Employment Act of 1946
81,82
Europe, Western (see also International trade)
67, 68, 137, 141, 145, 150
Chart 21.—Industrial production in Western Europe
.
68
Exports, United States (see also International trade)
72, 138-141
Chart 20.—Merchandise exports and imports
67
Farm. (See Agriculture.)
Finance. (See Corporate finance; Government finance.)
Fiscal policy (see also Government
finance)
77
Foreign aid (see also International trade)
69, 137-141
Chart 20.—Merchandise exports and imports
67
Table 16.—Measure of the insufficiency of foreign dollar earnings
139
Table 17.—Means of financing the insufficiency of foreign dollar earnings
140
Foreign investment, private
69, 77, 139, 150
Government finances:
Federal:
Deficits
71, 78, 89, 107
Developments in 1952
58-63
National security programs (see also Security)
60—61,89
Chart 18.—Government cash receipts from and payments to
the public
59
Chart 23.—Major national security programs
90
Nonmilitary construction programs. (See Natural resource development. )
Public debt operations
64—65
Receipts and expenditures
60-63
Chart 19.—Federal budget expenditures
62
Table 4.—Summary of Federal fiscal operations
60
Table 5.—Federal receipts and expenditures: Conventional budget and
consolidated cash statement
61
Table 6.—Federal budget expenditures by major classes
.
61




215

Receipts and expenditures—Continued
Page
Table 7.—Federal budget receipts by source
63
Table 8.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public
63
Taxes: policy, legislation, economic effects
62-63, 77-79, 89, 111, 113, 119-122
State and local government
finance
64, 131-132
Chart 18.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the
public
.
59
Gross national product (see also Projections)
36,84
Table 12.—Gross national product: 1952 and projections of needed
levels, 1953-55
84
Health
128
Chart 30.—Public outlays for new construction
129
Highways
127
Chart 30.—Public outlays for new construction
129
Hours, working. (See Projections)
83
Chart 2.—National output and labor input
3
Table 12.—Gross national product: 1952 and projections of needed
levels, 1953-55
84
Housing
51, 72,94, 125-127
Chart 25.—New nonfarm housing starts
95
Imports, United States
68-69, 72, 138, 141, 142-145, 150
Chart 20.—Merchandise exports and imports
67
Chart 32.—U. S. imports and industrial production
143
Table 18.—Indexes of industrial production and exports of Western
Europe and United States imports of manufactured goods
146
Table 19.—Indexes of volume of exports of certain Western European
countries to the United States
147
Income, personal
48
Chart 13.—Personal income
49
Chart 14.—Personal income, spending, and saving
50
Chart 26.—Liquid assets and disposable personal income
98
Chart 27.—Consumer credit and disposable personal income
100
Outlook
72,97
Industrial production, United States
36-37, 75
Chart 1.—Growth in production since 1929
2
Chart 4.—Total national output
14
Chart 6.—Industrial production
37
Inflationary pressures (see also Stabilization):
Effect on international trade
148, 150
Outlook
70,75
International economic policy of the United States
79, 136-151
International trade (see also Inflationary pressures; Productivity; Prices) :
Balance of payments
65-67, 69
Chart 20.—Merchandise exports and imports
67
"Dollar shortage"
136-151
Table 16.—Measure of the insufficiency of foreign dollar earnings
139
Table 17.—Means of financing the insufficiency of foreign dollar
earnings
140
Gold and dollar reserves, foreign
69, 139-140, 145, 150
Import barriers
79, 138, 142-145, 150
Trade with Soviet Bloc
141, 146
Inventories:
Chart 16.—Business investment
55
Chart 17.—Sources and uses of corporate funds
56
Developments in 1952
51-53
Outlook for 1953
72




216

Investment (see also Capacity expansion; Construction; Inventories):
Developments in 1952
53-54
Chart 16.—Business investment
55
Chart 17.—Sources and uses of corporate funds
56
Table 2.—Changes in business expenditures for new plant and
equipment, 1951 to 1952
54
Table 9.—Business expenditures for new plant and equipment
71
Investment abroad, private
69, 139, 150
Investment-consumption balance
108-110, 111-113
Investment policies, private
116—118
Outlook for 1953
71
Labor force (see also Projections)
37,83
Chart 2.—National output and labor input
3
Chart 7.—Civilian labor force
38
Liquid assets, corporate
92
Liquid assets, personal
97
Materials (see also Allocations; Capacity expansion)
47-48, 73-74, 76
Chart 22.—Expansion in major industries
73
Long-range demands
130-131
Chart 31.—Increase in demand for selected raw materials and products, 1950 to 1975
130
Metals. (See Materials.)
Minerals (see also Materials) :
Chart 6.—Industrial production
37
Money supply
45-47
Table 1.—Factors changing the volume of the privately held money
supply
45
Natural resource development
130-131
Chart 30.—Public outlays for new construction .
129
Outlook, short-run
70-79
Outlook, longer-run
88-103
Output. (See Agricultural Production; Industrial Production.)
Population (see also Projections)
83
Table 10.—Population and labor force
82
Price controls
43-47
Price supports, farm. (See Agriculture.)
Prices, developments in 1952
39-41
Wholesale
40
Chart 9.—Wholesale prices
41
Chart 10.—Comparison of wholesale and consumers' prices
42
Consumers'
39-40
Chart 8.—Consumers' prices
40
Chart 10.—Comparison of wholesale and consumers' prices
42
Prices abroad
149
Outlook
74
Production. (See Agricultural production; Industrial production.)
Profits. (See Corporate profits.)
Projections:
Population
82
Labor force
82
Employment
83
Unemployment
83
Hours, working
83
Productivity
84




217

Projections—Continued
Page
Gross national product
84
Table 10.—Population and labor force
82
Table 11.—Labor force, employment, and unemployment
83
Table 12.—Gross national product: 1952 and projections of needed
levels, 1953-55
84
Regional considerations and problems
117
Research and development
116, 117
Retail sales
51-53
Table 3.—Retail sales, total and selected groups
57
Saving, personal:
Developments in 1952
48-51
Chart 14.—Personal income, spending and saving
50
Chart 26.—Liquid assets and disposable personal income
98
Outlook
72, 97
Security, national:
Chart 4.—Total national output
14
Chart 19.—Federal budget expenditures
62
Defense mobilization policy
76
Developments in 1952
35,60-61
Outlook
70
Chart 23.—Major national security programs
.
90
Small business
117
Social security and welfare programs
122—124
Table 15.—Indexes of per capita social security benefits and per capita
earnings of selected groups, and consumers' prices
123
Stabilization (see also Inflationary pressures)
76
And credit
118
Built-in stabilizers
105
State and local government finance (see also Government finance) :
Chart 18.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public
59
Steel
73
Tariffs, U. S. (See International trade.)
Tax amortization, accelerated. (See Investment; Capacity expansion.)
Taxation. (See Government finance.)
Textiles
57
Underdeveloped countries (see also International trade; International economic policy of U. S.)
137, 148-149, 150
Unemployment (see also Projections)
38-39,82-83
Chart 7.—Civilian labor force
38
Table 11.—Labor force, employment, and unemployment
83
Wage stabilization
43-45
Wages, developments in 1952
41-43
Chart 11.—Changes in hourly earnings in manufacturing industries
44
Work stoppages
39




218







