33O?73

ECONOMIC REPORT
OF THE PRESIDENT

Transmitted to the Congress
January 1964
Slill

iti

iiiiiii

a!

'lii

lli
ll
1

-lilliliill




Wii^ 3p?::S|:;K ^iSt^^^WF^fg^fi^^rWJP^mi^^SS^'^^^y-

u
ill
pi'lip




Economic Report
of the President

Transmitted to the Congress
January 1964
TOGETHER WITH

THE ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE




WASHINGTON : 1964




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
THE WHITE HOUSE

Washington, D.C., January 20, 1964
The Honorable the PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE OF THE SENATE,
The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
SIRS:

As required by the Employment Act of 1946, I am sending to the
Congress my annual Economic Report.
I am also sending the Annual Report of the Council of Economic
Advisers.
Sincerely,




III




CONTENTS
ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
THE

$100

BILLION EXPANSION

Page
4

Economic Milestones
Extent of the Advance
Comparative Gains
Contributions of Business, Labor, and Government
Federal Purchases and Tax Cuts

4
4
4
5
6

T H E J O B AHEAD OF U S
EARLY T A X REDUCTION

6
7

Greatest Fiscal Stimulus
Sustained Expansion
Safeguard Against Recession

7
8
8

T H E 1964 ECONOMIC OUTLOOK . ,
PRICE-WAGE POLICY IN 1964
OTHER POLICIES FOR 1964

Monetary Policy and Balance-of-Payments Measures
Trade Expansion and Development Assistance
Agriculture
Labor and Manpower Policies
Transportation and Technology
Housing and Community Development
THE

9
10
11

11
12
12
13
14
14

W A R ON POVERTY

The Role of Prosperity and Faster Growth
Building Individual Earning Power
Providing a Decent Living
A Versatile Attack
America's Economic Challenge

14

15
15
17
17
17

ANNUAL R E P O R T OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS*
INTRODUCTION

29

CHAPTER 1. ECONOMIC EXPANSION AND FEDERAL POLICY

32

CHAPTER 2. T H E PROBLEM OF POVERTY IN AMERICA

55

CHAPTER 3. T H E PROMISE AND PROBLEMS OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE .

85

CHAPTER 4. PRICE AND WAGE POLICY FOR H I G H EMPLOYMENT. .

112

CHAPTER 5. T H E BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY SYSTEM
CHAPTER 6. U.S.
SEAS

*For a detailed table of contents of the Council's Report, seepage 23.




121

ASSISTANCE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OVER149

Page
APPENDIX A. TESTIMONY OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMPLOYMENT AND MANPOWER OF
THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE, OCTOBER

28, 1963

165

APPENDIX B. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING 1963
APPENDIX C. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME, EMPLOYMENT, AND PRODUCTION




VI

191
201




ECONOMIC REPORT
OF THE PRESIDENT




ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
To the Congress of the United States:
This is my first report to you under the Employment Act of 1946.
As a member of the Congress at that time, I was proud to vote for this
historic Act.
As your President today, I am proud to respond to its challenge—
to its mandate "to promote maximum employment, production, and
purchasing power" within the framework of "free competitive
enterprise."
Nothing less than the maximum will meet our needs.
Our gross national product (GNP) for the fourth quarter of 1963
rose to a $600 billion annual rate.
But an unemployment rate of 5 / 2 percent continues to
—cast a long shadow over our pride in this achievement;
—remind us that far too much of our precious human potential
still lies idle.
As I stated in outlining my political philosophy six years ago:
I regard achievement of the full potential of our resources—physical, human, and otherwise—to be the highest
purpose of governmental policies next to the protection of
those rights we regard as inalienable.
The road to that full potential is still a long one. But we have
moved steadily and impressively forward in the past three years.
And the tax cut will speed our climb toward our goals of full
employment, faster growth, equal opportunity, balance in our external
payments, and price stability.
As the Employment Act requires, I shall in this report
—assess our progress toward our economic goals,
—review the current and foreseeable trends in the U.S. economy
in relation to its potential, and
—set forth my policy and program for achieving our national
economic potential.




THE $100 BILLION EXPANSION

As we face the tasks ahead, we have much to build on.
Economic Milestones
Our record $100 billion expansion since early 1961 has carried us
past important milestones in the march toward a better life. In 1963,
for the first time in history:
—GNP passed the $600 billion mark, by year-end.
—Average earnings in manufacturing exceeded $100 a week, by
year-end.
—Personal income (before taxes) reached an average rate of some
$2,500 per capita, by year-end.
—After-tax income of individuals exceeded $400 billion, for the
year.
—Corporate profits exceeded $50 billion before taxes and $25
billion after taxes, for the year.
—Residential construction passed $25 billion, for the year.
—Civilian employment exceeded 70 million, during the year.
Extent of the Advance
These striking statistics tell us where we are. But they do not tell us
how far and how fast we have come.
In the nearly three years of unbroken expansion since early 1961:
—GNP is up 16 percent, measured in constant dollars.
—Industrial production is up 23 percent.
—Civilian nonfarm jobs are up 2^4 million.
—Personal income is up $70 billion, or 17 percent.
—Corporate profits before taxes are up $17 billion, or 44 percent.
—Net income per farm for 1963 is up almost $375, or 12 percent.
—Total after-tax income of the American people is up $56 billion,
or 16 percent.
—Real disposable income per family is up more than $600, or 8
percent.
Comparative Gains
It is fair to ask how the 1961-63 expansion in output and incomes
compares with earlier upswings in the American economy. Here is the
answer:
1. The $100 billion rise in output in 2^4 years knows no parallel
in our peacetime economic annals.
2. The advance of $51 billion in labor income is also unparalleled.
Average real income of nonfarm workers has risen by $345 a year,
a gain not exceeded in any previous comparable period.




3. The rise in corporate profits from a rate of $ 3 8 / 2 billion in
early 1961 to roughly $55 billion at the end of 1963 is notable
for three reasons:
a. The 14-percent annual rate of advance is high by previous
standards.
b. The rise is not only large, but prolonged—at this stage
in past expansions, profits had already declined from their
peaks.
c. The rise has occurred even as the liberalized depreciation
guidelines of 1962 were transferring $2}4 billion of business receipts out of taxable profits into nontaxable depreciation.
Most heartening to me is that these gains to American labor and
American business were not at the expense of
—the American consumer—whose income is no longer being eroded
by inflation, as prices have held steadier in the United States than
in any other major industrial country;
—the competitive position of U.S. exports—which has benefitted
from several years of stable domestic wholesale prices, our best
record since the war and better than that of any other major
industrial country.
Contributions of Business, Labor, and Government
An expansion as long, strong, and free of excesses as the one we are
now experiencing does not "just happen."
—Business has generally held prices in check, kept inventories on
an even keel, and avoided excesses in capital financing.
—Labor has been constructive in its collective bargaining and in
its contributions to rising productivity. Average wage rate increases over the period 1961-63 have been the most modest since
World War II, thereby helping to stabilize unit labor costs and improve our ability to compete with Europe and Japan.
—Government has steadily pursued fiscal and monetary policies
designed to promote recovery, accelerate expansion, and encourage business and consumer confidence:
in 1961, when the Administration's quick anti-recession program got recovery off to a flying start;
in 1962, when, in sharp contrast to 1960 and 1957, rising
Federal purchases, new tax incentives to investment, and
continued credit ease lent a steadying hand to an economy
whose advance was faltering;
in 1963, when prospects of a timely tax cut buoyed a reassured
and resurgent economy.




Federal Purchases and Tax Cuts
Rising Federal purchases have played an important role in sustaining
the 1961-63 expansion. They accounted directly for 11 percent of the
growth in GNP, quite apart from their substantial indirect effects in increasing business and consumer outlays.
Our fiscal program for 1964-65 will shift emphasis sharply from
expanding Federal expenditure to boosting private consumer demand
and business investment.
The $11 billion tax cut will challenge American businessmen, investors, and consumers to put their enlarged incomes to work in the
private economy to expand output, investment, and jobs.
I am confident that our private decision makers will rise to this
challenge.
I am confident of their growing agreement
—that "new records" in output and employment are not enough;
—that four million unemployed and 13 percent idle factory capacity
are intolerable;
—that the acid test of economic policy is whether we can make
full use of our growing labor force and our rising productivity—
our full potential.
THE JOB AHEAD OF U S

We have not yet met this test. New high ground is not the summit.
That still lies ahead.
Our 1961-63 advance—though impressive, sustained, and noninflationary—has not gone far enough and fast enough
—to create the jobs needed by our unemployed,
—to get our factories humming to desired capacity,
—to lift our GNP to its reasonable potential,
—to restore the growth rate of our productive potential to the
pace we took for granted in the early postwar period,
—to raise the incomes of farm families to a level more comparable
to those of nonfarm families,
—to expand investment and profits to levels that will hold more
of our capital funds at home and thereby shrink our external
payments deficit.
The size of the job that lies ahead of us is measured by—
1. Unemployment—5*4 percent of our labor force is still idle, even
after a year-to-year advance of $30 billion in our GNP. Taking
into account the added workers who seek employment as jobs
become more plentiful, we would need at least two million more
jobs today just to get rid of stubborn excess unemployment.




2. Productivity advance—we need about two million new jobs each
year to offset the labor-saving effects of rising output per worker.
3. Labor force growth—more than a million added jobseekers enter
the labor market each year—indeed we will soon need 75 million
jobs.
4. Unused capacity—operating rates in manufacturing still average
only 87 percent of capacity, against the 92-percent rate preferred
by business managers.
5. Wasting potential—men, machines, and materials that lie idle
today could readily add about $30 billion more to our $600
billion GNP.
6. The balance-of-payments deficit—although sharply reduced by
the determined steps announced in July, the deficit is still with us.
And gold outflows—though only half as large in 1963 as in 1962,
and less than half as large in the three years 1961-63 as in 195860—have not been eliminated.
EARLY TAX REDUCTION

If we are to master these problems, we must above all enact the
tax bill (H.R. 8363)
—not in one or two or three months, but now;
—not in diluted, but in strengthened form, with an immediate
drop from an 18-percent to a 14-percent withholding rate.
Far too long, our economy has labored under the handicap of Federal
income tax rates born of war and inflation:
—Those rates were designed to curb demand in an economy
bursting at the seams.
—But now, when demand and incentives are not strong enough
to make full use of our manpower and machines, the tax brake
is set far too tight.
—We need to release that brake quickly to put billions of dollars
of new consuming and investing funds into the hands of the
private economy.
Greatest Fiscal Stimulus
Speedy passage of the tax cut, at the 14-percent withholding rate
—will cut individual income tax collections by $8.8 billion in 1964,
over $2 billion of which will come from lowering the withholding
rate to 14 percent instead of 15 percent;
—will cut corporate tax liabilities by $11/2 billion in 1964;
—will provide a net fiscal stimulus, taking both expenditures and
tax cut into account, that will be three times as great in 1964 as
in any of the years 1961, 1962, and 1963;




—will, in fact, provide a greater net stimulus to the economy in
1964—to jobs, production, income, and profits—than in any
other peacetime year in history.
The economics of efficiency is in no way inconsistent with the economics
of expansion. By combining efficiency with expansion, frugality with
compassion:
—we shall hold the fiscal 1965 budget below the fiscal 1964
budget, and cut the deficit in half;
—we shall get a dollar's value for a dollar spent, while not fearing
to spend a dollar when and where the Nation will reap a full
dollar or more in benefit;
—we shall strengthen our programs to meet pressing human needs;
fully satisfy our defense requirements; and respond to the demands of economic progress;
—and we shall, at the same time, provide an unparalleled fiscal
stimulus to the economy.
Sustained Expansion
The tax cut will give a sustained lift, year-in and year-out, to the
American economy.
When fully effective in 1965, it will send well over $11 billion annually
coursing through the arteries of the private economy.
The resulting stream of purchases by willing consumers and of investment by responsive businessmen will, at full strength, expand the
tax cut's initial impact several-fold.
The Nation will then, year-after-year, reap this benefit in the form of
—$35 to $45 billion more GNP,
—$25 to $30 billion more consumption,
—$5 to $7 billion more profits,
than we would attain without the tax cut.
These gains, growing steadily, will at long last lead to a balanced
budget in a balanced economy at full potential.
Safeguard Against Recession
For the near term, the tax cut will give us the vital fiscal safeguard
we need against recession. It will convert what is already a long and
strong advance into the longest and strongest expansion in our peacetime history:
—By April, it will have outdistanced all but the long and incomplete
climb out of the Great Depression from 1933 to 1937.
—By mid-1965, it will have outlasted even that expansion.
I do not say that we can, at one stroke, wipe out recession or legislate
the business cycle out of existence. But vigilant, bold, and flexible




policy can prevent some recessions and nip others in the bud. And we
have a great stake in doing so.
The American economy suffered two recessions in quick succession in
1957-58 and 1960-61. If a recession of the same average force were
to hit us in 1964 or 1965, it would cost us
—a loss of $25 billion or more of output;
—a rise of two million in unemployment;
—a drop of nearly 12 percent in industrial production;
—a sag of more than $5 billion in after-tax profits.
Clearly, by enabling us to avoid a recession, the tax cut will pay us a
handsome quick bonus quite apart from its basic long-run benefits.
THE 1964

ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

We enter 1964 with optimism
—riding the strong mount of an expansion that has already crossed
the $600 billion mark, and
—responding to the expected spur of a quickly enacted $11 billion
tax cut.
With the tax cut, promptly enacted, our gross national product for
1964 should rise from $585 billion for 1963 to a projected $623 billion
(understood as the midpoint of a $10 billion range). But, without the
tax cut, our sights would have to be set $10 to $15 billion lower—and
dashed expectations could turn expansion into recession.
With the tax cut, the state of business confidence is strong: business
forecasters today foresee a 5- to 6-percent, or even greater, rise in GNP
from 1963 to 1964. In contrast, a year ago they foresaw only a 3- to 4percent rise. Today's business optimism is one of our strongest economic assets in 1964.
With the tax cut, unemployment will decline significantly in 1964.
With the tax cut, profits will continue to rise, avoiding the decline
that usually sets in after the first year or two of a business expansion.
With the tax cut, our balance of payments will benefit from basic
improvements
—in our ability to compete in world markets as costs are cut directly through lower taxes and indirectly through modernization;
—and in our ability to retain and attract capital as returns on
domestic investment rise with higher volume and lower unit costs.
With the tax cut, consumer spending—fueled by the extra $8.8 billion of take-home pay—will propel the economy forward in 1964.
With the tax cut, business fixed investment should rise more in 1964
than in 1963, and housing and automobile demand should remain
strong.




With the tax cut, in short, 1964 will be a year of strong, sustained
economic advance.
But all this will not come about automatically. It requires, and I
confidently expect:
—that the Congress will act swiftly;
—that taxpayers will respond by putting the released funds to work
in the private economy;
—that business will resist the temptation to exploit stronger markets
by unneeded price boosts;
—that labor will resist the temptation to exploit stronger job opportunities by excessive wage demands;
—that Government will follow a balanced policy to maintain a
favorable monetary climate, while meeting the requirements of
our balance-of-payments situation;
—that both public and private action will be taken as needed to
overcome those pockets of excessive unemployment that remain
even in the face of the job-creating stimulus of the tax cut.
PRICE-WAGE POLICY IN

1964

Prospects are favorable for continuing in 1964 our good record of
price stability and stable unit labor costs:
First, the price and wage record from which we start is excellent:
a. The wholesale price index is still below the level of 3 years ago.
b. The consumer price index has risen only 1.2 percent a year,
mostly in services.
c. Average wage increases have stayed generally within the
bounds of productivity increases.
Second, because of wage moderation and rising productivity,
labor costs per unit of output have held steady, while volume has
risen.
Third, the tax cut will further reduce costs, increase take-home
pay, and keep sales and profits rising.
Fourth, with ample supplies of labor and industrial capacity, the
force of expanding demand touched off by the tax cut can express
itself in more output, income, jobs, and profits rather than
inflationary price or wage increases.
Nevertheless, a series of specific price increases in recent months—
especially in manufactured goods—gives me some cause for concern.
I do not anticipate a renewal of the price-wage spiral—a spiral that
would weaken our expansion and worsen our balance-of-payments
position.




10

I count on the sense of responsibility of the Nation's industrialists
and labor leaders
—to extend the excellent price and cost records of recent years
—to maintain price and wage policies that accord with the noninflationary guideposts that I have asked the Council of Economic Advisers to reaffirm in its attached Report.
In the face of a 44 percent increase in corporate profits in less than
three years and the prospect of further increases to come with the tax cut,
I see no warrant for inflationary price rises.
On the heels of solid increases in real wages, plus therisein take-home
pay under the tax cut, I see no warrant for inflationary wage increases.
Accordingly:
—I shall keep a close watch on price and wage developments, with
the aid of an early warning system which is being set up in the
appropriate agencies.
—I shall not hestitate to draw public attention to major actions
by either business or labor that flout the public interest in noninflationary price and wage standards.
—And I shall translate into action the view
a. that antitrust policy must remain keenly alert to illegal
price-fixing and other practices that impair competition;
b. that we must resist new steps to legalize price-fixing where
competition should prevail.
OTHER POLICIES FOR

1964

Monetary "Policy and Balance-of-Payments Measures

A strong upswing in the economy after the tax cut need not bring
tight money or high interest rates, especially when
—our balance of payments is improving so sharply in response to
measures begun in 1961 and reinforced last July;
—the budget for fiscal year 1965 will cut the Federal deficit in half
and ease pressures on interest rates from Treasury borrowing.
It would be self-defeating to cancel the stimulus of tax reduction by
tightening money. Monetary and debt policy should be directed toward
maintaining interest rates and credit conditions that encourage private
investment.
But monetary policy must remainflexible,so that:
—It can quickly shift to the defense if, unexpectedly, inflation
threatens or the balance of payments worsens.
—When monetary measures are not needed as defensive shock
troops, they can reinforce fiscal policy in promoting domestic
expansion.

715-113 O-64-2



II

Our balance of payments will continue to benefit from the special
program launched last July. This requires
—early enactment of the interest equalization tax, designed to raise
the costs of foreign borrowing in our capital market without forcing up domestic interest rates,
—further economies in dollar outflows from Government programs, without compromising our efforts to maintain the strength
of the free world,
—continued price stability and export promotion to maintain or improve the competitive position of our exports.
Trade Expansion and Development Assistance
1. The Kennedy Round. The United States' 30-year campaign to
reduce barriers to world trade—and the intensified pursuit of that goal
signalled by the passage of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962—will
reach a climax in 1964.
U.S. industry and agriculture are in excellent condition to seize the
new opportunities offered by trade liberalization and to weather the adjustments that may be required.
Our goal is a more prosperous America in a more prosperous world.
2. The developing countries. Reduced trade barriers will expand
exports and help an increasing number of developing countries to become self-supporting.
But for most poorer countries full self-support is still some distance off.
We must help them find a path to development through freedom—and
freedom through development.
Our development assistance effort must and will be more sharply
focused and rigorously administered. We shall encourage others to
share more of its burden and seek a larger role for private investment.
But a strong development assistance program continues to be vital to
our pursuit of peace and stability in the free world.
Agriculture
The contribution to our Nation's economic growth made by rising
agricultural productivity is too often overlooked.
We need only look at the restraints placed on national growth in
Soviet Bloc countries to understand what a failure in the growth of
agricultural productivity can mean to a nation and its people.
Looking forward in 1964, we face a number of challenges in
agriculture:
—While net income per farm his grown 12 percent in 1961-63,
chronic problems of overproduction remain.
—We need improved commodity legislation this year for many
of our major commodities.




12

—The highly successful Food For Peace program requires new
legislative authority this year.
—We must also provide the research and development support
necessary to the continued strength, adaptability and growth of
American agriculture.
Labor and Manpower Policies
No matter how mechanized it becomes, our economy is still an
organization of people—working with tools. In 1964 we must redouble
our efforts to meet these problems of our working people:
1. Automation. Technological change is a prime mover of our economic growth—but it can lead to painful job displacement.
—A special high-level commission should be established to determine how we can best gain the benefits of automation while
minimizing its human costs.
—As a starting point, I commend to it the analysis of this problem
which the Council of Economic Advisers has made in Chapter
3 of its accompanying report.
2. More efficient labor markets.
—Displaced workers must be retrained and helped by improved
Federal-State placement and counseling services to find their
way back to fully productive lives.
—And we must strengthen our education and training facilities at
every level to give our youth the background and skills demanded by our rapidly developing economy. The Youth Employment Act remains high on our agenda.
3. Unemployment insurance. The burden of displacement on the
individual must be eased by extending the coverage and increasing the
benefits of our unemployment insurance programs.
4. The Fair Labor Standards Act. Coverage should be extended to
over 2^2 million workers who lack overtime coverage or are not protected
at all—among them, 650,000 hotel, motel, restaurant, laundry, drycleaning, and farm-processing workers.
5. Working hours. We should and will solve our present unemployment problem by expanding demand, not by forcing the standard work
week down to 35 hours. This would only redistribute work, not expand it.
At the same time, the regular use of heavy overtime may be unreasonably curtailing job opportunities in some industries.
Accordingly I shall ask for legislation authorizing higher overtime
penalty rates on an industry-by-industry basis where tripartite industry
committees determine that such rates could create more jobs without
unduly raising costs.




Transportation and Technology
Our expanding economy and growing population place ever-rising
demands on the Nation's transportation system. It is particularly urgent
that the Congress now enact legislation before it
—to assist our cities in modernizing their mass transportation
facilities;
—to revise and strengthen our national transportation policy and
place more reliance on the creative force of competition.
The Federal Government provides major support for the research
and development which underlie our striking technological advances.
In the past much of our research and development has been connected
with national defense. Now, as military outlays level off, we face
—a challenge to apply the Nation's growing scientific and engineering resources to new socially profitable uses;
—an opportunity to accelerate the technological progress of our
civilian industries.
The Federal Government should join with private business and our
universities in speeding the development and spread of new technology.
I have directed the Department of Commerce to explore new ways to
accomplish this.
Housing and Community
"Development
Americans generally are better housed than the citizens of any other
nation. Much of this could not have been accomplished without
the encouragement and help Government has given to our private financial institutions.
Authorizations expire this year for several of our major programs.
They need to be renewed and extended
—to renew the decaying areas of our cities, while minimizing the
burden of dislocation on families and small businesses;
—to allow cities to acquire land for open-space urban use and to
facilitate better urban planning;
—to strengthen our program of low-rent public housing;
—to provide for construction of more specialized housing for the
elderly.
THE WAR ON POVERTY

In the State of the Union Message, I announced that this Administration was declaring unconditional war on poverty in America. I shall
present the details of the attack, including legislative proposals, in a
later special message to the Congress.
Americans today enjoy the highest standard of living in the history
of mankind. But for nearly a fifth of our fellow citizens, this is a
hollow achievement. They often live without hope, below minimum
standards of decency.




The per capita money income of these 35 million men, women, and
children was only $590 in 1962—against $1,900 per capita for the
Nation as a whole.
We cannot and need not wait for the gradual growth of the economy
to lift this forgotten fifth of our Nation above the poverty line.
We know what must be done, and this Nation of abundance can
surely afford to do it.
The Role of Prosperity and Faster Growth
Today, as in the past, higher employment and speedier economic
growth are the cornerstones of a concerted attack on poverty:
—In the Great Depression mass unemployment made poverty all
too common an experience.
—Since 1947, prosperity and progress have reduced the incidence of
substandard incomes from one-third to one-fifth of the Nation.
—But the erosion of poverty slowed measurably after 1957.
—The tax cut will once again generate jobs and income at a pace
that will provide an escape from poverty for many of our least
fortunate families.
But general prosperity and growth leave untouched many of the
roots of human poverty. In the decade ahead, the forgotten fifth must
be given new opportunities for a better life.
There are two major prongs to our specific attack on poverty in
America:
First, to enable every individual to build his earning power to full
capacity
Second, to assure all citizens of decent living standards regardless
of economic reverses or the vicissitudes of human life and
health.
Building Individual Earning Power
The first approach is the more fundamental.
Let us deny no one the chance to develop and use his native talents to
the full.
Let us, above all, open wide the exits from poverty to the children of
the poor.
These are the keys to earning power:
1. Education. Poverty and ignorance go hand in hand:
—Of families headed by a person with only a grade school education, 37 percent are poor. Of those headed by high school
graduates, only 8 percent are poor.
—We must upgrade the education of all our youth, both to advance human well-being and to speed the Nation's economic
growth.




—But, most vitally, and with Federal support, we must upgrade
the education of the children of the poor, so that they need not
follow their parents in poverty.
2. Health. The poor, and the children of the poor, are handicapped
by illness and disability that could be avoided:
—Largely as a result of the ill health that grows out of poverty,
we rank below many other countries in the conquest of infant
and maternal mortality, in average life expectancy and nutrition.
—We must speed and intensify our efforts to make good health
more accessible to the poor.
3. Skills and jobs. We need to help both young adults and older
workers acquire marketable skills by the programs already indicated.
4. Community and area rehabilitation. Concerted community
action, with new Federal assistance, can break the dismal and vicious
cycle found in too many of our rural and urban areas:
—The cycle of poverty: inadequate schools, drop-outs, poor
health, unemployment—creating delinquency, slums, crime,
disease, and broken families—thereby breeding more poverty.
—The cycle of chronic depression: regions needing new economic
uses for their idle or underutilized human and physical resources,
but too poor to provide them alone—and therefore unable to
break out of their depression.
The Area Redevelopment Act must be renewed and improved, and
rural communities must be helped to find new economic strength.
Furthermore, in a forthcoming special message, I shall propose a new
program to deal with our Nation's most distressed major region,
Appalachia.
5. Equal opportunity. Forty-four percent of nonwhite families are
poor. Deficiencies of education and health and continuing job discrimination depress the earnings of Negroes, and other nonwhites,
throughout their lives.
—Only 40 percent of nonwhites—compared to 70 percent of
whites—complete high school.
—Infant mortality is nearly twice as high, maternal mortality four
times as high, for nonwhites.
—The life expectancy of a nonwhite man at age 20 is nearly 5 years
shorter than for his white contemporary, and shorter than the
average life expectancy reported in some 40 foreign countries.
—Unemployment rates for nonwhites are generally double those
of whites.
Even beyond civil rights legislation, the fight to end discrimination
requires constructive action by all governments and citizens to make
sure—in practice as well as in principle—that all Americans have equal
opportunities for education, for good health, for jobs, and for decent
housing.
16



Providing a Decent Living
The second prong of the attack on poverty is to protect individuals
and their families from poverty when their own earnings are insufficient
because of age, disability, unemployment, or other family circumstances.
1. Too many of the poor and disabled today fail to receive aid
under the eligibility requirements of our Federal, State, and
local network of programs of insurance and assistance.
2. For the aged, enactment of the proposed program for hospital
insurance under social security is the first order of business.
3. For the unemployed, permanent legislation to strengthen unemployment insurance is urgently needed, as indicated above.
A Versatile Attack
The tactics of our attack on this ancient enemy must be versatile and
adaptable. For the sources of poverty vary from family to family, city
to city, region to region:
—A solution will not be found in any single new progam, directed
from Washington and applied indiscriminately everywhere.
—Instead, we urgently need to bring together the many existing
programs—Federal, State, local, and private—and focus them
more effectively in a frontal assault on the sources of poverty.
—Most important, we shall encourage and assist communities and
regions to develop their own plans of action; to mobilize their
own resources sis well as those available under Federal programs.
Only in this way can we assure that the Federal funds devoted to the
war on poverty—over $1 billion of new funds in the first year—will be
invested wisely and well.
AMERICA'S ECONOMIC CHALLENGE

In 1964 and beyond we seek a free and growing economy which
—offers productive employment to all who are willing and able to
work;
—operates at the full potential of our human and material
resources;
—encourages free enterprise, innovation, and competition by
citizens in all walks of life;
—avoids setbacks from recession or inflation;
—generates steady and rapid growth in productivity—the ultimate
source of higher living standards—while providing the new skills
and jobs needed for displaced workers;
—meets ever more fully the needs and preferences of our citizens,




as freely expressed in the market place and in the halls of
governments;
—provides increasing leisure, and satisfying ways to use the time,
to those who wish it;
—safeguards the security of the Nation and the free world by assisting efficiently the economic development and political independence of the less developed countries;
—promotes mutually advantageous trade with other countries, and
progressively reduces barriers to international competition;
—earns enough in free international transactions to balance our
external payments and yet meet our world responsibilities;
—distributes fairly the fruits of economic growth among consumers
and producers, workers and employers;
—moves steadily toward the American dream of equality of opportunity for all citizens—regardless of race, religion, sex, or residence, regardless of social and economic status at birth;
—permits every American to produce and to earn to the full measure of his basic capacities;

—eliminates, with the compassion and foresight of which a free and
abundant economy is capable, avoidable suffering and insecurity
from the lives of our citizens.
These aspirations are not easy to fulfill—but neither are they beyond
our powers.
The policies—public and private—we must pursue are not waiting
to be discovered. They are at hand and we must use them.
Our main reliance is on private ingenuity, initiative, and industry.
But it is the obligation of government
—to support the vibrant, steady growth of the economy;
—to expand the opportunities of free enterprise;
—to guard against its excesses;
—and to serve the economic interests of all the people.
The Federal Government,
—working closely with labor, business, and agriculture, yet respecting the economic and political freedoms of individuals;
—working closely with State and local governments, yet careful
not to trespass on their domain
faces the economic challenges of 1964 with confidence.
Strengthened by the programs I have outlined in this Report, the
Nation will move steadily toward the realization of its full potential.




18

THE ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS







LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,

Washington, D.C., January 13, 1964.
THE

PRESIDENT:

SIR: The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual
Report, January 1964, in accordance with Section 4(c) (2) of the Employment Act of 1946.
Respectfully,




WALTER W. HELLER.,

Chairman.

GARDNER ACKLEY

JOHN P. LEWIS

21




CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 1. ECONOMIC EXPANSION AND FEDERAL POLICY

Page
29
32

Review of the Expansion
Expansion of Demand
Moderation in Price Increases
Expansion in Incomes
Unemployment and Unused Potential Output
Maintenance of the Expansion
Federal Policy and Full Employment
The Full-Employment Budget
Fiscal Policy in a Growing Economy
The Role of Monetary Policy
Federal Policy in the Expansions of 1954-57 and 1958-60—
Fiscal Policy in the Present Expansion
Monetary Policy in the Present Expansion
The Current Situation and Outlook
The Economy in 1963
Residential Construction
Automobiles
The Outlook for GNP in 1964

32
32
35
35
36
37
39
41
42
42
44
46
47
48
48
48
49
51

Beyond 1964

53

CHAPTER 2. T H E PROBLEM OF POVERTY IN AMERICA

Eliminating Poverty—A National Goal
The Nature and Extent of Poverty
Needs and Resources
The Changing Extent of Poverty
The Composition of Today's Poor
The Roots of Poverty
Earned Income
Property Income and Use of Savings
Transfer Payments and Private Pensions
The Vicious Circle
Recent Changes in the Pattern of Poverty
Strategy Against Poverty
.
Maintaining High Employment
Organizing the Attack on Poverty -.




55

55
57
57
59
61
62
62
67
68
69
72
73
73
77

CHAPTER

3. T H E

PROMISE AND PROBLEMS OF TECHNOLOGICAL

CHANGE

The Fruits of Advancing Technology
The Nature of Technological Change
The Growth of Output and Incomes
Effects on Labor Income
The Opportunity for Leisure
Some Nonmeasurable Gains
America's Role in the World
Sources of Technological Progress
Invention and Innovation
Investment and Technological Change
Technological Change and Aggregate Demand
The Expansion of Demand
The Trend of Labor Productivity
Adjustment to Technological Change
The Changing Distribution of Job Requirements
The Adjustment Process
Defects of the Adjustment Process
Private Policies Facilitating Adjustment
Public Policy and Technological Change
Tax Stimulus for Investment
Government Support of Technological Advance
Reasons for Underinvestment in Research and Innovation
The Extent and Distribution of R&D
A Federal Civilian Technology Program
Federal Support for Basic Research
Government's Role in Aiding Adjustment
Conclusion
.

Page
85

86
86
88
89
90
90
91
92
92
93
94
94
96
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
104
105
107
108
109
110
111

CHAPTER 4. PRICE AND WAGE POLICY FOR HIGH EMPLOYMENT

112

The Price-Wage Situation and the Prospects
Anti-Inflationary Policies for High Employment
The Need for Stability
Government Actions
Private Decisions and the Price-Wage Guideposts
Conclusion

112
116
116
117
118
120

CHAPTER 5. T H E BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY SYSTEM

The Balance of Payments: Developments, Policies, and
Outlook
The Nature of the Balance-of-Payments Problem
Recent Developments in the Balance of Payments
Policies to Improve the Balance of Payments
The Outlook for the Balance of Payments




121

122
122
123
127
130

5—Continued
The Future of the International Monetary System
Objectives To Be Served
The Present System
Actual or Potential Shortcomings of the System
Proposals for Strengthening or Changing Existing Arrangements
Concluding Comments
.„

CHAPTER

p age
133
134
135
138
142
148

CHAPTER 6. U.S. ASSISTANCE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OVERSEAS

Evolution and Rationale
Shifting Policy Goals
The Case for Development Assistance
Role of Development Assistance
Strategies for Achieving Self-Support
Implementing Self-Support
The United States and Other Donors
Accomplishments and Needs
The Incomplete Record
Why Are We "Suddenly So Fatigued"?

149

,_

149
150
151
152
154
155
157
160
160
163

APPENDIXES

A. Testimony of the Council of Economic Advisers Before the
Subcommittee on Employment and Manpower of the
Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, October
28, 1963
B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of
Economic Advisers During 1963
C. Statistical Tables Relating to Income, Employment, and
Production
List of Tables and Charts
Tables
1. Changes in Real Gross National Product in Three Postwar Expansions
2. Share of Disposable Personal Income Used for Consumer Durable Expenditures, 1954-63
3. Money Income of Families, 1947 and 1950-62
4. Selected Characteristics of All Families and of Poor Families,
1962
5. Incidence of Poverty, by Characteristics Relating to Labor Force
Participation, 1962
6. Incidence of Poverty by Education, Color, and Residence, 1962—
7. Number of Families and Incidence of Poverty, by Selected
Family Characteristics, 1947 and 1962
8. Selected Characteristics of Poor Families, 1947 and 1962




165
191
201

34
50
59
61
64
66
71
72

List of Tables and Charts—Continued
Tables
x
9. Number and Money Income of Unrelated Individuals, by Selected Characteristics, 1962
- —
10. Number and Distribution of Poor Families, by Education and
Other Selected Characteristics, 1959
11. Number of Families and Distribution of Poor Families, by Residence and Other Selected Characteristics, 1959—
12. Incidence of Poverty, by Occupation of Family Head, 1962
13. Number of Families and Incidence of Poverty, by Residence
and Other Selected Characteristics, 1959
14. Number of Families and Incidence of Poverty, by Education and
Other Selected Characteristics, 1959^_
—
15. Earnings of Elementary School Graduates, By Color and Occupation, 1959—
— .
16. Distribution of Spending Units With Income Under $3,000, by
Age of Head and Amount of Liquid Assets, 1962-.
17. Changes in Output per Man-Hour in the Private Economy,
1919-63—™
:
— —
18. Research and Development Performed by Industry, 1961,19. Research and Development Expenditures, 1953-54 to 1962-6320. Prices, Wages, Profits, and Productivity in the Private Economy,
1948-63—
•21. Productivity in the Private Economy and Prices, Wages, and
Profits in Manufacturing, 1948-63—
—22. Changes in Wholesale Prices in Selected Industrialized Countries, 1953 to 5 8 . — - —
—
23. United States Balance of Payments, 1958-63
.24. United States Private Portfolio Investment Abroad, 1960-63—.
25. World Exports: Current Value by Regions, 1953-6226. World Trade: Volume and Unit Value Indexes of Exports by
Regions, 1953-63
„
—
27. Bilateral Economic Aid Commitments and Various Measures of
Donor Capacity and Interest, 1962
—
—28. Terms of Official Bilateral Economic Aid Commitments of Development Assistance Committee, 1962
.
29. Selected Characteristics of Less Developed Countries Receiving
Since 1946 U.S. Economic Assistance of More Than $300 Million or More than $30 Per Capita——
— — —
Charts
1. Indicators of Production and Income
;
-—
2. Real Gross National Product in Three Postwar Expansions
3. Corporate Profits After Taxes and Capital Consumption
Allowances
—
.
— —




p age
79
80
81
81
82
83
84
84
97
107
108
114
115
H
6
124
125
153
154
158
159

160
30
33
36

List of Tables and Charts—Continued
ChdTtS

Page

4. Gross National Product, Actual and Potential, and Unemployment Rate——
.-—
5. Federal Budget (National Income Accounts Basis) — —
6. Federal Surplus or Deficit: Actual and Full-Employment Estimates (National Income Accounts Basis)
._—
—
7. Number of Families by Family Income—.-.-.
——
. .—
8. Characteristics of Poor Families (Compared With All
Families) — .
—
-———————9. Incidence of Poverty——
-—•*-———
——.—
10. Real Hourly Compensation and Productivity in Manufacturing—
11. Prices in Three Postwar Expansions——
—.
12. Comparative Prices and Unit Labor Costs (Seven Industrial
— — — — — ^
——
—

27
715-113 O-64-3



38
40
43
60
63
65
89
113
132




INTRODUCTION
The Nation's economic gains in 3 years of expansion reached the $100
billion mark in the last quarter of 1963. In early 1961 the country was in
its third recession since the end of the Korean conflict. Gross national
product was barely at the $500 billion rate of a year earlier, and many
feared that it would go lower. Yet less than 3 years later, sustained economic expansion had carried GNP to an annual rate of $600 billion for
the fourth quarter of 1963. This unprecedented gain in gross national
product was accompanied by a record of price stability unsurpassed in any
expansionary period since World War II.
As Chart 1 shows, the economy has made a strong and sustained advance
beyond the records of earlier years. The expansion has demonstrated the
vitality of the private economy in an environment of progressive Federal
policy. But the Nation's performance must be measured against its potential levels of output and employment, not simply against past records.
Compared with the past, there is much to be proud of. Compared with
the Nation's potential, there is much yet to do. This Report is in large
part addressed to the goals that lie ahead and to the policies needed for
advancing toward them.
By all odds, the country's number one economic problem is persistent unemployment. Indeed, this would stand near the top of any list of ills afflicting our society. The unemployment problem has many dimensions, and so
it must be attacked on many fronts. It is clear, however, that more rapid
growth in domestic and international markets for the Nation's output is the
central prerequisite for full employment. Tax reduction is urgently needed
as the prime mover toward this target. Programs of education and retraining, aid to depressed areas and disadvantaged groups, and measures to
improve labor mobility are also essential in this endeavor, but they can have
their full effects only if there is adequate over-all demand for the products
of labor. Chapter 1 of this Report appraises the gains of the past 3 years
and the prospects for 1964 and discusses the role of Federal fiscal and
monetary policy in generating enough demand to use the economy's full
potential.
Solution of the unemployment problem and its associated waste of potential output is essential to a successful attack on many of our social evils.
But we cannot expect a reduction in unemployment alone to eliminate the
poverty that afflicts 20 percent of American families. This degrading and
self-perpetuating condition can be fully overcome only by programs that
attack directly the many sources of impoverishment in our society. Chapter




29

Chart 1

Indicators of Production and Income
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED!/

RATIO SCALE

RATIO SCALE

600F
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT 1 /
(Billions of Dollars, 1963 Prices)

500

400

2,600
PER CAPITA PERSONAL INCOME

U

(Dollars, 1963 Prices)

2,300

2,000

70
CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT
(Millions)

65

130
120

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
(Index, 1957-59-100)

110
100
90
80

110
MANUFACTURING WEEKLY EARNINGS
(Dollars, 1963 Prices)

100
90
80
70
1954

I
J
I
J
I
1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960

J
I
1961 1962 1963

I / A L L DATA SEASONALLY ADJUSTED. EXCEPT MANUFACTURING WEEKLY EARNINGS
1/ANNUAL RATE.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD,
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION. AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




2 of this Report contains an analysis of the roots of poverty in America and
the broad outlines of a program to attack it.
In the long run the growth of economic abundance in any society depends
heavily on improvements in its technology. The current stage of technological development promises a continued growth in productivity and a
reduction in toil. But technological progress always creates problems of
adjustment, and many fear that today's problems may be more severe than
those of earlier periods. Chapter 3 examines the process of innovation in
production, ways of speeding it up, and ways of easing the painful human
problems it creates.
The return to full employment will put to a test the ability of the American economy to make full use of its productive potential without a renewal
of the price-wage spiral. Chapter 4 evaluates the economy's capacities for
avoiding inflation in 1964 and beyond and emphasizes the need for responsible private price and wage making.
The importance of maintaining price stability is heightened by the need
to eliminate the deficit in the United States' balance of international payments, which remains a problem in spite of substantial inroads that have
been made in the past year. After reviewing recent developments in this
area, Chapter 5 turns to a question that will inevitably be raised by the
reduction in this country's payments deficits—namely, the effectiveness of
the free world's present international monetary system.
Since the end of World War II, the United States has become increasingly
aware that its own interests are closely interwoven with those of the developing nations. Chapter 6 re-examines this interplay of interests and explores its implications for American development assistance1 policies.
On October 28, 1963, the Council of Economic Advisers testified before
the Subcommittee on Employment and Manpower of the Senate Committee
on Labor and Public Welfare. The testimony dealt with the unemployment
problem, its relationship to changing production methods, and the role of
the pending tax legislation in attacking the problem. Because the testimony
relates to matters discussed in Chapters 1 and 3, it is reproduced in this
Report as Appendix A.




31

Chapter 1

Economic Expansion and Federal Policy
.HE AMERICAN ECONOMY has recorded nearly 3 years of solid
expansion since early 1961. But it urgently needs the tax cuts now pending
to complete the climb back toward full employment and full production
that began 3 years ago. After reviewing the impressive record of these years
and examining the role of Federal fiscal and monetary policy in achieving
this record, this chapter discusses the economic situation at the end of
1963; the prospects for 1964; and the broad outlines of policy that can complete the return to full employment.
REVIEW OF THE EXPANSION

By April of this year, the present expansion will have become the second
longest peacetime expansion of this century—exceeded only by the prolonged
climb out of the depths of the Great Depression. As Chart 2 shows, the
$100 billion expansion since early 1961 has eclipsed the brief 1958-60 expansion in both extent and duration, and has achieved in its first 11
quarters a greater increase in total real output—16 percent—than was
achieved in the 13 quarters of the 1954-57 expansion. With early enactment of the pending tax bill it has every prospect of continuing throughout
1964 at an accelerated pace.
EXPANSION OF DEMAND

While all major components of demand have contributed to the expansion of the past 3 years, much of the advance has come from rising
Federal, State, and local purchases of goods and services. Federal purchases
in constant dollars rose by 16 percent from the first quarter of 1961 to the
fourth quarter of 1963 and accounted for 11 percent of the total increase
in demand. As Table 1 indicates, this contrasts sharply with the two
previous expansions, when declining real Federal purchases detracted from
the increase in gross national product. State and local purchases rose by
13 percent in constant dollars over the recent period, accounting for 9
percent of the total demand increase.
A second major source of demand strength in the present expansion
has been private nonfarm residential construction. In contrast to the
experience of the two previous expansions, housing expenditure has risen
fairly steadily since the beginning of 1961. From the first quarter of that




32

Chart 2

Real Gross National Product
in Three Postwar Expansions
GNP TROUGH = 1 0 0 Jj

TOTAL GNP

115

110

1961-63

105

100

0

1

0 1

2

3

2

3

4

4

5

5

6

6

7

7

8

8

9

9

10

1
1

12 13

10

Tl

12

QUARTERS AFTER GNP TROUGH 1 /

JJ BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA, 1963 PRICES.
21 EMPLOYED PERSONS INCLUDE ARMED FORCES.
2l TROUGH QUARTERS FOR GNP WERE 1954 H, 19581 AND 19611
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




33

13

year to the fourth quarter of 1963, it rose 33 percent in constant dollars,
accounting for 8 percent of the total increase in GNP.
The unusually vigorous expansion in government expenditures and residential construction has been supplemented by a sustained increase of
business investment in producers' durable equipment and nonresidential
construction. Measured in constant dollars, it rose by 20 percent from the
first quarter of 1961 to the fourth quarter of 1963. Although this percentage rise is larger than that in total GNP, it is disappointing by past
standards. Business investment typically has risen faster than GNP in
expansions, just as it has fallen faster in recessions. During the 1947-57
period, the rate of business fixed investment consistently exceeded 10 percent of GNP in constant (1963) dollars; in the current expansion, the
ratio has remained close to its recession low of 9 percent.
The pace of inventory accumulation has been moderate by comparison
with some periods in the past and has been unusually steady since mid-1962.
After jumping from a $4.3 billion annual rate of liquidation at the recession trough to an $8.1 billion rate of accumulation in the first quarter of
1962, inventory investment has fluctuated moderately around an average
value of $4.4 billion for the last half of 1962 and the whole of 1963.
Despite the notable strength of the demand for automobiles (discussed
below), total personal consumption outlays have remained between 92 and
94 percent of after-tax personal income, as they have in every year since
1950. The rise in consumption outlays from the first quarter of 1961 to
the fourth quarter of 1963 amounted to 12 percent in constant dollars, and
accounted for about half the over-all increase in GNP.
TABLE 1.—Changes in real gross national product in three postwar expansions
Annual rate of change 1
(Percent)
Component

Total gross national product
Federal Government purchases
State and local government purchases.
Residential construction
Business fixed investment *
Business inventory cbangc_I
Personal consumption expenditures
Net exports

Distribution of total change1
(Percent)

1954II to 1958 I to 19611 to 1954II to 1958 I to 1961 I to
1960 II 1963 IV « 1957 III
1960 II 1963 IV »
1957 III
4.1

5.3

5.4

100.0

100.0

100.0

-3.3
4.9
.9
5.3
(«)
4.6
(»)

-.6
4.5
7.8
4.1

5.6
4.7
11.0
6.8
(4)
4.1
(»)

-10.9
10.6
.8
13.3
10.1
70.5
5.7

-1.2
8.4
6.0
7.4
17.2
60.5
1.9

11.4
8.8
8.2
11.1
12.0
48.9
-.5

(

\
(»)

9

» Based on data in 1963 prices.
»Preliminary estimates oy Council of Economic Advisers for latest quarter in current expansion.
»Includes producers' durable equipment and nonresidential construction.
4
Inapplicable because inventory changes were negative in the trough quarters.
• Not shown because of small numbers on which changes would be based.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




34

MODERATION IN PRICE INCREASES

This strong, sustained advance in real output in the past 3 years has been
accompanied by an unusual degree of price stability. As in nearly all
periods of expansion, there has been some upward drift in the prices of final
purchases. But the price rise of the past 3 years has been well below
that in other periods of comparable output gains. Of the 20 percent
increase in current-dollar GNP from the first quarter of 1961 to the fourth
quarter of 1963, 16 percent consisted of a rise in constant-dollar output,
and only 4 percent of a rise in prices. Only in the short expansion of
1958-60 was the price rise comparably small.
The average annual rate of increase in the consumer price index over
thefirst34 months of the current expansion amounted to a very moderate 1.2
percent. Considering the availability of new products and quality changes
not fully reflected in the index, there has been little, if any, real erosion of
the purchasing power of the consumer's dollar. The wholesale price index,
which is a better measure of the international competitiveness of American
products, has not risen since the recession trough in early 1961.
EXPANSION IN INCOMES

In this environment of sustained increases in output and comparative
price stability, gains in real income have been significant and widely diffused. The moderation of money wage increases has served the Nation's
balance of payments well without serving labor ill. Money wages have not
had to push ahead rapidly in order to keep pace with consumer prices.
Employee compensation per nonfarm worker, adjusted for the mild rise
in consumer prices, increased by 7 percent from the recession trough to
the last quarter of 1963.
The farming sector of the economy has also shared in the advance. Net
income per farm, adjusted for changes in prices paid by farmers for cost-ofliving items, rose by 9 percent from early 1961 to 1963.
The rise in disposable personal income adjusted for price increases—the
best measure of the after-tax economic gains of individuals—amounted to
13 percent from the recession trough to the fourth quarter of 1963. On a
per capita basis, the rise was 8 percent.
In previous business expansions corporate profits characteristically have
risen rapidly in the early quarters of recovery and then levelled off or declined because of a sharp diminution in the rate of gain in productivity. In
the current expansion, the rate of increase in GNP per worker has been better
maintained than in the past (Chart 2). As a consequence, profits after
taxes increased $10 billion, or 52 percent, from the recession trough to the
fourth quarter of 1963. Because of the advantageous shift of corporate
earnings from profits to depreciation allowances permitted by the 1962 liberalization of the Internal Revenue Service's depreciation guidelines, the
sum of corporate profits after taxes and capital consumption allowances




35

provides a more useful comparison over time for most companies. This
total rose $17 billion during the expansion, as Chart 3 indicates.
These continued gains in both labor and profit incomes could not have
been consistent with price stability without the excellent productivity record
during the past 3 years. A high rate of productivity increase is the surest
means of reconciling the aspirations of all for higher incomes with the
maintenance of a stable price level and improvement in the balance of
payments.
UNEMPLOYMENT AND UNUSED POTENTIAL OUTPUT

Although the expansion brought rising levels of economic welfare to most
Americans during the past 3 years, it was marred by continuing excessive
unemployment. The 16-percent increase in demand from the first quarter
of 1961 to the fourth quarter of 1963 brought about a 4-percent increase
Chart 3

Corporate Profits After Taxes and Capital
Consumption Allowances
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

II

60 PROFITS AFTER TAXES PLUS
CAPITAL CONSUMPTION ALLOWANCES

40

20

1954

1956

1958

1960

1962

1 / SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.
NOTE: BEGINNING 1962, DATA REFLECT NEW DEPRECIATION GUIDELINES AND INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




in civilian employment; but even so, in the last quarter of the year 5.6
percent of the civilian labor force was unemployed. Moreover, lack of job
opportunities kept many potential workers out of the labor force, while
others held jobs well below their capabilities.
In the first year of recovery substantial progress was made in cutting
unemployment. The over-all seasonally adjusted rate dropped from 6.7
percent in 1961 to 5.6 percent in 1962. Reductions were largest among
those workers most affected by the 1960-61 recession; the unemployment
rate fell 1.5 percentage points for nonwhites, 2.1 points for semiskilled and
unskilled workers, and 1.9 points for manufacturing workers. However,
during 1963, no further progress was made. The monthly unemployment
rate varied within narrow limits about an average of 5.7 percent.
Excessive unemployment is the most obvious symptom and one of the
worst consequences of a level of demand that falls short of the Nation's
potential output. During 1963 the Council of Economic Advisers carefully
re-examined its measure of potential GNP. This concept, fully discussed in
the Council's January 1962 Report, defines "potential" as the output that
would be produced if unemployment were at the interim-target level of 4
percent. For the period to date, the earlier conclusion still holds: the level
of constant-dollar GNP needed to maintain the unemployment rate at 4
percent has been growing at an average rate of about 3 / 2 percent a year
since mid-1955, when the unemployment rate was close to 4 percent.
As Chart 4 shows, the cumulative effect of actual output growth at a
rate less than 3y2 percent after mid-1955 had produced a gap of $50 billion
(1963 prices) between actual and potential output by the first quarter of
1961. The rapid recovery in the first year of expansion lowered this gap
to $30 billion by the first quarter of 1962, but since that time expansion in output has just about kept pace with the growth in potential. As a
consequence, unemployment has failed to decline to a tolerable level, and
a gap close to $30 billion between actual and potential output remained
in the fourth quarter of 1963.
Merely avoiding recession or even maintaining a rate of expansion comparable to that of the last 8 quarters will not close the gap or eliminate excessive unemployment. Only a significant acceleration of expansion can
enable the Nation to make full use of its growing labor force and productive
potential. The choice of appropriate fiscal and monetary policies to achieve
this goal is one of the problems challenging the Federal Government in
1964.
MAINTENANCE OF THE EXPANSION
Two years ago, many observers who noted that postwar expansions had
become successively shorter wondered if this trend would continue. Although that anxiety has long since been allayed, there is some fear now
that, simply because of its duration, the current expansion must be approaching its end. If this were true, we would face much higher un-




37

Chart 4

Gross National Product Actual and Potential,
and Unemployment Rate
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*(RATIO SCALE)

650
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT
IN 1963 PRICES

600

550

500

450

pxfj
400

\

1953 1954

1955 1956

1957 1958

1959 1960 1961

PERCENT

D

I

11

t

I

1962 1963
PERCENT

GNP GAP AS PERCENT OF POTENTIAL (Left scale)

• - • UNEMPLOYMENT RATE 1/ (Right scale)

-5

j

1953 1954
*

I

I

T955 1956

I

1957 1958 1959

1960

1961

1962 1963

SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.

±/2V2% TREND LINE THROUGH MIDDLE OF 1955.
I/UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE; SEASONALLY ADJUSTED.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




employment and greater wasted potential instead of a return to fuller use
of our available resources.
The fact is that over-all business fluctuations have no fixed rhythms, and
recessions are not in any scientific sense inevitable. There are, it is true, certain systematic features of the economic process leading to the onset of recession. During periods of prosperity, a larger part of the Nation's output is used to increase productive capacity through investment in plant,
equipment, and business inventories. If over-all demand rises rapidly
enough to justify the added capacity, incentives for further growth of capital are maintained, and the expansion of economic activity continues. But
when the growth of demand does not keep pace, business firms curtail
further additions to capacity by trimming their investment outlays. The
reduction in investment, in turn, reduces employment and income, thus converting the initial slowdown in the growth of demand into an actual decline
in general economic activity—a recession.
While individual recessions have their own features and their own proximate causes, reversals from expansion can typically be traced to a failure
of demand to keep pace with the expansion of capital facilities. There
have been many occasions in the past when timely Federal policy actions
could have maintained the balance between demand and capacity and
thereby changed our economic history. It is vital that such opportunities
be seized in the future.
FEDERAL POLICY AND FULL EMPLOYMENT

To comply with the mandate of the Employment Act of 1946 "to promote
maximum employment, production, and purchasing power," the Federal
Government must adjust its programs to complement private demand.
Given the magnitude of its expenditure commitments, its revenue collections, its public debt management obligations, and its money and credit
responsibilities, the Government inevitably exerts a powerful impact on
demand. It is, therefore, a first principle of responsible Federal economic
policy to try, insofar as possible, to adjust this impact in a way that promotes
expansion and price stability.
The instruments of fiscal policy—Federal taxes, transfer payments, subsidies, grants-in-aid, and purchases of goods and services—are the Government's most powerful tools for promoting expansion. Federal purchases of
goods and services are themselves a component of demand, and indirectly
they affect the other components. Through their impact on employment
and income, they influence the level of consumption. By increasing sales
and profits, they encourage investment expenditures. Similarly, taxes,
transfers, and subsidies affect consumption and investment through their
obvious effects on disposable incomes, after-tax profits, and incentives.
Federal grants-in-aid finance many State and local expenditure programs.
These fiscal policy tools, while powerful, can at present be used by the
Executive with only limited flexibility. Major expenditure programs must
be related to a variety of domestic and international objectives as well as to




39

Chart 5

Federal Budget
NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS BASIS
BILLIONS O F DOLLARS

120

100
EXPENDITURES

80
RECEIPTS

1
1954

1955

1
1956

1
1957

1

I

1958

1959

1960

1961

1
1962

1963

20
SURPLUS

lull

!•••••••••

DEFICIT

J

-20

1954

I
1955

J
1956

1957

1958

I
1959

J
1960

1961

I
1962

1963

CALENDAR YEARS

* SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, BUREAU OF THE BUDGET, AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




40

the requirements of economic efficiency. They are therefore sometimes
difficult to reconcile with income and employment goals in the annual
budgetary process. Moreover, under our constitutional system, legislation
needed to implement fiscal policies is the prerogative of the Congress. The
Congress has demonstrated its ability to enact tax and expenditure legislation quickly in time of emergency, and the Executive Branch does have
some flexibility in the timing of expenditures. This limited flexibility was
used to good advantage in 1961. But without legislation to establish in
advance specific rules designed to facilitate flexible fiscal policy—such as
those requested by President Kennedy in 1962—tax and expenditure policies
cannot be adjusted with sufficient speed to cope with the swift changes
in private demand that bring recession or inflation. Greater flexibility
would be desirable. However, the main function of fiscal policy must
continue to be the provision of a good supporting framework for expansion.
THE FULL-EMPLOYMENT BUDGET

The Federal budget on a national income and product accounts basis
gives the most comprehensive picture available of the revenue and expenditure activities of the Government as these affect private demands and the
level of economic activity. This budget includes the receipts and expenditures of the Federal trust fund accounts, as well as those in the administrative
budget, but excludes credit transactions. Unlike the administrative budget,
it records corporate tax liabilities at the time they accrue rather than when
collections are made. These and other differences between the administrative budget and the national income and product accounts budget are outlined in the January 1962 Report of the Council of Economic Advisers.
Federal policy decisions determine budgeted expenditures and a set of
laws governing tax rates and transfer payments. The actual surplus or
deficit position of the budget depends partly on the planned levels of expenditure and the rates incorporated in the tax structure, and partly on the
general strength of private income and demand. Since both receipts and
expenditures are affected by the level of private demand, the budget serves
as an automatic stabilizer, moving into deficit in a recession and toward a
surplus in recovery. This pattern is evident in Chart 5.
The economic impact of a given budget program is best measured by
its surplus or deficit at full-employment income levels. The surplus in the
full-employment budget is too large when the Government demand contained in the budget, and private investment and consumption demands
forthcoming from after-tax incomes, are insufficient to bring total output
to the full-employment level. The actual budget will then show a smaller
surplus or larger deficit than the full-employment budget.
If the fiscal structure is biased in this direction, it can be corrected either
by expanding Government purchases to employ idle resources in satisfying
public needs; or by expanding private business and personal after-tax incomes through reduced tax rates or increased transfer payments to employ




idle resources in satisfying the demands of the private sector. When the
budget is too expansionary, the combination of public and private demands
will eventually exceed productive capacity, and excessive upward pressure
on prices will develop. In this event, sound fiscal policy calls for lowering
expenditures or raising tax rates, or both.
The appropriate size of the surplus or deficit in the full-employment
budget depends on the strength of private demand and its responsiveness to
fiscal policy. The budget must counterbalance private demand. The
weaker the underlying determinants of private demand, the more expansionary the budget should be; the stronger these determinants, the more restraining the budget should be.
Whether a given budget is too expansionary or restrictive depends also
on other Government policies affecting private spending, of which monetary
policy is the most important. Other things being equal, a strongly expansionary monetary policy permits a larger surplus by strengthening business
investment, residential construction, and other expenditures that are sensitive to the cost and availability of credit.
FISCAL POLICY IN A GROWING ECONOMY

In a growing economy, periodic budget adjustments are required to
maintain adequate expansion of total demand. The volume of tax revenues
rises as incomes grow if tax rates remain unchanged. At present tax rates,
the revenues that the Federal Government would collect at full employment
increase by more than $6 billion a year. If program needs do not require
expenditures to grow at the same rate, tax rates must be reduced, or a
growing full-employment surplus will result, with increasingly restrictive
effects on the economy.
In the past this very process has been a major factor in slowing expansions and precipitating downturns. Thus the consequences of excessive
potential surpluses have been large actual deficits, unemployment, and
inability to achieve steady growth.
To avoid these consequences, an appropriate expansion-promoting fiscal
program would call for tax and expenditure policies that prevent a constrictive rise in the full-employment surplus. As Chart 6 suggests, the experience of the past 10 years has illustrated the tendency of the full-employment
surplus to build up to expansion-retarding levels as the economy grows.
The tax reductions of 1964 will be a giant step to remove a burdensome
fiscal restraint before the economy levels off or goes into a recession, and
to provide a framework for continued vigorous growth.
THE ROLE OF MONETARY POLICY

Establishing a suitable fiscal framework is not the only step the Government can take to promote full employment. The ability of the economy
to maintain expansion in both its actual and its potential output is significantly affected by the monetary and debt management policies of the
Federal Reserve System and the Treasury Department. Expenditures on




42

Chart 6

Federal Surplus or Deficit:
Actual and Full-Employment Estimates
NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS BASIS
BILLIONS O F DOLLARS

20
SURPLUS

FULL-EMPLOYMENT
ESTIMATE

ACTUAL

15
10
5
0

r

I

-5
-10
DEFICIT

-15
1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

1961

1962

1963

CALENDAR YEARS
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, BUREAU OF THE BUDGET, AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

long-lived assets, such as residential and commercial buildings, business
plant and equipment, and to a lesser extent consumer durables, are particularly sensitive to cost and availability of credit, which are heavily
influenced by monetary and debt management policies.
The choice of monetary policies must be related to the character of
private demand, to the type of fiscal policy being pursued, and to goals with
respect to the balance of payments. In the light of these considerations,
various combinations of fiscal and monetary policies are appropriate to
different conditions in the economy.
When aggregate demand is generally deficient and investment and consumption are expanding too slowly to provide jobs for all those seeking employment, expansionary monetary policy normally can and should accompany expansionary fiscal policy. Likewise, when excessive aggregate
demand threatens to cause inflation, a tight monetary policy may be called
for in conjunction with a fiscal program that permits full-employment
Federal revenues to rise relative to expenditures.
Under some circumstances, however, it may be appropriate to operate
monetary policy at seeming cross purposes to fiscal policy in order to restrict

715-113 O-64-4



43

or expand the share of output devoted to investment. In general, an easier
monetary policy will permit a higher sustainable rate of investment and
capacity growth. Together with a slightly restrictive full-employment
budget, such a policy mix may raise the growth rate of potential output
while keeping total demand within noninflationary bounds. Alternatively,
if investment is so large relative to consumption and Government purchases
as to threaten a rapid buildup of excess capacity or serious bottlenecks in
capital-goods industries, the need may be for monetary restraints on investment and stimulus to consumption through a tax reduction.
A partially offsetting mix of fiscal and monetary policies also becomes
appropriate when, as now, the Nation's balance-of-payments deficit is excessive at the same time that domestic expansion needs to be stimulated. In
this case, however, it is useful to differentiate among types of monetary policies. Efforts can be made—as they have been in the current expansion—
to use the various tools of monetary and debt-management policy to keep
the cost and availability of long-term credit favorable to domestic expansion,
while maintaining short-term interest rates at a level necessary to restrain
short-term capital outflows. Meanwhile, other more direct measures to
deal with the balance-of-payments problem need to be pushed vigorously to
correct the basic causes of the deficit and in the process provide more scope
for monetary policy in promoting domestic expansion.
Against the background of these general considerations, an understanding
of the problems and possibilities of Federal policy in the maintenance of
expansion can best be gained by examining the experience of the past three
expansions.
FEDERAL POLICY IN T H E E X P A N S I O N S OF

195 4 - 5 7 AND

195 8 - 6 0

The recovery from the 1954 recession was aided by a substantial tax cut
and by the fact that materials shortages and controls during the Korean
conflict had limited the buildup of capacity to produce civilian goods. The
result was a period of rapid expansion in late 1954 and early 1955, centering
first in inventories, automobiles, and housing. This was followed by a
remarkable boom in fixed investment from the third quarter of 1955 through
the third quarter of 1957.
The absence of price-wage restraint in the 1955-57 period contributed to
a widespread inflation despite the lack of any general excess of demand
over capacity output. Excess demand was confined to the durable goods
manufacturing industry, where orders strained capacity in many lines.
But sharp price and wage increases in this sector were imitated in other
industries that did not share similar demand pressures.
Indeed, the lack of real output increases in early 1956 prompted predictions of recession. Despite the capital goods boom, total output levelled off
at that time as automobiles, residential construction, and Federal purchases
all declined. But defense outlays increased sharply from mid-1956 to mid1957, and capital goods purchases remained strong. By the time the




44

investment boom had run its course, total demand had not grown sufficiently to use fully the added capacity that had been created. Federal
outlays levelled off early in 1957 and then declined, just at a time when
expansionary policy was needed to avoid a downturn. And the Federal
Reserve, which had been tightening money and credit conditions throughout
most of the expansion, raised the discount rate in August 1957, just as
the downturn in production was beginning.
The entire expansion of 1958-60 was characterized by price stability,
ample productive capacity, and excessive unemployment. Wholesale prices
were virtually steady throughout the expansion. The capacity utilization
rate in manufacturing had dropped to 73 percent in the 1958 recession,
nearly 20 points below its peak level in the fourth quarter of 1955. Except
for brief periods of rapid inventory accumulation before and after the lengthy
steel strike of 1959, the utilization rate never regained much more than
half this loss. Consequently the recovery of investment expenditure was
weak. The unemployment rate fell only to 5.0 percent, and that for only
1 month. The average unemployment rate from January 1959 to May
1960 (when the peak of the recovery was reached) was 5.4 percent.
Yet Federal policy was restrictive and wholly inappropriate to a
period of insufficient demand. The full-employment surplus was allowed
to rise drastically from a $4*4 billion level in 1958 to more than $12 billion
in 1960. The expenditure line was held firmly while the only tax-rate
changes made were increases in social insurance and excise tax rates. The
turnaround from actual deficit to actual surplus was even more striking.
Between the third quarter of 1958 and the first quarter of 1960, there was
a swing of nearly $20 billion (annual rate) from a $10.7 billion deficit to
an $8.2 billion surplus. At a time when private investment demand was
depressed by excess capacity, this fiscal restraint was clearly inconsistent
with continued expansion. If it had not been for a slow rise throughout
the period in the share of disposable income consumed, it is doubtful that
this shortest of all recent recoveries would have lasted even as long as it did.
The restrictive fiscal policy of 1958-60 was accompanied early in the
expansion by a shift toward monetary restraint that became progressively
more severe and by late 1959 resulted in the tightest monetary and credit
conditions of the postwar period. Treasury bill yields rose by 3*/2 percentage points from mid-1958 to the end of 1959. Long-term Government
bond yields increased by a full percentage point during the same period.
The sector most adversely affected by this monetary tightness was housing.
Private housing starts, which had risen strongly during the period of monetary ease immediately following the 1958 recession, fell by one-fourth from
the beginning of 1959 to the middle of 1960. This reduced the demand for
building materials and, through its effect on incomes earned in the construction industry, the demand for consumer goods. The combination of fiscal
and monetary tightness contributed to a halt in the expansion of business
investment expenditures and led to a downturn after only 25 months of
expansion.




45

FISCAL POLICY IN THE PRESENT EXPANSION

When the new Administration came to office in early 1961, the 1960-61
recession was near its trough. The unemployment rate was close to 7 percent, and the rate of capacity utilization in manufacturing had fallen to
77 percent. The economic task of first priority was to end the unnecessary
waste of resources.
The fiscal program adopted by Congress and the Administration lowered
the $12 billion full employment surplus of 1960 to $6 billion by 1962.
This reduction was accomplished through both tax reductions and expenditure increases.
The expenditure increases of the 1961-62 period, undertaken to bolster
our defense and space programs and to provide for unmet civilian needs,
were highly stimulating to the economy. Total Federal expenditures increased by $10 billion (annual rate) between the first quarter of 1961 and
the first quarter of 1962, making a major contribution to the 8.8 percent
rise in GNP during the first recovery year. Increases in Federal expenditures continued beyond the initial recovery year. From the first quarter of
1961 to the fourth quarter of 1963, Federal purchases of goods and services
in current prices increased by $ll}/2 billion at annual rates, or 21 percent.
Total Federal expenditures, which include transfer payments, subsidies,
interest, and grants-in-aid as well as purchases of goods and services,
increased by $19*/2 billion, or 20 percent, over the same period.
Two tax reduction measures—the new depreciation guidelines announced
by the Treasury in July 1962 and the investment tax credit enacted by the
Congress in the Revenue Act of 1962—were adopted to stimulate lagging
private investment. Their details are discussed in Appendix A of the January 1963 Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. Their net effect
was to raise the annual cash flow to corporations by $2.5 billion in 1963 and
to increase the after-tax rate of return on new investment projects. These
measures contributed to the rapid rise in plant and equipment outlays
that occurred after the first quarter of 1963. Since there are substantial lags in the investment decision-making and spending process, their full
effects have not yet been realized.
In early 1963 the Administration proposed a program of tax reduction
and revision designed to move the country toward full employment. Failure
to enact this key part of the fiscal program by mid-1963 led to a rise in the
full-employment surplus when a reduction was needed. By the fourth quarter of 1963, with output still about $30 billion short of potential and an
unemployment rate of 5.6 percent, the full-employment surplus was $9
billion, and the actual budget deficit, on a national income and product
basis, fell close to zero. However, early enactment of the tax bill and enactment of the President's budget for fiscal 1965 will bring a sharp and needed
reduction in the full-employment surplus. The tax and expenditure program will give a bigger fiscal stimulus in calendar 1964 than in any of the
past 3 years and will provide a strong, fresh impetus to the expansion.




46

MONETARY POLICY IN THE PRESENT EXPANSION

The fiscal policy of the 1961-63 years was complemented by a monetary
policy designed to encourage an expanding economy while also defending
the balance of payments. Actions were taken to raise short-term interest
rates and to maintain them at levels that would reduce outflows of funds to
money markets abroad. Within the limits established by this policy, the
Federal Reserve provided money and bank credit to support the expansion
and generally avoided placing upward pressure on long-term rates.
In attempting to pursue both its domestic and its balance-of-payments
objectives, the Federal Reserve used its policy instruments flexibly. In
February 1961 it began to supply a portion of new bank reserves through
the purchase of longer-term securities. Meanwhile the Treasury concentrated its new offerings of securities largely in short maturities to exert
upward pressure on short-term interest rates. In the autumn of 1962 the
Federal Reserve reduced reserve requirements on time and savings deposits,
thereby releasing reserves for seasonal growth in money and credit without
purchasing short-term securities in the open market.
A particularly important factor that exerted upward pressure on shortterm rates but held long-term rates down was the two-step change in
Regulation Q in January 1962 and July 1963, which permitted banks to
pay higher interest rates on time and savings deposits. These steps accelerated the flow of savings into commercial banks, which in turn invested
heavily in mortgages and State and local securities, thereby putting downward pressure on mortgage and other long-term yields. At the same time
commercial banks began to issue negotiable time certificates of deposit
in substantial quantities, which in effect added to the supply of short-term
securities and helped to push up short-term interest rates.
In July 1963 the Federal Reserve increased the discount rate from 3
to 31/2 percent, largely to reinforce efforts to raise short-term interest rates
for balance-of-payments reasons.
Analysis of the results of Federal Reserve actions on the growth of deposits and bank credit is especially difficult for this expansion period
because of the changes in Regulation Q. The recorded growth in money
supply—at an average rate of 2.8 percent a year during the expansion—
understates the degree to which monetary policy provided a stimulus to
the economy, since many business firms and individuals were induced to
shift idle balances from demand to time deposits in order to take advantage
of the higher interest rates.
On the other hand, the increase in time deposits—at an average rate
of 15.2 percent a year—exaggerates the expansionary stimulus from monetary policy. The interest-rate increases on commercial bank time deposits
raised their attractiveness relative to direct holdings of securities or deposits
at other financial intermediaries. Thus, while bank credit expansion was
particularly rapid, part of it reflected lending that otherwise would have




47

occurred through nonbank financial institutions or directly through the
securities markets.
THE CURRENT SITUATION AND OUTLOOK
T H E ECONOMY IN

1963

The economic expansion in 1963 substantially outdistanced most expectations and even exceeded the forecast by the Council of Economic
Advisers in its January 1963 Report, which was one of the more optimistic
of the period. That forecast projected a range from $573 billion to
$583 billion. Preliminary estimates indicate an actual figure of $585
billion.
Much of the strength in 1963 centered in residential construction and
automobile buying. If the strength of those expenditures represented an
unsustainable buildup of stocks or an excessive resort to credit, it would
amount to borrowing from the future. If, however, it reflected long-term
forces, it would be cause of optimism.
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION

Among the major demand components, the most surprising performer
in 1963 was housing. Many observers expected that private nonfarm
residential construction expenditures would no more than hold their 1962
level. Instead, because of the boom in construction of multifamily units,
such expenditures increased by $l}/2 billion for the year as a whole, and the
fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter advance was even larger.
The increase in housing activity is attributable partly to the success of
monetary policy and Federal housing credit policies in maintaining an adequate supply of mortgage funds at favorable interest rates. Mortgage yields
continued to decline during the first half of 1963 and then levelled off. The
average term to maturity of conventional mortgages extended on new home
purchases increased from 23.3 years in December 1962 to 24.6 years in
October 1963, and the average ratio of loan to value on such mortgages
increased from 72.1 percent to 73.4 percent over the same period. Terms
on FHA mortgages were also liberalized.
Liberalization of mortgage credit makes more potential home buyers
eligible to enter the market. But it also reduces the equity protection of
those homeowners who borrow up to the limit, increasing their vulnerability
to personal misfortune or general economic reversals. It is difficult to
evaluate recent developments because of the lack of consensus on criteria
of soundness in mortgages and because the safety of the credit structure
depends basically on the general health of the economy. During the past
year, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board has issued or proposed a series of
regulations that will help preserve sound credit practices of savings and loan
associations, the major source of home mortgage credit.




The future of residential building depends heavily on the sustainability of
construction of multifamily units. Multifamily housing starts have risen to
36 percent of total starts in 1963, compared to an average of 13 percent during the 1950's. Rental, vacancy rates have been rising in the last year, and
in some metropolitan areas are quite high. But in the aggregate they are
still below the levels that prevailed in 1961 at the beginning of the current
housing boom. While an attitude of caution and concern about rental
housing in 1964 is certainly justified, there are several favorable factors in
the outlook. Part of the great expansion of multifamily housing in the past
few years has come in response to demographic changes. The increased
relative importance of households at the two extreme ends of the adult age
spectrum has raised the demand for apartment units. This demand has
not yet been fully met in many communities, and builders of multifamily
units can look forward to its acceleration in 2 or 3 years as the early postwar babies enter the housing market. Moreover, there continue to be unmet
needs for housing among lower-income and minority groups. The proposed tax cut will provide some support to multifamily construction by increasing the number of those able to afford better rental apartments.
However, given the large volume of multifamily construction already in
the pipeline, there is little probability of a further sizable expansion in 1964.
Housing demand could decline in the coming year if the availability and
terms of mortgage credit are not maintained in the face of rising business
demands for credit.
AUTOMOBILES

While the share of their incomes that consumers devoted to auto purchases
during 1963 was not far above the average for the past 10 years (as Table 2
shows), the stock of automobiles in use has, nonetheless, grown considerably,
both in quantity and in quality. In a static economy, this would suggest a
sizable decline in purchases in the following year. However, two considerations are reassuring.
First, the economy will not be static in 1964. The rate of cna,n5c of aftertax income next year will be extraordinarily large, both because of the cut
in taxes and because of a substantial increase in before-tax incomes. Moreover, the number of licensed drivers should continue to grow by at least
2J/2 million a year.
Second, the buildup of car stocks during 1963 offers significant contrasts
with that in 1955, which was the one clear case of substantial borrowing
of demand from the future. Both real disposable income and the number
of licensed drivers are about 30 percent greater now than they were in 1955,
while the number of domestic and imported cars sold in 1963 was not
appreciably greater than in the earlier year. Moreover, a rising scrappage
rate restrained the growth of the stock of cars. Hence, relative to population and income, the increase in automobile ownership in 1963 was not
nearly so great as it was in 1955.




49

TABLE 2.—Share of disposable personal income used for consumer durable expenditures, 1954-63
[Percent]
Consumer durable expenditures as percent of disposable personal income
Year

Constant prices l

Current prices
Total

Automobiles
and parts

Other

Total

Automobiles
and parts

Other

12.8

5.3

7.4

12.3

5.2

7.1

1954

12.6

5.2

7.4

11.8

5.2

6.6

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

14.4
13.1
13.1
11.7
12.9

6.7
5.4
5.5
4.4
5.4

7.8
7.8
7.5
7.4
7.6

13.6
12.4
12.3
11.2
12.3

6.5
5.2
5.2
4.2
5.1

7.1
7.2
7.0
7.0
7.2

12.8
12.0
12.5
12.8

5.4
4.7
5.3
5.5

7.5
7.3
7.2
7.3

12.4
11.8
12.4
12.8

5.2
4.6
5.2
5. t

7.2
7.2
7.1
7.3

1954-63 average--

I960
1961
1962 2
1963

_
—
_

* Based on data in 1963 prices.
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

2

The strength of consumer durables sales in 1962 and especially in 1963
was stimulated by ready availability of credit. Maximum credit terms on
new automobiles were not generally liberalized, but more automobile buyers
took advantage of these maximum terms. The ratio of outstanding instalment credit to disposable income (at an annual rate), which was 11.7
percent at the end of 1961, increased to 13.1 percent by the end of 1963.
The proportion of disposable personal income committed to monthly
payments has continued its upward drift and now approaches 14 percent.
Rut there is no reason to think that this ratio is unsustainable. It has
risen recently partly because the proportion of spending units using consumer credit has been rising. According to the Survey Research Center's
1963 Survey of Consumer Finances, this percentage rose from 46 in 1962
to 50 in early 1963. As the general level of per capita income rises, more
households become good credit risks. A rise in the ratio of aggregate
consumer debt to income is far more sustainable when it comes from
wider-spread use of debt than when it reflects only heavier indebtedness
on the part of existing credit users.
The crucial factor in determining whether indebtedness imposes an
excessive burden is the rate of expansion of disposable income. The rise
in disposable income from the proposed 1964 tax cut will reduce appreciably
the ratio of beginning-of-year debt to income. If a decline in consumer
incomes were in the offing in 1964, the current level of consumer indebtedness might be a cause for concern. It poses no serious threat when income
is expected to grow rapidly.




THE OUTLOOK FOR GNP IN 1964

The demands for automobiles and housing should continue at high levels
in 1964, but they cannot be expected to provide fresh impetus to expansion.
Nor is a substantial independent thrust likely to come from business investment or government purchases. Thus a favorable outlook for 1964 is heavily
dependent upon the passage and timing of the proposed tax reductions.
The process by which tax reduction will stimulate consumption and investment demand is outlined in Appendix A of this Report. If the tax cuts were
not forthcoming, business and consumers not only would have to do without
their direct effect but would have to adjust to sharp disappointment. With
the tax cuts, and taking into account the projected budget expenditures, the
economy will receive a powerful stimulus. Indeed, it will be operating with
little if any full-employment surplus for the first time since the Korean conflict. The elimination of the estimated $9 billion full-employment surplus of calendar 1963 will mark an unprecedented use of fiscal policy for
the maintenance and acceleration of expansion. It must be recognized
that, while the expansive effects of the projected tax cuts will be very sizable,
the month-to-month timing of their impacts upon expenditures is not precisely predictable. For this reason, it is especially appropriate this year to
attach a range of plus or minus $5 billion to the forecast of the GNP for 1964.
Administration forecasts are always in some degree projections because
they rest on assumptions about the enactment of the President's program.
The dependence of this year's forecast on assumptions made about the
nature and timing of the tax cuts is particularly heavy. The date of enactment and the initial withholding rate applied to wages and salaries are
both critical.
The assumptions underlying the present projection are—
First, that reduction of tax liabilities as recommended in the
President's Budget Message will be enacted by February 1;
Second, that the withholding rate will be reduced from 18 percent to 14 percent by this legislation, to take effect as soon as possible thereafter.
Under these assumptions, it is estimated that GNP for calendar 1964 will
fall within a $10 billion range centering on $623 billion. If events
depart from the above assumptions, prospects for the year will be significantly altered. For example, if passage of the tax bill were delayed by
1 month, the projected GNP range would center on $621 billion.
Prospects for the major components of demand appear to be the
following:
Government expenditures. State and local purchases of goods and services are expected to rise by at least $4 billion, the trend rate for the last few
years. Although the President's Budget will call for a decline in Adminis-




trative Budget expenditures from fiscal 1964 to fiscal 1965, Federal purchases of goods and services are projected to increase by $2j/2 billion, from
calendar 1963 to calendar 1964. This will be a smaller increase than
those of the past few years.
Residential construction. Outlays for residential construction are not
likely to rise from their level at the end of 1963, but a small year-to-year increase seems probable.
Business fixed investment. The basic determinants of expenditures on
fixed investment—both real and financial—are favorable to further expansion. According to the business plant and equipment survey made by
the Department of Commerce and the Securities and Exchange Commission, the annual rate of such expenditures (which account for over threefourths of business fixed investment) will be about $1 billion higher in the
first half of 1964 than in the latter half of 1963. The demand and profit
stimulus provided by the tax cut should be sufficient to accelerate the rate
of increase in the second half of 1964, giving a somewhat higher year-toyear increase than in 1963.
Inventory investment. With inventory-sales ratios quite favorable, inventory investment should respond fairly promptly to a step-up in the rate
of increase in final demand and proceed at a rate well above the 1963 level,
particularly toward the end of the year.
Consumption. Under the stimulus of a cut of nearly $9 billion in personal tax collections, consumption expenditures will be a substantial force
in economic expansion in 1964, providing more than two-thirds of the total
demand increase. Substantial year-to-year gains should be realized in all
major expenditure categpries. While the dollar volume of automobile outlays should rise with a tax cut, their share of disposable personal income may
fall slightly. A rise in the income share spent on other durables is quite
probable.
In summary, the outlook this year calls for a significant acceleration in
the growth of output. At the midpoint of the forecast range, current-dollar
GNP for 1964 is estimated to increase 6/ 2 percent above the level of 1963,
and the real GNP, about 5 percent. Because last year's gains in the labor
force and productivity somewhat exceeded past trends, the 1963 growth of
3.8 percent in real output was not sufficient to reduce the unemployment
rate. It seems likely that potential will continue in the year ahead to grow
slightly faster than its 3J4 percent average annual rate since 1955. Nevertheless, the more rapid expansion of production in 1964 should lower the
unemployment rate. By the end of the year, it is expected to fall to approximately 5 percent. Thus the year promises progress in reducing unemployment, but attainment of the interim goal of 4 percent lies beyond 1964.




BEYOND 19 6 4
Demand will continue to benefit in the years ahead from the powerful
stimulus of the current tax-reduction program. Prospects for 1964 are
enormously improved by the impending tax legislation, but even so, the
full effect will not be felt this year. It will take some time for consumer outlays to adjust fully to the rise in household incomes; somewhat longer delays
are likely in the response of capital expenditures. As these adjust to higher
operating rates and higher after-tax profits, the underlying strength of business demand for new capital should become evident for the first time in
nearly a decade.
Private demand will get support from fiscal policy throughout the 1965
fiscal year. On January 1, 1965, a second instalment of tax reduction
will take effect. As a result, the gradual leveling off of Federal outlays,
desired for—and permitted by—increasing efficiency in the government,
can be consistent with a continued movement toward full employment.
A return to full employment will yield many benefits, as succeeding
chapters make clear. It will reinforce programs to aid the disadvantaged
and to promote smooth adjustment to technological change. It will increase the mobility of labor and capital. It will improve our productivity
performance, so important to the international competitiveness of our
products. Once demand matches our productive potential, efforts to
accelerate the growth of potential will become more effective and merit a
higher priority. In combination, full employment and accelerated growth
can produce a sharp improvement in U.S. economic performance for the
rest of the 1960's.
On November 17, 1961, the United States joined with the other 19
member nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in setting as a target the attainment of a 50 percent (4.1
percent a year) increase in their combined real gross national products
during the decade from 1960 to 1970. The average year-to-year rate of
increase of this Nation's GNP in the first 3 years of the decade, 3.9 percent,
did not match the target rate for the OEGD countries as a whole. For the
United States to raise its output by one-half during the decade, it will
need to grow at an average annual rate of 4.2 percent in the next 7 years.
That rate is within our grasp.
Any lessening in international tensions that permits significant arms
reductions consistent with national security will increase our ability to raise
our rate of economic growth. Resources no longer used in arms production
can be used to upgrade the skills and equipment of the labor force, as well
as to raise the levels of private and public consumption. An economic
policy ensuring that these resources are used for such purposes rather than
left idle can raise the growth rate of potential output.
If we are to achieve the full benefits of our rising productive potential
and to avoid excessive unemployment, aggregate demand will have to con-




53

tinue to expand more rapidly than it has in the past. With the major
relaxation in fiscal restraint in 1964, we will get a new and more accurate
assessment of the strength of private demand as we move toward full employment. This information will help to guide the monetary and budgetary
programs for the years ahead. But the principles to guide policy are clear.
They were stated in the Employment Act; they have been dramatized by
the experience of recent years. If this Nation is to achieve and maintain
"maximum employment, production and purchasing power." it will be the
continuing task of fiscal and monetary policy to support a strong, sustainable
pace in the expansion of aggregate demand.




54

Chapter 2

The Problem of Poverty in America

I

N HIS MESSAGE on the State of the Union, President Johnson declared
all-out war on poverty in America. This chapter is designed to provide
some understanding of the enemy and to outline the main features of a
strategy of attack.
ELIMINATING POVERTY—A NATIONAL GOAL
There will always be some Americans who are better off than others. But
it need not follow that "the poor are always with us." In the United States
today we can see on the horizon a society of abundance, free of much of the
misery and degradation that have been the age-old fate of man. Steadily
rising productivity, together with an improving network of private and
social insurance and assistance, has been eroding mass poverty in America.
But the process is far too slow. It is high time to redouble and to concentrate our efforts to eliminate poverty.
Poverty is costly not only to the poor but to the whole society. Its ugly
by-products include ignorance, disease, delinquency, crime, irresponsibility,
immorality, indifference. None of these social evils and hazards will, of
course, wholly disappear with the elimination of poverty. But their severity
will be markedly reduced. Poverty is no purely private or local concern.
It is a social and national problem.
But the overriding objective is to improve the quality of life of individual
human beings. For poverty deprives the individual not only of material
comforts but of human dignity and fulfillment. Poverty is rarely a builder
of character.
The poor inhabit a world scarcely recognizable, and rarely recognized,
by the majority of their fellow Americans. It is a world apart, whose inhabitants are isolated from the mainstream of American life and alienated
from its values. It is a world where Americans are literally concerned with
day-to-day survival—a roof over their heads, where the next meal is coming
from. It is a world where a minor illness is a major tragedy, where pride
and privacy must be sacrificed to get help, where honesty can become a
luxury and ambition a myth. Worst of all, the poverty of the fathers is
visited upon the children.




55

Equality of opportunity is the American dream, and universal education
our noblest pledge to realize it. But, for the children of the poor, education
is a handicap race; many are too ill prepared and ill motivated at home to
learn at school. And many communities lengthen the handicap by providing the worst schooling for those who need the best.
Although poverty remains a bitter reality for too many Americans, its
incidence has been steadily shrinking. The fruits of general economic
growth have been widely shared; individuals and families have responded
to incentives and opportunities for improvement; government and private
programs have raised the educational attainments, housing standards,
health, and productivity of the population; private and social insurance
has increasingly protected families against loss of earnings due to death,
disability, illness, old age, and unemployment. Future headway against
poverty will likewise require attacks on many fronts: the active promotion
of a full-employment, rapid-growth economy; a continuing assault on discrimination; and a wide range of other measures to strike at specific roots
of low income. As in the past, progress will require the combined efforts
of all levels of government and of private individuals and groups.
All Americans will benefit from this progress. Our Nation's most precious resource is its people. We pay twice for poverty: once in the production lost in wasted human potential, again in the resources diverted to
coping with poverty's social by-products. Humanity compels our action,
but it is sound economics as well.
This chapter considers, first, the changing numbers and composition of
America's poor. Second, it presents a brief report on the factors that
contribute to the continuation of poverty amidst plenty. Although the
analysis is statistical, the major concern is with the human problems that
the numbers reflect. The concluding part concerns strategy against poverty
in the 1960's and beyond. Supplementary tables at the end of the chapter
provide further data on the dimensions of poverty in America.
The sections below will chart the topography of poverty. A few
significant features of this bleak landscape deserve emphasis in advance.
Poverty occurs in many places and is endured by people in many situations;
but its occurrence is nonetheless highly concentrated among those with certain characteristics. The scars of discrimination, lack of education, and
broken families show up clearly from almost any viewpoint. Here are
some landmarks:
—One-fifth of our families and nearly one-fifth of our total population
are poor.
—Of the poor, 22 percent are nonwhite; and nearly one-half of all nonwhites live in poverty.
—The heads of over 60 percent of all poor families have only grade
school educations.
—Even for those denied opportunity by discrimination, education significantly raises the chance to escape from poverty. Of all non-




56

white families headed by a person with 8 years or less of schooling,
57 percent are poor. This percentage falls to 30 for high school
graduates and to 18 percent for those with some college education.
—But education does not remove the effects of discrimination: when
nonwhites are compared with whites at the same level of education,
the nonwhites are poor about twice as often.
—One-third of all poor families are headed by a person over 65, and
almost one-half of families headed by such a person are poor.
—Of the poor, 54 percent live in cities, 16 percent on farms, 30 percent
as rural nonfarm residents.
—Over 40 percent of all farm families are poor. More than 80 percent of nonwhite farmers live in poverty.
—Less than half of the poor are in the South; yet a southerner's chance
of being poor is roughly twice that of a person living in the rest of
the country.
—One-quarter of poor families are headed by a woman; but nearly
one-half of all families headed by a woman are poor.
—When a family and its head have several characteristics frequently
associated with poverty, the chances of being poor are particularly
high: a family headed by a young woman who is nonwhite and has
less than an eighth grade education is poor in 94 out of 100 cases.
Even if she is white, the chances are 85 out of 100 that she and her
children will be poor.

THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF POVERTY
Measurement of poverty is not simple, either conceptually or in practice.
By the poor we mean those who are not now maintaining a decent standard
of living—those whose basic needs exceed their means to satisfy them. A
family's needs depend on many factors, including the size of the family,
the ages of its members, the condition of their health, and their place of
residence. The ability to fulfill these needs depends on current income
from whatever source, past savings, ownership of a home or other assets,
and ability to borrow.
NEEDS AND RESOURCES

There is no precise way to measure the number of families who do not
have the resources to provide minimum satisfaction of their own particular
needs. Since needs differ from family to family, an attempt to quantify
the problem must begin with some concept of average need for an average
or representative family. Even for such a family, society does not have
a clear and unvarying concept of an acceptable minimum. By the standards of contemporary American society most of the population of the world
is poor; and most Americans were poor a century ago. But for our society
today a consensus on an approximate standard can be found. One such
standard is suggested by a recent study, described in a publication of the




57

Social Security Administration, which defines a "low-cost" budget for a
nonfarm family of four and finds its cost in 1962 to have been $3,955.
The cost of what the study defined as an "economy-plan" budget was
$3,165. Other studies have used different market baskets, many of them
costing more. On balance, they provide support for using as a boundary,
a family whose annual money income from all sources was $3,000 (before
taxes and expressed in 1962 prices). This is a weekly income of less
than $60.
These budgets contemplate expenditures of one-third of the total on food,
i.e., for a $3,000 annual budget for a 4-person family about $5 per person
per week. Of the remaining $2,000, a conservative estimate for housing (rent or mortgage payments, utilities, and heat) would be another
$800. This would leave only $1,200—less than $25 a week—for clothing,
transportation, school supplies and books, home furnishings and supplies,
medical care, personal care, recreation, insurance, and everything else.
Obviously it does not exaggerate the problem of poverty to regard $3,000 as
the boundary.
A family's ability to meet its needs depends not only on its money income
but also on its income in kind, its savings, its property, and its ability to
borrow. But the detailed data (of the Bureau of the Census) available for
pinpointing the origins of current poverty in the United States refer to
money income. Refined analysis would vary the income cut-off by
family size, age, location, and other indicators of needs and costs. This
has not been possible. However, a variable income cut-off was used in the
sample study of poverty ;n 1959 conducted at the University of Michigan
Survey Research Center. This study also estimates the over-all incidence
of poverty at 20 percent; and its findings concerning the sources of poverty
correspond closely with the results based on an analysis of Census data.
A case could be made, of course, for setting the over-all income limit
either higher or lower than $3,000, thereby changing the statistical measure
of the size of the problem. But the analysis of the sources of poverty, and
of the programs needed to cope with it, would remain substantially
unchanged.
No measure of poverty as simple as the one used here, would be suitable
for determining eligibility for particular benefits or participation in particular programs. Nevertheless, it provides a valid benchmark for assessing the dimensions of the task of eliminating poverty, setting the broad goals
of policy, and measuring our past and future progress toward their achievement.
If it were possible to obtain estimates of total incomes—including nonmoney elements—for various types of families, those data would be preferable for the analysis which follows. The Department of Commerce does
estimate total nonmoney incomes in the entire economy in such forms as
the rental value of owner-occupied dwellings and food raised and consumed
on farms, and allocates them to families with incomes of different size.




58

Because of statistical difficulties, these allocations are necessarily somewhat
arbitrary, and are particularly subject to error for the lower income groups.
No attempt is made to allocate them by other characteristics that are
meaningful for an analysis of poverty. Of course, the total of money
plus nonmoney income that would correspond to the limit used here would
be somewhat higher than $3,000.
THE CHANGING EXTENT OF POVERTY

There were 47 million families in the United States in 1962. Fully 9.3
million, or one-fifth of these families—comprising more than 30 million persons—had total money incomes below $3,000. Over 11 million of these
family members were children, one-sixth of our youth. More than 1.1 million families are now raising 4 or more children on such an income. Moreover, 5.4 million families, containing more than 17 million persons, had
total incomes below $2,000. More than a million children were being raised
in very large families (6 or more children) with incomes of less than $2,000.
Serious poverty also exists among persons living alone or living in nonfamily units such as boarding houses. In 1962, 45 percent of such "unrelated individuals"—5 million persons—had incomes below $1,500, and 29
percent—or more than 3 million persons—had incomes below $1,000 (Supplementary Table 9 ) . Thus, by the measures used here, 33 to 35 million
Americans were living at or below the boundaries of poverty in 1962—
nearly one-fifth of our Nation.
The substantial progress made since World War II in eliminating poverty
is shown in Chart 7 and Table 3. In the decade 1947-56, when incomes
TABLE 3.—Money income of families, 1947 and 1950-62
Median money income
of all families
(1962 prices)

Percent of families with
money income

Index,
1947=100

Less than Less than
$3,000 (1962 $2,000 (1962
prices)
prices)

Year
Dollars

1947
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

.

—

4,117

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

.

I960
1961
1962

18

32
29
28
26
28

19
17
17
16
17

122
130
130
129
137

25
23
23
23
22

15
14
14
14
13

5,759
5,820
5,956

—

32

102
105
108
117
114

5,004
5,337
5,333
5,329
5,631

—

100

4,188
4,328
4,442
4,809
4,705

_
_

140
141
145

21
21
20

13
13
12

Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.

were growing relatively rapidly, and unemployment was generally low, the
number of poor families (with incomes below $3,000 in terms of 1962
prices) declined from 11.9 million to 9.9 million, or from 32 percent to


715-113
http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/ O-64-5
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

59

23 percent of all families. But in the period from 1957 through 1962, when
total growth was slower and unemployment substantially higher, the number
of families living in poverty fell less rapidly, to 9.3 million, or 20 percent of
all families.
The progress made since World War I I has not involved any major
change in the distribution of incomes. The one-fifth of families with the
highest incomes received an estimated 43 percent of total income in 1947
and 42 percent in 1962. The one-fifth of families with the lowest incomes
received 5 percent of the total in 1947 and 5 percent in 1963.
Even if poverty should hereafter decline at the relatively more rapid rate
of the 1947-56 period, there would still be 10 percent of the Nation's
families in poverty in 1980. And, if the decline in poverty proceeded at the
slower rate achieved from 1957 on, 13 percent of our families would still
have incomes under $3,000 in 1980. We cannot leave the further wearing
away of poverty solely to the general progress of the economy. A faster
Chart 7

Number of Families by Family Income
MILLIONS OF FAMILIES

45

$3,000 AND OVER
(1962 prices)

30

LESS THAN $3,000

15

(1962 prices)

I
1947

1949

1

I

1951

1

I

1953

1955

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




6o

I
1957

I 1
1959

1961

reduction of poverty will require that the lowest fifth of our families be
able to earn a larger share of national output.
THE COMPOSITION OF TODAY'S POOR

To mount an attack on poverty we must know how to select our
targets. Are the poor concentrated in any single geographical area? Are
they confined to a few easily identifiable groups in society? Conclusions
drawn from personal observation are likely to be misleading. Some believe
that most of the poor are found in the slums of the central city, while
TABLE

4.—Selected characteristics of all families and of poor families, 1962
Number of families
(millions)

Percent of total

Selected characteristic
All
families

Poor
families

All
families

Poor
families

47.0

9.3

Age of head:
14-24 years
25-54 years.55-64 years
65 years and over..

2.5
30.4
7.3
6.8

.8
3.9
1.4
3.2

42
15
34

Education of head: i
8 years or less
9-11 years
12 years
More than 12 years..

16.3
8.6
12.2
9.3

6.0
1.7
1.5
.7

61
17
15
7

Sex of head:
Male
Female

42.3
4.7

7.0
2.3

75
25

Labor force status of head: 2
Not in civilian labor force_
Employed
_
Unemployed

8.4
36.9
1.7

4.1
4.6

44
49

Color of family:
White
Nonwhite...

42.4
4.6

7.3
2.0

78
22

Children under 18 years of age in family:
None
One to three
.-_
_
Four or more

18.8
22.7
5.5

4.9
3.3
1.1

52
36
11

Earners in family:
None
One
Two or more__.

3.8
21.1
22.1

2.8
4.3
2.2

30
46
23

Regional location of family: 3 4
Northeast
North Central
South
West

11.5
13.1
13.5
7.0

1.6
2.3
4.3
1.0

17
25
47
11

Residence of family: 4
Rural farm
Rural nonfarm
Urban

3.3
9.9
31.9

1.5
2.7
5.0

16
30
54

Total.

100

100

1 Based on 1961 income (1962 prices).
2 Labor force status relates to survey week of March 1963.
* Based on 1960 residence and 1959 income (1962 prices).
* Data are from 1960 Census and are therefore not strictly comparable with the other data shown in this
table, which are derived from Current Population Reports.
» Based on 1959 residence and 1959 income (1962 prices).
NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals, Poor families are defined as all families
with total money income of less than $3,000.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




61

others believe that they are concentrated in areas of rural blight. Some
have been impressed by poverty among the elderly, while others are convinced that it is primarily a problem of minority racial and ethnic groups.
But objective evidence indicates that poverty is pervasive. To be sure,
the inadequately educated, the aged, and the nonwhite make up substantial
portions of the poor population. But as Table 4 shows, the poor are found
among all major groups in the population and in all parts of the country.
Further data on the composition of the poor population are found in Supplementary Tables 10 and 11.
Using the income measure of poverty described above, we find that
78 percent of poor families are white. Although one-third of the poor
families are headed by a person 65 years old and over, two-fifths are headed
by persons in the 25 to 54 year range. Although it is true that a great deal of
poverty is associated with lack of education, almost 4 million poor families
(39 percent) are headed by a person with at least some education beyond
grade school. The data show that less than half the poor live in the South.
And the urban poor are somewhat more numerous than the rural poor.
In Chart 8 the poor and the non-poor are compared in terms of these and
other characteristics.
Yet there are substantial concentrations of poverty among certain groups.
For example, families headed by persons 65 years of age and older represent
34 percent of poor families. Moreover, they appear among the poor 2 5/2
times as frequently as they appear among all families. The last 2 columns
of Table 4 show 5 additional major categories of families that appear more
than twice as often among the poor as among the total population: nonwhite families, families'headed by women, families headed by individuals
not in the civilian labor force, families with no wage earners, and rural
farm families. Of course, some of these groups overlap considerably; but
the data help to identify prospective targets for an antipoverty attack. The
next section pinpoints these targets further.
THE ROOTS OF POVERTY
Poverty is the inability to satisfy minimum needs. The poor are those
whose resources—their income from all sources, together with their asset
holdings—are inadequate. This section considers why those in poverty lack
the earned income, property income and savings, and transfer payments
to meet their minimum needs.
EARNED INCOME

Why do some families have low earned incomes? Some are unemployed
or partially unemployed. High over-all employment is a remedy of first
importance. It would provide earned income for those unemployed who
are able to accept jobs and greater earnings for many presently working
part-time. Yet it is clear that this is only a partial answer. Even for those
able and willing to work, earnings are all too frequently inadequate, and a




62

Chart 8

Characteristics of Poor Families
COMPARED WITH ALL FAMILIES

PERCENT OR FAMILIES l /

0

25

50

I
CHARACTERISTICS OF FAMILY HEAD:
A L L FAMILIES
65 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER
POOR FAMILIES 1 /

EDUCATION OF 8 YEARS OR LESS

FEMALE

FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS:

NONWHITE

NO EARNERS

FOUR OR MORE CHILDREN

RURAL FARM 1 /

URBAN

±1 BASED ON 1962 DATA (EXCEPT AS NOTED).
1 7 F A M I L I E S WITH INCOME OF $3,000 OR LESS.
Xl BASED ON 1959 DATA.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




63

75

large number of the poor are unable to work. An analysis of the incidence
of poverty helps one understand the reasons for low earnings.
The incidence of poverty for any specified group of families is the percentage of that group with incomes below $3,000. For all families, the
incidence in 1962 was 20 percent. An incidence for a particular group
higher than 20 percent, or higher than the rates for other similar groups,
suggests that some characteristics of that group are causally related to
poverty. The basic cause may not be the particular characteristic used to
classify the group. But an examination of groups with high incidence
should throw light on the roots of poverty. Incidence of poverty in 1947
and 1962 is shown for several major types of families in Chart 9.
Table 5 shows that the incidence of poverty is 76 percent for families
with no earners. From other data, it appears that the incidence rate is 49
percent for families headed by persons who work part-time. A family may
be in either of these situations as a result of age, disability, premature death
T A B L E 5.—Incidence of poverty,

by characteristics

relating to labor force participation,

Selected characteristic

7962

Incidence
of poverty
(percent)

All families

20

Earners in family:
None
One
Two
_.
Three or more-

76
20
10

Labor force status of head:»
Not in civilian labor force.
Employed
Unemployed

50
12
34

Age of head:
14-24 years
25-54 years
55-64 years
65 years and over.

31
13
19
47

Sex of head:
Male
_
Wife in labor force.
Female. _

17
9
48

i Status relates to survey week of March 1963.
NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poverty is defined to include al
families with total money income of less than $3,000; these are also referred to as poor families. Incidence
of poverty is measured by the percent that poor families with a given characteristic are of all families having
the same characteristic.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.

of the principal earner, need to care for children or disabled family members,
lack of any saleable skill, lack of motivation, or simply heavy unemployment in the area.
The problem of another group of families is the low rates of pay found
most commonly in certain occupations. For example, the incidence of
poverty among families headed by employed persons is 45 percent for
farmers, and 74 percent for domestic service workers (Supplementary
Table 12).




64

Chart 9

Incidence of Poverty
PERCENT

U
COLOR OF FAMILY

60

NONWHITE

40

ALL

WHITE

20

1947

1962

1947

1962

AGE OF FAMILY HEAD

1962

65 YEARS AND OVER

60
UNDER 24 YEARS

1947

25-64 YEARS

40

20

1947

1962

1947

1962

1947

1962

1947

1962

1947

1962

1947

1962

40 20 ~

i / P E R C E N T OF FAMILIES WITH GIVEN CHARACTERISTIC THAT ARE POOR. POOR FAMILIES ARE DEFINED
AS A L L FAMILIES WITH TOTAL MONEY INCOME OF LESS THAN $3,000 (1962 PRICES)
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




The chief reason for low rates of pay is low productivity, which in turn can
reflect lack of education or training, physical or mental disability, or poor
motivation. Other reasons include discrimination, low bargaining power,
exclusion from minimum wage coverage, or lack of mobility resulting from
inadequate knowledge of other opportunities, or unwillingness or inability to
move away from familiar surroundings.
The importance of education as a factor in poverty is suggested by the
fact that families headed by persons with no more than 8 years of education
have an incidence rate of 37 percent (Table 6). Nonwhite and rural families show an even higher incidence of poverty (Table 6 and Supplementary
Table 13). The heads of these families are typically less well educated than
average. For example, nonwhite family heads have completed a median of
TABLE 6.—Incidence of poverty by education, color, and residence, 1962
Selected characteristic

Incidence
of poverty
(percent)

All families

20

Education of head: 1
8 ye
years or less...
9-11 years
12 years
More than 12 years..

37
20
12
8

Color of family:
White
Nonwhite—

17
44

Residence of family:
Farm
Nonwhite,.
Nonfarm..

43
84
18

* Data relate to 1961, and money income in 1962 prices.
NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poverty is denned to include all
families with total money income of less than $3,000; these are also referred to as poor families. The incidence of poverty is measured by the percent that poor families with a given characteristic are of all families
having the same characteristic.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.

8.7 years of school, compared to 11.8 for whites. In 1959 the median education of all males over 25 with incomes below $1,000 and living on a farm
was slightly above 7 years in school; those with incomes above $5,000 had
completed over 10 years in school.
Supplementary Table 14 presents additional detail from the 1960 census
on the incidence of poverty among families classified by educational attainment, color, age, and family type. The severely handicapping influence
of lack of education is clear. The incidence of poverty drops as educational
attainments rise for nonwhite as well as white families at all ages. The high
frequency of poverty for nonwhites is not, however, fully explained by their
educational deficit. As Supplementary Table 14 shows, the incidence of poverty among nonwhites is almost invariably higher than among whites regardless of age, family type, or level of educational attainment. Supplementary
Table 15 shows that nonwhites earn less than whites with the same education
even when they practice the same occupation.




66

Some families are forced into poverty by society's own standards. Their
potential earners, otherwise able to hold a job, cannot free themselves from
the family responsibilities which they must fulfill. Such is the case, for
example, with families headed by women with small children.
Customary or mandatory retirement at a specified age also limits earnings by some healthy, able-bodied persons. However, retirement is often
associated with deteriorating health, and poverty among the aged is greatest
at ages over 70 or 75 and for aged widows—persons for whom employment
is not a realistic alternative.
PROPERTY INCOME AND USE OF SAVINGS

Some families with inadequate current earnings from work can avoid
poverty thanks to past savings—which provide an income and, if necessary,
can be used to support consumption. Savings are particularly important
for the elderly. More than half of those over 65 have money incomes
above $3,000, and many also own homes. Others, although their money
incomes are below $3,000, have adequate savings that can be drawn upon
to support a decent standard of consumption.
But most families with low earnings are not so fortunate. If avoiding
poverty required an income supplement of $1,500 a year for a retired man
and his wife, they would need a capital sum at age 65 of about $19,000 to
provide such an annuity. Few families have that sum. The median net
worth for all spending units (roughly equivalent to the total of families
and unrelated individuals) was only $4,700 in 1962. For all spending
units whose head was 65 years or more, the median net worth was $8,000.
Meeting contingencies caused by illnesses is often a crucial problem for
older people. About half of the aged, and about three-fourths of the aged
poor, have no hospital insurance, although their medical care costs are 2J4
times as high as those of younger persons. Their resources are typically
inadequate to cover the costs of a serious illness.
The median net worth of the fifth of all spending units having the lowest
incomes was only $1,000. Much of what property they have is in the form
of dwellings. (About 40 percent of all poor families have some equity in
a house.) Although this means that their housing costs are reduced,
property in this form does not provide money income that can be used for
other current expenses.
Most families—including the aged—whose incomes are low in any one
year lack significant savings or property because their incomes have always
been at poverty levels. This is clear in the results of the Michigan study
already cited. Among the reporting families classified in that study as poor
in 1959, 60 percent had never earned disposable income as high as $3,000,
and nearly 40 percent had never reached $2,000. The comparable figures
for all families were 17 percent and 10 percent, respectively. Among the
aged poor reporting, 79 percent had never reached $3,000, and fully onehalf had never earned $2,000. While nearly 60 percent of all families have




67

enjoyed peak incomes above $5,000, among all poor families only 14 percent
had ever reached that level; and a mere 5 percent of the aged poor had
ever exceeded $5,000.
The persistence of poverty is reflected in the large number who have been
unable to accumulate savings. The Survey Research Center study found
that more than one-half of the aged poor in 1959 had less than $500 in liquid
savings (bank deposits and readily marketable securities), and they had
not had savings above that figure during the previous 5 years. Less than
one-fifth of all poor families reported accumulated savings in excess of $500.
The mean amount of savings used by poor families in 1959 was $120; and
only 23 percent of the poor drew on savings at all.
It is clear that for most families property income and savings do not
provide a buffer against poverty. Some 1962 data on liquid savings are
contained in Supplementary Table 16.
TRANSFER PAYMENTS AND PRIVATE PENSIONS

Poverty would be more prevalent and more serious if many families
and individuals did not receive transfer payments. In 1960, these payments
(those which are not received in exchange for current services) constituted
only 7 percent of total family income, but they comprised 43 percent of the
total income of low-income spending units. At the same time, however,
only about half of the present poor receive any transfer payments at all.
And, of course, many persons who receive transfers through social insurance
programs are not poor—often as a result of these benefits.
Transfer programs may be either public or private in nature and may or
may not have involved past contributions by the recipient. Public transfer
programs include social insurance—such as Unemployment Compensation,
Workmen's Compensation, and Old-Age, Survivors', and Disability Insurance (OASDI); veterans' benefits; and public assistance programs, such as
Old Age Assistance (OAA) and Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC).
Private transfer programs include organized systems such as private pension plans and supplementary unemployment benefits, organized private
charities, and private transfers within and among families.
It is important to distinguish between insurance-type programs and assistance programs, whether public or private. Assistance programs are ordinarily aimed specifically at the poor or the handicapped. Eligibility for
their benefits may or may not be based upon current income; but neither
eligibility nor the size of benefits typically bears any direct relationship to
past income. Eligibility for insurance-type programs, on the other hand,
is based on past employment, and benefits on past earnings.
The Federal-State unemployment insurance system covers only about 77
percent of all paid employment and is intended to protect workers with a
regular attachment to the labor force against temporary loss of income.
Benefits, of course, are related to previous earnings.




68

While the largest transfer-payment program, OASDI, now covers approximately 90 percent of all paid employment, there are still several million aged persons who retired or whose husbands retired or died before
acquiring coverage. Benefits are related to previous earnings, and the
average benefit for a retired worker under this program at the end of 1963
was only $77 a month, or $924 a year. The average benefit for a retired
worker and his wife if she is eligible for a wife's benefit is $1,565 a year.
Public insurance-type transfer programs have made notable contributions
to sustaining the incomes of those whose past earnings have been adequate,
and to avoiding their slipping into poverty as their earnings are interrupted or terminated. These programs are of least help to those whose
earnings have never been adequate.
Public assistance programs are also an important support to low-income
and handicapped persons. Money payments under OAA average about
$62 a month for the country as a whole, with State averages ranging from
$37 to about $95 a month. In the AFDG program the national average
payment per family (typically of 4 persons) is about $129 a month,
including services rendered directly. State averages range from $38 a
month to about $197 a month.
Private transfers within and between families are included in the total
money income figures used in this chapter only to the extent that they are
regular in nature, e.g., alimony or family support payments, and are excluded when they take the form of casual or irregular gifts or bequests.
While data are lacking on the value of such gifts, they are clearly not a
major source of income for the poor.
Private pensions, providing an annuity, are additional resources for some
persons and families. In 1961 the beneficiaries of such plans numbered
about 2 million (as against about 12 million receiving OASDI benefits), and
total benefits paid were about $2 billion. While the combination of OASDI
and private pensions serves to protect some from poverty, most persons receiving OASDI receive no private pension supplement. In any case, benefits under private pension plans range widely, and since they are typically
related to the individual's previous earnings, they are low when earnings
have been low.
Thus, although many families do indeed receive supplements to earnings
in the form of pensions, social insurance benefits, and incomes from past
saving, those families with a history of low earnings are also likely to have
little of such supplementary income. And since most poor families have
small amounts of property, they cannot long meet even minimum needs
by depleting their assets.
THE VICIOUS CIRCLE

Poverty breeds poverty. A poor individual or family has a high probability of staying poor. Low incomes carry with them high risks of illness;
limitations on mobility; limited access to education, information, and train-




ing. Poor parents cannot give their children the opportunities for better
health and education needed to improve their lot. Lack of motivation,
hope, and incentive is a more subtle but no less powerful barrier than lack
of financial means. Thus the cruel legacy of poverty is passed from parents
to children.
Escape from poverty is not easy for American children raised in families
accustomed to living on relief. A recent sample study of AFDG recipients
found that more than 40 percent of the parents were themselves raised in
homes where public assistance had been received. It is difficult for children to find and follow avenues leading out of poverty in environments where
education is deprecated and hope is smothered. This is particularly true
when discrimination appears as an insurmountable barrier. Education may
be seen as a waste of time if even the well-trained are forced to accept menial
labor because of their color or nationality.
The Michigan study shows how inadequate education is perpetuated from
generation to generation. Of the families identified as poor in that study,
64 percent were headed by a person who had had less than an eighth grade
education. Of these, in turn, 67 percent had fathers who had also gone no
further than eighth grade in school. Among the children of these poor
families who had finished school, 34 percent had not gone beyond the
eighth grade; this figure compares with 14 percent for all families. Fewer
than 1 in 2 children of poor families had graduated from high school, compared to almost 2 out of 3 for all families.
Of 2 million high school seniors in October 1959 covered by a Census
study, 12 percent did not graduate in 1960. Of these drop-outs 54 percent
had IQ's above 90, and 6 percent were above 110. Most of them had the
intellectual capabilities necessary to graduate. The drop-out rate for nonwhite male students, and likewise for children from households with a
nonworking head, was twice the over-all rate. And it was twice as high for
children of families with incomes below $4,000 as for children of families
with incomes above $6,000. Moreover, many of the children of the poor
had dropped out before reaching the senior year.
A study of drop-outs in New Haven, Connecticut, showed that 48 percent
of children from lower-class neighborhoods do not complete high school.
The comparable figure for better neighborhoods was 22 percent.
Other studies indicate that unemployment rates are almost twice as high
for drop-outs as for high school graduates aged 16-24. Moreover, average
incomes of male high school graduates are 25 percent higher than those of
high school drop-outs, and nearly 150 percent higher than those of men
who completed less than 8 years of schooling.
There is a well-established association between school status and juvenile
delinquency. For example, in the New Haven study cited above, 48 percent
of the drop-outs, but only 18 percent of the high school graduates, had one
or more arrests or referrals to juvenile court.




70

Low-income families lose more time from work, school, and other activities
than their more fortunate fellow citizens. Persons in families with incomes
under $2,000 lost an average of 8 days of work in the year 1960-61, compared to 5.4 for all employed persons. They were restricted in activity for
an average of 30 days (compared to 16.5 for the whole population) and
badly disabled for 10.4 days (compared to 5.8 for the whole population).
TABLE 7.—Number of families and incidence of poverty, by selected family characteristics, 1947 and 1962
Incidence of
poverty (percent) 1

Number of families
Selected characteristic

1947

1962

Percentage
change,
1947 to 1962

number
of poor
families,
1947 to 1962

1962

1947

Percentage

Millions
All families

37.3

47.0

26

32

20

-22

Earners in family:
None
One
Two
Three or more. _

2.2
21.9
9.9
Q O

3.8
21.1
17.0
5.1

68
-4
73
56

83
35
20
10

76
20
10
8

54
-45
—13
29

Labor force status of head: *
Not in civilian labor force
Unemployed
Employed

5.5
1.2
31.9

8.4
1.7
36.9

52
49
16

61
49
28.

50
34
12

23
2
-48

Age of head:
14-24 years
25-54 years
55-64 years _ _
65 years and over

1.8
25.0
6.1
4.4

2.5
30.4
7.3
6.8

39
22
19
64

45
27
32
57

31
13
19
47

—6
-41
-28
27

33.5
3.8

42.3
4.7

26
26

30
51

17
48

-30
19

Color of family:
White
Nonwhite

34.2
3.1

42.4
4.6

24
46

29
67

17
44

-27
-3

Children under 18 years of age in
family:
None
One
Two
_—
Three or more

16.2
8 9
6.4
5.7

18.8
8.7
8.5
10.9

16
—2
33
92

36
30
27
32

26
17
13
17

-16
—46
-33
2

Regional location of family: '
Northeast
North Central
South
West

10.1
11.5
11.5
5.1

11.5
13.1
13.5
7.0

14
14
17
37

26
30
49
28

14
18
32
15

-42
-31
-24
-26

6.5
30.8

3.2
43.8

51
42

56
27

43
18

-62
-5

Sex of head:
Male
Female

Residence of family:
Farm *
Nonfann •

_ __

...

1 The incidence of poverty is measured by the percent that poor families with a given characteristic are
of all families having the same characteristic.
2 Labor force status is for April survey week of 1949 and March survey week of 1963. Income data (1962
prices) are for 1948 and 1962.
3 Income data for 1949 and 1959. Since regional location data are from 1950 and 1960 Censuses, they are not
strictly comparable with other data shown in this table, which are derived from Current Population Reports.
* The 1960 Census change in definition of a farm resulted in a decline of slightly over 1 million in the total
number of farm families. Therefore, the incidence figures for 1947 and 1962 may not be strictly comparable.
« Since 1959, nonfarm data are not available separately for rural nonfann and urban.
NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poverty is denned to include all
families with total money income of less than $3,000 (1962 prices); these are also referred to as poor families.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




REGENT CHANGES IN THE PATTERN OF POVERTY

In spite of tendencies for poverty to breed poverty, a smaller proportion
of our adult population has been poor—and a smaller fraction of American
children exposed to poverty—in each succeeding generation. But, at least
since World War II, the speed of progress has not been equal for all types
of families, as is shown in Table 7.
The incidence of poverty has declined substantially for most categories
shown in the table. But there are some notable exceptions—families (1)
with no earner, (2) with head not in the civilian labor force, (3) with
head 65 years of age or older, (4) headed by a woman, and (5) on farms.
It is also striking that in these classes poverty is high as well as stubborn.
Poverty continues high also among nonwhites, although there has been a
large and welcome decline in this incidence.
With the sole exception of the farm group, the total number of all families
in each of these categories has remained roughly the same or has increased.
Hence the high-incidence groups, including the nonwhites, have come to
constitute a larger proportion of the poor (Table 8).
TABLE 8.—Selected characteristics of poor families, 1947 and 1962
Percent of poor families
with characteristic

Selected characteristic

1962

1947
Family head:

18

34
25
22

Rural farm families...

30

l 20

No earners in family

16

30

65 years of age and over
Female

„

*

20
16

1 Data are from Current Population Reports and are for 1959, based on income in 1962 prices. See Table 7,
footnote 4, for comparability problem.
NOTE .—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poor families are defined as all families
with total money income of less than $3,000 (1962 prices).
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.

This tabulation shows that certain handicapping characteristics, notably
old age, or absence of an earner or of a male family head, have become increasingly prominent in the poor population. This is both a measure of past
success in reducing poverty and of the tenacity of the poverty still existing.
Rising productivity and earnings, improved education, and the structure
of social security have permitted many families or their children to escape;
but they have left behind many families who have one or more special
handicaps. These facts suggest that in the future economic growth alone
will provide relatively fewer escapes from poverty. Policy will have to be
more sharply focused on the handicaps that deny the poor fair access to
the expanding incomes of a growing economy.




But the significance of these shifts in composition should not be exaggerated. About half of the poor families are still headed neither by an
aged person nor by a woman, and 70 percent include at least one earner.
High employment and vigorous economic growth are still of major importance for this group. And it is essential to remember that one-third of the
present poor are children. For them, improvements in the availability
and quality of education offer the greatest single hope of escaping poverty
as adults.
STRATEGY AGAINST POVERTY
Public concern for the poor is not new. Measures to prevent, and particularly to relieve, poverty have an ancient origin in every civilization.
Each generation in America has forged new weapons in the public and
private fight against this perennial enemy. Until recent decades the focus
was primarily on the alleviation of distress, rather than on prevention or
rehabilitation. Yet all the while, the sources of poverty have been eroded
as a by-product of a general advance in economic well-being and of measures designed to achieve other social goals. Universal education has been
perhaps the greatest single force, contributing both to social mobility and
to general economic growth.
The social legislation of the New Deal, strengthened and expanded in
every subsequent national administration, marked a turning point by recognizing a national interest in the economic well-being and security of individuals and families. The social insurance programs established in the
1930's were designed principally to alleviate poverty in old age and to
shield families from the loss of all income during periods of unemployment.
The tasks for our generation are to focus and coordinate our older programs
and some new ones into a comprehensive long-range attack on the poverty
that remains. A new federally led effort is needed, with special emphasis
on prevention and rehabilitation.
A forthcoming special Presidential message will describe the new attack
and propose specific programs. The purpose of this section is not to present
those measures, but rather to outline some leading elements of an over-all
attack on poverty, recognizing the wide array of existing antipoverty programs, pointing to ways in which they might be reinforced and focused in
the years ahead, and taking account of programs proposed in the past three
years and awaiting consideration.
MAINTAINING HIGH EMPLOYMENT

The maintenance of high employment—a labor market in which the
demand for workers is strong relative to the supply—is a powerful force
for the reduction of poverty. In a strong labor market there are new and
better opportunities for the unemployed, the partially employed, and the
low paid. Employers have greater incentive to seek and to train workers
when their own markets are large and growing. For these reasons, tax
reduction is the first requisite in 1964 of a concerted attack on poverty. To




73

fight poverty in a slack economy with excess unemployment is to tie one
hand behind our backs. We need not do so.
Accelerating economic growth. In the longer run the advance of standards of living depends on the rate of growth of productivity per capita, and
this in turn depends on science and technology, capital accumulation, and
investments in human resources, as Chapter 3 has indicated. Growth also
expands the resources available to governments and private organizations to
finance specific programs against poverty.
Fighting discrimination. A program to end racial discrimination in
America will open additional exits from poverty, and for a group with an
incidence of poverty at least twice that for the Nation as a whole. Discrimination against Negroes, Indians, Spanish-Americans, Puerto Ricans
and other minorities reduces their employment opportunities, wastes their
talents, inhibits their motivation, limits their educational achievement and
restricts their choice of residence and neighborhood. Almost half of
nonwhite Americans are poor. For nonwhites infant mortality is twice as
high as for whites; maternal deaths are four times as frequent; expectation
of life for males at age 20 is almost five years less.
Discriminatory barriers have been erected and maintained by many
groups. Business and labor, other private organizations and individuals,
and all levels of government must share in their removal.
The economic costs of discrimination to the total society are also large.
By discrimination in employment, the Nation denies itself the output of
which the talents and training of the nonwhite population are already
capable. By discrimination in education and environment, the Nation denies
itself the potential talents of one-ninth of its citizens. But the basic case
against discrimination is not economic. It is that discrimination affronts
human dignity.
The Executive Branch is vigorously pursuing nondiscriminatory policies
and practices. It has proposed comprehensive Civil Rights legislation that
would help make it possible for all Americans to develop and use their
capabilities. But it will have its full effect only when all Americans join
in dedicating themselves to the justice of this cause.
Improving regional economies. In a dynamic economy, whole regions
lose their economic base when their natural resources are depleted or changes
in taste and technology pass them by. Appalachia and the cutover areas
of the Northern Lakes States are contemporary examples. State and
regional programs, assisted by the Federal Government through the Area
Redevelopment Administration, seek to restore in such regions a viable economic base suitable to their physical and human resources.
Rehabilitating urban and rural communities. Overcrowded, unsanitary,
and unsafe neighborhoods are a drag on the economic progress of a whole
city. Eradication of slums can provide improved opportunities for their
residents and enable them to contribute more to the community. Improved
relocation programs are essential to avoid pushing the poor from an old




74

slum to a new one. Improved community facilities and services, including
day care centers for children of working mothers, are needed in low-income
urban areas. (Nine million children under 12 have mothers who work
outside the home. Of these fully 400,000 are now expected to care for
themselves while their mothers work full time.) Among facilities that are
critically needed for slum families are adequate housing, hospitals, parks,
libraries, schools, and community centers. Improvement of the physical
environment, however, is not enough. Especially when newcomers to urban
areas are involved, there need to be programs to facilitate adaptation to the
new environments. The Administration's proposed National Service Corps
could aid and supplement local efforts to provide these and other urgently
needed services.
Parallel programs for rehabilitation are needed in depressed rural areas.
In some rural communities, even in whole counties, almost every family
is at the poverty level. In such situations local resources cannot possibly
provide adequate schools, libraries, and health and community centers.
A healthy farm economy is basic to the strength of farm communities;
and the Rural Area Development program and the ARA are also of
assistance in improving income and employment opportunities on and off
the farm. Particular attention must be paid to the special problems of
depressed nonfarm rural areas—such as the Ozarks or the larger part of
rural Appalachia; of Indians on reservations; and of migrant workers.
Improving labor markets. Improved employment information can help
potential workers learn about and take advantage of new job opportunities,
sometimes in different industries, occupations, and locations. A strengthened
Federal-State Employment Service, better guidance and counseling services, development of a system for early warning of labor displacement resulting from technological change, assistance in worker relocation (as provided by the Trade Expansion Act and in the recent amendments to the
Manpower Development and Training Act), increased amounts and duration of unemployment insurance benefits and extension of its coverage—
all these will enable more persons to maintain or increase their earnings.
Expanding educational opportunities. If children of poor families can
be given skills and motivation, they will not become poor adults. Too
many young people are today condemned to grossly inadequate schools
and instruction. Many communities lack resources for developing adequate schools or attracting teachers of high quality. Other communities
concentrate their resources in the higher income areas, providing inadequate
educational opportunities to those at the bottom of the economic ladder.
Effective education for children of poor families must be tailored to their
special needs; and such education is more costly and surely more difficult
than for children from homes that are economically and socially more secure.
The school must play a larger role in the development of poor youngsters
if they are to have, in fact, "equal opportunity." This often means that

715-113 O-64-6



75

schooling must start on a pre-school basis and include a broad range of
more intensive services. The President's program against poverty will propose project grants to strengthen educational services to children of the poor.
Where such special efforts have been made, it has become clear that
few children are unable to benefit from good education. Only a small percentage of those born each year are incapable of acquiring the skills,
motivation, and attitudes necessary for productive lives. The idea that
the bulk of the poor are condemned to that condition because of innate
deficiencies of character or intelligence has not withstood intensive analysis.
Enlarging job opportunities for youth. Recent legislation for Vocational
Education will help to improve the preparation of teen-agers for productive
employment. Improved counseling and employment services are needed
for those leaving school. The Administration's proposed Youth Employment Act will strengthen on-the-job training and public service employment programs, and will establish a Youth Conservation Corps.
Improving the Nation's health. The poor receive inadequate medical
care, from before birth to old age. And poverty is perpetuated by poor
health, malnutrition, and chronic disabilities. New and expanded school
health and school lunch programs will improve both health and education.
The recent Report of the President's Task Force on Manpower Conservation, based on a survey of Selective Service rejectees, lends particular
emphasis to the importance of improving our health programs, especially
those aimed at children and young people. That Report also underlines
the need to cope with educational deficiencies by expanded vocational and
literacy training and improved counseling.
Legislation has recently been enacted to increase the supply of physicians
and dentists, and to expand mental health services. The poor have a
special stake in our ongoing programs of medical research. Many aged
persons are confronted by medical needs beyond their financial means.
Passage of the program to provide hospital insurance for the aged under
the social security system is an urgent immediate step.
Promoting adult education and training. In an economy characterized
by continual technological advance, many adults will not be able to earn
incomes above the poverty line without new skills and training. The
Manpower Training and Development Act and the training programs
under the Area Redevelopment Act represent public recognition of this
need. These and other programs to train and retrain workers must be expanded and strengthened, placing more emphasis on those with the greatest educational deficiencies. In particular, our relatively modest efforts
to provide basic literacy have proved the value of such training. Many
who have been regarded (and have often regarded themselves) as uneducable can and do learn the basic skills, and these in turn equip them
for training programs supplying the specific skills sought by employers.
Such basic education is now being made available to many more adults.
Assisting the aged and disabled. Continued long-run improvement of
social insurance benefits, along with expanded programs to cover hospital-




related costs for the aged, and augmented construction of housing to meet
the particular needs of the aged, are necessary steps in a continuing campaign against poverty.
ORGANIZING THE ATTACK ON POVERTY

In this latest phase of the Nation's effort to conquer poverty, we must
marshal already developed resources, focus already expressed concerns, and
back them with the full strength of an aroused public conscience.
Poverty, as has been shown, has many faces. It is found in the North and
in the South; in the East and in the West; on the farm and in the city.
It is found among the young and among the old, among the employed and
the unemployed. Its roots are many and its causes complex. To defeat
it requires a coordinated and comprehensive attack. No single program
can embrace all who are poor, and no single program can strike at all the
sources of today's and tomorrow's poverty.
Diverse attacks are needed, but we must not lose sight of their common
target—poverty. Many programs are directed against social problems
which the poor share with the non-poor—insecurity of income, depressed
regional economies, inefficient and unattractive rural and urban environments, disabilities of health and age, inadequate educational opportunities,
racial discrimination. These are all to the good. But we must not let
poor individuals and families get lost between these programs. Programs
must be sufficiently coordinated that, whatever else they individually accomplish, they act together to lift the economic and social status of America's
poor. And soon. For war has now been declared on poverty as such.
This coordinated attack must be adapted to local circumstances. The
needs of the poor are not the same in East Kentucky and in West Harlem.
Coordinated programs of community action will play a critical role in the
assault on poverty. Communities will be encouraged and helped to develop
individual programs aimed at the special problems of their own poor families.
Individual communities thus can participate in a nationwide action, research, and demonstration program, backed by the interest and resources of
State and local governments and private organizations, and the coordinated
efforts of Federal agencies working in such fields as education, health,
housing, welfare, and agriculture.
Conquest of poverty is well within our power. About $11 billion a
year would bring all poor families up to the $3,000 income level we
have taken to be the minimum for a decent life. The majority of the
Nation could simply tax themselves enough to provide the necessary income
supplements to their less fortunate citizens. The burden—one-fifth of
the annual defense budget, less than 2 percent of GNP—would certainly
not be intolerable. But this "solution" would leave untouched most of the
roots of poverty. Americans want to earn the American standard of living
by their own efforts and contributions. It will be far better, even if more
difficult, to equip and to permit the poor of the Nation to produce and to
earn the additional $11 billion, and more. We can surely afford greater
generosity in relief of distress. But the major thrust of our campaign must




77

be against causes rather than symptoms. We can afford the cost of that
campaign too.
The Nation's attack on poverty must be based on a change in national
attitude. We must open our eyes and minds to the poverty in our midst.
Poverty is not the inevitable fate of any man. The condition can be eradicated; and since it can be, it must be. It is time to renew our faith in the
worth and capacity of all human beings; to recognize that, whatever
their past history or present condition, all kinds of Americans can contribute to their country; and to allow Government to assume its responsibility for action and leadership in promoting the general welfare.




Supplementary Tables Relating to Poverty
TABLE 9.—Number and money income of unrelated individuals, by selected characteristics, 1962
Percent with income
Number
(millions)

Selected characteristic

All individuals.

11.0

Less than
$1,500
(1962 prices)
45

Less than
$1,000
(1962 prices)
29

Age:
14-24 years
25-64 years
55-64 years
65 years and over.

1.1
3.5
2.3
4.2

40
19
25
37

Sex:
Male...,
Female-

4.3
6.8

21
34

Color:
White
Nonwhite.

9.5
1.5

Residence:
Farm
Nonfarm..

.4
10.6

Nonearners

4.3

43

27
41
50
28

75

49

NOTE.—Unrelated individuals are persons (other than inmates of institutions) who are not living with
any relatives.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




79

TABLE 10.—Number and distribution of poor families, by education and other selected
characteristics, 1959
Percent of poor families with characteristic

Selected characteristic

Number of
poor
families
(thousands)

Years of school completed
Total
8 years
or less

9 to 11
years

12 years

More
than 12
years

100

64

16

13

6

7,615

79

49

13

11

6

Head under 25 years of age
Husband-w ife families
Female head

597
496
86

6
5
1

1

2

2
2

(2) *

(>) *

Head 25 to 64 years of age
Husband-wife families
Female head

4,419
3,288
981

46
34
10

27
21
5

8
6
2

7
5
2

4
3
1

Head 65 years old or older
Husband-wife families
Female head

2,599
2,120
359

27
22
4

21
17
3

3
2

2
1

1
1

2,036

21

15

3

Head under 25 years of age
Husband-wife families
Female head

154
101
49

2
1
1

Head 25 to 64 years of age.
Husband-wife families
Female head

1,533
962
511

16
10
5

11
8
3

Head 65 years old or older
Husband-wife families
Female head

349
235
94

4
2
1

3
2
1

Allfamiliesi
White families

Nonwhite families

9,651

1
(2)

(2)

1

(2)

1
1
1

3
1
1

$

1

2

(2)
(2)
(2)

(2)

(2)

i Include "husband-wife" families, "female head" families, and "other male head" families. Husbandwife families are those in which both spouses are present. Female head families are those with no male
spouse present. Other male head families are those with no female spouse present; this family type is
excluded from the detail of table but is included in the totals for color and age.
3
Less than 0.5 percent.
NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poor families are defined as all
families with total money income of less than $3,000 in 1959. Since the data in this table relate to income
in 1959 prices, they are not strictly comparable with data in other poverty tables in this Report, which are
based on income in 1962 prices.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




8o

TABLE 11.—Number of families and distribution of poor families, by residence and
other selected characteristics, 1959
Total
families

Selected characteristic

Urban
families

Rural
nonfarm
families

Rural
farm
families

Millions
Number of families:
All
Poor

.

.

.

.

.

.

45.1
9.2

31.9
5.0

9.9
2.7

3.3
1.5

10
5

4
1

Percent
Percent of poor families with selected characteristic:
Head:
65 years of age and over. . _
Female
Nonwhite

31
22
21

.

No earners

17
16
13

6

2

31

_

19

9

3

NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated Individuals. Poor families are defined as all
families with total money income of less than $3,000 (1962 prices).
Data are from 1960 Census and relate to residence in 1959, the latest year for which rural families can be
identified as farm or nonfarm.
Since percentage distributions are computed from 1960 Census data, they are not strictly comparable
with distributions of poor families shown in Tables 4 and 8, which are derived from Current Population
Reports.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.

TABLE 12.—Incidence of poverty, by occupation of family head, 1962
Occupation of head i

Total civilian workers

Incidence of
poverty
(percent)

-

12

Professional and technical workers..
Farmers or farm managers
Clerical workers
Sales workers
Craftsmen
Operative workers. _Domestic workers
Service workers other than domestic.
Farm laborers or foremen
Laborers, except farm and mine

3
45
7
9
5
11
74
22
56
23

i Occupation in March 1963.
NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poverty is defined to include all
families with total money income of less than $3,000; these are also referred to as poor families. Incidence
of poverty is measured by the percent that poor families with a given characteristic are of all families
having the same characteristic.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




8i

TABLE 13.—Number of families and incidence of poverty, by residence and other

selected characteristics, 1959
Total
families

Selected characteristic

Urban
families

Rural
nonfarm
families

Rural
farm
families

Millions
Number off amilies:
45.1
9.2

All. _.
Poor

31.9
5.0

9.9
2.7

3.3
1.5

62
63

61
63

Percent
Incidence of poverty by selected family characteristic:
Head:
65 years of age and over
Female

47
48
46

Nonwhite,
No earners

_.

_
_

39
44
38

68

82

81

77

87

91

NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poor families are denned as all families
with total money income of less than $3,000 (1962 prices). Incidence of poverty is measured by the percent
that poor families with a given combination of characteristics are of all families with the same combination
of characteristics.
Data are from 1960 Census and relate to residence in 1959, the latest year for which rural families can be
identified as farm or nonfarm.
Since incidencefiguresare computed from 1960 Census data, they are not strictly comparable with incidencefiguresin Tables 5, 6, and 7, which are derived from Current Population Reports.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




TABLE 14.—Number of families and incidence of poverty, by education and other
selected characteristics} 1959
Incidence of poverty (percent)
Number of
families
(thousands)

Selected characteristic

Years of school completed
Total
8 years
or less

9 to 11
years

12 years

More
than 12
years

45,150

Head under 25 years of age
Husband-wife families
Female head___

35

18

12

19

31

15

11

7

2,114
1,964
112

White families

21

40,887

All families i

28
25
77

45
42
85

33
28
86

22
20
68

22
20
60

8

Head 25 to 64 years of age
Husband-wife families
Female head

__
_

33,164
30,067
2,344

13
11
42

23
21
51

12
9
46

8
6
36

5
4
23

Head 65 years old or older
Husband-wife families
Female head___

_

5,609
4,434
849

46
48
42

53
55
46

39
39
40

33
34
33

24
23
28

4,263

48

57

42

30

18

Nonwhite families

242
178
55

"Fp/malfi hflad

Head 25 to 64 years of age
Husband-wife families
Female head..
Head 65 years old or older
Husband-wife families
Female head

_

64
57
89

76
71
94

66
56
92

51
45
83

3,527
2,680
713

Head under 25 years of age
Husband-wife families

40
42
50

43
36
72

53
47
77

38
26
73

27
18
62

15
11
39

494
335
123

71
70
76

74
73
79

52
53
63

50
45
75

41
42
50

1
Include "husband-wife" families, "female head" families, and "other male head" families. HusbaDdwife families are those in which both spouses are present. Female head families are those with no male
spouse present. Other male head families are those with no female spouse present; this family type is
excluded from tne detail of table but is included in the totals for color and age.
.NOTE.—Data relate to families and exclude unrelated individuals. Poor families are defined as all families with total money income of less than $3,000 in 1959. Since the data in this table relate to income in
1959 prices, they are not strictly comparable with data in other poverty tables in this Report, which are
based on income in 1962 prices. Incidence of poverty is measured by the percent that poor families with a
given combination of characteristics are of all families with the same combination of characteristics.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Adviser




TABLE 15.—Earnings of elementary school graduates, by color and occupation, 1959
Average earnings of ele- Earnings of
mentary school graduates nonwhites as
percent of
earnings of
White
Nonwhite
whites

Occupation

Craftsmen, foremen, and kindred workers 1 .—
Machinists
_
Painters and construction and maintenance workers
Plumbers and pipefitters

$5,300
5,500
4,200
5,600

Farm laborers and foremen
1

3,600
3,300
3,800

75
68
80

3,900

2,900

75

2,400

Other operatives and kindred workers. _.
Service workers (including private household workers) i.

72
79
73
71

4,800
4,900
4,800

Operatives and kindred workers i
Truck and tractor drivers

$3,800
4,300
3,100
4,000

1,500

62

._.

Over-all average for group includes some occupations not shown separately.

NOTE.—Elementary school graduates are persons who completed 8 grades of school but not more.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.
T A B L E 16.—Distribution

of spending units with income under $3,000,
amount of liquid assets, 1962

by age of head and

Percent of spending units with income of less
than $3,000, by age of head
Amount of liquid assets
Under 35
years
Total
None
$l-$499
$500-$999
$l,000-$4,999
$5,000-$9,999
$10,000 and over

35 to 44
years

45 to 64
years

100.0

_

100.0

100.0

100.0

68.5
25.8
2.8
2.9

Percent of total units in age group with income under
$3,000

70.6
19.6
1.7
7.0
1.1

57.5
22.3
5.7
9.2
3.1
2.2

39.7
9.6
7.5
25.5
10.6
7.1

12.9

23.9

68.7

(0
(0

21.3

(0

i Less than 0.05 percent.
Source: 1962 Survey of Consumer Finances, Survey Eesearch Center, University of Michigan.




65 years
and over

84

Chapter 3

The Promise and Problems of Technological
Change
NE LESSON of man's history is unmistakable: the crucial element in the rise in our material well-being has been the progressive utilization of our ever-growing store of knowledge of the world
in which we live. From the wheel to the electronic computer, new
discoveries have been put to work for man's benefit—benefit that has
taken the form of shorter hours of work, the elimination of backbreaking toil,
a continuing stream of new goods and services, and a total output per capita
that has risen 5-fold in the United States since the Civil War.
While technological change is as old as man, its character and pace, and
therefore its impact, have changed in recent centuries. The modern economic history of the industrial nations constitutes a decisive break with all
of prior history. For thousands of years, a man followed the path of his
father and grandfather before him, doing the same things in essentially the
same way. Major technological changes came infrequently, and their
adoption was spread over many centuries. The whole structure of
modern society, however, is geared to innovations—those who initiate
or adapt to change are rewarded, those who do not or cannot are
penalized. The businessman who refuses to adopt new technology will
not merely see his profits stand still; they will surely dwindle and turn
into losses as his more adventuresome competitor adopts newer and
more efficient production techniques.
Moreover, in a modern society, technological change is self-reinforcing
and almost self-generating. Major new breakthroughs in technology soon
pave the way for a multitude of other changes. The production of
cheap electricity for example, not only replaced gaslights, but made possible the assembly line, modern communications, and the computer.
Even if we wished to, we could not eliminate pervasive and continuous
technological and economic change without remaking—on a much
inferior basis—the whole fabric of our social and economic institutions.
And we would not wish to. Its benefits are essential for continued economic
growth, higher standards of living, and the elimination of poverty. Our
objective should be to foster and encourage it.
But recognition of the many benefits of technological change must not obscure the human toll often exacted in this process of job transition—the un-

O




85

employed coal miners of West Virginia, the rural migrants who crowd urban
slums, the older workers forced into unwanted retirement, and the middleaged workers whose earnings power and entitlement to fringe benefits have
been eroded by the obsolescence of their skills and the loss of their seniority.
We can and should reduce that toll by appropriate public and private
policies.
This chapter will explore some issues and policies related to technological change in this country's economy. Some of these issues have
recently been the subject of considerable public attention. There has
been dispute whether the newest and most dramatic form of technical
change, "automation," is a monster that threatens to destroy our whole
economic order or an economic and social boon. Others debate whether
automation must share the blame for the persistence for six years of an
unacceptably high rate of unemployment. President Kennedy proposed—and President Johnson has repeated the proposal—that a highlevel Commission on Automation be created to explore carefully these
and other questions.
This chapter first points to the benefits of technological change, both
those easily measurable and others less so but perhaps equally important. It then turns to a brief review of the sources of such change.
It analyzes the extent to which rapid technological change may
threaten the maintenance of high over-all employment and the way in
which our system adjusts to the unequal impacts of technological change on
regions, industries, and skills. Finally, it reviews the policies that Government can use to foster rapid technological change while at the same time
helping workers to adapt to the resulting dislocations.
THE FRUITS OF ADVANCING TECHNOLOGY
The state of technological knowledge determines what man can do with
his labor, his capital, and the natural resources he finds—what can
be produced and how it can be produced. Increases in our standard of living—"economic progress"—come about in considerable part from the application of new technical knowledge to production.
THE NATURE OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE

By technological change we mean the introduction of new arrangements
in the process of production and distribution which enable us either to
produce new products, or to produce existing products more efficiently and
cheaply, employing fewer real resources. The basic characteristic of technological change is that it permits us to use a given set of resources in a
way that better satisfies human wants. It includes not only narrowly
technical changes but also the application of new organizational and managerial concepts.




86

It is useful, if imprecise, to distinguish between technological changes that
reduce the cost of turning out already existing private and public consumption goods, and those that create completely new or substantially improved
products which enlarge the menu of final goods. Television, penicillin, nylon, and the airplane are examples of technological change that produced
goods not previously available. Color television, the electric typewriter,
and the automobile with automatic transmission represent substantial quality improvements. The Bessemer process for making steel, the catalytic
refining of oil, the mechanical picking of cotton, and the automation of
bookkeeping are examples of advances enabling industries to produce more
cheaply goods or services that were already produced. Yet each of the
examples of new products might also be said to be merely better or cheaper
ways of producing already existing services—television as a substitute for
the radio or motion picture in communication, penicillin for sulfa drugs and
hospital care in the treatment of pneumonia, nylon for cotton in tires or for
silk in blouses, the airplane for the automobile or the ship in transporting
persons or goods.
Technological change is only one of several major elements that
contribute to economic growth. Others include:
1. Increases in the available quantity of the basic resources used in production—growth of the labor force and accumulation of capital.
2. Improvements in the quality of labor as a result of the better health,
education, training, or motivation of members of the labor force.
3. Reductions in cost resulting from expansion in the size of markets—
described by economists as economies of scale.
An increased stock of physical capital, embodied in buildings, machinery
and equipment, land improvements, mines, stocks in trade, and so on, is one
of the more important of these sources. And, since the stock of capital has
increased considerably faster than the number of workers, each worker now
commands a larger complement of inanimate productive resources. But it
has been possible to employ this rising amount of capital per worker primarily through the progress of technology. Equipping a worker with a
sturdier or larger shovel does not necessarily raise his output very much.
But the invention of a ditch-digging machine or bulldozer allows each
worker to use a great deal more capital and thereby to increase his output
enormously. Because the added output is the joint product of technological
change and an added use of capital, it is impossible fully to separate their
contributions.
The same close interrelationship with technological change exists in
connection with other sources of expanded output. The improved
education and skill of workers often require technical rearrangements of
production to make them effective. The availability of a larger supply of
trained mathematicians will not significantly improve the productivity of
an accounting department based on pencil and paper technology. But a
mathematician, developing programs for a computer, may cut the cost of




87

accounting in half. Many of the economies of mass production associated
with wider markets have been possible only because technological innovations—for example, the assembly line—opened up new possibilities for
organizing the production process on a larger scale.
A fixed quantity of available land, together with a continually depleted
stock of fuel and mineral resources might well have inhibited economic
growth and rising living standards for an exploding population. Yet in the
West, at least, technological change has fully overcome "diminishing
returns," as proved by the fact that prices of food and minerals are, in
general, no higher relative to other prices today than they were 100
years ago.
THE GROWTH OF OUTPUT AND INCOMES

The most inclusive measure of the gains from technological improvement is the enlargement of total incomes. Technological advance is a
major source of higher output; and in the broadest sense higher output and
higher incomes are synonomous.
Since the turn of the century, the Nation's real total output—measured
as GNP in 1963 prices—has risen by 760 percent, from $68 billion in
1900 to $585 billion in 1963. This represents an annual growth rate averaging 3 / 2 percent for the whole period. With the population rising from
76.1 million to 189.3 million over this period, real output per person
climbed from $890 at the start of the century to $3,091 last year. Although
many benefits are not captured in GNP measurements, this is perhaps the
single best summary index of the increased material well-being of the
American people.
An alternative measure of our gains is private consumption per capita,
which reflects rising living standards. But it is an incomplete measure,
even of living standards, because it omits the growing public services
provided by all levels of government. Since 1929, the earliest date for
which this measure is available, real private consumption per capita has
risen by 66 percent, while total output per capita has risen by 76 percent.
Rising total output, as noted earlier, is the joint product of: a rising
input of labor; a larger input of physical capital; and the increased productive efficiency of these inputs—as a combined result of improvements
in the quality of labor, advances in technology, and economies of scale.
A simpler approach divides the total output gain into two parts: a rising
input of labor, measured in total man-hours worked; and an increased
average output per hour of work—which reflects both the rise in capital
input and the increase in productive efficiency. Output in the private
economy in 1963 was 720 percent of 1900. This is the product of: (1) total
man-hours worked in 1963 equal to 180 percent of 1900; times (2) an
output per man-hour in 1963 equal to 400 percent of 1900.




88

EFFECTS ON LABOR INCOME

Every technological advance is an opportunity to raise the average standard of living of the whole community. But we are not concerned with the
average standard of living alone. Rather, we are interested as well in how
the fruits of technological progress are shared by the various sectors of the
economy. In particular it is sometimes feared that technological progress
may benefit property incomes proportionately more than the incomes of
labor.
It is a matter of arithmetic that labor's share in total income will remain
unchanged if total hourly labor compensation rises in the same proportion
as labor productivity when prices are constant. Although there is no immutable law either of economics or of equity that requires this result, historically the rise in the real earnings of workers has been closely linked
with the advance in labor productivity.
Since 1900 real hourly compensation of production workers in manufacturing (average hourly earnings plus fringe benefits deflated by the change in
consumer prices) has risen at approximately the same average rate as the
average hourly productivity of manufacturing labor, as Chart 10 clearly
demonstrates. Despite year-to-year variations, and certain limited periods of
apparently nonproportional growth, both productivity and earnings have
Chart 10

Real Hourly Compensation and Productivity
in Manufacturing
INDEX, 1962 = 100

(RATIO SCALE)

DC
DOLLARS

3.00
100
90 _

2.50

80 70
60

-

PRODUCTIVITY 1/
(Left Scale)

50 40

-

^"«#^f

^

% t

^

'OJ%?
f S

30

1.50

S^

_£r-J\

-

2.00

-

^T

-

:

REAL HOURLY COMPENSATION
(Right Scale)

1.00
.90

1/

.80

25

.70
.60

20

.50

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

I/OUTPUT PER MAN-HOUR FOR ALL EMPLOYEES.
I/HOURLY COMPENSATION FOR PRODUCTION WORKERS DEFLATED BY THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX, 1962 = 100.
SOURCE: COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS (BASED ON DATA FROM VARIOUS PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SOURCES).




risen strongly and consistently, and their movement has been essentially
parallel.
THE OPPORTUNITY FOR LEISURE

One of the most important choices that technological improvement permits
is that between increased output, incomes, and consumption, on the one
hand, and increased leisure on the other. The growth in output per
capita cited earlier underestimates the improvement in the well-being of the
population to the extent that workers have voluntarily chosen to take some
of the potential rise in their incomes in the form of shorter hours, longer
vacations, or later entry into, or earlier retirement from, the labor force.
When workers voluntarily choose to reduce their working time—preferring
an extra hour of leisure to its equivalent in income—these extra hours of
leisure might properly be given a monetary value equal to the incomes
foregone.
It is estimated that average annual hours per employee were reduced by
about 25 percent between 1909 and 1963. In manufacturing, where measures are best, the average workweek of production workers fell from 51 hours
in 1909 to 40.4 hours last year. Moreover, the average number of days
worked in a year has declined substantially, through longer vacations and
more frequent holidays. Between 1900 and 1960 male life expectancy at
birth rose by 19 years. But the expected number of male working years
rose by only 9, primarily because of typically earlier retirement from, and
later entry into, the work force.
Not only average annual hours per worker, but also average annual hours
worked per member of the total population have declined appreciably
since 1900. As a result output per capita rose by 250 percent, a considerably smaller increase than the 350 percent rise in output per man-hour.
On the whole, the discipline of modern production permits neither the
individual worker nor, except very crudely, workers as a group to weigh and
to choose freely the precise combination of income and leisure that best suits
their preferences. Nevertheless, we may expect that over the longer run,
some further reduction is likely to occur in hours worked and that this will,
in a general way, reflect an increasing preference for leisure over income as
further increases in potential income occur at the existing level of hours.
SOME NONMEASURABLE GAINS

Even if we adjust for potential gains taken in the form of leisure, the increase in measured output per capita fails to account for a wide range of real,
but unmeasurable benefits of technical progress. We have no satisfactory
way of measuring the additional output value incorporated in completely
new products, and our methods of measurement probably often undervalue
the contribution to real incomes of improvements in the quality of existing
products.
For example, can anyone measure how much better off people are as a




result of telephone communication? The benefit is surely not measured by
comparing the cost of messages delivered by mail and messages spoken along
a wire. Nylon is not only cheaper than silk, it is more durable, easier to
care for, more resistant to stains. The benefit of transoceanic air travel is
not measured solely by the reduction of cost relative to sea travel—the
saving of travel time permits many persons to visit Europe or the Far East
who would never otherwise be able to do so. Examples abound in the area
of medical care. How do we measure the benefit of a vaccine that practically eliminates smallpox or polio—a medicine that conquers tuberculosis
or pneumonia—scientific discoveries that permit us to attack mental
retardation?
Technological change has permitted everyone to share experiences previously, by their very nature, limited to a few—to attend a World Series
game, a class taught by a great teacher, a recital by Pablo Casals.
Moreover, no measure of gross national product attempts to take account
of the reduced human costs of producing it. A job on an assembly line
may be dull; but it is a vast improvement over the backbreaking drudgery
of many jobs a century earlier. And if one complains that our output
measures fail to take account of the pollution of urban air and water, it
must be noted that they also fail to take account of the fact that inexpensive automobile transportation permits city dwellers to escape to the ocean
beaches, the mountains, the areas of forest wilderness.
Thus technological advance and the rising productivity associated with
it have many human payoffs: higher incomes and consumption, longer
life, reduced suffering and illness, reduced drudgery, greater leisure, and
an improved quality of life that cannot be measured in income statistics.
Philosophers may debate whether all this contributes to human happiness
or the edification of the soul. Ordinary men—those who have not yet enjoyed the fruits of technological advance, those who have tasted them, and
those grown accustomed to the diet—all pursue them with fervor undiminished by the philosophers5 doubts.
AMERICA'S ROLE IN THE WORLD

America's position of free world leadership carries heavy responsibilities—
for our own defense and that of our allies, and for assistance to the newly
awakened nations of Latin America, Africa, and Asia. These burdens are
not easy. But continued rapid technological advance can permit them
to be borne with minimum strain.
The burden of maintaining our defense and aid programs is not only
that of producing the value of output that we wish to devote to these
purposes. In a world of fixed exchange rates and free convertibility of
currencies into each other and of the dollar into gold, it is also a problem
of our balance of payments.
Continued rapid technological advance can help in three ways. First,
by contributing to a rise in productivity, it can permit us to hold our price
level steady in the face of rising wage rates. Combined with some tendency

715-113 O-64-7



91

for prices to rise in other industrial countries, this will permit us to compete
more effectively in world trade. Second, the higher rates of profit that
arise from investments exploiting new technological advances will reduce
the outflow of capital and attract it from abroad. Third, and perhaps
most important, the continued development of new products is one of the
surest roads to export expansion. Within a few years after the introduction of almost any new product in today's world, a dozen nations will be able
to compete with us in its production. To maintain or expand our share
of world exports we must continually be in the vanguard of product development. This requires continuous innovation, increasing technological
development, and the most rapid possible exploitation of the new opportunities that emerge from scientific advance.
Thus, rapid technological change needs to be fostered not alone for its
effects on the growth of our internal comfort and well-being. It is also an
urgent necessity for the solution of our international economic problems. It
is the answer to those who say that America must choose between two
sets of irreconcilable objectives—domestic prosperity and international payments equilibrium. Combined with the responsible price and wage making
discussed in Chapter 4 of this Report, rapid technological gains can permit
us to reconcile policies for high employment and growing incomes domestically with our objective of achieving equilibrium in our international payments. It is truly the "great reconciler."
SOURCES OF TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS
Technical change occurs in several ways. In its most distinctive and
easily identified form, it is a process that begins with an advance in basic
scientific knowledge. Such an advance may then lead—often after years
or even decades—to the application of the new scientific knowledge to
a "practical" problem: the "invention" of a way to produce an existing
good or service in a more efficient (i.e., less costly) way or the production
of a new good or service.
INVENTION AND INNOVATION

Today the process of invention has been increasingly organized and
systematized, and we now identify "R&D" (research and development)
as a major activity in our economy. Nonetheless, it must be recognized
that significant inventions are often still the product of the individual
working alone, sometimes with little formal scientific training. And some
of the principal breakthroughs in pure science—particularly, the development of new theoretical concepts—are often still the product of individual
scholars.
The final step in the process of technological advance comes after the
application has been proved technically feasible and seems to promise
economic gain—when it is actually introduced and used. It is at this




92

point that technological change really occurs, a step identified as "innovation." It is important to emphasize that new knowledge and even its
application in a technically successful way has, by itself, no direct economic
significance. Innovation is the key element in the process of technical
change from the standpoint of economic progress. The innovator, whether
the inventor himself, a small entrepreneur, the manager of a giant firm, or
a government official, must make the decision to take the risks of introducing a new and untried process, good, or service. The costs of using a
new process or the acceptability of a new product are uncertain until tested
on the production line or in the market place. And as cost and demand
conditions change, inventions that previously had no chance of successful
application may become economically feasible.
Technological change can also come about without any conscious decision to "innovate," but through the many minor changes that occur from
day to day as existing processes are used. It may also come about with
little or no change in the physical circumstances of production. For example, the discovery that a furnace performs more effectively at a higher
or lower temperature than previously supposed may be applied through only
the adjustment of a valve.
INVESTMENT AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE

But much technological change requires an alteration of the physical
apparatus of production. And where the innovation is of any significance,
such an alteration will ordinarly require an act of investment—the modification of existing apparatus, the installation of new machines or equipment,
even, the construction of new buildings. This fact has several important
consequences.
One such consequence is that the rate at which technological progress
can be incorporated in production is closely tied to the rate of gross investment. Stepping up the rate of growth of the stock of plant and
equipment accelerates the improvement in its quality and productivity.
A second consequence of the tie between technology and physical investment is that normally new technology is not introduced all at once. Particularly where the change represents a new process for accomplishing some:
productive task, it will often pay business firms to introduce it only as theii
existing facilities become less efficient with age, thus permitting the differential efficiency of the new equipment to compensate for its additional
capital cost. But even if the new equipment is so superior in its productivity
that it would pay to scrap the previous equipment immediately, production
of new equipment takes time. It would have been impossible to convert all
railroads from steam to diesel in one year, simply because the makers of
diesel engines could not economically expand their production fast enough.
The physical investment lag—and a perhaps equally important information lag—mean that it often takes years, sometimes decades, for new
technology to spread throughout an industry or an economy. The in-




93

troduction of automation is a case in point. In many applications,
automated facilities—which control productive processes through servomechanical ("feed-back") devices—accomplish dramatic savings in direct
labor. As with previous major technological changes, one can expect this
innovation to be applied to an increasing number of activities. But merely
because automation is technically feasible in many applications, it is not
necessarily economically feasible, even though it may greatly reduce direct
labor costs. Higher capital costs, lack of flexibility, and the necessity for
large runs make automation noneconomic in thousands of applications
where it is technically feasible. Moreover, even where it is economically
advantageous eventually to substitute automated for nonautomated equipment, its introduction may well be delayed until the relative cost of
operating the older equipment increases substantially. In a previous generation, electric power did not displace the steam engine overnight, nor
did the steam engine in its time take over from the waterwheel overnight.
Only a small fraction of the ultimate benefits of automation have yet been
realized.

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND AGGREGATE DEMAND
Like all previous technological change, automation creates the necessity for many workers to change jobs during their lifetimes and for sons
to find different work from that of their fathers. The problem created by
these labor market adjustments is discussed in a later part of this chapter,
together with the policies that can lubricate such adjustments and ease
their human toll.
THE EXPANSION OF DEMAND

Quite apart from these adjustment problems many are convinced that
recent and current technological change is somehow different in its employment effects from all previous changes. This conviction rests upon one or
both of the following propositions: (1) that our productive powers are now
outstripping our wants and needs and ability to buy our own output, and
thus our economy's ability to create new jobs; and (2) that technological
change is now destroying jobs at a much faster rate than ever before.
If the Nation's ability and eagerness to buy output can and does keep
pace with its ability to produce, a speeded-up pace of technological advance
means that standards of living and economic security can rise more rapidly
than ever. In this case, faster progress of productivity is to be sought and
welcomed. Only if demand cannot keep pace (or if the required adjustments cannot readily be accommodated) is there a basis for fearing more
rapid technological change.
Historically, there is surely no evidence of any inability of demand to
rise along with productive capacity, or of any permanent inadequacy of
total job opportunities. Rather, our technologically progressive economy
has brought higher output and incomes, and more and better consumption




94

and investment, along with the voluntary decision to take some of the
fruits of progress in the form of leisure. Since 1929, for instance, output
per worker has almost doubled. If total demand had not grown since
1929, and if we were still producing the 1929 level of output, using present
methods of production and the present shorter workweek, it would take just
26 million workers to do it. This would leave two-thirds of our present
labor force unemployed. Instead, the demand for output is almost three
times as high, and employment is 50 percent higher than in 1929. If total
demand had grown since 1929 only as fast as population, 46 percent of our
labor force would now be unemployed as a result of the higher
productivity.
Clearly, the increase in total demand for our potential output is the factor
that has reconciled advancing technology with rising employment.
And it should continue to do so far into the future. Despite dramatic
increases in average family income, American consumers have continued to
spend a remarkably constant proportion of their disposable income on consumer goods and services. And a very large proportion of our families
still earn very modest incomes. Millions of families live in actual poverty,
as the preceding chapter has shown, and half of American families in 1963
had incomes below $6,200. If median family income increased at the same
rate in the next 17 years as it has since 1947, half of American families in
1980 would still have incomes below $9,300 in today's prices. Today, even
families at twice that level have no trouble finding ways to spend extra
income. There is surely no reason to believe that any plausible rate of
technical progress could lead to consumer satiation in the lifetimes of
persons now on earth.
Technological change permits any given level of output to be produced
with less labor and, in that sense, destroys jobs. But it also provides a
significant spur to investment and consumption and thus creates jobs. Technological change makes existing capital equipment obsolete. New processes
and products increase the profitability of investment and stimulate business
demand for new machines, new equipment, and new buildings. Technological change both generates high levels of investment and gives consumers
new purchasing incentives. Historically periods of rapid technological
change have generally been periods of high and rising employment.
There is, of course, no automatic mechanism which guarantees that actual
demand will grow each year at exactly the same rate as potential full-employment output. An economy characterized by technological change and
growth always faces the challenge of maintaining a growth in demand
sufficient for full employment, but not so high as to lead to inflation.
Fortunately, growing sophistication in the uses of economic policy, particularly fiscal and monetary policy, make this goal more nearly attainable
than ever before.
These tools of economic policy are capable of righting the balance
whenever the job-destroying effects of technological progress outweigh
its job-creating effects. They will succeed in this task, however, only if




95

they are adjusted to take account of changes in the rate of productivity
gains, whether from an altered pace of technological advance or from other
sources.
THE TREND OF LABOR PRODUCTIVITY

Some recent developments have been cited frequently to support the
belief that technological change is accelerating. In certain instances, automation has greatly lifted output per man-hour and has revolutionized the
productive process. These instances are highly dramatic, but they are
insufficient for evaluating the over-all impact of technological progress.
Such an evaluation must be based on a study of the trend in over-all productivity—output per man-hour—for the private economy.
The main difficulty in assessing the trend of productivity is that current
output per man-hour is also affected by numerous transitory factors, most
significantly by fluctuations in output and changes in the average age of
the machinery in use. For example, during recessions employment falls
proportionately less than output as a result of lags in employer reaction,
uncertainty about the future, the need to retain the same supervisory and
maintenance personnel over wide ranges of output, and hiring and firing
costs. Employed manpower is not fully utilized, and the level of output
per man-hour is depressed. This is usually followed by rapid rates of increase
in labor productivity during the early phases of cyclical expansions (Chart 2).
Moreover, our statistical measures of productivity are far from exact.
Productivity is a ratio of recorded output to recorded labor input, and
relatively small errors in measuring either the numerator or denominator
can distort the pattern of change in productivity. Particularly in measuring
productivity for individual sectors of the economy, there are statistical problems associated with the measurement of output change; and measures of
labor input are also a source of difficulty. (Currently there are two separate
official series on employment and man-hours—one based primarily on payroll
data reported by business establishments and the other based on a monthly
survey of households.) The Department of Commerce is now engaged in
major revisions of output data, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics is planning to.publish revised productivity indexes during 1964, based on the
revised output data. Recorded changes in productivity for individual years
and sectors must be viewed as a broad gauge—rather than a precise reading—of economic performance.
With these qualifications, productivity measurements for recent years
are presented in Table 17, accompanied by some comparisons with longerrun trends. Labor input data are based on information collected primarily
from establishments. The table shows that productivity gains have been
healthy but not unprecedentedly large during the past 3 years. While
improvement has varied among sectors, the average gain in each case has
been greater during the past 3 years than in the preceding decade, but less
than the average of 1947-50.




T A B L E 17.—Changes in output per man-hour in the private economy•, 1979-63
Percentage change per year
Period

Total
private

Agriculture

Nonagriculture
Total

Manufacturing i

Nonmanufacturing *
(»)

1919 to 1947
1947 to 1963

2.2
3.2

1.4
6.1

2.0
2.6

*3.0
2.7

1947 to 1950
1950 to 1960
1960 to 1963

4.5
2.7
3.5

8.8
5.4
5.5

3.7
2.1
3.2

4.3
2.0
3.7

3.4
2.2
2.9

1960 to 1961
1961 to 1962
1962 to 1963

3.3
3.9
3.5

5.9
3.4
7.4

2.9
3.8
3.0

2.6
5.4
3.1

3.1
2.9
2.8

2.5

» Department of Labor estimates for 1960-63 are in the course of revision and are not available (see note to
Table C-32). Therefore estimates for all years beginning with 1947 have been made by the Council of
Economic Advisers on a consistent basis using Department of Commerce net output estimates.
2
Based on data from private sources.
s Not available.
NOTE.—Man-hours are based primarily on establishment data.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Department of Labor, and Council of Economic Advisers.

To determine whether these relatively larger gains of the past 3 years
exceed past trends, it is necessary to sort out the cyclical and transitory
factors affecting productivity. For this purpose, several alternative statistical
analyses were undertaken on the noinfarm productivity gains of 1949-60 to
determine the separate influences on productivity of the average age of
equipment stocks, variations in the growth of output, and changes in the
degree of capacity utilization. These findings were then used to estimate
the productivity gains that might have been expected in the years 1961
through 1963 if the past relationships and trends still held.
Depending on which statistical analysis is used (and there is no clear
basis for preferring one to another), the recent gains are either about in line
with the expectation or exceed it by amounts ranging up to 1 percentage
point. These differences are sufficiently tentative that further experience
is needed to confirm a positive conclusion.
Recent large gains could reflect no more than a possibly unusually cautious
hiring policy on the part of business in the current expansion. Experience
with the slack labor market of recent years may have deterred the anticipatory hiring of overhead and skilled personnel, which appears typically to take
place during a business expansion as insurance against the possibility of future labor shortages. If so, the recent higher rates of productivity increase
may prove to be transitory. Yet optimism may still be warranted. If objective analysis does not support a firm conclusion that the trend of productivity has accelerated, neither can that possibility be dismissed. Technological progress may indeed have accelerated, but its impact on productivity
may be only gradually becoming visible because of the time that must
elapse before innovations become embodied in new capital equipment and
expressed in new organizational forms.




97

ADJUSTMENT TO TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE
The benefits to society from technological change are not costless. For
some individual workers, businesses, and communities technological change
brings new opportunity: better jobs, higher profits, greater prosperity. For
others it imposes burdens and even hardships. For technical change may
reduce the value of—or even make obsolete—particular labor skills, plant
and equipment, or natural resources.
By and large our enterprise system works well in producing the shifts of
capital and managerial resources from one activity to another that changed
circumstances—including technical progress—dictate. But unless the individual worker who is displaced from his job by technological change finds
other employment soon, both he and society lose.
Even when over-all employment opportunities are adequate, job security
for the individual worker is never certain. Technological change has perhaps been the most perennially disruptive influence on job security; but
changes in consumer tastes and business organization, increased competition, and decisions of public policy also frequently and unpredictably disrupt existing job patterns. And even in a strong labor market, it almost
always takes time for displaced workers to find new jobs.
The development of new processes directly alters the labor requirements
of particular firms and industries and of the whole economy. More indirectly, by raising real incomes and changing relative prices, technological
advance induces shifts in the industrial composition of output and employment. A faster-than-average pace of technological change reduces costs of
production in the industry where it occurs and is ordinarily reflected either
in a decline in the relative price, or in an improvement in the relative
quality, of the products of that industry.
Sometimes the technologically induced lowering of price or raising of
quality leads to enough expansion of demand actually to increase employment in the industry where the change occurs. Where technological change
gives birth to an entire new industry, this is, of course, true. Automobiles
in the 1920's and, more recently, airlines, office machinery, and electronic
and communications equipment are clear cases of this sort. In other activities, of which farming and coal mining are good examples, spectacular productivity advances have not led to equivalent increases in sales, and employment has declined sharply.
If rates of technological advance were not too unequal among industries
and over-all growth is rapid, employment might still expand in some industries without requiring layoffs in others. Normally, however, transitional
problems arise, as the number of jobs in specific firms, industries, occupations, or geographic areas declines more rapidly than the number of workers
seeking to fill them, even after account is taken of retirements and voluntary
job changes.




THE CHANGING DISTRIBUTION OF JOB REQUIREMENTS

In the past decade, jobs have been destroyed and created at very unequal
rates in various regions, occupations, and industries.
Changing regional requirements are illustrated by the fact that nonagricultural employment actually declined between 1953 and 1963 in Rhode
Island, Pennsylvania, Michigan, and West Virginia, remained essentially
unchanged in Maine and Ohio, and rose by 1.5 million (almost 40 percent)
in California, 65 percent in Florida, 80 percent in Arizona, and 97 percent
in Nevada. Even more striking disparities can be found among metropolitan areas.
Shifts in the occupational distribution of jobs have been equally dramatic.
The number of farmers and farm workers declined by 2.8 million, or 40 percent, between 1950 and 1960. In more narrowly defined occupations, there
were employment declines of 25 percent among locomotive engineers and
firemen, 38 percent among textile weavers and spinners, 42 percent among
telegraph operators, and 50 percent among fishermen. During this same
period, employment rose by 45 percent among professional nurses, 49 percent among teachers, and 60 percent among engineers and draftsmen.
Changes in the industrial composition of jobs were highlighted by the
continued decline in the importance of goods-producing industries as
sources of employment. Total employment in manufacturing, mining, and
construction declined by 2 percent between 1953 and 1963. In contrast,
employment increased by 65 percent in State and local government, 41
percent in services, 33 percent in finance, and J6 percent in trade.
Automation is often regarded as having a qualitatively different effect
on worker displacement than did earlier forms of technological change.
Specifically, it is suggested that automation requires a higher average level
of education or skills than did earlier forms of technology, and that this
complicates the adjustment process for displaced blue-collar workers whose
old skills have been rendered obsolete while lack of adequate educational
background disqualifies them from filling the new jobs created by
automation.
However, the current changes in skill requirements appear to continue
a long evolutionary process. Professional and technical workers and craftsmen, for instance, accounted for about 15 percent of the work force in
1900, 23 percent in 1950, and 26 percent in 1960. In contrast, unskilled
farm and nonfarm workers accounted for 30 percent of the labor force in
1900, 11 percent in 1950, and only 8 percent in 1960. It is not clear whether
automation has caused any acceleration in these trends. Further studies
are needed, to which the proposed Commission on Automation should
contribute.
Whatever the exact pace and cause, it is clear that the proportion of jobs
calling for the exercise of considerable responsibility and for a substantial
educational background is rising.




99

THE ADJ USTMENT PROCESS

With the dramatic changes we have experienced in recent decades in
the distribution of available job openings and in the nature of job requirements, it is remarkable that labor market adjustment takes place as efficiently as it does. But American workers are highly mobile.
Although many workers, particularly older ones, are reluctant to sever
local ties, even when they become unemployed, there is nevertheless an impressive degree of geographical mobility. On the average, during each
year of the past decade over 6 percent of the civilian population moved its
residence across county lines, and 3 percent across State lines. During prosperous periods, the rates of mobility out of labor surplus areas are considerably higher. Today only 55 percent of all persons aged 25 and over
still live in the State of their birth. Rapidly growing areas have managed
to attract large numbers of workers from sections of the country where the
natural population increase has exceeded the expansion of job opportunities.
The net in-migration rate between 1950 and 1960 was over 50 percent in
Florida and Nevada, and between 20 and 45 percent in Arizona, Alaska,
California, and Delaware. In contrast, the net out-migration rate was 20
percent or higher from such States as Arkansas, West Virginia, and
Mississippi.
During 1961 some 8.1 million workers changed jobs, including about
2.6 million who changed voluntarily in order to improve their economic
status. Mobility declines rapidly with age; still, almost 6 percent of men
45-64 years old changed jobs in 1961. Fifty-six percent of all job changes
involved a shift between major industry groups, and 47 percent between
major occupation groups.
The extensive training and retraining programs conducted by many,
though not by enough, private employers contribute significantly to the
occupational flexibility of the work force. In 1962, establishments accounting for almost 50 percent of private nonfarm employment had some
type of training program and were providing training for 15 percent of
their employees. The natural turnover in the labor force also contributes
to this flexibility. An average of 1,275,000 older persons will die or retire
during each year of the current decade, while an average of 425,000 women
will leave for family reasons. At the same time an average of 2.6 million
young persons will enter the labor market each year, so that by 1970, 30
percent of the labor force will consist of persons who were not in the
job market in 1960. This substantial inflow of new workers can provide
a supply of relatively well educated and mobile labor for expanding
activities.
Indeed, improved education has been the primary factor permitting the
rapid adjustment of the labor supply to the demands of changing technology. The average educational attainment of new workers currently
entering the labor force is about 40 percent higher than that of those
currently retiring. Just since the beginning of World War II the median




100

level of education among the entire adult male labor force aged 18-64 has
risen by more than 50 percent. The proportion of the labor force with
an 8th grade education or less declined from 36 percent in 1952 to 26 percent in 1962. In contrast, the proportion who were college graduates rose
from 8 to 11 percent. And this educational upgrading will certainly continue. More than 1 million persons are expected to graduate from college
in 1964 and 1965, and an additional 220,000 persons will receive advanced
degrees. The total number of degree recipients will be 70 percent greater
than a decade earlier. Unsatisfied as we are, and rightfully so, with our
educational accomplishments, it is clear that rising levels of education have
been the major force permitting the rapid—and on the whole successful—
adjustment of the work force to changing occupational requirements.
DEFECTS OF THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS

Displaced workers rarely find new jobs instantaneously. Time is required
for the flow of job information and for matching the location, education,
skill, wage, working conditions, and other preferences of job hunters with the
requirements of employers. Personal contacts, employment services, and
help-wanted advertisements provide important channels of communication
between employers hunting for workers, and workers hunting for jobs.
Nonetheless, the flow of labor market information is unnecessarily slow and
circumscribed. Because of insufficient staff and, in some instances, because
of the failure of employers to provide information, local offices of the
Federal-State Employment Service cannot provide complete information on
local job opportunities, to say nothing of a full exchange of information
among different localities. In the absence of adequate vocational guidance,
many young workers are not properly prepared for the activities in which
employment is expanding most rapidly. Geographic movement is often
restrained by lack of information and by the inability of workers to finance
transportation, job search, and change of residence. Occupational mobility
is often inhibited by the absence of adequate educational background and
the inability to acquire needed skills.
The average displaced worker spends far too long between jobs, even in
periods of adequate demand. The average duration of unemployment was
11.6 weeks during the period 1955-57, when the over-all unemployment rate
averaged 4.3 percent. And, during the boom years of 1951-53, when the unemployment rate averaged 3.1 percent and the number of unfilled jobs very
probably exceeded the number of unemployed workers, the average duration
of unemployment was still 8.7 weeks. These statistics do not refer specifically
to the average period of joblessness for workers displaced by technological
change, but they do indicate the time-consuming nature of the job-hunting
process. They also suggest that reduction of the human cost of technological
change will require policies—both private and public—for improving and
speeding the matching of available jobs and workers.
Such policies can never be completely adequate. The burdens of transitional unemployment may be harsh, but they sometimes represent only part




IOI

of the cost of change to the displaced worker. The worker made permanently unemployable by technological change is relatively rare, but it is frequent
for a displaced worker to find himself required to accept a less challenging
and lower paying job. The specialized skill, experience, and seniority which
contributed to earning power in the original job frequently do not have
transferable market value.
Moreover, the burden of technological displacement often falls most
heavily on those least able to bear it. As noted already, the general drift
of technological change has tended to be toward increased rather than reduced skill and education requirements and thus in favor of groups already
higher up on the income ladder. To be sure, some of the elite of the labor
force have suffered—printers and flight engineers, to take two recent examples. But overwhelmingly, the groups displaced have been the lessskilled, less-educated, and therefore poorer members of the labor force.
But even if the incidence of technological change were entirely random, the
wealthier community, the more prosperous business, the more highly trained
and better paid workers have greater adaptability, and greater resources
to help them through the period of adaptation.
When technological change displaces considerable numbers of workers
in a particular region or occupation, and these workers lack the skills or
mobility necessary to find other jobs quickly, their continuing unemployment can well be called "structural." Pockets of such structural unemployment are never absent, and the problems they present for public policy are
intensified (and partly .concealed) in a generally slack economy with
excessive over-all unemployment.
In its testimony before the Senate Subcommittee on Employment and
Manpower on October 28, 1963, the Council considered at some length the
interrelationships between slack labor markets resulting from insufficient
total demand for goods and services and problems of structural unemployment. It dealt in particular with the question whether recent technological change may have increased the incidence of structural unemployment
in the American economy and the possible relevance of this for policies to
raise demand. The Council explained in detail its reasons for doubting
that structural unemployment has increased, but emphasized that such
unemployment is both an economic and a human problem of serious proportions and that Government has a responsibility for taking appropriate
measures to reduce it. The bulk of this testimony is reprinted as Appendix
A to this Report.
PRIVATE POLICIES FACILITATING ADJUSTMENT

Recognition of the human toll that can result from technological change
and labor displacement has led to a wide range of private efforts to reduce
transitional costs. Human adjustment problems are minimized when
needed work force reductions can be accomplished by normal attrition and
reassignment. This goal—toward which firms with enlightened personnel
policies strive—is often made economically feasible by the limited scope




102

of many innovations or by a sufficiently high rate of voluntary employee
turnover. But it requires careful planning. The Bureau of Labor Statistics
recently surveyed the work history of 2,800 persons employed in 18 offices
doing data processing work which was to be transferred to electronic computers. The firms tried to ensure employment security for their current
work force by advance planning and curtailment of hiring. Twelve months
after the new installation, more than half of the workers were still in their
original positions, and more than 30 percent had been transferred to other
positions in the firm. Thirteen percent had quit or retired, and less than
1 percent were laid off.
Collective bargaining agreements have been concerned increasingly with
problems of accommodating change while protecting worker security.
In recent agreements, increasing stress has been placed on interplant seniority pools, relocation allowances, early retirement provisions, and severance
pay plans that provide a lump sum payment or its equivalent as reimbursement for the income losses associated with displacement. The recent Kaiser
Steel-United Steelworkers and West Coast Longshoremen's agreements provided employment guarantees or income assurances for workers displaced
by technological change. The Railroad Arbitration Board decreed the
eventual elimination of 90 percent of diesel locomotive firemen's jobs in
freight and yard service, but it provided income guarantees for those with
2 to 10 years of seniority, and lifetime employment protection for those
with greater seniority.
Private programs to minimize displacement or to reimburse displaced
workers are desirable because the burden of adjustment is prevented from
falling exclusively on the displaced worker. Such programs serve a doubly
useful purpose when they facilitate the rapid introduction and economical
use of new processes. However, they can often be only partial remedies.
In many instances of major technological change, private programs either
are impracticable (for example, if the displacement occurs in industry A
as a result of technological change in industry B), or else cannot provide
complete worker protection without unduly slowing the pace of technical
advance, and preventing the flexible and efficient utilization of the labor
force.
PUBLIC POLICY AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE

Two central points emerge from the preceding discussion. First, technological advance is a key element in economic progress; achieving the
goals of rapid growth and higher living standards and better international
balance depends on maintaining and even increasing its pace. Second,
technological change—like other kinds of change—demands adaptations
on the part of labor, business, and the community at large; and these adaptations impose real burdens on adversely affected individuals.
Each of these points has significant implications for public policy. They
suggest that Government should stimulate and facilitate rapid technological




103

change in order to enlarge its benefits, at the same time attempting to
strengthen processes of adaptation and to lighten the burdens of change
on affected individuals.
The single most important support the Government can provide for
accomplishing each of these purposes is to help the economy achieve and
sustain high employment. Without strong markets for their products,
businessmen will have inadequate incentives to undertake the risks inherent
in innovation. Likewise, the economy's adaptation to technical change—
and particularly its ability to transfer the resources released by technical
change to other industries and activities—become immeasurably weakened
in the absence of strong demand.
TAX STIMULUS FOR INVESTMENT

Enactment of the pending tax bill is thus crucial to the achievement
of our dual objectives. First, it helps insure the increase in demand necessary to provide markets for our growing productive potential. But the tax
program of the Administration carries a further impact of great importance
for the encouragement of rapid technological innovation. This is the
specific emphasis on encouraging investment. The investment tax credit
and the revised depreciation guidelines of 1962 were designed particularly
to reward firms which raised their rate of investment in new plant and equipment. And the pending bill carries this emphasis further, with a large
reduction in corporate taxes, a cutback of risk-inhibiting top bracket individual tax rates, and a further broadening of the investment credit.
The stimulus that tax reduction will give to investment both through
its effects on markets generally and through its specific improvement in
investment incentives is one of the most powerful ways available to encourage the rapid introduction of new and better technology.
GOVERNMENT SUPPORT OF
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCE

A healthy rate of innovation is encouraged by preserving freedom of
entry into markets by new competitors, and by a patent system which provides positive incentives to both invention and innovation.
The Government has also provided more direct encouragement of technological advance, and it can and should do more. Federal support is
clearly warranted and appropriate when it encourages innovations that
will be used directly to improve performance of a service recognized as a
direct responsibility of the Federal Government. National defense is the
most important current example of such an activity. But there are many
other activities in which government—Federal, State, or local—plays a major
role: providing public highways, airways, inland waterways, weather services,
and postal services; maintaining an atmosphere free from dangerous pollution and an adequate supply of pure water; and a long list covering such
diverse fields as criminology, recreation, and education. In such activities
Government has a special responsibility to undertake, or to support, research




104

and development which promise improvements in public services—better
quality, greater safety and reliability, and lower cost. In none of these
fields can private incentives be expected to provide an adequate research
effort.
But there are other situations that justify Federal support of invention and
innovation, even in areas that are and should remain the province of private
enterprise. This is surely true where the benefits to the community extend
far beyond the gains to the individual buyers of the new product or service.
The benefits to these buyers may be quite insufficient to cover the private
costs and risks of developing the new good or service; yet the benefits to
society at large may pay a handsome return to the innovational activity.
Medical research is clearly an example of this kind of activity. Improvements in medical technology are certainly in the public interest; yet the costs
of many such improvements could not—and perhaps should not—be borne
by the immediate beneficiaries of the new knowledge. Through a political
process society has determined that a larger effort should be made, and
Government funds primarily support it.
REASONS FOR UNDERINVESTMENT IN
RESEARCH AND INNOVATION

Aside from medicine, the other principal field in which significant Federal
support has been given to technological change in an essentially private,
civilian industry is agriculture. This type of support has a long history,
going back at least to 1887, when the Hatch Act established the national
system of agricultural experiment stations, and to 1914, when the Agricultural Extension Service was founded. The basic justification for supporting
agricultural research differs from that applicable to national defense or
medicine. And it is a justification which would seem to extend to other
industries as well. In a number of industries the amount of organized private research undertaken is insignificant, and the technology of many of these
low-research industries has notably failed to keep pace with advances elsewhere in the economy.
Several factors can be identified to account for the underinvestment in
research and development on the part of private firms in such industries.
The primary one is an inability of the individual firm to recover the costs
of research in its prices, even though the additional value to the direct consumers of the product would greatly exceed those costs. Particularly in the
case of basic research, the "product" is new knowledge; but scientific knowledge cannot be appropriated by an individual firm. Other firms and even
other industries—which have not incurred the research costs—share the
benefits. As a new development moves further along the research and development spectrum toward actual production, an individual firm may be
able, through the patent system, to appropriate to itself rewards sufficient to
justify the costs and risks of developing and introducing the new process or
new product. The clearest case for public support thus applies to the more
basic forms of research. This case is reinforced by greater riskiness at this




105

early end of the R&D spectrum. Ordinarily, at least, uncertainty decreases
as a new process or product approaches specific economic application. Indeed, the research cycle can usefully be viewed as a process of progressive
reduction of uncertainty as more knowledge is acquired.
Another reason for the virtual absence of organized research in many
industries is the high cost of research in the relevant technologies in relation
to the typical size of firms in those industries. Research plant and equipment costs are very high in nuclear physics, for example. In other cases,
effective research may require large staffs of scientists and engineers since
advances may depend on contributions from many scientific specialties.
Furthermore, the small establishment is unable to take advantage of the
spreading of risks among a number of R&D projects under way at the same
time. The larger firm, able to support a number of projects, can safely
take the risk of many "failures" (i.e., projects that do not produce economically applicable results), since a few successes will ordinarily more than
compensate for the entire investment. The large firm has the additional
advantage of being in a better position to market successfully the new products of its research laboratory because of its broader market coverage. For
example, in the chemicals industry—which is relatively active in research—
many firms typically participate in a broad range of product markets. In
this field, at least, where new R&D results are often profitably applicable
in more than one market, the large firm is better able to recognize and take
advantage of possible payoffs in several applications.
However, some industries characterized by large firms undertake relatively little R&D. Part of the explanation seems to lie in the age of the industry. Industries which were already mature before sophisticated scientific and engineering techniques began to be applied to industry lack
a research tradition. Many important newer industries, such as electronics,
grew directly out of modern organized research and development, and their
managements find it natural and profitable to continue this emphasis on
R&D as they mature.
The fact that some industries spend little on research does not in itself
prove that there would be high payoffs to additional research. It may be
that research effort is slight because it is clear that it would not pay. Nor
does it automatically follow that productivity gains in these fields are low.
They may, and often do, show rapid gains based on innovations by the
capital goods industries which supply their equipment.
Nevertheless, the above analysis has suggested some reasons, quite unrelated to the potential gains from accelerated R&D, that account for an
underinvestment in research in many fields—particularly where firms are
small. The data at the bottom of Table 18 clearly show that manufacturing firms with R&D programs, and with 5,000 or more employees, did—on
the average—more than twice as much research as a percentage of sales
as did smaller firms.




106

TABLE 18.—Research and development performed by industry, 1961
Millions of dollars
Industry and size

Total

Company
financed

Percent of sales i
Total

Company
financed

By industry:
10,872

4,631

4.4

3,957
2,404
1,073

392
871
877
610

24.2
10.4
4.6
4.4

Motor vehicles and other transportation equipment
Professional and scientific instruments
Petroleum refining and extraction
Primary metals
_
___

384
294
160

212
286
151

Rubber products
Fabricated metal products
Food and kindred products
Stone, clay, and glass products-

126
118
105
103

90
106
95

Total—.
Aircraft and missiles
Electrical equipment and communication.
Chemicals and allied products
Machinery
__
___

Paper and allied products
Textiles and apparel
Lumber, wood products, and furnitureOther industries

60
33
9
»348

3 127

1.9
2.4
3.8
3.6
3.0
2.3
4.0
1.0
.8
1.5
1.0
.3
1.7

2.9
7.3
1.0
2.2
1.3
1.8
.7
.5
1.4

.8
(2)

.5

By size of company:
Less than 1,000 employees..
1,000 to 4,999 employees-...
5,000 employees or more

935
9,341

()
591
3,728

2.0
2.2
5.2

1.5
2.0

1 Data for manufacturing companies with R&D programs.
2 Not separately available but included in total.
3
Includes dollar amounts for other manufacturing and nonmanufacturing companies not elsewhere
classified.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Spurce: National Science Foundation.
THE EXTENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF R&D

Table 18 shows the heavy concentration of R&D performance in 3 industry
groups: aircraft and missiles, electrical equipment and communications,
and chemicals and allied products. These 3 fields account for 68 percent
of the total. Together with machinery and motor vehicles and other transportation equipment, they account for 84 percent. Professional and scientific instruments is a smaller industry in which research and development
expenditures are high relative to sales. Federal support for research is
important in several of these cases. Yet it is striking that these 6 highresearch industries all show an important volume of company-financed
R&D.
The data in Table 19 show that the Federal Government is already a
heavy contributor to research and development in America, although its
support is now heavily concentrated in areas related to defense and space
exploration. Its contribution grew from $2.7 billion in 1953-54 to an
estimated $11.0 billion in 1962-63 and expanded from a little over half of
the total R&D spending in 1953-54 to more than two-thirds in 1962-63.
What is now at issue is whether a relatively small fraction of that support

107
715-113 O - 6 4 - 8




should be directed in the future to civilian fields in which technological
development has been lagging.
TABLE 19.—Research and development expenditures, 1953-54 to 1962-63
[Billions of dollars]
By performance

By sources of funds *
Year*

Total
expenditures

Federal
Government

Industry

Universities
and other
nonprofit
institutions

Federal
Government

Industry»

Universities
and other
nonprofit
institutions»

1953-54
1954-55

5.15
5.62

2.74
3.07

2.24
2.37

0.17
.18

0.97
.95

3.63
4.07

0.55
.60

1955-56
1956-57.
1957-58
1958-59
1959-60

6.39
8.67
10.10
11.13
12.68

3.67
5.10
6.39
7.17
8.32

2.51
3.32
3.45
3.68
4.06

.21
.25
.26
.28
.30

1.09
1.28
1.44
1.73
1.83

4.64
6.60
7.73
8.36
9.61

.66
.79
.93
1.04
1.24

1960-61
1961-62.
1962-63<

13.89
14.74
16.42

9.01
9.65
11.00

4.55
4.71
6.00

.33
.38
.43

1.90
2.09
2.71

10.51
10.87
11.66

1.48
1.78
2.15

» Federal Government performance on fiscal year basis; datafor industry are calendar year basis and other
data are primarily on fiscal year basis. Fiscal years are as indicated; calendar years refer to year beginning
with half of indicated fiscal year.
2 Based on reports by performers.
* Includes research centers administered by organizations in this sector under contract with Federal
* Preliminary.
Note.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: National Science Foundation.
A FEDERAL CIVILIAN TECHNOLOGY

PROGRAM

Primary responsibility for Federal programs fostering industrial technology is assigned to the Department of Commerce, which has embarked
on several broad programs to stimulate technological advance in all sectors
of the economy. The fundamental role of government is to help industry
help itself by catalyzing and supporting the efforts of firms and communities to promote economic progress through technical change.
In order to disseminate the results of federally sponsored research and
development more efficiently, the Departments of Commerce and Defense
have agreed to assign to the Office of Technical Services in Commerce the handling of all unclassified and unlimited Department of
Defense documents.
The National Bureau of Standards is administering contracts for research
useful to the textile industry, under a new Civilian Technology program
approved by Congress in 1963. The objective of this program is to sponsor
technical investigations of problems faced by the industry at large—
problems that no single firm could afford to solve on its own behalf, but
that are especially suited to combined investigation.
Industry associations can be an important vehicle for undertaking
research of broad significance to an entire industry. The Commerce
Department is accordingly considering a legislative proposal authorizing government assistance to such groups in order to stimulate their
sponsorship of non-proprietary technical investigations.




108

A further legislative proposal is under consideration to provide for
Federal cooperation with States, universities, and industry groups to aid in
the development and dissemination of new technological information.
The purpose of this program would be to bring the reservoir of technical
information available at scientific centers to bear on the problems of firms
that are not able to support large research organizations. Such a technical
service program should be tailored to the needs of the local area and
conducted under local direction.
FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR BASIC RESEARCH

"Basic research" has sometimes been defined as research undertaken with
no specific practical goal in mind—beyond a general conviction that
extending man's knowledge of his environment and of himself is bound
to serve the purposes of human life and human society. Most basic research
is conducted in universities, sometimes supported by the Federal Government. A relatively small number of large business organizations support
basic research in areas of their general interests.
Merely to agree that basic research is a "good thing" does not necessarily
justify Federal support for it and, in particular, gives no basis for determining how much support should be provided for what kinds of basic
research.
It is inevitable that primary support should be given to those fields of
natural science where potential payoff's in national security, health, and
economic growth are obviously high even if uncertain in location and
character. The fact that many of our most dramatically "practical" technological achievements have grown quite directly—and often quite
promptly—from new discoveries in these fields builds a solid case for their
support.
Recognizing this relationship between basic research in the natural sciences and practical achievements benefiting society in many diverse ways,
the Congress has provided generous support for research in the natural
sciences, particularly through the Department of Defense, the Atomic
Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, and the National
Science Foundation. The breadth of Federal support of basic research is
reflected in the work of the NSF, which supports and encourages research
over a spectrum including atmospheric sciences, high energy physics, oceanography, and metabolic biology—in each of which research costs are often
high and the potential payoff to society may be very great.
Yet basic research in other fields may also have "practical" payoffs even
if not in industrial technology or national security. Thus Federal support
is given to investigations in psychology, where potential payoffs in more efficient organizations or better mental health can be large. The social sciences,
where expanding knowledge of economic and social relationships may im-




109

prove the efficiency and effectiveness of government and private organizations, also merit support even on "practical" grounds, and some modest beginnings in these fields are now being undertaken.
A strong system of university and technical education must underlie progress in basic research. Institutions of higher education not only conduct
much of our national research effort, but they also train most of the scientific
research workers on whom future progress depends. The National Science
Foundation's program simultaneously supports both university research and
higher education, reflecting their close interrelationship. Higher education
is also supported through programs under the National Defense Education
Act and the new Higher Education Facilities Act.
GOVERNMENT'S ROLE IN AIDING ADJUSTMENT

Federal responsibility for fostering more rapid technical advance clearly
could not be successfully—or even appropriately—undertaken in an economy
in which total demand perennially failed to rise enough to reemploy the
workers initially displaced as well as new additions to the labor force. But
maintaining high demand and satisfactory over-all employment is not
enough. There are other important policies which the Federal Government
must pursue if adjustments to change are to be successful, and if the effects
on labor, business, and local communities are to be acceptable. Many of
the programs needed for this purpose also form one cornerstone of the attack
on poverty.
The labor market programs of the Federal Government have made
striking progress in recent years, and this progress must continue. Since
1961 the Federal-State Employment Service has increased its nonfarm job
placements by almost 25 percent. But its guidance and placement facilities must be further strengthened in order to improve the matching of
workers and jobs. The vocational retraining program of the Department
of Labor and the Area Redevelopment Administration has reduced transition costs and improved future earning potential for a significant number
of displaced workers. Some 148,000 workers will be in training or retraining during fiscal year 1964 in skills as diverse as drafting, stenography,
nursing, auto repairing, and metalworking; and the program will be expanded to provide training and retraining for 288,000 workers in fiscal
year 1965. The recent broadening of the Manpower, Development and
Training Act will increase its effectiveness in coping with unemployment
among low-skilled workers and youths. An important element included
as part of this program will be the provision of adult education courses in
fiscal year 1965 for 60,000 persons who are unable to acquire industrial skills
because of a lack of basic literacy, and vocational training will be provided
for 85,000 unemployed youths.
In this connection the recent passage by the Congress of a broad new
program of aid to vocational education is of great significance. It should
lead not only to a large expansion of existing programs but also to a
considerable broadening and redirection, including new emphasis on busi-




IIO

ness and office occupations. The work-study program and provision in
the new legislation for residential vocational schools will greatly improve
opportunities for young people previously unable to acquire vocational
training. In addition, passage of the Youth Employment Act will provide
work and training through conservation work camps and work projects
in local communities for 60,000 youths during 1964 and over 100,000 the following year. The prevalence of discriminatory hiring practices has been significantly reduced by the vigorous efforts of the President's Committee on
Equal Employment Opportunities.
The unemployment insurance system—first line of defense against the costs
of unemployment—must be modernized in order to deal better with the
unemployment that results from shifts of jobs from one occupation, industry,
or area to another. The additional labor market programs that are being
recommended will be discussed at greater length in the forthcoming Manpower Report of the President.
In our concern with the problems of today's unemployed, it should not
be forgotten that a strengthened system of basic education will be the best
guarantee against significant problems of displacement and dislocation in
tomorrow's full-employment economy.
Technical education and vocational guidance programs can be kept more
current by the creation of any early warning system on new technological
advances. But the possibility of accurately predicting occupational requirements even 10 years into the future is highly limited. And the average
male's working life now extends over 45 years. We can best prepare for
the occupational requirements of the labor market of 1970 through an educational system that produces well-educated and technically versatile graduates, able rapidly to acquire new skills. Such versatility will accelerate the
process of matching jobs and workers and greatly reduce the loss of potential earning power resulting from the obsolescence of specific skills.
CONCLUSION

Fears of technological advance are understandable on the part of those
who feel its threat to their livelihoods. In the absence of wise and effective
private and public action such fears are justified. But any comprehensive
appraisal can lead only to the conclusion that the benefits of technical
change—in the future as in the past—are such that public policy should
foster rather than shun it. To yield to apprehension that the machine will
become our master, that we are unable to absorb and adjust to rapid change,
that we must deny ourselves the continued rise in material well-being that
ever-growing knowledge and understanding place within our grasp and the
increased freedom it brings to pursue higher goals—such a defeatist view
is both unworthy of our heritage and unjustified. For as scientific and
technical knowledge has grown over the years, so, too, has understanding
of our social and economic system and institutions—including the proper
role of government in a free society. Applying this knowledge, all citizens
can enjoy the fruits of rapid change.




Ill

Chapter 4

Price and Wage Policy for High Employment
XNFLATION need be no more of a threat in 1964 than it was in 1963 or
1962 or 1961—and the threat was well contained in each of those years.
But the good record of price stability in the expansion to date provides no
basis for relaxing our vigilance in 1964 and beyond. At stake are not only
important domestic economic objectives but also our long-term balance-ofpayments position.
The decisions that can make or break this country's price stability record
rest in private hands, and they should remain there. Yet it is the responsibility—and the determined purpose—of the Administration to do all it
properly can to promote the right outcome.
THE PRICE-WAGE SITUATION AND THE PROSPECTS
The impressive noninflationary record of this expansion thus far—the
stability of wholesale prices and the slow upward movement of over-all
consumer prices—has been reviewed in Chapter 1 and is portrayed in
Chart 11. At the same time, as Tables 20 and 21 show, the price stability
has not been "paid for" either by a failure of wages to keep up with the
trend change in productivity in the economy as a whole or by a corporate
profits squeeze. (In the tables, "trend change in productivity" for any
given year is defined as the 5-year moving average of the annual percentage
changes in the Bureau of Labor Statistics index of output per man-hour in
the total private economy. These estimates use labor input data collected
primarily by establishments.) While money wages have not risen as fast as in
some earlier expansions, the gain in purchasing power has been eroded very
little by price increases. And while over-all profits have continued to rise,
this has been achieved without substantial price increases. In terms of the
balance among wages, prices, and profits, the economy is in a good position,
as it enters 1964, to avoid inflationary price and wage decisions.
The price stability of 1961-63 has resulted in part from persistent slack
in the economy. But another major factor has been the responsible action
of most union and business leaders in making noninflationary wage and
price decisions. Although shifting patterns of demand and supply are the
major factors ruling prices, wages, and output in our market economy, there




112

Chart 11

Prices in Three Postwar Expansions
GNP TROUGH = 100

110
GNP PRICE DEFLATOR 1 /

/
1954-57
>

105 --

**

- -

"

, ' y l»58-60

--

^S^
1961-63

100
1

1

1

1

1

I

1

10

|

12

110
CONSUMER PRICES

105 1958-60

— * S

100
i

t

i

I

s e S e S G

1

^

1961-63

I

I

^ * ^ * ~ ~

i

1954- 57

1

I

1

10

12

110
WHOLESALE PRICES

1954-57

105 S*

1958-60

100

•MB

I

I

t

i

1

4

i

I

i

6

i

8

^-1961-63
I
i

1

10

I

12

QUARTERS AFTER GNP T R O U G H ! /
J / BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA, 1963 PRICES.
I / T R O U G H QUARTERS FOR GNP WERE 1 9 5 4 I I , 19581, AND 19611
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




113

TABLE 20.—Prices, wages, profits, and productivity in the private economy, 1948-63
Produc-

tivity i

Year

Trend
productivity 2

Total compensation
per
employee
man-hour

Percentage change
1948
1949

3.5
2.9

_-_

7

8.6

Percent of corporate sales
5.1
4.1

2.0
2.3

7.0
6.4

2.2
2.3

7.2
6.0

2.5

6.8
-.8

5.7
9.3

1.2
7.8

5.0
3.8

5.9
5.8

1.7
.6

3.2
3.2

2.5
2.7

7.2
2.5
2.2
4.1
1.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
I960 .
1961
1962
1963-

Profits plu s
Corporate Capital con- capital conPrices 3 profits after sumption 8 sumption 8
allowances allowances
taxes 4

_

.
.

3.5

3.3

.8

3.0

3.1

6.0

4.5
.1
3.5
2.5
3.6

3.0
2.5
2.8
2.5
2.8

2.9
6.1
5.9
3.6
4.6

.9
3.1
3.5
1.7
1.5

3.6
3.4
3.0
2.6
3.1

3.1
3.2
3.2
3.4
3.3

6.6
6.6
6.3
6.0
6.4

1.9
3.3
3.9
3.5

3.0
3.0
3.2

2.3

3.6

1.1
1.0
.8
1.2

2.6

2.5
8 2.6
8 2.7

3.4
3.4
8 3.7
8
3.6

6.0
8 6.3
8 6.3

3.6
3.8

3.4
3.9
3.1

5.7
5.9

6.0

i Output per man-hour for all persons; labor input based primarily on establishment data.
* Annual average percentage change in output per man-hour during latest 5 years.
3
G N P deflator for private economy.
4
Excludes profits for "rest of world."
«Includes depreciation, capital outlays charged to current accounts, and accidental damages.
6
Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances.
7
Percentage change from previous year except for trend productivity. (See footnote 2.)
8 Data beginning 1962 have been adjusted for the effects of the new depreciation guidelines. The effect
of the guidelines was to shift the proportion between profits and capital consumption allowances in favor
of the latter.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Department of Labor, and Council of Economic Advisers.

is considerable room for discretionary decision making in most major
industries. In the past, wage and other cost increases, together with price
decisions based on fixed markups or target-profit policies, have combined
to push up prices. And price increases often have led to wage increases.
The postwar record, shown in Tables 20 and 21, indicates how the complex interaction of wage increases to catch up with prices, and price increases
to preserve profit ratios, worked in ratchet fashion. The net result has
been that prices have risen roughly in proportion to the difference between
increases in labor compensation per man-hour and national trend productivity gains. In particular, the experience of the years 1956-58 shows that
sharp price advances can occur in periods of increasing unused capacity and
rising unemployment. The data do not establish causality. But clearly the
collective bargaining power of unions and the market power of large firms
can interact to inject an inflationary bias into our price-wage performance.
It is encouraging that there has been so little inflationary exercise of
such power in the past 3 years. In that period, increases in compensation
to labor have been close to economy-wide productivity gains, and prices, on
the whole, have not been raised to widen profit margins. The ability of
private decision makers to extend this record through 1964 will be powerfully reinforced by the effects of tax reduction. It is true that the tax
cuts, by stimulating demand and expanding output and employment, will




114

TABLE 21.—Productivity in the private economy and prices, wages, and profits in
manufacturing, 1948-63

Year

Trend productivity
in private Total comeconomy l pensation
per
man-hour

Manufacturing

Prices *

Percentage change 8

Corporate
profits
after
taxes 3

Capital
Profits plus
consump- capital contion allow- sumption
ances* allowances«

Percent of corporate sales

9.5
4.3

1948
1949

6.1
1.6

5.7
4.6

1.9
2.2

7.6
6.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

3.6
3.8
3.5

4.9
10.3
6.2
5.6
4.1

2.3
8.0
1.-3
2.1
1.3

5.9
4.2
3.4
3.5
3.4

2.0
2.1
2.3
2.5
3.0

7.9
6.3
5.8
6.0
6.5

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959..

3.0
2.5
2.8
2.5
2.8

3.7
6.2
6.1
3.8
4.1

1.7
4.1
3.5
.5
2.1

4.3
4.1
3.7
2.9
3.7

3.0
3.2
3.2
3.4
3.2

7.4
7.3
6.9
6.3
6.9

1960
1961
1962
1963

2.3
3.0
3.0
3.2

3.9
2.9
3.5
3.6

1.8
.4
-.3
.6

3.1
3.0
7 3.1
7 3.2

3.3
3.4
73.7
7 3.8

6.4
6.4
7 6.8
7 7.0

1 Annual average percentage change in output per man-hour during latest 5 years. See Table 20.
2 GNP deflator for manufacturing, except 1963 which is based on goods output deflator.
3 Excludes profits for "rest of world."
4
Includes depreciation, capital outlays charged to current accounts, and accidental damages.
5
Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances.
8
Percentage change from previous year except for trend productivity.
7
Data beginning 1962 have been adjusted for the effects of the new depreciation guidelines. The effect
of the guidelines was to shift the proportion between profits and capital consumption allowances in favor
of the latter.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Department of Labor, and Council of Economic Advisers.

increase the opportunity and the temptation to raise prices and wages
contrary to the public interest. But they also will reduce management's and
labor's need to pursue such a course. The tax cuts will add to workers'
take-home pay. They will add directly to aftertax profit margins. And
by stimulating a larger volume of sales, they will tend to reduce firms' unit
costs by raising their operating rates, which now typically are well below
desired levels.
The view that 1964 need not be marked by renewed inflationary pressures is further reinforced by the prospect that, even with the strong
expansion forecast in Chapter 1, the economy will be operating throughout
the year with sizable balances of unused capacity and idle manpower.
However, some recent omens are disquieting. A widely scattered
minority of the larger industrial corporations in recent months has been
testing the market's readiness to accept price increases. And more and
more firms that do not face strong competition may try to improve their
short-run profit positions by raising prices as the expansion continues.
Such action could trigger intensified worker demands for much steeper
wage increases. Many workers are restive, especially in industries that
have been making above-average gains in productivity and profits. Thus,
despite the present strong foundation for continued price stability, either




"5

management or labor, by unrestrained pursuit of its own near-term advantage, could reactivate the price-wage spiral that has remained quiescent for
several years.
ANTI-INFLATIONARY POLICIES FOR HIGH EMPLOYMENT
It is the business of responsible government to try to achieve the best
possible balance among such major economic objectives as full employment, economic growth, reasonable price stability, and the promotion of
economic freedom and opportunity. The importance of price stability as
compared with the other goals is sometimes minimized. But there are
compelling reasons why we can ill afford to neglect prices.
THE NEED FOR STABILITY

First, inflation redistributes real incomes and wealth arbitrarily. When
prices rise, those groups that are able to expand profits and wages most
rapidly improve their situation at the expense of those whose incomes
respond slowly. Inflation erodes the real value of public assistance and
makes it difficult for local governments to maintain adequate standards of
education and other essential services. It also reduces the purchasing
power of retirement pensions and other fixed incomes—in effect, subjecting
them to a discriminatory tax. Fixed-income assets lose value, while the
prices of equity securities and other properties rise.
A second cost of inflation that we cannot afford is its adverse impact
on our balance of trade and on our balance of payments. During most of
the 1950's the pricing of American industrial products caused some loss of
competitive ground to the* products of other industrial countries. From
1953 to 1958, the over-all wholesale price index rose only moderately
more than the comparable indexes in most Western European countries
and Japan. But the prices of certain goods important among U.S. exports
rose substantially faster in the United States than in most of the countries
with which we compete. Table 22 indicates the deterioration of our relaTABLE 22.—Changes in wholesale prices in selected industrialized countries, 1953 to 1958
Percentage change in wholesale prices
Machinery
Total
United States
France 2
Italy
Japan *
United Kingdom.
West Germany...

and

Steel
8.3
9.8
.9

-1.3
11.4
3.0

equipmentl

24.0
(8)

20.2

5.2

5.1
2.6

•16.5
1.8
9.1

«6.8
18.2
6.0

1
Implicit deflator for machinery and equipment component of gross national product used for all countries except Japan.
3
Adjusted for change in exchange rate in 1958.
»Not available.
* Change from 1954 to 1958.
»Iron and steel.
• Machinery.
Sources: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Japanese Economic Planning
Agency, and Council of Economic Advisers.




n6

tive price position particularly in the crucial areas of steel and machinery
and equipment during the period 1953 to 1958.
Since 1958 the relative movement of over-all prices has begun to be reversed, partly because our unit labor costs have declined in comparison with
those in most European countries (Chart 12, Chapter 5). The competitive
price position of American producers has improved both in their home markets and overseas. It would be foolishly complacent, however, to believe that
these recent gains can be extended, or even retained, without special effort.
The European countries have been striving to establish rigorous "incomes
policies" to restrain wages and prices. Despite recent setbacks, they will
continue to press these efforts. In doing so, some European nations are
willing to accept substantial interventions into private decision making.
The United States is not. If we would compete with them successfully
over the long pull, we shall need to achieve a high degree of price stability
by means that are consistent with our traditions and values.
A third cost of inflation that we can ill afford is the compromise it could
impose on our pursuit of full production and full employment. If cost
and price pressures should arise through the exercise of market power while
the economy is still climbing toward high output and employment levels,
we would be forced once more into the dreary calculus of the appropriate
trade-off between "acceptable" additional unemployment and "acceptable5*
inflation. This could result in a serious setback to attainment of our
national goals.
The choice for key private decision makers is clear. It is a particularly
critical choice as the economy, after 6 years of excessive slack and unemployment, progresses toward full employment after enactment of the tax cut.
For several years now many observers, including many leaders of the business
and labor communities, have been saying that we have solved the cost-push
inflation problem that appeared in the mid-fifties to have become endemic.
This hopeful appraisal could not be demonstrated conclusively in a period
when unemployment averaged 6 percent. But, given a combination of
private and public efforts, we will have the opportunity to prove it in 1964
and later years.
GOVERNMENT ACTIONS

For its part, the Government will be striving energetically to reinforce one
of the most significant comparative advantages that the American economy
has over nearly all other industrialized nations—namely, a tradition and an
institutional structure that nurture vigorous internal competition.
In the period ahead the Administration plans actively to enforce the Nation's antitrust laws, in part choosing its cases and concentrating its enforcement energies so as to curb price-fixing and those proposed mergers and other
business practices and structures that tend to make for anticompetitive enhancement of prices. Likewise, it will resist proposals—such as the revival
of resale price maintenance now before the Congress in the so-called Quality




117

Stabilization Bill—that would inhibit price competition and reduce the
competitive vitality of our marketing system. In its efforts to promote freer
international trade the Government typically is not unmindful of the
effects that import competition has on domestic American pricing practices.
And it will continue to promote and encourage vigorous price competition by
United States exporters.
At the same time, existing, expanding, and new labor market programs, already enacted by the Congress or proposed by the Administration, will help firms meet their labor needs without raising costs and
prices. These programs will increase labor mobility, provide opportunities
for training and retraining, and improve education at all levels.
The Government also will be making a determined and continuing effort,
as was pointed out in Chapter 3, to promote what are by all odds the best
anti-inflationary measures of all—large and sustainable productivity improvements, which allow both wages and profits to increase with stable
prices. The pending tax bill will have a major effect of this kind through
its lasting stimulus to investment.
Finally, as the economy's single largest buyer of goods and services, the
Federal Government will redouble its efforts in 1964 to get full value for each
dollar it spends.
PRIVATE DECISIONS AND THE PRICE-WAGE GUIDEPOSTS

Government policies can only provide an environment conducive to
responsible private price and wage decision making. By choice, our Government can advise, inform, and bring to bear the pressure of public
opinion—but it cannot direct.
With so much at stake, however, the Government's opportunity to
advise and inform the public is one it must seize. In the Kennedy
Administration, general advice as to the pattern of private price-wage
decision making that would take account of the public's interest in avoiding market-power inflation was first formally set forth in the Economic
Report of January 1962. The "guideposts" therein described—and repeated in the 1963 Report—offered standards by which union and business
leaders themselves—along with the general public—could appraise particular wage and price decisions. They are restated here.
The guideposts contain two key propositions. The first—the general
guidepost for wages—says that, in a particular firm or industry, the appropriate noninflationary standard for annual percentage increases in total
employee compensation per man-hour (not just in straight-time hourly
rates) is the annual increase in national trend output per man-hour. The
standard is not the productivity trend in the particular firm or industry
in question. Nor is it the particular year's productivity change, which can
be influenced by short-run transitory factors.
The general guidepost for prices specifies that when an industry's
trend productivity is growing less rapidly than the national trend, prices




n8

can appropriately rise enough to accommodate the labor cost increases indicated by the general wage guidepost. Similarly, in an industry whose trend
productivity is growing more rapidly than the national average, product
prices should be lowered enough to distribute to the industry's customers
the labor-cost savings it would make under the general wage guidepost.
It should be emphasized that the general price guidepost does not counsel
against price changes per se in a particular firm or industry. On the
contrary, it contemplates changes in specific prices—downward in industries with high rates of productivity gain, as well as upward in industries
with lower-than-average productivity gains.
Adherence to these general guideposts not only would make for over-all
price stability but would be generally consistent with the tendencies of
competitive labor and product markets. The principles established by the
guideposts do not imply that the entire gains from productivity improvement should go either to labor or to capital. Rather, they suggest a proportionate sharing of average national productivity gains among labor, capital,
and the other related factors of production throughout the economy.
The general guideposts can cover the vast majority of wage and price
decisions, but cannot provide for all of the adjustments the economy requires,
especially over an extended period. Hence, the guideposts, as originally
expounded in 1962, appropriately included a set of exceptions that reflected
certain considerations of equity and resource allocation.
On the wage side, it was suggested that exceptions might be made to
adjust for labor supply conditions and for wages that are exceptionally
high or low compared with the average for comparable work. Price
exceptions took into consideration capital requirements, nonlabor costs,
and profits based on excessive market power.
The original formulation of the guideposts in the January 1962
Report of the Council of Economic Advisers also noted that ". . . Although
output per man-hour rises mainly in response to improvements in the
quantity and quality of capital goods with which employees are equipped,
employees are often able to improve their performance by means within
their own control. It is obviously in the public interest that incentives be
preserved which would reward employees for such efforts."
These modifications of the general guideposts still apply, but it must
be emphasized that they are intended to apply to only a relatively few cases.
Particularly at a time when our national capabilities for responsible price
and wage making may undergo a more serious test than in recent years,
the most constructive private policy in the great majority of situations
would be to arrive at price decisions and wage bargains consistent with
the general guideposts.
Two other comments on the guideposts seem appropriate this year.
First, it is not the purpose of these advisory policies permanently to freeze
the labor and nonlabor shares of total industrial income, as would a rigorous,
unrelieved application of the general guideposts. The 1962 Report noted




lip

that "The proportions in which labor and nonlabor income shares the
product of industry have not been immutable throughout history . . ."
It went on to point out that bargaining over the shares is consistent
with the guideposts if it is conducted "within the bounds of noninflationary
price behavior." Specifically, this means that it is consistent with the guideposts for wage and profit shares to be bid up or down in a particular industry
so long as price behavior in that industry remains consistent with the general
price guidepost indicated above.
Second, it is appropriate to focus special attention this year on price reductions. The guideposts call for reductions in those industries whose trend
productivity gains exceed the national trend. It is fair to say that large
industrial enterprises thus far have not widely heeded this advice. And yet,
as noted earlier, there will be ample room for such price reductions in 1964.
If they are not forthcoming, over-all price stability will be rendered more
difficult, since price increases are likely in industries that are progressing
at a less-than-average rate. Moreover, in industries whose trend of productivity rises faster than the national average, if wages conform more nearly
to national than to industry productivity trends (as the guideposts would
have them do), failure to follow the general price guide will cause profits to
pile up. Such profits become highly visible to the public and constitute
a lure for strongly intensified wage demands.
Such circumstances pose a most unattractive dilemma from the
viewpoint of the public interest. On the one hand, extra increases in
wages or fringe benefits might tend to spread to other industries, creating a
general cost-push from the wage side. On the other hand, there is no justification, on either economic or equity grounds, for distributing above-average
gains in productivity exclusively through the profits channel. The real way
out of this dilemma is for the firms involved to remove its cause by reducing
prices.
CONCLUSION
In 1964, a year of still ample unused resources and a year in which both
after-tax profits and labor incomes promise to rise substantially, there is no
occasion for actions that result in substantial price increases. The public,
quite properly, will be intolerant of any major businesses or unions whose
short-sighted actions tend to set inflation in motion. To discharge its own
responsibility, the Administration is taking steps to follow emerging price
and wage developments with great care and to assemble data that will
illuminate the price- and wage-making situations in particular industries.
It will not hesitate to call public attention to major private decisions—by
either business or labor—that seriously overstep noninflationary price and
wage standards.
Certainly it is reasonable to hope, however, that such instances will be
rare and that 1964 will be recorded as another year when American private
price and wage makers demonstrated their capacity for responsible action.




120

Chapter 5

The Balance of Payments and the International
Monetary System
A HE UNITED STATES occupies a unique position in the world economy. It provides the largest national source of exports, the largest market
for imports, and the largest source of savings for investment abroad. It
undertakes substantial military expenditures abroad and has a large foreign
aid program. Its currency, the dollar, is widely used as a means of exchange—in transactions among foreign countries as well as with the United
States—and as a store of value in foreign private balances and official
monetary reserves. As a consequence, U.S. economic policy, at home and
abroad, has special importance to the rest of the world.
The diverse international transactions of the United States—as trader,
as investor, and as banker—are summarized in the U.S. balance-of-payments accounts. In recent years, the U.S. accounts have shown an undesirably large deficit, while other countries—especially in Continental
Western Europe—have had undesirably large surpluses. The first part of
this chapter reviews recent developments in the U.S. balance of payments
and discusses the policies—notably those included in President Kennedy's
July message—that have been adopted and have begun to improve our
international financial position.
A declining U.S. payments deficit will affect the functioning of the
international monetary system, since this deficit has been a major source
of growth in world monetary reserves. Moreover, the large volume of outstanding short-term liabilities to foreigners, if combined with continued
large U.S. deficits, could raise questions about the effective working and
continued stability of the system. To examine this and related long-term
questions, the leading industrial countries have undertaken a study of the
international monetary system. The problems with which that study is concerned are discussed in the second part of this chapter.




121

THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS: DEVELOPMENTS, POLICIES,
AND OUTLOOK

Between 1950 and 1957, the United States sold $2/ 2 billion of gold and
incurred $8*/2 billion in liquid liabilities to foreigners. These transfers
of gold and dollars, through payments deficits averaging $1.3 billion a year, made a welcome contribution to replenishing the international
monetary reserves of other countries. Since 1957, however, the annual
deficits, before taking into account special governmental transactions, have been in the range of $3 to $4 billion, and the additions to the
dollar reserves of some surplus countries in Western Europe have tended to
exceed the amounts that those countries regard as necessary or desirable.
In the 6 years since 1957, U.S. gold sales have amounted to about $7*/2 billion—of which $5 billion occurred during the 3 years, 1958-60—and liquid
dollar liabilities to foreigners have increased about $8^2 billion.
In these circumstances the United States has adopted policies designed
to bring its external accounts into equilibrium, to minimize its loss of gold,
and to protect the dollar from possible speculative attack. At the same
time domestic policies designed to achieve high employment and more rapid
economic growth have been framed with a view to reinforcing the specific
balance-of-payments measures.
THE NATURE OF THE BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS PROBLEM

The U.S. balance-of-payments problem does not reflect any over-all
tendency for the United States to "live beyond its means." Americans
collectively do not spend more than their real incomes permit and therefore
do not absorb goods and services, on balance, from the rest of the world.
On the contrary, the United States earns a large surplus on commercial
account—that is, its exports of goods and services exceed its imports. The
deficit in its external accounts arises from the fact that the United States
transfers abroad—through military expenditures, foreign assistance,
and private capital movements—a sum of dollars larger than the surplus on
goods and services. This excess of dollar payments measures the "deficit
on regular transactions." In recent years, as discussed below, the transfer
of gold and liquid dollar balances abroad has been less than the deficit on
regular transactions, as the result of a number of special transactions undertaken in cooperation with European surplus countries.
The United States deficit does not reflect a reduction in net worth in
relation to the rest of the world. In fact, U.S. assets abroad—in the form
of private equity investment, short- and long-term credits, and government
loans—have in general been increasing faster than U.S. liabilities. The U.S.
deficit does reflect a loss of liquidity in the form of a reduction in gold
reserves and a build-up of liquid liabilities to foreigners. This way of
characterizing the imbalance in the U.S. payments position does not lessen
the urgency of correcting it.




122

As it takes steps to restore equilibrium in its external accounts, the United
States must perforce be conscious of these major considerations:
1. Its actions to correct the balance-of-payments problem need to be
consistent with its domestic objectives; a healthy domestic economy is important not only to Americans but also to the rest of the world.
2. The United States carries heavy responsibilities for the military security
and the economic development of the countries of the free world. These
responsibilities should not be compromised by measures taken to improve
our payments position.
3. In adopting measures to cope with the balance of payments, the United
States should avoid any lapse in the effort, in which other free world
countries join, to reduce barriers to international transactions.
4. Finally, in formulating policies it must recognize that the several
components of its balance of payments are interrelated. For example, a
reduction in capital outflows or foreign aid would reduce the deficit only
to the extent that it did not also cause a fall in exports. Similarly, a reduction (or slower increase) in imports would improve our payments position only to the extent that it did not cause other countries to buy less from
us.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

Trade, services, and Government items. In recent years the surplus on
commercial goods and services (Table 23, lines 1-6) has shown a gradual
upward trend if allowance is made for the temporary bulge in this
surplus in 1961, when cyclical factors dampened the U.S. demand for
imports. Commercial exports have risen at a moderate but fairly steady
pace as rapid economic growth in Western Europe and Japan has provided
expanding markets, and our prices have remained relatively stable. At the
same time, dividends and interest on our investments and loans abroad1 have
been a large and growing element in our surplus on goods and services.
Net U.S. military expenditures abroad, although large, have steadily
declined (line 9). The Department of Defense has increased its procurement in the United States of supplies for use abroad, despite the frequently
higher cost of such procurement. In addition, some U.S. allies have
agreed to purchase military supplies from the United States, offsetting all
or part of U.S. dollar defense outlays within their borders.
The gross amount of U.S. Government economic aid programs has continued to be sizable, but the dollar payments to foreigners and international institutions (line 10) resulting from these programs have been maintained at a much lower level. More than two-thirds of current outlays
under the aid program of the Agency for International Development (AID)
directly finance U.S. exports and thus result in no direct dollar outflows.
This proportion is over 80 percent on new commitments. Export programs
administered by the Department of Agriculture and loans by the ExportImport Bank involve no direct dollar outflow abroad.


715-113 O-64-9


123

TABLE 23.—United States balance of payments, 1958-63

l

[Billions of dollars]
Line

Type of transaction

1958-60
average

1961

1963

1962

II

III

Seasonally adjusted
annual rates
Regular transactions:
Balance on commercial goods and services K
Balance on commercial goods
Commercial exports of goods «...
Commercial imports of goods
Investment income, net
Other commercial services, net*
Remittances and pensions
Government items, net

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

3.2
17.7

-14.5

-.7

Private long-term capital, net
U.S. direct investment
Foreign long-term capital, net
New issues of foreign securities
Transactions in outstanding securities, net
Other*

20

5.3

1.1
15.5
-14.3
2.2

-.7

-3.3

Military expenditures, net *
Dollar payments to foreign countries
and international institutions arising from Government grants and
capital*
__.
Government grants and capital,
net
Exports of goods and services
financed by Government
grants and capital
Scheduled repayments on U.S. Government loans

-3.1

-2.9

-2.5

4.3
4.0
3.9
2.0
2.0
1.6
18.1
17.6
18.7
-16.1 -16.0 -16.7
3.3
3.6
3.2
-1.0
-1.2
-1.3
-.7
-.8
-.8
-3.0
-2.9
-2.7
-2.4
-2.3
-2.1

4.5
2.1
19.7
-17.6
3.3
-.9
-2.2
-2.1

-1.0

-1.1

-1.1

-1.0

-1.1

-.7

-3.2

-4.1

-4.3

-4.2

-5.4

-3.9

2.2

2.7

2.9

3.0

4.0

2.9

.6
-2.1
-1

.6

-2.1
-1.6
.5
-.5
-.4
-.1

-2.5
-1.6
.3

-4.1
-2.0

.7

-3.6
-2.0
.8
-2.1

-1.9
-1.1
.3
-.7
.2
-.5

-1.1

-2.0

-.1
-.1

-.2

-.3
-.3

-1.6

Unrecorded transactions

-.7

.3

-2.4

.1

.1

-.9

-1.0

-.5

.6

-1.3

Short-term private capital, net-

21

2.7

22

Balance on regular transactions

-3.9

-3.0

-3.6

-3.9

-5.0

-1.6

23

Special government transactions

.2

.7

1.4

1.8

.7

1.3

.2

.7

1.1

.2

.1

.3

.3

-.4

1.4

.7

24
25
26

Nonscheduled repayments of debt and
advances on military exports
Sale of special nonmarketable nonconvertible securities
Sale of special nonmarketable convertible securities
•

1.0

27

Balance after special Government transactions
except convertible securities_ -

-3.7

-2.4

-2.2

-3.5

-5.0

-1.0

28

Balance after all special Government transactions-.

-3.7

-2.4

-2.2

-2.1

-4.3

-.3

29

Balance after all special Government transactions (not seasonally adjusted).

-3.7

-2.4

-2.2

-2.8

-4.7

-2.4

-1.6

-.7

o

-.5

-.7

-.9
-1.6

-3.6

-1.5
-.2

Gold and convertible currencies
Liquid liabilities to official and international holders
Liquid liabilities to others

-2.1

US

-1.1
-.2

i Excludes military transfers under grants.
* Excludes exportsfinancedby Government grants and capital shown in line 12.
» Military expenditures abroad less military sales.
« The total includes lines 11 and 12, and a few other small balancing items.
» Redemptions, and other long-term items.
« Less than $500 million.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.




124

Private capital movements. A large outflow of private long-term capital
has been an important element in the balance-of-payments deficit (line 14).
In the earlier postwar years, through 1955, these long-term outflows fluctuated below $1 billion a year. Between 1956 and 1962 they ranged above
$1.6 billion but exceeded $2.6 billion only in 1957. In the first half of 1963,
however, the long-term capital flow swelled to an annual rate of nearly
$4 billion.
The upward shift in capital outflows in the mid-fifties was accounted
for primarily by U.S. direct investment in countries producing raw materials.
More recently, about half of U.S. direct investment has been in Western
Europe, in part because American firms have acquired production and
trading facilities in the Common Market countries.
Portfolio investment abroad, which had also increased after the mid1950's, began to surge higher in late 1962. As Table 24 shows, net purchases
of new foreign securities by Americans increased from $523 million in 1961
to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $1.9 billion in the first half of 1963.
New issues of Canadian securities in the U.S. market accounted for much
of the increased long-term capital outflow in the first half of 1963. But
evidence was accumulating that a striking acceleration of European and
Japanese borrowing was under way.
TABLE 24.—United States private portfolio investment abroad, 1960-63
[Millions of dollars]

1961

1960

Type and country of purchase

1963

1962

I

in

II

Seasonally adjusted
annual rates
750

Outstanding securities, net

___

1,131

2,092

2,200

523

1,076

1,900

1,944

852

177

New securities

876

573

Purchases of foreign securities

353

55

192

256

-204

648

Unadjusted annual rates
Purchases of foreign securities
Western Europe Japan
Canada »
_.
Other

750
.

133
(l)

>

241

0)

876

1,331

2,246

2,238

512

266
79
327
204

195
124
379
433

336
188
1,328
364

776
320
1,044
188

68
228
204
12

i Not available.
Source: Department of Commerce.

An increasing number of foreign borrowers had been taking advantage of
the relatively low long-term interest rates, the efficient flotation facilities,
and the ready availability of capital in our markets. At the same time
American underwriters and investors had become increasingly willing to
lend abroad. Canadian borrowers have used the U.S. market for a long
time, but European and Japanese borrowers have recently found more




125

ready acceptance. In many instances these borrowings were not related
to any financing of imports from the United States nor even to any
particular need for foreign exchange. For example, the proceeds of some
substantial dollar bond issues have been used to finance the purchase of
already existing domestic facilities in the borrowing countries.
Private short-term capital flows (Table 23, line 20) have been more
erratic in their effect on the payments balance. They increased abruptly in
the latter half of I960, and, though the flow decreased thereafter, it
remained large in 1961 and rose again in the second quarter of 1963. A
substantial part of the recorded outflow in 1960 was a movement of funds
into higher-yielding short-term investments abroad. Since that time,
monetary policy and debt management actions have been used to influence
the level of short-term rates in the United States in order to bring yields on
short-term assets here into closer alignment with those abroad.
U.S. bank loans and acceptance credits to foreigners appear to explain a
greater proportion of changes in total recorded short-term flows than do
movements of funds into and out of liquid assets abroad. In particular, acceptance credits to Japan were large in 1960 and 1961. After the first quarter of 1962 short-term credits to foreigners by U.S. banks remained at a
moderate level until the spring of 1963, when Japan again borrowed heavily.
At that time there was also a renewal of the flow of U.S. funds into money
market assets and bank deposits abroad.
Unrecorded transactions (line 21)—thought to contain a large element
of Short-term capital—also contributed to a sizable outflow in 1961 and
1962, but moved in opposite directions to the recorded short-term flows in
1963.
The deficit before and after special transactions. The net outcome of the
flows of funds related to exports, imports, Government outlays, and private
capital movements was a deficit on regular transactions ranging between
$3 and $4 billion in recent years. This deficit contracted temporarily in
1961, owing to cyclical factors, and increased again in late 1962. In the first
half of 1963, as the result mainly of private capital outflows, the deficit increased sharply, to $3.9 billion in the first quarter and $5.0 billion in the
second quarter, at seasonally adjusted annual rates.
The "balance on regular transactions" measures the outcome of our external transactions before taking account of special governmental transactions with some of the surplus countries. These special transactions have included prepayments on Marshall Plan and Export-Import Bank loans
and advance payments by our allies for future delivery of military items.
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 1962, the Treasury arranged to sell special
nonmarketable, medium-term securities to foreign monetary authorities.
Some of these securities are denominated in dollars, but most of them are
denominated in the currency of the purchasing country. More recently, a
convertibility feature was added, so that the foreign monetary authority may
redeem them for short-term claims prior to their stated maturity. This pro-




126

vision was intended to satisfy legal and traditional requirements governing
the liquidity of the instruments that certain foreign central banks may hold
as a component of their monetary reserves. The official balance-ofpayments statistics of the United States now present the balance-ofpayments position before and after inclusion of these special transactions
(lines 22-29).
POLICIES TO IMPROVE THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

President Kennedy's balance-of-payments message in July announced
certain new policies together with an intensification of other policies that
had constituted the earlier balance-of-payments program of the United
States.
The program before 1963. The Federal Government has given first
priority to reducing its own direct contribution to the deficit. Thus efforts
have been made to reduce and offset military outlays abroad, to minimize
the dollar drain associated with aid programs, and in general to scrutinize
all Federal transactions affecting the balance of payments.
The effort to improve the commercial balance on goods and services has
included export promotion measures and a new program of export credit
insurance and guarantees. The wage-price policies described in the previous chapter—desirable in any event for domestic reasons—have taken on
additional urgency because of the necessity to maintain and improve the
U.S. competitive position both at home and in other markets.
The Revenue Act of 1962 removed artificial tax inducements to investment in developed countries by effectively neutralizing the so-called "tax
haven" form of operation.
The Federal Reserve and the Treasury have for some time been working
to maintain a level of short-term interest rates high enough to discourage
outflows of short-term capital while, at the same time, encouraging domestic
credit availability and a level of long-term interest rates conducive to
economic expansion.
These measures to reduce the deficit were complemented by a series of
other arrangements designed to prevent or correct temporary disturbances in
foreign exchange markets, as described in the second part of this chapter.
These arrangements have been extremely helpful in stopping or smoothing
the effects of sudden and presumably reversible flows of funds, and in cushioning the impact of such potentially unsettling developments as the Berlin
crisis, the revaluation of the mark and guilder in 1961, the stockmarket
break of 1962, the Cuban crisis, and the assassination of President Kennedy.
Special government transactions and intergovernmental cooperation in
stabilizing foreign exchange and gold markets have, in addition to their
other benefits, provided major assistance in reducing incentives for the conversion of foreign-held dollar liabilities into gold. The gold outflow during
the past three years has been cut to somewhat less than half of its total in the
preceding three years.




127

Progress made in reducing the U.S. deficit during 1961 and the first half
of 1962 aroused hopes that the U.S. payments problem was on its way
toward solution. But the worsening of the deficit at the end of 1962 and
the subsequent further deterioration during the first half of 1963—mainly
as a result of enlarged short- and long-term capital outflows—interrupted
this progress and indicated that further actions were necessary.
The President's July balance-of-payments program. After intensive discussion within the Government, a series of new and expanded measures
was taken in July to deal with the balance-of-payments problem.
On July 16 the Federal Reserve announced an increase in the discount
rate from 3 to Zl/2 percent. The Federal Reserve also raised interest rate
ceilings on time deposits payable in 90 days to 1 year, as did the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation, thus enabling U.S. commercial banks to
compete more effectively with foreign banks for funds that might otherwise
be placed abroad.
On July 18 President Kennedy sent to the Congress a special message
that announced a program of companion measures. These included:
1. A proposal for the enactment of an Interest Equalization Tax (IET)
to be made generally effective as of the day following the message. This
measure, an excise tax on American purchases of new or outstanding foreign
stocks and bonds, was designed to impose on foreign sellers the equivalent
of 1 percentage point of additional interest cost.
2. Further "tying" of foreign aid to U.S. exports to reduce the dollar outflow directly attributable to the program of the AID to $500 million by
fiscal year 1965 (from $1 billion in fiscal 1961).
3. Important further reductions in overseas military expenditures to
reduce the dollar drain on this account by approximately $300 million.
4. A further reduction of $200 million in purchases of strategic materials
abroad and another $100 million in other Government programs.
5. An intensified effort to expand exports, a "See America Now" program
to encourage both Americans and foreigners to travel in this country, and
a new effort to encourage foreigners to buy U.S. private securities.
6. An additional measure, designed not to reduce the deficit but to lessen
foreign purchases of gold and to strengthen the dollar in foreign exchange
markets, was a $500 million U.S. stand-by drawing, or line of credit, from
the International Monetary Fund ( I M F ) . This became desirable because,
under its rules, the IMF could no longer accept additional dollars from
countries other than the United States. Thus other countries that wished
to use some of their current dollar holdings for making repayments to the
Fund were about to be forced, instead, either to buy gold from the United
States or to sell dollars for other currencies in the foreign exchange markets
in order to get means of repayment acceptable to the Fund. With the
stand-by arrangement, the United States is in a position to draw other
currencies, which it can sell, for dollars, to the countries needing them for
repayment. This stand-by arrangement also has broader significance as




X28

a visible indication that the United States is prepared to make appropriate
use of the resources of the Fund.
The President emphasized in his message that this series of immediate
and specialized efforts, which would reduce the deficit by about $2 billion
when fully effective, would provide the time needed for achievement of the
basic long-term program of improving the U.S. competitive position and
increasing the attractiveness of investment in the United States. The tax
reduction bill and continuation of price-cost stability were essential aspects
of the long-term program.
Meanwhile the immediate steps taken in July were designed to be consistent with acceleration of domestic economic expansion. Thus increases
in interest rates were to be confined largely to the short-term sector of the
market, while the proposed IET would raise the cost of capital to foreign
borrowers without increasing the domestic cost of long-term funds.
Achievement of equilibrum through expanding exports and increasing
incentives for capital to remain at home will permit the United States
gradually to remove the temporary measures it has been forced to apply
in the past few years. The goal of the United States is to be able to untie
its aid program, just as it now urges other countries with payments surpluses to untie theirs. The IET was proposed to retard temporarily, not
permanently, the outflow of U.S. capital. The stiffer "Buy American"
policies for U.S. procurement—adopted for balance-of-payments reasons—
can be relaxed when equilibrium is restored.
Developments subsequent to the July program. The balance-of-payments
deficit on regular transactions dropped from a seasonally adjusted annual
rate of $5.0 billion in the second quarter to $1.6 billion in the third quarter—a reduction of about two-thirds—while the balance after special government transactions was even lower as a result mainly of advance debt
repayments by France and the Netherlands.
It is, of course, too early to be able to evaluate the full effects of
the July measures, but they clearly played a major role in this
marked improvement. There was a substantial reduction in the third
quarter in the outflow of U.S. portfolio capital, mainly in purchases of
new issues of foreign securities. Virtually the only new foreign securities
sold in the United States in the third quarter were those arranged for prior
to July 18 and hence not affected by the tax proposal.
The proposed IET legislation would not apply to borrowers in less
developed countries and would allow limited or full exemption of new
issues of particular countries if necessary to avoid imperiling the stability
of the international monetary system. The Administration has announced
its intention of allowing a new-issue exemption for Canada and believes
that this can be done without adverse effects on the United States. In
connection with this exemption, Canadian authorities have agreed that it
is not the intention of Canada to increase foreign exchange reserves




129

through the proceeds of borrowing in the United States, with the implication
that borrowing would be restored to the more normal levels of earlier years.
Following passage of the proposed IET, some portfolio capital will continue to flow abroad, both to exempt nations and to borrowers willing to
bear the tax. But total outflows are likely to continue to be sharply curtailed. The President's message anticipated that this tax would remain in
effect only through 1965, when improvement in the U.S. balance of payments and a strengthening and freeing of the capital markets of other
major countries are expected to permit its abandonment.
A reversal in recorded short-term capital flows also contributed to the substantial reduction in the payments deficit in the third quarter. In part, the
shift reflected a cessation of the heavy lending in the form of bank loans and
acceptance credits that had occurred in the preceding quarter. But following the increase in short-term interest rates—rates on 3-month Treasury
bills rose from 2.99 percent on the average in June to 3.38 percent in September—there was a net movement of short-term funds back to the United
States as reported by both banks and nonfinancial concerns.
At the same time, the balance on commercial goods and services also
continued to improve and contributed to the reduction in the deficit on
regular transactions.
Preliminary information concerning the fourth quarter indicates that the
deficit on regular transactions may have turned out to be of about the same
order of magnitude as in the third quarter.
THE OUTLOOK FOR THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS

The U.S. payments position can be expected to benefit from the proposed
general reduction of individual and corporate income taxes, as from the
effects of the investment tax credit in the Revenue Act of 1962 and the
depreciation changes of that year. Although accelerated economic expansion in the United States will bring a faster rise of imports, an offsetting
beneficial effect on capital flows and favorable effects on productivity and
the competitiveness of U.S. exports may also be expected. Improved profit
opportunities resulting from a more vigorous economy and fuller use of
capacity should reduce the net outflow of capital by encouraging domestic
investment by Americans and by attracting more foreign capital to the
United States. While corporations will have an enlarged volume of retained earnings, they will be confronted with an even greater increase in
profitable domestic uses for funds.
Success in bringing U.S. external payments into equilibrium will also
depend, however, on developments and policies abroad. Not only will
sustained economic expansion in the leading industrial countries benefit
their own citizens and the economies of the less developed countries, but
also it is important for the continuing expansion of U.S. exports.
The Brookings report. In the spring of 1962 a group of economists at
the Brookings Institution undertook a comprehensive study, The U.S.
Balance of Payments in 1968, at the request of the Council of Economic Ad-




130

visers, the Treasury, and the Bureau of the Budget. The authors were asked
to assess the effects on the U.S. balance of payments of a sustained expansion
of the U.S. economy which, after the unemployment rate was reduced to 4
percent, would proceed at an annual rate of 4 percent and later accelerate
to 4% percent a year. The Council provided the Brookings group with a
set of initial assumptions regarding growth and prices in the United States
and with guidance concerning the assumptions about Western Europe.
The group also calculated projections based on alternative assumptions
of its own.
The Brookings group analyzed the relationships of changes in imports
and exports to expansion in GNP, given assumptions about costs and prices.
From these analyses, projections were derived of the U.S. "basic balance,"
i.e., the balance on goods and services, government items, and long-term
capital (and exclusive of short-term capital flows, unrecorded transactions,
and special government transactions) in 1968. These projections indicated
that the United States in 1968 would have a "basic" surplus ($1.9 billion)
on the initial assumptions, or a modest deficit ($600 million) on the alternative assumptions, compared with the basic deficit of $2.1 billion in
1962.
A principal factor in the projected improvement in the U.S. payments
balance was the assumption that the United States would be better able
to maintain internal cost and price stability than the countries of Europe,
where slower growth of a fully employed labor force was expected to result
in greater upward pressure on money wage rates.
As the previous chapter has indicated, the recent cost and price record of
the United States is quite good: wholesale prices have not increased since
1958, and this has undoubtedly helped to maintain our export surplus during
the current expansion period despite a cyclical increase in imports. However, the United States must continue to maintain price stability and to
pursue other measures directed at improving the balance of payments.
Prices and costs in the United States and abroad. The international competitive position of any country is determined by many factors besides the
movement of its prices relative to prices in other countries. But relative
prices are, of course, an important influence. Chart 12 presents the
movements of prices and unit labor costs for a number of industrial countries, after allowing for adjustments in exchange rates. The first panel
shows that while the average of U.S. wholesale prices remained stable between 1958 and 1963, French and Canadian prices, expressed in U.S. dollars, were lower in 1963 than in 1958 (both countries having undertaken
exchange rate depreciations in the period). But prices in all the other
countries were higher (in the case of Germany, reflecting, in part, the exchange rate appreciation of 1961).
The picture presented by relative changes in wholesale prices is supplemented in the lower panel by a comparison of movements in labor costs per
unit of output in manufacturing (again adjusted for exchange rate varia-




Chart 12

Comparative Prices and Unit Labor Costs
SEVEN INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES^
INDEX, 1958=100

110

GERMANY
WHOLESALE PRICES 1 /

UNITED KINGDOM
ITALY
JAPAN

100

• UNITED STATES

-

CANADA

FRANCE

90

I

80
1958

1959

I

1960

1961

1962

1963

130
GERMANY

UNIT LABOR COSTS 1 /

120

UNITED KINGDOM
JAPAN
UNITED STATES
ITALY
CANADA
FRANCE

1958

1959

1960

1961

1962

_L

1963

i/ADJUSTED FOR EXCHANGE RATE VARIATIONS: FRANCE (1958), GERMANY (1959), AND CANADA.
I/PRODUCER PRICES FOR INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS IN UNITED KINGDOM.
i / R A T I O OF WAGES, SALARIES, AND SUPPLEMENTS TO PRODUCTION. ESTIMATES FOR UNITED STATES BY
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS AND FOR OTHER COUNTRIES BY DEPARTMENT OF LABOR (TO BE
PUBLISHED IN THE FORTHCOMING REPORT "UNIT LABOR COSTS IN MANUFACTURING"). DATA RELATE
TO WAGE EARNERS IN FRANCE AND ITALY AND TO ALL EMPLOYEES IN OTHER COUNTRIES.
SOURCES: ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR,
AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




132

tion). The 1962 positions of the several countries in the two rankings are
almost identical.
Naturally, such over-all calculations obscure much relevant detail. Not
all goods enter into foreign trade, and prices and costs of those important
for trade may move quite differently from the over-all average (as shown
in Table 21, Chapter 4). Yet prices and costs of domestically produced,
import-competing commodities are likely to be closely related to the general
indexes, and the competitive position of exports is unlikely to resist for
very long the basic economic forces at work in any economy.
Policies to curb inflation abroad. As was pointed out in Chapter 4,
European policies are being adapted to counteract upward price pressures. The United States has no reason to expect surplus countries to
accept inflation, just as they have no reason to expect the United States to
accept unemployment and unused capacity because of its payments deficit.
In dealing with these domestic problems, the countries of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) have been striving
to develop general principles of cooperative behavior for surplus and deficit
countries, as described in the second part of this chapter. All countries
should be aware of the undesirability of initiating a chain of competitive upward movements in interest rates such as would occur if surplus
countries—in their efforts to stop advancing prices—took monetary actions
that attracted large amounts of capital from deficit countries.
Trade policies. Relative costs and prices will play an even more significant role in the pattern of world commerce if negotiations under the Trade
Expansion Act of 1962, now about to enter the formal stage, are successful
in reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade. This is a major objective of
U.S. policy for a host of reasons, both political and economic. One significant outcome of successful negotiations would be to prevent an increase in
discrimination against both agricultural and nonagricultural imports by the
European Economic Community as intra-Community trade barriers continue to come down.
More broadly, there is much to be gained, by both industrial and developing countries, from a progressive reduction not only in tariffs but in other
barriers to international trade. The United States has a strong interest in
a lowering of such barriers, quite apart from balance-of-payments
considerations.
THE FUTURE OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM
The leading industrial countries—known as the "Group of Ten"—agreed
in October 1963 to undertake a study of the international monetary system—
the set of mutual understandings, commitments, and institutional arrangements under which international trade and payments are now conducted. A
communique was issued on October 2, 1963, by the Finance Ministers and
Central Bank Governors of the 10 countries: Belgium, Canada, France,




133

Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. It stated in part:
In reviewing the longer-run prospects, the Ministers and Governors agreed
that the underlying structure of the present monetary system—based on fixed
exchange rates and the established price of gold—has proven its value as the
foundation for present and future arrangements. It appeared to them, however,
to be useful to undertake a thorough examination of the outlook for the functioning of the international monetary system and of its probable future needs for
liquidity. This examination should be made with particular emphasis on the
possible magnitude and nature of the future needs for reserves and for supplementary credit facilities which may arise within the framework of national
economic policies effectively aiming at the objectives of [high levels of economic
activity with a sustainable rate of economic growth and in a climate of price
stability]. The studies should also appraise and evaluate various possibilities
for covering such needs.

This examination, and a similar study by the International Monetary
Fund, necessarily involves a careful appraisal of how well the existing
system advances the basic economic objectives shared by the participating
countries. How, and how effectively, do present arrangements operate
to minimize imbalances in international payments and to finance those
that inevitably arise? How resistant is the system to shocks arising from
unexpected political or economic events? Can it support a steady increase in
world trade and production? The Group of Ten and the IMF will attempt
to answer questions like these and review various proposals for modifying
the international monetary system.
It would be neither appropriate nor fruitful to try to anticipate here the
outcome of the studies now under way. But this section of the Report does
provide a background to these studies by (1) suggesting the basic economic
objectives to be served by the international monetary system, (2) describing
briefly the international monetary system as it evolved at Bretton Woods and
has been strengthened more recently, (3) discussing some of the actual or
potential shortcomings of the existing system, and (4) summarizing some of
the proposals for its modification, ranging from a further strengthening of
existing arrangements to a major overhaul.
These discussions in the Group of Ten will focus on relationships
among the leading industrial countries. These are the countries that
hold most of the world's reserves and whose payments problems can be
serious enough to have a significant impact on the functioning of the whole
international monetary machinery. But this does not mean that the rest of
the world is unaffected by these monetary arrangements. On the contrary,
the less developed countries have a vital stake in a monetary system that
fosters steady growth in world trade and payments.
OBJECTIVES TO BE SERVED

A properly functioning international payments system, like any monetary
or financial arrangement, must be judged by its contribution to the basic
economic objectives shared by all countries. These include: (1) full




134

employment, (2) a satisfactory rate of economic growth, (3) mutually
beneficial trade that reflects and contributes to efficient international allocation of resources through freedom of international transactions, and (4)
reasonable stability of prices.
In a world economy where technology is advancing, living standards are
rising, and tastes are subject to change—and from which the business cycle
has not been banished—it is inevitable that the external accounts of individual countries will, from time to time, develop surpluses and deficits of varying size and duration. If the monetary reserves available to finance these
imbalances are too small or the credit facilities too limited, deficit countries
may have to adopt monetary, fiscal, and. trade policies that depress
economic activity both in their own economies and elsewhere. On the other
hand, if the funds available to finance imbalances are too large, deficit countries may make excessive claims on, and may even impose inflationary pressures on, their trading partners—when, instead, they should be adopting
policies to restore equilibrium in their payments balances.
Along with the inevitable swings in payments positions, there are occasional economic and political shocks to which the international system is
subject. Unless it is able to adjust smoothly to such disturbances, the resulting instability in foreign exchange markets is likely to disrupt the normal
flow of trade and payments.
What is sought ideally is an international monetary system that facilitates attainment of all the economic objectives listed above, imposing
neither inflation nor deflation, encouraging freedom of international transactions, and not giving way to disruptive instability when subjected to shock.
Discipline to correct imbalances, whether surpluses or deficits, is necessary;
but that discipline should exert its influence toward adoption of policies that
expand rather than restrict real income, emancipate rather than shackle
international trade, encourage rather than impede the flow of productive
capital.
THE PRESENT SYSTEM

Present international monetary arrangements have resulted partly from
design and partly from the unplanned evolution of private and official
practices in international trade and payments. The basic principles governing the existing international monetary system, laid down some 20 years
ago at the Bretton Woods Conference, call for the elimination of direct
controls over foreign exchange transactions and, consequently, free convertibility of one currency into another—at exchange rates that fluctuate
not more than 1 percent in either direction from declared parities. These
exchange-rate parities are subject to adjustment only at times of "fundamental disequilibrium" in the international payments positions of individual countries.
International reserves. Countries need international monetary reserves
to support the market value of their currencies within 1 percent of parity.
More broadly, they need reserves to meet possible shortfalls between




135

receipts and payments that may arise for a variety of reasons and may persist
over periods ranging from one season to several years. These reserves are
held in the form of gold and foreign exchange (other national currencies).
Actually only two national currencies—the dollar and the pound sterling—serve to an important extent as monetary reserves for other countries. And
of these two, in recent years the dollar has been the principal reserve
currency.
A reserve currency country acts in effect as a banker to other countries.
Foreign-held short-term claims denominated in dollars—liabilities of the
United States Government or U.S. financial institutions—constitute international money. Dollars and sterling are used as an international medium
of exchange—much of world trade is transacted in these currencies—and as
a store of value for balances of foreign monetary authorities and foreign
private institutions, businesses, and individuals.
In addition, the dollar plays a unique role as the currency unifying foreign
exchange markets. Other countries, including the United Kingdom, maintain their exchange rates within 1 percent of their declared par values, as
required by the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund,
by buying or selling dollars in exchange for their own currencies. The
United States, while it also chooses on occasion to buy and sell foreign currencies for this purpose, meets its basic commitment to maintain the value
of the dollar in world markets by undertaking to buy gold from, or sell it
to, foreign monetary authorities at a fixed price—$35 an ounce.
The reserve currency system, linked to gold through the dollar, was not
created by a specific agreement. Rather it evolved from the use first of
sterling, then of the dollar as important trading currencies; as currencies
in which short- and long-term loans could be arranged; and as universally
acceptable currencies in which reserves could be safely, conveniently, and
profitably invested by both private and official holders.
Its pre-eminence as an industrial country and the strength of its financial
structure make the United States attractive to other countries as a place in
which to hold liquid balances—and hence account for its role as banker to
the rest of the world. But this countiy also engages in wide-ranging activities as a trader and investor and is responsible for much of the free world's
economic and military assistance programs. Its transactions with the rest
of the world represent a commingling of its trading, investing, and foreign
assistance activities with its banking activities.
Just as the successful operation of a bank depends on the continuing confidence of depositors that their claims on the bank will be freely usable and
will not lose their value, the viability of the present reserve currency system
depends on the confidence of foreign holders, both official and private, that
their dollar claims will not lose value for any type of use.
Everyone agrees that a bank must be subject to special limitations and
disciplines for the protection of its depositors and, indeed, of the whole community. Similarly the system that makes the United States an interna-




136

tional bank imposes special responsibilities. Unless this country pursues
policies that encourage confidence in the continued stability of the dollar,
the entire international monetary system will become vulnerable to instability or even breakdown. This responsibility imposes limits on the policies,
both domestic and international, that the United States, as a reserve currency country, may pursue. It is equally clear, however, that other countries, in. their own self-interest, share this responsibility for maintaining a
viable international payments system.
When the United States has a deficit in its balance of payments, the
corresponding surpluses of other countries accrue largely in their official
holdings of dollars—usually in the form of deposits in United States banks or
holdings of United States Government securities. To the extent that other
countries continue to hold these liquid dollar assets instead of using them to
purchase gold from the United States, total world reserves are larger. If
instead they buy gold, U.S. reserves go down by the amount that the reserves
of others rise.
Just as a deficit in the United States balance of payments may expand
world reserves, a surplus in its balance of payments may reduce them. This
would happen to the extent that countries with deficits (corresponding to
the U.S. surplus) financed them by drawing down their holdings of dollar
assets. This would reduce their reserves without expanding those of the
United States. If, on the other hand, deficit countries sold gold to the
U.S., total world reserves would not be diminished, although there would,
of course, be a shift of reserves from the rest of the world to this country.
And, if we were to accumulate the currencies of deficit countries as part
of our reserves, a U.S. surplus would not contract total world reserves,
but rather would expand them. Such a development would, in effect,
convert other currencies into a limited form of reserve currency.
It should also be noted that, under the existing system, the volume of
world reserves can be affected by shifts in surpluses and deficits among other
countries, even though the U.S. balance-of-payments position remains unchanged. Other countries hold differing proportions of gold and dollars
in their official monetary reserves. If a country that holds a relatively high
proportion of its reserves in dollars has a deficit and transfers dollars to a
surplus country whose practice is to hold relatively fewer dollars and more
gold, the second country is likely to use a good part of its dollar accruals to
buy gold from the United States. The result is a reduction in world monetary reserves, for the United States loses gold without gaining other reserves and the total reserves of the rest of the world remain unchanged.
Role of the IMF. The International Monetary Fund stands at the center of the present international system as a source of financing for temporary
balance-of-payments deficits and as an influence toward freer international
transactions.




The Fund's resources are derived from subscriptions, equal in each case
to the "quota" assigned to the member country. These subscriptions were
paid, in most cases, one-fourth in gold and three-fourths in the member
country's own currency. The total resources of the Fund amount to $15.8
billion, including $2.3 billion in gold, $3.1 billion in dollars, and $3.5 billion
in the currencies of other members of the Group of Ten.
The amount that each member can borrow from the IMF is related to its
quota, the first 25 percent of which (the so-called "gold tranche") can be
used virtually on demand. Under present Fund policies, further borrowing is increasingly conditional upon adoption by the member country of
policies to eliminate the causes of the deficit. The total amount of Fund
drawings that can be outstanding at any one time is considerably less than
the total of its resources. This is so because, if the IMF is to make a net
contribution to financing imbalances, the funds it makes available must
ordinarily be in the currencies of surplus countries. As a supplement to the
Fund's regular resources, there is a special arrangement under which the
Group of Ten countries, including the United States, have agreed to lend up
to $6 billion of added resources to the Fund in case of need.
Additional bulwarks. The reserve currency system has been buttressed
in other ways in recent years. These arrangements, like the special IMF
borrowing agreement, represent cooperative action by governments and
central banks to make the system less vulnerable to instability resulting from
speculative activity in foreign exchange and gold markets.
Central banks of many of the leading industrial countries^ have cooperated
with the Federal Reserve System in the past 3 years in developing currency
"swap arrangements," which provide for reciprocal deposit balances to be
drawn as needed to help stabilize foreign exchange markets. The U.S.
Treasury, also in cooperation with foreign monetary authorities, has engaged
in both spot and forward exchange operations for the same purposes. An informal pooling arrangement has succeeded in reducing the destabilizing
effect of speculative activity in the London gold market. A number of the
central banks that are membrs of the Bank for International Settlements
have entered into special ad hoc lending arrangements to help each other at
times of special need.
As was mentioned earlier, cooperation has likewise been strongly
evident in the willingness of various European surplus countries to prepay
debts to the United States, to purchase and make advance payments for
military supplies, and to buy special nonmarketable, medium-term securities
from the U.S. Treasury.
ACTUAL OR POTENTIAL SHORTCOMINGS OF THE SYSTEM

Within the framework described above, the world economy has enjoyed
impressive growth in the postwar era, and international trade has flourished.
Nevertheless, private and official observers of the international mone-




138

tary system have raised questions concerning: (1) the weaknesses in the
existing adjustment process for restoring balance-of-payments equilibrium,
(2) the potential instability associated with the large and growing volume
of short-term claims against the United States, and (3) the means of providing for long-term growth of world reserves.
Weaknesses in the adjustment process* Under the textbook version of
the 19th century gold standard, a country in deficit would lose gold to a
surplus country, and an automatic process of adjustment would begin. The
gold-losing country would experience contraction of its domestic money
supply, rising interest rates, and falling money incomes and prices (coupled
possibly with falling output and employment). The gold-gaining country
would experience the opposite changes. The result would be a correction
of the balance-of-payments disequilibrium through a change in relative
prices of, and in demands for, the two countries' imports. This automatic
adjustment in trade might be abetted and quickened by movements of
capital, in response largely to interest rate differentials, from the surplus to
the deficit country.
In this idealized and perhaps partly imagined system—involving a smooth
and quick correction of imbalances—the flow of gold from deficit to surplus country served two functions: (1) it set in motion the process of adjustment, and meanwhile (2) it financed the imbalance.
The present international system resembles the textbook gold standard
in one important respect: exchange rates are fixed within a narrow margin.
But other conditions are very different. Domestic credit conditions in most
countries today are to some degree independent of the volume of international monetary reserves. Prices and wages tend to resist downward movement. And most countries pursue domestic policies aimed at full employment and price stability.
This means that internal deflation in deficit countries is not an acceptable
means of reducing imports and making exports more competitive. By the
same token, surplus countries are understandably unwilling to accept inflation as a means of restoring balance in their external accounts.
While the Articles of Agreement of the IMF permit exchange-rate adjustment in case of a "fundamental disequilibrium"—an imbalance that is
chronic and intractable at the existing exchange rate—most countries are
reluctant to take this step. For a reserve currency country, this alternative
is not available. For other major industrial countries, even occasional
recourse to such adjustments would induce serious speculative capital
movements, thereby accentuating imbalances.
What then is the adjustment mechanism under modern conditions?
Policies called for by a country's domestic situation frequently may also
help to correct an imbalance in its external accounts. If a country is suffering from excessive total demand for its domestic output and also has
a deficit in its balance of payments—a combination of ills that has
frequently been encountered—restrictive fiscal and monetary policies

*39
715-113 O-64-10



are appropriate. If successfully applied, they serve to reduce excessive
domestic demand, and this effect in itself tends to reduce imports and encourage exports. In addition, stopping domestic inflation will at least
prevent the country's competitive position from worsening further. Moreover, restrictive monetary policy and higher interest rates tend to attract
interest-sensitive capital from other countries and to discourage domestic
capital from moving abroad.
Similarly, there is no conflict between internal and external objectives in
the case of a country experiencing deficient demand at home but a surplus
in its balance of payments. Here the application of expansionary fiscal and
monetary policies helps to restore full use of domestic resources and tends to
increase imports relative to exports. This mix of policies also encourages
interest-sensitive capital to move abroad.
It is not these combinations of internal and external problems that
raise questions about the adequacy of the adjustment process in today's
world. Rather it is the less tractable combinations, such as a deficiency of
demand at home and a deficit in the balance of payments—which the
United States has faced in recent years—or excess demand internally along
with a surplus in the external accounts—which some European countries
have been experiencing.
Conventional notions as to policies for adjustment contain a clear bias
toward imposing greater pressure on deficit countries to adopt restrictive
fiscal and monetary policies than on surplus countries to adopt expansionary policies. This bias results in part from the simple fact that the lower
limit to which a deficit country's reserves can ultimately fall (zero) is
more definite and compelling than the upper limit to which a surplus
country's reserves can rise. To be sure, the availability of IMF and other
credit may extend the period during which a deficit can be sustained, but
such borrowing brings with it added pressures for correction of the deficit.
Related to this asymmetry is the fact that a balance-of-payments deficit
is often regarded as an indication of "profligacy"—in view of the traditional
association of deficits with domestic inflation—which requires the imposition
of discipline on deficit countries. There is no disciplinary counterpart for
surplus countries. To some extent, this conventional view is institutionalized in the IMF, whose long-standing policies require increasingly vigorous
corrective measures by deficit countries as their drawings from the Fund
increase beyond the first (gold) tranche. Fund policies do not place a
corresponding emphasis on the need for adjustment by surplus countries.
The stability of liquid dollar claims. As was indicated at the beginning oi
this chapter, the United States has had payments deficits since 1949. Until
the late 1950's, however, most countries were anxious to enlarge their dollar
holdings and welcomed our modest deficits. But after 1957 U.S. deficits
were larger; and, with a smaller appetite for dollar holdings, many foreign countries converted a higher proportion of their dollar accruals into
gold. Even so, foreign dollar balances have increased by about $8 billion




140

since 1957. Foreign central banks and governments held $8 billion of
short-term dollar claims at the end of 1957 and $12J4 billion in late 1963;
foreign banks, businesses, and individuals held $6 billion in December 1957
and $9 billion in late 1963. Over the same period, the U.S. gold reserve
fell by $ 7 / 2 billion, from $23 billion to $15/ 2 billion.
The expanding total of liquid dollar claims, set against a declining gold
stock, is sometimes viewed as a potential source of instability for the reserve
currency system. This is based on the possibility of a convergence of
demands by foreign monetary authorities for conversion of dollar balances
into gold. The more intractable the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit appeared to be, the less remote such a threat might be considered. Conversely,
evidence of U.S. progress toward balance-of-payments equilibrium mitigates
such destabilizing fears.
Potential instability is regarded by some observers as inherent in a reserve
currency system—or indeed in any fractional reserve system in which credit
claims convertible into gold are an important element. It is characteristic
of such a system that growing needs for international monetary reserves cannot be met solely from gold becoming available for monetary use. In fact
many observers believe that the currency or credit component of reserves
must rise relative to gold holdings. In these circumstances the system will
always be subject to the possibility of instability when for one reason or another private or official holders of a reserve asset become uneasy.
As was described earlier, international cooperation has led to the development in recent years of a series of measures designed to reduce these dangers.
But the risks of instability have not been wholly eliminated.
Provision for growth of reserves. The total of official reserves held by
the industrial countries is generally regarded as adequate at the present
time. The question is whether the present system for creating reserves will
be able to function so as to meet future requirements.
It is clearly impossible to devise an exact criterion for determining the
world's needs for reserves in the years ahead. This need will depend on at
least three factors: (a) the strength of the forces creating potential imbalances, (b) the effectiveness of the adjustment process which tends to limit
and correct these imbalances, and (c) the availability of credit supplements
to official reserves.
It is an objective of the nations of the free world that trade and capital
movements should be increasingly freed from restrictions. Yet, for a number of reasons, increased freedom of international transactions is likely to
make each country's balance of payments more sensitive than before to
changes in economic conditions within its own borders and outside.
The extent to which tendencies toward imbalance actually create large
or prolonged deficits depends, of course, on the speed and effectiveness of
the processes of adjustment. If the existing adjustment mechanisms are
slow-acting, larger reserves will be needed; if they can be made quick and




141

effective—while consistent with the basic objectives of growth, stability, and unrestricted trade—smaller reserves will suffice. Of course,
there is an interaction among the supply of reserves, the adjustment
process, and the size of swings in payments balances. For example, if reserves are too large, countries may not have to pay much attention to
current changes in their payments balances, and they may avoid or delay
the adjustments needed to restore equilibrium.
Similarly, the availability and dependability of credit sources to supplement "owned" reserves influence countries' views as to the volume of reserves they need as well as the extent to which they feel compelled to take
prompt action against forces tending to disturb payments equilibrium.
Given the existing adjustment mechanisms and the priorities of economic
policy in most countries, the supply of reserves and credit facilities will have
to be prepared to cope with substantial future imbalances.
In the years since World War II, the growth of world reserves has had
two major sources: (1) a growth of monetary gold stocks and (2) deficits
in the U.S. balance of payments. In the future, gold can be expected to
provide for only a part of the needed growth in world reserves, as it has in
the past. In the decade from 1953 through 1962, monetary gold reserves
of all countries increased by about $5/2 billion, or by less than 15 percent of
total monetary reserves at the end of 1952, whereas, over the same period
world trade, as measured by total imports, increased by nearly 65 percent.
During this decade, the total gold and foreign exchange reserves of the rest
of the world increased by about $19 billion, or nearly 75 percent. But about
two-fifths of this growth represented a transfer abroad of U.S. gold—a
process which cannot continue indefinitely to provide a source of reserve
growth for the rest of the world.
The net outflow of dollars from the United States has been a major
source of growth in world reserves over the past decade. But reliance on
this method of increasing reserves creates a dilemma. U.S. deficits are
accompanied by a growth of dollar liabilities relative to the gold stock,
increasing the dangers of instability referred to earlier; yet, when the U.S.
deficit is eliminated—or gives way to a surplus—world reserves will probably
rise too slowly (or even contract) under existing monetary arrangements.
For these reasons a range of proposals has been put forward for modifying
the existing method of generating monetary reserves.
PROPOSALS FOR STRENGTHENING OR CHANGING
EXISTING ARRANGEMENTS

Recognition of the problems discussed in the previous sections of this
chapter has stimulated a wide range of suggestions for change. They vary
from a careful building on the existing system, through a series of innovations and supplements, to a rather complete revision of the whole system.
The proposals, which have stimulated discussion on both sides of the
Atlantic, differ in many respects. The differences arise in part from varying
diagnoses of the nature of present problems, in part from differing degrees of




142

preoccupation with the current U.S. situation as against a future situation in
which our deficits will have disappeared. They also reflect divergences in
relative values placed on the several objectives of policy.
Most of the suggestions brought forward for strengthening or revising the
international payments system are aimed at one or more of the following
purposes: improving the balance-of-payments adjustment process, reducing the dangers of instability in the system, and providing a satisfactory
means for increasing international liquidity. This section first indicates
some of the possibilities for correcting payments imbalances more effectively
by supplementing those built-in adjustment tendencies that now exist. It
then describes a range of proposals—from a strengthening of the existing
system to a major overhaul—that deal with potential instability and future
growth of reserves.
Improvements in the adjustment process. Recent experience and discussion indicate that it is possible to devise combinations of policies that
simultaneously promote domestic and international objectives without
imposing undue pressures toward contraction in the world economy.
Two major approaches merit attention: (1) changes in the mix of
fiscal and monetary policies and (2) acceleration by surplus countries of
movements to relax barriers to international trade and payments.
As was pointed out above, there is no conflict between internal and
external objectives if a country is subject to inflationary pressures at home
and has a balance-of-payments deficit, or if it has unemployed resources at
home and a payments surplus. It is the other combinations that pose
particularly difficult policy problems.
In a world of relatively free capital movements, flexible changes in the
mix of fiscal and monetary policies can serve to reconcile internal and
external policy goals. In using this approach, a deficit country with unemployment and idle capacity would be advised to emphasize expansionary
fiscal policy to deal with its domestic demand problem while pursuing a
relatively restrictive monetary policy to deal with its balance-of-payments
problem, particularly by affecting capital movements. This, it will be
recognized, is similar to the policy prescription that the United States has
been trying to apply—a large tax reduction program to spur domestic
expansion, and a monetary policy, in the past two or three years, that calls
for interest rates, in some sectors of the market, that are relatively high for
a period of inadequate domestic investment. The United States has also
used its monetary and debt management policies to influence the maturity
structure of interest rates so as to raise short-term rates while moderating
the upward pressure on long-term rates.
For the surplus country with excess demand at home the opposite policy
mix is called for: restrictive fiscal policy and relatively easy monetary policy.
Here the fiscal policy would tend to reduce internal inflationary pressures,
while the monetary policy would discourage capital inflow and encourage
capital outflow.




143

It is clear that if changes in the mix of fiscal and monetary policies are
to serve in this way to facilitate both correction of payments disequilibrium
and pursuit of domestic goals of full employment and price stability, fiscal
policies must become more flexible. But this is desirable, in any case, for
dealing with problems of internal stabilization.
A second, although self-limiting, means of adjustment involves the
relaxation of restrictions on trade and capital movements by surplus
countries. The removal of quantitative restrictions, reductions of tariffs,
and freeing of capital flows is a continuing objective of the countries of the
free world. Constant efforts in these directions can be seen in the activities
of the IMF, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
A country prepared to relax a trade or payments restriction should not
postpone that action. On the other hand, countries with persistent balanceof-payments surpluses might well be encouraged to accelerate removal
of barriers to both current and capital transactions, including unilateral
(even if temporary) tariff reductions. This would contribute both to a
reduction in the external surplus and to an amelioration in the pressure
of excess demand at home. While a permanent relaxation of restrictions
is preferable, even a temporary suspension of trade or capital account
impediments may be helpful as a means of adjustment. A recent example
is the inclusion of selected temporary tariff reductions in the French stabilization program.
There is not a corresponding acceptable prescription for deficit countries
that are suffering from deficient demand at home. Clearly it would be undesirable for a tightening of trade restrictions or an increase in tariffs to become part of the accepted means of adjustment. When a choice must be
made among undesirable alternatives, measures to retard the rate of capital
flow from deficit countries are preferable, in terms of effects on resource allocation, to moves away from freedom of current account transactions. The proposed temporary interest equalization tax in the United
States is an example of such a step.
It may be that still other adjustment policies can be found for reconciling
international and domestic goals. In this regard, the OECD and its various committees and working parties will no doubt continue to play an important role. The success of these bodies in working to harmonize policies
and prevent a deflationary bias in the adjustment process stands out as a
significant achievement of the past few years.
Strengthening the existing reserve currency system. Most proposals for
improvement of international monetary arrangements, whatever their form
and whether moderate or drastic, deal both with the problem of stability
and with the adequacy of the means for providing reserves. One approach,
emphasizing the evolution that has been taking place in the present system
in the past few years, seeks to build on and strengthen this system through
further gradual changes.




144

As for the problem of stability of the reserve currencies, this approach
points to the success that has been achieved in stopping and reversing destabilizing speculative activity through the use of "swap" and other cooperative arrangements among central banks. With the special borrowing
arrangement, the IMF can now provide up to $4 billion of additional financing to meet any speculative run on the dollar. These arrangements could
presumably be further strengthened and enlarged if the need should arise
in the future.
This approach also includes the possible further development of sales by
the United States of special nonmarketable securities to surplus countries.
These sales, initiated recently, provide a way of consolidating short-term
dollar holdings that may be considered excessive. When denominated in
the currency of the country that purchases them (if this is mutually desired),
these securities provide an exchange guarantee. Such securities can also
provide the holder with easily available resources when its surplus turns
into a deficit.
Another element in this approach involves the recognition that
there is already a mechanism whereby U.S. surpluses need not reduce
the reserves of other countries. The United States can acquire the currencies of industrial countries that have deficits, thus preventing a decline in
the reserves of other countries as U.S. reserves increase. This practice has
been initiated on a small and exploratory scale over the past few months.
The United States has acquired Italian lire, in effect reciprocating in part
an earlier Italian purchase of medium-term U.S. securities that was made
when Italy was in surplus. In fact, regardless of whether the United
States has a deficit, a balance, or a surplus, it could acquire the currencies
of other industrial countries, with their agreement, thus providing additional liquid dollar balances to those countries and to the system as a whole.
Such amendments to the present reserve currency system begin to break
the automatic link between changes in the balance of payments of a reserve currency country and changes in the liquid monetary reserves of the
rest of the world.
This general approach recognizes that the ratio of gold to currency holdings in world monetary reserves will continue to decline, but does not view
this as involving increasing instability. Rather it rests on the belief that
so long as excessive and prolonged U.S. deficits are avoided, increasingly
close cooperation among the leading countries and the growing availability
of reciprocal credit facilities, both within or outside the IMF, can maintain
confidence in the currency element of monetary reserves, and permit their
expansion as needed.
Overhauling the existing system. Some proposals for more drastic
changes in monetary arrangements are aimed mainly at reducing the potential for instability, and others are aimed mainly at improving the
mechanism for generating reserves. But most of them contain elements




145

that would achieve both purposes. The plans are here sketched only very
briefly, and no effort is made to deal with the problems that their implementation might involve.
The plans that focus largely on lessening potential instability propose
to eliminate the possibility of disruptive and self-defeating efforts to convert
non-gold reserve assets into gold by establishing a fixed ratio of gold in each
country's total reserves (a ratio subject to change by general agreement).
Some of these plans would also create a new type of reserve unit that would
partly or wholly replace national currencies in reserves.
A proposal put forward by Professor S. Posthuma of the Netherlands
Bank would require that each member country of the Group of Ten agree
to hold a fixed proportion of its monetary reserves in the form of gold. The
remainder would be in the currencies of the other members, and these
official holdings would receive reciprocal exchange guarantees. Once the
proposal had been put into effect, countries would finance deficits by reducing gold and foreign exchange holdings proportionately so as to maintain
the agreed ratio, with similar provisions for countries gaining reserves.
This proposal would, after a period of time, effectively increase the number of reserve currencies, since each country, including the United States and
the United Kingdom, would hold the currencies of the others. Thus the
system would permit growth in reserves independently of individual deficits
and surpluses, so long as gold reserves were increasing. This system could
be further adapted to the need for additional growth of reserves through
agreed reductions in the fixed ratio between gold and foreign exchange
holdings.
A somewhat similar approach, suggested by Dr. E. M. Bernstein, is also
designed to enhance international monetary stability. This proposal would
establish a "reserve unit" as a generalized liability of the IMF. The major
industrial countries would pay over to the IMF a quantity of their own
currencies in exchange for such reserve units and would undertake to hold
reserve units in an agreed proportion—ultimately, one-half—of their gold
reserves. This composite reserve unit would in time come to replace the
reserve currencies. This plan too could be adapted to growth needs by
adjusting from time to time the fixed relationship between reserve units and
gold.
A number of proposals would increase international reserves and credit
availability by making IMF resources more readily usable by member
countries. Any such change in Fund practices would increase international
credit availability. To the extent that member countries came to regard a
larger proportion of their maximum potential drawing rights at the Fund
as freely available, the effect would be equivalent to an increase in "owned"
reserves.
Such proposals for greater, and perhaps less conditional, use of Fund
resources are usually accompanied by a plea for a change in member country
attitudes toward reliance on the IMF. Instead of regarding the Fund




146

as a lender of last resort, member countries, especially industrial countries
holding substantial amounts of reserves, would be encouraged to draw
regularly on the Fund as a complement to the use of their owned reserves
in financing a part of any deficits.
While these proposals aim at using the IMF more intensively, they are
frequently accompanied by suggestions for regular increases in Fund quotas
to provide for needed expansion in liquidity over time. Such increases
could be negotiated periodically, or agreement might be reached on a regular
automatic expansion of quotas.
Another approach to increasing the volume of reserves is the proposal for
a "mutual currency account" to be administered by the IMF. This proposal provides that the industrial countries form an arrangement under
which a surplus country could deposit the currency of a deficit country
in the mutual currency account. This facility would encourage the provision of financing to the deficit country—though definite limits would
be established—and would give the surplus country a claim against the
mutual currency account, which would receive the usual IMF gold-value
guarantee against exchange risks. Once established, such claims would
become a new form of reserve, usable under certain conditions by their
holders when they in turn find themselves in deficit.
Perhaps the most far-reaching of the many plans that have been widely
discussed—that of Professor Robert Triffin of Yale—aims to replace the
present system so that reserve creation will no longer depend on additions
to the stock of monetary gold and to claims on reserve currency countries.
Instead it proposes to place in the hands of an international institution
(a reconstituted IMF) the power to regulate the creation of international
monetary reserves. Under this proposal reserve currencies would be replaced by new claims on the expanded IMF, and these claims would be
transferred from deficit to surplus countries in settlement of imbalances.
The new institution would be empowered to make loans to members
by creating additional claims on itself—as does a bank. And, as in the case
of bank loans, the member's policies would be scrutinized by the lending
institution. In addition the new IMF could expand reserves at its own
volition or on some predetermined basis by purchasing government securities of its members, with their agreement, paying for these securities by
creating deposits (claims against itself). Such loans and "open market
operations" would be used to expand world reserves at an appropriate rate.
This proposal, like others related to it, takes inspiration from the historical development of central banking within individual countries. Recognizing that "money does not manage itself," individual countries have established centralized instititions that now regulate the aggregate creation of
new money, regardless of the size of deficits of individual borrowers. Whether such a development would also be desirable, practicable, and acceptable
internationally—and, if so, when—is understandably the subject of considerable controversy.




147

CONCLUDING COMMENTS

Without trying to anticipate the outcome of the studies now in process, it
is possible to state some general propositions that follow from the preceding
discussion:
1. International monetary arrangements are not an end in themselves but
a means of fostering a steadily growing world economy, in which freedom
of international transactions contributes to rising living standards, and
price stability helps to assure equitable distribution of the fruits of economic
growth.
2. If it is to serve these purposes, the international monetary system should
provide both leeway and discipline: (a) It should encourage adjustment
of imbalances by both deficit and surplus countries in ways that avoid imparting either a deflationary or an inflationary bias to the world economy,
and it should encourage greater rather than less freedom of international
transactions, (b) It should reduce or eliminate the potential for disruptive
and speculative conversions of foreign exchange reserves into gold. And
(c) it should make financial resources available in a volume and under
conditions adequate to finance imbalances consistently with these objectives.
3. In evaluating specific plans that are put forward for modification or
reform of the existing system, it is important not to confuse form with
substance. Any plan—regardless of its outward trappings—can be adapted
so as to become too restrictive or too inflationary. Whatever the outcome of the present studies, it must be recognized that for any monetary
arrangement to function successfully, it is essential that there be an increasing degree of mutual understanding, cooperation, and responsibility
among the countries whose reserve holdings and reserve needs account for
the bulk of the problem of international liquidity.




148

Chapter 6

U.S. Assistance of Economic Development
Overseas
UCH OF THE WORLD in which the United States conducts
its economic affairs consists of poor countries now urgently striving
to modernize and develop their economic systems. Our economic relations
with these countries constitute a major aspect of U.S. foreign policy, and
they interact with our domestic economic performance and programs.
Because of the sharp debate over the U.S. foreign aid program that was
mounted during the past year and still goes on, this is a particularly appropriate time for reviewing our economic relationships with these less
developed countries.
Even if there were no other reasons, the sheer size of the United States
would give our economic performance and policies a particular significance
for the developing nations. These nations depend heavily on American
savings as a major source of capital; on American science, technology, and
management as a major source of productive and organizational technique;
and on American markets as a major source of demand. Rapid growth and
prosperity in the United States make an important contribution to establishing favorable conditions for economic development abroad.
A great variety of American activities—by U.S. businesses, consumers,
tourists, and private nonprofit institutions, as well as Government—significantly affect the developing countries, and these activities reflect a
variety of purposes. The focus of this chapter, however, is on the economic
policies of the U. S. Government toward the developing countries.

M

EVOLUTION AND RATIONALE
In common usage "foreign aid" refers to transfers on concessionary terms
of goods, services, or purchasing power from one government to another, either directly or through the medium of international organizations. (Frequently, although the relations between sovereign nations require that it be agreeable to the recipient government, aid is destined
for specific private uses. Also the term "foreign aid" sometimes is extended
to foreign transfers by private nonprofit institutions.) While all such governmental transfers are intended to serve the general foreign policy inter-




149

ests of the donor country, the aid mechanism is a vehicle that can be
adapted—and has been adapted by the United States—to many specific
uses that vary over time and from place to place. For example, arms
shipments coupled with military training have been supplied to nations
directly threatened by a foreign power hostile to our interests, but such
programs may not be appropriate in other situations.
"Development assistance" is only one type of foreign aid. But it is
a type that, while .guided by the basic criterion of our foreign policy interests, is properly based on economic analysis and evaluated in concrete
economic terms. This chapter will deal primarily with this type of foreign
aid, rather than with programs that are of necessity dominated by political
or military considerations of a tactical nature. All the same, it is well to
recognize that assistance can evolve from one form to another within
the same administrative framework—as the cases of Greece and Taiwan,
for example, well illustrate. Since our early aid efforts in these nations
were responses to military crises, internal and external, longer-run economic development considerations properly took a subsidiary position.
Both countries soon gained a measure of internal security and political
stability. Our interests, as well as theirs, then dictated embarking on a
program of long-run economic development.
SHIFTING POLICY GOALS

American aid commitments during the early postwar period had short
time horizons. The Marshall Plan and its various instrumentalities were
a response to the postwar economic chaos and were designed to tide highly
industrialized nations over a reconstruction period. The Marshall Plan
succeeded handsomely and ended ahead of schedule.
Meanwhile, the social, political, and economic revolution sweeping the
underdeveloped world was beginning to give our aid program a new focus.
Throughout much of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, rising economic expectations coincided with the disintegration of traditional colonial empires
and the emergence of independent but inexperienced and vulnerable nations. Their desire for the benefits of the Industrial Revolution was not
matched by the skills, the social and political traditions, and the capital
required for an industrial economy.
Our initial response was President Truman's Point IV Program of
technical assistance. Barely had his proposal been acted upon, however,
when the Communists in mid-1950 invaded the Republic of Korea—
highlighting the vulnerability of the emerging nations to military attack
and their need for more than technical assistance or capital for development projects. For the next few years, reinforcement of the military
strength of the free world received primary attention from American
policymakers.
As the decade of the 1950's proceeded, however, military and technical
assistance was supplemented increasingly by economic aid designed to help
emerging nations cope with particular short-run problems or to galvanize




150

longer-run development potentialities. The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961
marked the major reorientation of American foreign economic policy in
the direction of development assistance. This reorientation was based
partly on the recognition that the threat to the internal security of the
developing countries from subversive elements within had become more
pronounced than the threat to their external security.
THE CASE FOR DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE

Development assistance—the transfer of resources on concessionary terms
in order to raise rates of output and living standards in less developed countries—is thus a major aspect of our present foreign aid program. While
the rational case for it rests on political, security, and economic grounds,
much of the American impulse in this direction comes from the heart as well
as the head. We have a development assistance program because we believe in the dignity of human beings. Although simple humanitarianism
may not have a high place in diplomatic confrontations, it speaks with a
powerful voice between peoples in the language of common wants, fears
and aspirations for themselves and for each other.
In addition to humane considerations, the prime case for development
assistance rests on the Nation's international political and security interests.
Over the long run the United States has a large stake in keeping the alternative of orderly nontotalitarian paths to development open to the nonaligned
nations as well as to those who are allies. Even in the short run, moreover,
instability, unrest, and subversion in the less developed areas constitute an
ever-present threat to our security. Since the end of World War II, a
high proportion of the crises that have jeopardized the peace have been
located in the underdeveloped world. As tensions in such areas mount and
incidents occur, the growing circle of parties to the conflict renders the
dispute ever more incendiary. It is far healthier for us, and for the world
as a whole, if stability can be fostered by evolving economic growth and
constructive social change.
Development assistance also serves our own economic interests. Poor
countries make poor markets; we need good markets for our exports. We
also need dependable sources of supply for a wide variety of imports. Insecure, undiversified, inefficient economies make weak partners in the network of international economic and financial institutions, and we need
strong partners. Developing countries have become better trading partners
as their incomes have grown. During the past decade, the total value of
imports into the developing countries has increased at a rate of about 5
percent a year or somewhat more rapidly than their total income. By
creating expanding markets abroad for U.S. products, agricultural and
industrial, we realize economic returns from our foreign economic development investments.
Nevertheless, it is well for us to be frank in admitting, both to ourselves
and to others, that our development assistance strategy rests primarily on




what are, in the broadest sense, national security grounds. It is well to be
realistic about the uncertainties that run through our development assistance strategy—about the fact, for example, that economic development
will not necessarily insure democratic governments or peaceful international
behavior. But it is also wise to rest our policy on the probabilities—and
these seem to be the following:
—that free, progressing, open societies typically make better, safer,
and friendlier neighbors and members of the international community;
—that, in nations imbued with surging expectations, vigorous economic development is a necessary, although not a sufficient, condition for the maintenance of orderly political processes; and
—that for most such nations, substantial external public assistance
for a limited period is a necessary, although not a sufficient, condition for economic development.
In short, the premise of our development assistance effort has been—
and remains—that, while the risks and uncertainties inherent in making
the effort are substantial, the risks of not making it are even greater.
ROLE OF DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE
In those countries where development assistance is effective, the requirements curve for foreign capital is likely to be bell-shaped, rising at
first, leveling off, then falling. As less developed countries succeed in
promoting more rapid rates of sustained economic growth, their very
success typically entails a period of severe foreign exchange shortage.
In many of the new nations the ability to use development assistance
effectively is still very limited, in terms of dollar volume. These are the
traditional societies that have yet to break themselves loose from economic
stagnation, whose production and consumption are largely those of selfsufficient households, and whose ability to absorb capital awaits the extension of the market economy. The prime need in such cases is for technical
assistance—for teachers and technicians to build skills and institutions basic
to economic growth.
As a country acquires the skills and institutions needed to help itself and
adopts public policies that adroitly apply both the rein and the spur, its
capacity to carry out new investment activity is likely to grow more rapidly
than its ability to save. Moreover, since—at least for some time—it must
obtain from abroad the great bulk of the manufactured and semimanufactured goods it uses in establishing new industries and raising incomes,
its requirements for imports rise swiftly. Such a country, having generated
a momentum of growth and typically having encountered balance-of-payments problems as a result, can absorb substantial government-to-government capital assistance. Such assistance, by speeding the expension of
the country's imports, can accelerate the expansion of output.




152

Estimates for the 1950's indicate that in the less developed countries a
1-percent change in GNP was associated with changes of 1.85 percent in
chemical imports, 1.65 percent in imports of agricultural raw materials and
ores, and 1.49 percent in imported foodstuffs. Similarly, a 1-percent change
in gross domestic fixed investment has been found to be associated, on the
average, with a 1.15-percent change in imports of capital equipment. These
relationships, moreover, reflect the level of imports actually achieved during the 1950's in the face of acute financing problems and may thus
understate the responsiveness of imports to income change under less
stringent financial conditions.
The rapid growth of import requirements, however, typically is not
accompanied by a parallel, automatic rise in the developing country's
exports. Indeed the growth process makes a parallel rise unlikely, for
the foreign markets for the developing country's traditional exports are
in most cases relatively unresponsive to income changes in the advanced
countries (Table 25).
TABLE 25.—World exports: Current value by regions, 1953-62
[Billions of dollars; f.o.b.]
World

Year
1953 _.
1954
1955
1956
1957...
1958...
1959

_-

..

__

1960
1961
1962

-

.

Free
world

Developed Less devel- Sino-Soviet
areas l
oped areas 3
bloc

82.6
86.1

74.7
77.5

3 53.7
3 55.4

21.0
22.1

7.9
8.6

93.7
103.7
111.8
107.9
115.4

84.3
93.6
100.5
95.8
101.2

60.6
68.7
75.1
71.1
75.4

23.7
24.9
25.4
24.7
25.8

9.4
10.1
11.3
12.1
14.2

127.7
133.4
140.6

112.7
117.8
123.7

85.4
90.2
94.7

27.3
27.6
29.0

15.0
15.6
«16.9

1
8
3

Includes United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa.
Regions other than developed areas and Communist bloc countries.
Adjusted by Department of Commerce to make data comparable with subsequent years.
* Estimated.
Sources: United Nations and Department of Commerce.

Since 1953, for example, while imports into the developing countries
were expanding by 50 percent, their exports increased by 37 percent. Without the foreign exchange necessary to support the higher level of imports,
not only would growth have been impeded, but the momentum of growth
actually achieved in certain countries would have been lost.
In the broadest sense, therefore, the economic programs of the developing
countries must address two problems—first to break out of traditional
stagnation and establish sustained growth; and, second, to -make the sustained growth self-supporting in the international market.




153

STRATEGIES FOR ACHIEVING SELF-SUPPORT

In order to become able themselves to finance the imports that they need
for growth, developing countries can resort to two strategies, and in fact
they tend to adopt mixtures of the two. First, they can design development
programs that provide for the replacement of some imports through domestic
production. During the past decade import substitution received prime
emphasis in the development policies of most less developed countries. But
its feasibility depends upon the developing country's resource endowment,
the general levels of education and skills, and the size of its market.
The second strategy open to developing countries for achieving selfsupport is that of export expansion. At present the developing countries
are producers mainly of primary products; more than 85 percent of their
current exports are food and raw materials, for which the demand in the
advanced countries has grown only slowly during the past decade (Table
26). While there are, of course, great differences in the positions of individual countries, realistic possibilities for a sizable expansion of export earnings tend generally to depend on a diversification of their exports—and this
is in process. One of the most rapidly rising components of the developing
countries' exports in recent years has been manufactured goods. Although
this category still accounts for less than 15 percent of their total commodity
exports, it rose at an average rate of more than 10 percent a year from 1958
to 1961, while total exports rose only 4 percent a year during the same period.
TABLE 26.—World trade: Volume and unit value indexes of exports by regions,
1953-63
[1953=100]
Volume indexes

Year
World

Unit value indexes

Developed
areas

Less
developed
areas

World

Developed
areas

Less
developed
areas

1953..
1954..

100
105

100
107

100
102

100
99

100
98

100
102

1955..
1956..
1957..
1958__
1959..

114
124
131
128
138

116
128
136
132
142

110
117
119
120
129

99
101
103
100
99

98
101
104
101
100

102
101
101
97
94

I960—
1961...
1962—
19631.

153
159
167
174

159
167
174
182

136
141
152
160

100
99
99
100

101
102
102
102

95
92
90
91

l Preliminary estimates: January-June average for volume indexes and January-September average for
unit values indexes.
Source: United Nations and Department of Commerce.

While both of the strategies for self-support are aimed at balancing the
imports and exports required for sustained growth, both imply increased
imports for an interim period. For the expansion of the processing and
manufacturing industries required by either strategy needs the creation of




154

new productive facilities, the enlargement of existing capacity, and additional materials and supplies that can still be obtained only from advanced
countries. Thus as the developing countries establish the basis for shifting
from sustained to self-supporting growth, success in their development effort
intensifies their aid needs, and their requirements for foreign capital will
reach a maximum—the top of the bell-shaped curve.
IMPLEMENTING SELF-SUPPORT

The financing problems that accompany growth will decrease in intensity—and the need for foreign aid diminish—as self-supplying capabilities
of the developing countries increase and the composition and volume of their
exports more and more reflect the expanding size and diversity of their internal economies. Success, however, requires, and will continue to require,
a variety of adjustments. If the advanced countries are prosperous and
expanding, their demand for all products, including the exports of the developing countries, will be buoyant, and the developing countries' foreign financing problem will be smaller. Vigorous economic expansion at home
is therefore one of the greatest contributions that the advanced countries
can make to the growth of the developing countries. Beyond this, the commercial policies of the advanced countries can maintain a congenial environment for the poorer countries' exports. For example, the "Kennedy
Round" of tariff negotiations, which will begin in the spring of 1964, can
make a major contribution to the welfare of the developing countries. In
addition, two steps taken in 1963 are worthy of note. The International
Coffee Agreement was completed, and legislation to permit U.S. participation in it has reached an advanced stage in the Congress. And the International Monetary Fund in March 1963 created a new facility to make funds
available to member countries that experience temporary declines in export
earnings due to circumstances beyond their control.
However, the greater part of the responsibility for making adjustments
that will accomplish a progressive narrowing of their foreign exchange
deficiency lies with the developing countries themselves. They must orient
their own development planning and administration, as well as the flow of
development assistance, away from overexpanded industries or those with
declining demand toward industries in which they are—or are likely to
become—most efficient. The concentration of production in areas of comparative advantage will provide the basis for a sustainable expansion of
exports. At the same time, they must exploit any good import substitution
possibilities they have thus far overlooked—for example, some of the less
developed countries possess the climate and soil that would permit them
economically to grow the basic foods they now import. The developing
countries need to manage their monetary, fiscal, and foreign exchange policies so that resources are not diverted from export markets to uneconomic
domestic use. They need, in some instances and in certain quarters, further
to encourage thrift and saving and a mobilization of domestic capital re-

155
715-1X3 O-64-11



sources. And they need to undertake far more determined, imaginative,
and better organized efforts to adapt their products to foreign demands and
to market them aggressively.
A major corollary of these efforts can be success in attracting private
foreign capital at reasonable terms and under constructive arrangements.
It is easy to exaggerate the portion of the problem that private foreign
capital can solve in the near future. Nevertheless, the more successfully
the developing countries pursue stable, sustained growth, the more they will
induce foreign private investors to participate widely in their expansion.
Foreign development assistance can contribute significantly, if marginally, to the attainment of sustained, self-supporting growth by a number
of less developed countries. On the other hand, carelessly provided, it
can be used by a less developed country to postpone economic self-discipline. Such perversions of assistance should be resisted. For example,
a developing country that yields to the temptation to spend its scarce
resources on sophisticated military equipment for prestige reasons should
not expect foreign assistance to take care of its development needs. The
managers of a development assistance effort should retain sufficient discretion occasionally to risk using economic aid as an inducement to constructive political and social change. But, in general, development
assistance—particularly capital assistance—should be directed only to those
countries that give convincing promise of effectively combining it with
their own resources to promote growth.
In recent years the U.S. aid program has been tending toward a greater
concentration of its development credits. This is the effect of its insistence
that, to qualify for substantial development assistance, recipients make
adequate showings of "self-help" and adopt economic programs and policies
that promise effective use of the assistance. Further such emphasis is
warranted.
Because of its prominence in the U.S. development assistance program,
special mention should be made of aid that, under Public Law 480, takes
the form of surplus farm commodities—conveyed mainly through the device
of selling them for local currencies. Because the proceeds of such sales are
inconvertible and because their disbursement within the host countries is
subject to joint U.S.-host government determination, th-, farm commodities
provided constitute net contributions to the developing countries' resources
and entail practically no claim on their foreign exchange.
While, in the abstract, there is no assurance that the particular physical
surpluses the United States happens to have consist of goods the developing
countries need, in practice there is a happy convergence of interests in
the case of surplus foods. For, wisely channelled, the provision of such
American foods, over and above what the developing countries can afford
to buy in the international market, can meet much more than relief needs.
It can supply the increments to local food supplies that allow host gov-




156

ernments, for example, to mobilize large amounts of idle manpower, especially in rural areas, into labor-intensive investment projects without
running serious inflationary dangers.
Trade and capital flows—both public and private—are interdependent.
The necessity for aid depends on the level of domestic production and
the volume and direction of trade; but the volume and direction of trade
and the level of domestic production are themselves a function of the form
and amount of public and private international capital flows. Because
trade and aid are interdependent ways of coping with the foreign exchange shortages that development efforts typically engender, the two
should be more systematically related within the same comprehensive development programs. The combinations that can make the greatest contribution to growth will vary not only among recipient countries, but for the
same country with the progress of its development effort.
THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER DONORS
All of the principal Western industrialized countries have now initiated,
or substantially expanded, their own development assistance programs. At
the same time, they have stepped up their contributions to multilaterally
supported programs. Despite the fact that the Communist countries are
themselves in many ways underdeveloped nations, they also have chosen to
divert some of their scarce resources to a foreign aid program. The United
States, which was at one time the only important source of aid to noncolonial areas now accounts for about 55 percent of the world total.
If "aid" is defined as government grants, public loans of more than 5
years' duration, and contributions from official sources to multilateral agencies for use on behalf of the less developed countries, then disbursements of
all donor countries (net of repayments) are estimated at approximately
$6/ 2 billion in 1962 and may have increased by $2OO-$5OO million in 1963.
About 90 percent of this assistance in 1962 was provided by the 12 members
of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Receipts by the less developed countries have run somewhat behind the global assistance figures—
about $500 million less in 1962—because disbursements by multilateral
agencies have been lower than the sums made available to them by capital
subscriptions, grants, and bond purchases.
The domestic resources of the developing countries are also augmented
by the inflow of foreign private capital that is invested either directly or by
the purchase of securities. The problems of measuring these private capital
flows are particularly severe. Probably, however, the total net flow of
private capital from the developed to the developing countries in 1962
exceeded $2 billion. This brought total long-term receipts of developing
countries from public and private bilateral and multilateral sources to the
neighborhood of $8J4 billion, an increase of about 50 percent over the
1956 level.




157

Donor countries differ widely in affluence, in the relative burden that
military expenditures and domestic needs place on available resources,
and in their internal budgetary and balance-of-payments problems. Table
27, which offers certain standards for assessing the bilateral aid commitments of DAG countries—gross national product, defense expenditures, and
trade with the less developed countries—illustrates the fact that there is no
single measure of the capability, or interest, of a donor to sustain a foreign
assistance program. These figures do not reflect the recently announced
plans of Canada and the United Kingdom for expanded aid contributions.
TABLE 27.—Bilateral economic aid commitments and various measures of donor
capacity and interest, 1962
Bilateral economic aid commitments
Development Assistance Committee
(DAC)

Total DAC_
United States.
Other D A C . . .
Belgium.
Canada
_
Denmark
France*
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
United Kingdom.

Total
(millions
of dollars)

Defense
expendiPercent of
tures as
Percent of exports to percent of
less develONP
GNP
oped countries

Per capita
QNP
(U.S. dollars) »

7,101

0.74

34

7.4

1,766

4,656
2,445

.84
.60

65
18

9.4
4.7

2,974
1,135

a 70
58
»1
2 901
428
60
265
42
4
60
556

.55
.16
».0l
M.26
.50
.15
.51
.32
.08
2.21
.70

13
13

3.3
4.5
3.1
6.1
5.1
3.5
1.1
4.6
3.7
7.4
6.4

1,381
2,009
1,559
1,524
1,558
788
547
1,105
1,423
294
1,482

31

«37
17
6
11
6
3
46
16

1 Converted into U.S. dollars at official exchange rates. Because official exchange rates are not an accurate
measure of relative purchasing power, the comparison among countries is distorted.
2
Bilateral gross expenditures.
3 Data for 1961.
«Grants are expenditures.
Sources: Agency for International Development and Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.

The response of a number of other developed countries to the needs of
the poorer countries has been gratifying, and further participation is desirable. Nevertheless, without specific efforts at coordination, the multiplication of sources of finance and technical assistance can result in an
inequitable sharing of responsibility and a haphazard allocation of resources.
Of special importance is coordination among donors with respect to the
financing of aid. Several DAC members provide relatively more of their
development assistance in the form of grant aid than does the United
States. Most DAG members, however, provide credits to developing countries at considerably higher interest cost than does the United States (Table
28). Since the credits from non-U.S. sources are also of shorter duration,
their annual service charges are much more burdensome, on average, than
those on U.S. credits. The 1962 loan commitments of the other DAG
countries, for example, will require interest payments of above $55 million
on a principal of about $1 billion, compared with interest of $42 million on




158

a principal of $1.6 billion in the American case. Clearly, other donor
countries can do more to liberalize the terms of their aid, by lowering interest rates, extending the maturity of their loans, or making more of their
development assistance available in the form of grants.
TABLE 28.—Terms of official bilateral economic aid commitments of Development

Assistance Committee^ 1962
Grants
Total aid
(millions
of
Amount
dollars) (millions Percent
of
of total
dollars)
aid

Development Assistance Committee
(DAC)

Total DAC
United States..
Other DAC
Belgium *
_
Canada. _. __ _
Denmark
France *
Germany
ItalyJapan
Netherlands.. _ .
Norway
Portugal
United Kingdom

_.

4,656
2,445
70
58
901
428
60
265
42
4
60
556

2

Average
Amount
(millions Average interest
rate
of
maturity
dollars)
(years) (percent)

61

2,740

25.8

3.6

3,025
1,336

65
55

3 1,631
1,109

29.9
19.8

2.6
5.1

66
44
1
772
154
19
104
11
4
3
158

94
76
100
86
36
32
39
26
100
5
28

4
14

7.5
14.0

5.5
6.0

129
274
41
161
31

23.3
17.0
9.8
8.1
20.0

4.4
4.2
4.9
6.1
5.0

57
398

22.4
26.3

4.6
5.6

4,361

7,101

Credits *

1
Credits of 5 years or more duration.
^ Includes country-use portion of sales under Public Law 480. title I, and commodity grants under Public Law 480, titles II and III.
3 Includes commodity loans under Foreign Assistance Act, Export-Import Bank, and Title IV of P.L.
480.
4
Expenditures; interest rate is assumption.
8
Grants are expenditures.
NOTE.—Data lack precision or consistency; average terms should be regarded as rough orders of magnitude.
Sources: Agency for International Development and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

The developing countries already are paying about $2.5 billion a year, or
one-fifth of their gross capital inflow for servicing their externally held public debts, and the charges are mounting rapily. Still worse, the charges are
mounting much more rapidly than are the export earnings required for
servicing the total debt. Between 1956 and 1962 debt service rose from 3
percent to 7 percent of the value of the developing countries' exports of
goods and services.
Members of the DAG are becoming increasingly aware of the need for
coordinated action in this field. They have adopted a resolution recommending that the terms of their aid be liberalized, be made more comparable, and be related to the specific debt-servicing capacities of recipient
countries. In keeping with this resolution, both the British and Canadian
governments have recently announced new and considerably liberalized
credit policies. In addition, various DAC countries have worked together
in the framework of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and OECD consortia to ensure that their individual aid contributions to specific countries are properly integrated and that the technical
assistance necessary to the use of the aid is available.




159

ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND NEEDS
THE INCOMPLETE RECORD

The statistical evidence, such as it is, of the impact of development assistance on the economic performance of the poorer countries is encouraging.
Economic statistics are much less reliable and complete for the developing
countries than for the advanced countries. Nevertheless, United Nations
data for the 1950's provide some indication of progress. The average annual rate of growth of real GNP during the period 1950-59 for developing
countries was estimated at 4.6 percent, considerably above the rate of the
preceding decade, and also above the rate achieved by the industrialized
TABLE 29.—Selected characteristics of less developed countries receiving since
1946 U.S. economic assistance of more than $300 million or more than $30 per
capita x
U.S. economic
Growth Per capita real GNP assistance obligated,
rate of
fiscal years 1946-62
real
Population, 1962 GNP,
1950-62 >
Growth(millions)
(percent Amount,
rate,
Total
per year) 1961 (U.S. 1957-62 < (millions Per capita
dollars) » (percent of dollars) (dollars)
per year)

Country

Israel
Greece
Jordan
Taiwan
Liberia..

:

Brazil
Panama
Iran
India
Thailand

.

23
8.5
1.7
11.9
1.0

10 4
6.3
7.0
7.7
5.3

814
431
184
145
159

6.0
4.7
4.3
4.2
3.8

879
1,785
325
2,045
125

382
210
191
172
125

_ _

_

75.0
1 l
21.6
452.0
28.7

5.6
58
5.2
3.8
5.4

186
416
211
80
97

3.3
3.0
2.8
2.5
2.3

1,737
100
732
3,867
338

23
91
34
9
12

27.3
4.0
29.6
15.6
37.1

4.2
5.8
4.6
5.8

120
113
117
283
313

2.1
2.0
2.0
1.8
1.7

608
258
1,334
360
761

22
65
45
24
21

96 6
4.3
40
79
11.6

23
2.9
4.7
41
3.4

79
161
175453
181

1.6
1.5
1.4
.8
.3

1,854
293
158
675
388

19
68
40
85
33

29.2
98 6
1 3
16
20.6

4.5

193
83
344
213
379

.0
-.1
—.3
-.8
-.9

1,580
682
89
66
572

54
7
68
41
28

130

-4.0

58

31

United Arab Republic (Egypt)
Bolivia
Philippines
Colombia
Mexico..
Pakistan
Tunisia
Guatemala. ..
Chile .
Peru
Turkey
Indonesia
Costa Rica
Nicaragua
Argentina
Paraguay

-.

.
_

__

1.9

1

56
5.8
1.5
(•)

Excludes countries in which economic development has not been a prime objective of U.S. economic
assistance and countries where aid programs have been terminated: South Korea, South Vietnam, Laos,
Cambodia, Yugoslavia, Libya, Morocco, Poland, Lebanon, Spain.
2 Based on GNP in 1961 prices; since 1950 data were not available for all countries, the following substitutions were made: 1951 for Philippines; 1954 for Jordan; 1957 for Bolivia, Iran, Liberia, and Tunisia; 1956
for Thailand. Growth based on average of 2 years at beginning and end of period.
* GNP unadjusted for inequalities of purchasing power among countries.
< Data for 1956 to 1962 for Thailand; 1959 to 1962 for United Arab Republic; 1954 to 1962 for Jordan. Growth
based on average of 2 years at beginning and end of period.
• Not available.
NOTE.—See footnotes above for necessary substitutions because of unavailability of data for specified
dates. Per capita data may not check exactly with data shown in this table because of use of unrounded
data.
Source: Agency for International Development.




160

countries. Individual countries showed wide differences in achievement.
Average annual rates of growth in real GNP since 1950, among countries
that have received significant amounts of U.S. economic assistance and
where economic development has been a principal objective of such assistance, varied from 10.4 percent for Israel and 7.7 percent for Taiwan to 1.5
percent for Argentina. Growth rates in per capita income, 1957-62, which
in many cases are greatly depressed by high rates of population increase,
have varied from 6.0 percent for Israel and 4.7 percent for Grece to —4.0
percent for Paraguay. Table 29 illustrates the diversity of experience.
There is no one universally appropriate rate of growth. Still it is
encouraging that 17 of the 26 countries that were the principal recipients
of U.S. aid have sustained during the years 1957-62 an annual rate of
growth of 1.5 percent or more in per capita income. In 13 of these countries, the per capita rate of growth of GNP has met or exceeded an average
of 2 percent.
The phenomenon of population growth intervenes, of course, between
rates of growth in total output and the per capita data just cited. Comparisons of the two highlight two points. First, in many of the developing
countries it is clear that a moderation of population growth could ease the
task of accelerating per capita economic gains. It is for this reason that
the United Nations and many of the developing countries themselves are
showing great interest in appropriate population policies and that the U.S.
Congress, in its most recent appropriations for the aid program, authorized
the support of research into the problems of population growth.
The second point, however, is that current rates of population growth in
the developing countries are not, in fact, outdistancing current average
rates of growth in output. Nor do they mean that it is useless to assist
development until the "population explosion" has been "brought under
control." The logic of the matter runs just the other way: until population growth has slowed down, the need for productive expansion is doubly
urgent.
The economic accomplishments of development assistance could be
better gauged by the kind of detailed examination of concrete cases for
which there is not space here. Such a review, for example, would include
the case of Taiwan, where an enviably rapid economic growth (estimated
at over 7 percent a year between 1950 and 1962) has been achieved
with U.S. assistance. Its total imports rose from $121 million in 1950 to
an estimated $325 million in 1963, its exports from $93 million in 1950 to
an approximate balance with imports in 1963. The private sector of
Taiwan's economy is growing rapidly, and Taiwan may soon be on its own.
Less need for external assistance is also now foreseen for other successful
countries, including the Philippines, Greece, Mexico, Israel, and Iran.
It would be appropriate to examine other examples also. The cases of
six other countries—Korea, Vietnam, India, Pakistan, Turkey, and Brazil—
which, along with Taiwan, the Philippines, Greece, and Israel, have received




161

about three-fifths of all U.S. economic assistance to developing nations
merit attention. India and Pakistan, for example, are among the
poorest and most populous of the major recipients of U.S. aid. The relatively large amounts of economic assistance that India has received from the
United States in recent years (averaging about $500 million during the
period 1957-62) have amounted to only a little more than $1 per person
per year, and self-support for India is still at least a decade away. But
the progress made since 1950 provides grounds for cautious optimism.
National income increased by 42 percent between 1950-51 and 1960-61,
per capita income by 16 percent, agricultural production by 41 percent,
industrial production by 94 percent, and school enrollment by 85 percent.
Even with a full set of such economic case studies, however, the record
of the accomplishments of development assistance would be incomplete—
in three senses:
First—harking back to the United States' underlying rationale for development assistance—the record is incomplete until one can trace the
internal political consequences of economic growth in the developing countries and the effects on the aided countries' international behavior. While
the Council of Economic Advisers has no special competence for making
such judgments, it seems to be the view of specialists that the balance of
events in this regard has already been favorable. Fewer situations have
deteriorated, and more have improved than would have been the case in
the absence of development and of the development-assistance contribution to it.
Second, the accomplishment record is incomplete in the sense that many
of the results of our past and present efforts to promote economic development in Asia, Africa, and Latin America have yet to appear. The Alliance for Progress, for example, is not yet 3 years old. The flow of development assistance has been substantial since 1958, but before that year development per se was hardly more than an incidental feature of foreign aid
programs. The process of economic development today is arduous and
long because the less developed countries have so far to go. The transformation of agricultural nations, poor in capital and in trained manpower,
into modern industrial states cannot be accomplished without time and
travail. Industrialization inevitably involves drastic adaptations of social
and economic institutions and the evolution of new attitudes and methods
of work. We have only to remind ourselves of the time it has taken to
achieve sustained economic development in our own Southeast or in the
more recently industrialized countries of Western Europe to appreciate the
lags that inevitably intervene between inputs and results.
Finally, development assistance's record of accomplishments is incomplete, because the needed effort itself still is in midstream. The job is not
yet done. It is now, finally, well started. Sufficient growth momentum
has been established in many countries so that the emphases of their development programs can begin to shift from getting things started to keep-




162

ing them going—and to expanding export capabilities and private foreign
investment opportunities enough so that gradually the need for government-to-government aid will be eliminated.
Moreover, as has been emphasized, there is room for increasing the effectiveness of specific aspects of our development assistance, for improving its
allocation, for improving its coordination with the efforts of other donors,
and for increasing the share of the total that others provide. Continuation of our effort at this time will maintain momentum, avoid disruption
of growth processes that have been arduously established, and avoid waste
of much of the substance we already have committed.
WHY ARE WE "SUDDENLY SO FATIGUED" ?

At his last press conference, on November 14, 1963, President Kennedy,
referring to the mood of the Congress toward authorizing foreign aid funds
for the current fiscal year, remarked, "I don't understand why we are
suddenly so fatigued."
Probably the explanation of the fatigue lies partly in the fact that broad
public understanding of the purposes of development assistance is still
incomplete. It lies partly also in a difficult administrative history, partly
in the inherently protracted character of the problems, and partly in the
fact that the income gulf between the United States and the nations we
have been assisting is so large. As a result, Americans have trouble perceiving improvements that, in the aided countries' own terms, are very
significant.
Most of all, however, our recent sense of fatigue is traceable to excessive expectations. Misled by the false analogy of our experience with the
Marshall Plan, whose goal was reconstruction, not construction, we have
underestimated the time it takes for development assistance to work its
effects. We have had exaggerated notions of how large a contribution
an aid program can make to a country's internal development. And we
have overestimated the orderliness with which economic and social revolution typically can be conducted.
Especially have our expectations about success and failure been unreasonable. History and experience offer no precedents for this program. It
involves an attempt to influence the forces determining the historical evolution of nation-States—about which even the wisest among us has little
insight. Yet we have expected the program to have a nearly perfect record
of success. Such standards of accomplishment would appear too rigorous
to any director of industrial research and development. We have made
mistakes, of course. But we have also learned much, both from the mistakes and from the experience of working with people in the developing
countries. While we can expect that the period of greatest mistakes is behind us, we can never expect a record of 100 percent success until
the definitive philosophy of history has been written.




163

Judged by our own interests and capabilities, the fatigue is inappropriate.
It is inappropriate especially now that the program, as Chapter 5 pointed
out, has been stripped of most of its adverse near-term balance-of-payments
effects. Moreover, there is certainly no doubt at present of our domestic
economic ability to continue the development assistance effort. Indeed,
the program is generating several hundred thousand jobs, and many hundred million dollars worth of business that American workers and American exporters would be loathe to lose.
In terms of the basic purpose of the development assistance program,
however, the central point is that fatigue is inconsistent with the solid
achievements beginning to emerge. It is out of step with the needs and
prospects of the developing countries and with our strategic stake in them.
In fact, the time has come for us to catch our second wind and move
ahead.




164

Appendix A
TESTIMONY OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMPLOYMENT AND
MANPOWER OF THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON LABOR
AND PUBLIC WELFARE




OCTOBER 28, 1963

165

STATEMENT OF WALTER W. HELLER, CHAIRMAN,
ACCOMPANIED BY GARDNER ACKLEY AND JOHN P.
LEWIS, MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC
ADVISERS, BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMPLOYMENT AND MANPOWER OF THE SENATE COMMITTEE
ON LABOR AND PUBLIC WELFARE, OCTOBER 28,1963*
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, we are pleased to have
an opportunity to participate in these hearings on Employment and Manpower. The employment problem is not only of the greatest importance
to the country and at the center of government economic policy, but is of
particular interest to an agency operating, as the Council does, under the
mandate of the Employment Act of 1946.
Recent discussions may have generated an impression of greater disagreement among the Nation's economists about the origins and solutions of the
employment problem than actually exists. For in fact, the great majority
of those who have studied the matter carefully would agree with the
Administration's view that our excessive unemployment today cannot be
traced to a single cause nor eliminated by a single cure. Rather, it has a
mixture of causes which must be dealt with by a mixture—an amalgam—
of cures.
One problem, and a central one, is that total expenditures in the economy—total demand for goods and services—are not sufficient to generate
an adequate total number of jobs. We can, for convenience, call this kind
of unemployment "demand-shortage" unemployment. In our view, demand-shortage unemployment can and must be attacked by vigorous policies—principally tax reduction—to raise the total demand for goods and
services.
Another problem is that the characteristics of our available workers—
their locations, skills, education, training, race, sex, age, and so on—do not
fully match the characteristics employers are seeking in filling the jobs
that are available (or that would be available at full employment). In a
dynamic, changing economy there is always some of this mismatching,
and we call the unemployment that results from it "frictional." But when
•Several passages and one entire section of the original have been deleted in reprinting this Statement, primarily where the same material is covered in the text of the
Report either more fully or using more recent information. Footnotes added to the
original are indicated with asterisks.




166

the pockets of such unemployment become large and stubborn—especially
when they impose chronic burdens on particular disadvantaged groups
and regions—we speak of the unemployment problem as "structural."
This type of unemployment is also a serious problem, which requires major
policy actions to overcome its corrosive effects. Structural problems are not
new. And the available evidence does not show that the proportion of our
total unemployment problem that we label "structural" has increased significantly, nor that its character has materially changed. But this in no way
diminishes the need for attacking these structural problems with vigorous
policies—principally education, training and retraining, and special regional
programs—to match the supply of labor skills more closely to the changing
demand for labor skills.
Along with demand-shortage and structural unemployment, one also
hears a great deal about the problem of "technological unemployment"—of
men being put out of work by machines and, more particularly, by the process which has come to be called "automation." This is, indeed, a serious and
continuing problem. But two points should be emphasized at the outset.
First, "technological unemployment" is not a third form of unemployment, separate from the other two. Rather, it expresses itself through these
other forms. Technological change causes obsolescence of skills and therefore produces some of the mismatching between available workers and jobs
that we call "structural" unemployment. Moreover, by raising output per
worker, technological change is one of the principal sources of growth in our
potential total output or GNP—which, if not matched by corresponding
growth in actual GNP, opens a gap in demand and thereby causes demandshortage unemployment.
Second, those who maintain that the economy now faces a problem of
"technological unemployment" that is somehow new, and more formidable
than in the past implicitly assert that the rate of technological change has
recently speeded up. Unless this is the case, the problem is not new—it has
always been with us and has not proved to be a long-run problem for the
economy as a whole. The continuing process of rapid technological change,
which has constituted the very core of the American economy's strength
and progressiveness for at least 150 years, has always put particular workers and businesses out of jobs and required particular adjustments that have
been difficult and sometimes painful. It poses a new general problem for
the economy only if technological change becomes so rapid that the demand
adjustments and labor market adjustments it requires cannot be accomplished by the economic processes of the past. Whether technological change
indeed has accelerated, or is in process of accelerating, is a factual question
that we consider at some length in this statement.*
* Treatment of this question has been deleted from the latter part of the Testimony
as reprinted here, because it is considered in the text of the Report (Chapter 3, subsection headed "The Trend of Labor Productivity").




167

These, then—demand-shortage elements, structural elements, and a
possible aggravation of both by accelerated technological change—are the
principal ingredients of the unemployment problem your Committee is
examining. It would be unwise and imprudent to ignore any of these ingredients either in diagnosing the problem or in prescribing remedies.
The primary attack on high unemployment must be through fiscal
measures to speed the growth of total demand and thereby to create new
job opportunities. But this need not—indeed, must not—impede a simultaneous attack on our stubborn structural problems. The two approaches
are not merely complementary; they are mutually reinforcing. On the one
hand, training and other programs to facilitate labor mobility can ease
and speed the process by which demand-stimulated increases in output are
translated into increases in employment. On the other, since structural
maladjustments tend to flourish in slack markets, a vigorous expansion in
demand helps cut structural problems down to size.
This statement deals first with the over-all dimensions of our unemployment problem and the central role of tax reduction in eliminating excessive unemployment. Second, we turn to several issues which have figured
prominently in the Committee's hearings to date: the nature, extent, and
recent pattern of structural unemployment; the current rate of growth
in productivity and the labor force; and the fears of automation and consumer satiation. In considering these issues, we are addressing ourselves to
three underlying questions:
1. Are the structural elements of the unemployment problem an
important barrier to the achievement of the objectives of the
tax cut?
2. Are we likely to experience speedier increases in productivity and
in the labor force which, while serving our objectives of faster
economic growth and balance-of-payment equilibrium, would
intensify our problems of re-employing displaced workers and
generating enough total demand to achieve full employment?*
3. What is the nature of the labor market policies that must go
hand-in-hand with the use of over-all fiscal and monetary policies
for expansion if we are to achieve our multiple economic goals?
A final section will summarize our observations on these questions.
I. UNEMPLOYMENT AND TAX REDUCTION

The American economy has been plagued with persistently excessive
unemployment for 6 years. The unemployment rate has been 5 percent
or more for 71 consecutive months. Since 1957, it has averaged 6 percent.
Even in the face of annual advances of about $30 billion in GNP (annual
* Treatment of this question has been deleted from the latter part of the Testimony
as reprinted here, because it is considered in the text of the Report (Chapter 3, subsection headed "The Trend of Labor Productivity").




168

rate), unemployment has not been diminishing. Thus, although GNP
rose from $556.8 billion in the third quarter of 1962 to $588.5 billion in
the third quarter of 1963, the unemployment rate remained the same in
both quarters. And even with a prospective increase of $100 billion in the
GNP rate from early 1961 to early 1964 (a rise of 20 percent in current
dollars and about 15 percent in constant dollars), the unemployment rate
will have come down only about 1 l/<x percentage points in that 3-year period.
The persistence of this high level of unemployment is sometimes cited
as evidence of structural difficulties which will blunt the effect of the proposed $11 billion tax cut now being considered by the Senate Finance
Committee and make it difficult to reach the interim full-employment goal
of 4-percent unemployment, let alone our ultimate goals beyond the 4percent level. The structural problem will be examined in some detail later
in this statement. But here, several points should be noted to indicate why
the road to 4-percent unemployment is clearly open to demand-powered
measures:
1. The pre-1957 postwar performance of the U.S. economy gives
ample evidence of its ability to achieve 4 percent and even lower
levels of unemployment without excessive strain.
2. The availability of 1.1 million excess unemployed workers (even
by the modest 4-percent criterion and not counting the labor force
drop-outs resulting from slack job opportunities) and of substantial excess capacity (even after large gains, the average operating rate in manufacturing is running at only 87 percent of capacity) demonstrates that we are still suffering from a serious
shortage of consumer and investment demand.
3. There are virtually no signs of economic tension, of the barriers
that would divert the force of demand stimulus away from higher
output, more jobs and higher incomes into higher prices—there
are no visible bottlenecks in the economy, wage rate increases
have been the most moderate in the postwar period, and the record
of price stability in recent years has been outstanding.
In reference to the first point, the unemployment rates in the first postwar decade deserve a further word. In the period of vigorous business
activity in 1947 and 1948, unemployment averaged 3.8 percent of the labor
force. After the recession of 1949 and the recovery of 1950, the rate was
relatively stable from early 1951 to late 1953, averaging 3.1 percent. Since
that time, the rate has drifted upward. In the period of stable unemployment from mid-1955 to late 1957, unemployment averaged 4.3 percent, an increase of more than one-third above the 1951-53 period. In the
first half of 1960, unemployment averaged 5.3 percent, nearly one-fourth
above the 1955-57 level. Following the recession and recovery of 196061, the rate fluctuated within a narrow range averaging 5.6 percent in
1962 and 1963 to date, a little higher than early 1960. Looking at the 1947-




169

57 period, the average unemployment rate was below 4 percent in each
of the following years: 1947, 1948, 1951, 1952, and 1953, and below 4 / 2
percent in 1955,1956, and 1957.
When one looks behind these figures to get a grasp of the economic conditions that produced them, the most notable difference between the pre1957 and post-1957 periods is found in the strength of market demand.
In the first postwar decade, markets were strong. Backlogs of consumer
demand had to be worked off. The demands of the Korean conflict had to
be met. Outmoded plants and equipment had to be replaced or modernized, and capacity had to be enlarged. Deficiencies in housing, office facilities, and public works had to be made up.
But 1957 marked a watershed. In the ensuing period, demand has
slackened at a time when our labor force growth has been accelerating in
response to the postwar jump in the birth rate. Business fixed investment
dropped off from 10-11 percent of the GNP to only 9 percent—indeed, the
level of such investment in 1962 barely struggled back to its level in 1956,
while GNP was rising by nearly one-fifth (both in constant prices).
Thus, the clearest and most striking change since 1957 is the weakening
of demand. So the clearest and most urgent need today is to remove the
overburden of taxation which is retarding the growth in demand to full
employment levels. Income tax rates enacted to finance war and fight inflation—though reduced in 1954—are still so high that they would yield
a large surplus of revenues over expenditures if we were at full employment today. They are, in short, repressing demand and incentives in an
economy operating well short of its capacity.
To avoid misunderstanding, it is important to stress that any employment program would be unbalanced and incomplete without determined
measures (a) to upgrade and adapt the skills and education of the labor
force to the more exacting demands of our advancing technology and (b)
to facilitate the flow of workers from job to job, industry to industry, and
place to place. Nevertheless, our principal reliance for a return to the 4percent-or-better levels of unemployment we took for granted in the early
postwar period must be on measures to boost demand for the products
of American industry and agriculture.
The amount of the increase in total demand which would be necessary
to reduce unemployment to the 4-percent interim-target level can be approximated in several ways. We have made direct estimates of the relationship
between unemployment rates and output levels; and we have independently
estimated the potential GNP that the economy could produce at 4-percent
unemployment. Both of these approaches yield consistent estimates of the
output and demand requirements associated with 4-percent unemployment
at a given time. Except for small differences reflecting cyclical variations
in productivity and erratic fluctuations in labor force participation rates,
these estimates of potential output (in constant prices) are very closely
approximated by a 3 }4-percent trend line passing through actual GNP




170

in mid-1955. The several methods of computing potential GNP were
reviewed in some detail in our Annual Reports both for 1962 and 1963, and
are analyzed more fully in a recent paper by one of the Council's consultants.1 Although estimates of this kind cannot be precise—and efforts to
improve and update them as new data come in must continue—the careful
cross-checking by different methods provides confidence in their general
order of magnitude.
These estimates show that the gap between actual GNP and the potential
GNP at 4-percent unemployment has been substantial in every year since
1957. In both 1962 and 1963, it has approximated $30 billion.
Our analysis thus suggests that total demand for goods and services would
have had to average some $30 billion higher than it was in each of these past
2 years for unemployment to average 4 percent. The basic purpose of
the tax cut is to close that $30 billion gap—and to realize the benefits to
employment, growth and our international competitive position that will
flow from this advance.
To be sure, by the time the full effects of the proposed two-stage tax cut
will be reflected in demand and output, the economy's potential will have
grown considerably, and total demand growth will therefore have to be
considerably more than $30 billion. But when the tax cut lifts the expanding level of private demand in the U.S. economy by the extra $30 billion
(in terms of 1963 GNP and price levels) that can confidently be expected,
it will have achieved its basic purpose. Had this increase been effective during the past 6 years, it would have eliminated our persistent slack and
allowed our unemployment rate to average 4 percent.
The process by which an $11.1 billion tax cut can add as much as $30
billion to total demand has been frequently described and needs only to be
summarized briefly here.
If the new proposed personal income tax rates were in full effect today,
disposable after-tax incomes of consumers would be approximately $8.8
billion higher than they are, at present levels of pretax incomes. In addition, if the lower corporate tax rates were now in effect, after-tax profits
would be about $2.3 billion higher. Based on past dividend practice, one
can assume that corporate dividends received by individuals (after deducting personal income taxes on such dividends) would then be more than
$1 billion higher, giving a total increment of consumer after-tax incomes—
at present levels of production—of about $10 billion.
Since consumer spending on current output has remained close to 93
percent of disposable income in each of the past dozen years, one can safely
project that consumer spending would rise by about 93 percent of the rise
in disposable incomes, or by over $9 billion.
1
Arthur M. Okun, "Potential GNP: Its,.Measurement and Significance," Cowles
Foundation paper No. 190, reprinted from the 1962 Proceedings of the Business and
Economic Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association.

171
715-11J O-64-12



But this is far from the end of the matter. The higher production of
consumer goods to meet this extra spending would mean extra employment, higher payrolls, higher profits, and higher farm and professional and
service incomes. This added purchasing power would generate still further
increases in spending and incomes in an endless, but rapidly diminishing,
chain. The initial rise of $9 billion, plus this extra consumption spending
and extra output of consumer goods would add over $18 billion to our annual GNP—not just once, but year-in and year-out, since this is a permanent, not a one-shot, tax cut. We can summarize this continuing process
by saying that a "multiplier" of approximately 2 has been applied to the
direct increment of consumption spending.
But that is not the end of the matter either. For the higher volume of
sales, the higher productivity associated with fuller use of existing capacity,
and the lower tax rates on corporate profits also provided by the tax bill
would increase after-tax profits, and especially the rate of expected aftertax profit on investment in new facilities. Adding to this the financial
incentives embodied in last year's tax changes, which are yet to have their
full effect, one can expect a substantial induced rise in business plant and
equipment spending, and a rise in the rate of inventory investment. Further, higher consumer incomes will stimulate extra residential construction; and the higher revenues that State and local governments will receive
under existing tax rates will prompt a rise in their investments in schools,
roads, and urban facilities. The exact amount of each of these increases
is hard to estimate with precision. But it is reasonable to estimate their
sum as in the range of $5 to $7 billion. This extra spending would also be
subject to a multiplier of 2 as incomes rose and consumer spending increased. Thus there would be a further expansion of $10 to $14 billion
in GNP to add to the $18 billion or so from the consumption factor alone.
The total addition to GNP would match rather closely the estimated $30
billion gap.
II. T H E PERSISTENT PROBLEMS OF STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT

The tax cut would thus increase demand to levels consistent with a 4percent rate of unemployment. It would ease our most pressing unemployment problems. But no one can assume that our worries about unemployment would then be over. Some of its most distressing and inequitable
aspects would remain.
To be sure, tax-reduction will create new jobs in every community across
the Nation and expand employment in every industry. The overwhelming
majority of American families will benefit directly from the income tax cuts
that will accrue to 50 million tax-paying individuals and 600,000 taxpaying corporations. Their direct rise in after-tax income will soon be translated, through the marketplace, into stronger markets for all kinds of goods
and services and a quickening of the business pulse in all communities.




172

With average working hours already at a high level, this added demand
and activity will in large part be translated, in turn, into additional jobs,
and income for the unemployed. Thus, the non-taxpaying minority will,
in a very real sense, be the greatest beneficiaries of the tax program.
Experience (which we will review later in this statement) clearly shows
(1) that the unemployment rate will decline for every major category of
workers and (2) that the sharpest declines will occur where the incidence
of unemployment is the highest: among teenagers, the Negroes, the lessskilled, the blue-collar groups generally.
But even so, the unemployment rates of many groups will still be intolerably high. Back in 1957, for instance, when the average unemployment
rate was just over 4 percent for the whole economy, the rates were much
higher for many disadvantaged groups and regions—e.g., 10.8 percent for
teenagers, 8.0 percent for nonwhites, 9.4 percent for unskilled manual
workers, and 11.5 percent for workers in Wilkes-Barre-Hazleton, Pennsylvania.
These high specific unemployment rates, which persist even when the general rate falls to an acceptable level, are the essence of the problem of structural unemployment. Even a fully successful tax cut cannot solve problems
like these by itself. They require a more direct attack.
To reduce the abnormally high and stubborn unemployment rate for
Negroes requires a major improvement in their education and training and
an attack on racial discrimination. To reduce the persistent high rate for
the unskilled and the uneducated groups demands measures to help them
acquire skills and knowledge. To reduce excessive unemployment associated
with declining industries and technological advance requires retraining and
relocation. To reduce high unemployment in distressed areas of Pennsylvania, Michigan, Minnesota, and elsewhere calls for special measures to
rebuild the economic base of those communities and assist their workers.
Both the Administration and the Congress have recognized that these
measures must be taken concurrently with measures to expand aggregate
demand. Coal miners in Harlan County are structurally unemployed now,
and so are Negro and Puerto Rican youths in New York City. Yet, programs to reduce structural unemployment will run into severe limits in the
absence of an adequate growth of demand, i.e., in the absence of rapid
expansion of total job opportunities. Such expansion is needed to assure
that retrained and upgraded workers, for example, will find jobs at the end
of the training period and will not do so at the expense of job opportunities
for other unemployed workers. As structural programs create new and upgraded skills, they will in some cases fit the participants for jobs that had
previously gone begging. But for the most part, the needed jobs must be
created by expansion of total demand.
Quite apart from the human significance of structural unemployment, it
also has great economic importance. For only as we reduce structural and




173

frictional unemployment can we achieve the higher levels of total output
which would be associated with unemployment rates below our 4-percent
interim target. The Council emphasized this point in its 1963 Annual Report
(p. 42), as follows:
"Success in a combined policy of strengthening demand and adapting manpower supplies to evolving needs would enable us to achieve
an interim objective of 4 percent unemployment and permit us to
push beyond it in a setting of reasonable price stability. Bottlenecks
in skilled labor, middle-level manpower, and professional personnel
[now] tend to become acute as unemployment approaches 4 percent.
The result is to retard growth and generate wage-price pressures at
particular points in the economy. As we widen or break these bottlenecks by intensified and flexible educational, training, and retraining
efforts, our employment sights will steadily rise."
Every worker needlessly unemployed represents a human cost which offends the sensibilities of a civilized society. But each worker needlessly unemployed also represents a waste of potential goods and services, which even
an affluent society can ill afford. More intensive measures to attack structural unemployment are necessary to reduce the unemployment rate not
merely to 4 percent, but beyond.
III.

HAS STRUCTURAL UNEMPLOYMENT INCREASED?

The preceding section addressed itself to structural unemployment as
a human and social problem and considered its role in the process of lowering the unemployment rate to and below 4 percent. But it is also appropriate to ask: has structural unemployment increased to such an extent
since 1957—the last time unemployment was near 4 percent—that it will
impede the expansionary effects of demand-creating measures in general
and the tax cut in particular?
An affirmative answer would, we believe, represent a misreading of the
facts. As we have already pointed1 out, there are serious structural problems, and prompt action is needed both to root out inequities and hardships
they inflict and to help us reach our employment goals. But this conclusion
need not—and does not—rest on a belief that there has been a disproportionate surge in structural unemployment since 1957.
A reading of the evidence on this score must focus principally on what
happens, over time, to the unemployment rates of particular groups—teenagers, untrained and unskilled workers, Negroes, and other disadvantaged
groups and regions—in relation to the total unemployment rate. It would
clearly be misleading simply to compare unemployment rates for such
groups in a year like 1957, when the total rate was about 4 percent, with
the corresponding rates in 1962-63, when the total rate has averaged 5.6
percent. Rather, it is the relationship between the total rate and the groups'




174

rates—and its historical development—that reveals whether the structural
problem is getting worse or not. And this relationship has been remarkably
stable.
The disadvantaged groups almost invariably share more than proportionately—and the skilled and white-collar groups less than proportionately—in both decreases and increases in total employment. In the past,
when the over-all unemployment rate has risen (or fallen) 1 percentage
point, the rate for nonwhites and teenagers has risen (or fallen) by about
2 percentage points, the rate for unskilled workers by about 2J4 percentage
points. But the rate for professional and technical workers has risen or
fallen by only about one-fourth of a percentage point.
One obvious reason for the disproportionate impact on teenagers is
that they are the most recent additions to the labor force. When new job
opportunities are few, there is a backing-up at the point of entry. Furthermore, even when they do find jobs, they tend to have the lowest seniority
and are therefore first to be laid off. Much the same is true of Negroes.
Given existing patterns of discrimination, they are often in marginal jobs
or at the bottom of seniority lists. Moreover, when jobs are scarce and
labor is plentiful, racial discrimination, where it exists, is more likely to enter
into hiring and firing decisions. And at such times, employers are also more
inclined to pass over inexperienced and untrained workers and less inclined to press their own efforts to adapt such personnel to their needs
via in-service training programs. They tend to be less aggressive in seeking
new employees outside their own local labor markets. And labor supply
considerations are less likely to determine the location of new plants.
On the other hand, employers do not typically discharge many supervisory and technical personnel when output drops and, as a result, they do
not need to expand their employment of such persons proportionately when
output rises.
Moreover, there are other reasons why the employment of many categories of workers does not rise and fall in the same proportion as the total.
Some disparities arise from the complex interrelationship between the
composition and the level of total output. To cite just one example, the
rate of inventory accumulation is highly sensitive to the rate of expansion
or contraction in total output, and goods that typically are inventoried tend
to require large numbers of production workers. In contrast, the service
industries, whose output is not subject to inventory accumulation nor to
such wide fluctuations in consumption, generally use more technical and
white-collar workers.
Thus it is not surprising to find that slackened demand since 1957 has intensified inter-group and inter-regional disparities in unemployment rates
at the same time that it raised the total unemployment rate. Nonwhites,
teenagers, unskilled and semi-skilled workers have suffered a greater-thanaverage increase in unemployment since 1957. But these same groups will




175

also benefit disproportionately as demand expands and the over-all unemployment rate declines. This point is illustrated in the table below, which
shows how the incidence of unemployment changed during the 1960-61
recession and the 1961-62 recovery.
Change in unemployment rate, selected groups and areas
Percentage points
1960-61

Total
Teenagers..
Nonwhites
Nonfarm laborers __ _
Operatives
Manufacturing workers
Miners
For illustrative purposes:
Michigan
Wheeling, W. Va_

1961-62

1.1

_

-1.1

1.6
2.3
2.0
1.6
1.5
2.1

-1.9
-1.5
-2.1
-2.1
-1.9
-3.0

3.4
6.9

__.

-3.4
-7.8

Studies of changes in the incidence of unemployment among unskilled
and semi-skilled blue-collar workers—whose jobs would seem to be highly
vulnerable to technological change—can provide important insights into
the structural unemployment problem. One would expect an accelerated
rate of technological displacement to be reflected in rising rates of unemployment for these groups—relative to total unemployment. One would
also expect to find such a relative rise for workers in industries such as
manufacturing, mining, and transportation where automation has so far
found its widest application.
To test this possibility, we have correlated the unemployment rate in
specific occupations and industries with the rate for all experienced workers in the labor force during the 1948-57 period—in other words, for the
period before the main structural unemployment upsurge is alleged to
have occurred. These correlations were then used to calculate what the
occupational and industrial distribution of unemployment would have been
in 1962 if the old relationships had held. If there had been a substantial
increase in structural maladjustments, the actual 1962 unemployment rates
for what we may call the "technologically vulnerable groups" should have
been higher than these calculated rates. But in fact, as Table 1 shows a
majority of the rates are lower. For some of these occupations and industries, the actual increase in unemployment was greater than expected, but
in most cases it was less. And taking all of the blue-collar occupations and
goods-producing industries together, we also find that the rise in actual unemployment was somewhat less than the 1948-57 experience would have
suggested.




176

TABLE 1.—Unemployment rates in industries and occupations most vulnerable to
technological displacement, 1957 and 1962
[Percent]
Change in rate, 1957-62

Industry or occupation

1957

1962
Actual

All workers

_._

4.3

5.6

1.3

Experienced wage and salary workers.

4.5

5.5

1.0

5.4
6.3
9.8
4.9
5.3
3.1

6.4
8.6
12.0
5.7
5.9
3.9

1.0
2.3
2.2
.8
.6
.8

Expected'

Workers in selected industries (goods producing)...
Mining, forestry, and fisheries
Construction.
Durable goods manufacturing
Nondurable goods manufacturing
Transportation and public utilities
Experienced workers..

1.3
1.8
1.8
1.4
1.0
1.0

4.9

Workers in selected occupations (blue collar)
Craftsmen, foremen, and kindred workers
(skilled)..
Operatives and kindred workers (semi-skilled) _.
Laborers, except farm and mine (unskilled)...

1.0

6.0

7.4

1.4

1.7

6.3
9.4

5.1
7.5
12.4

1.3
1.2
3.0

1.3
1.6
2.6

* Calculated by use of correlations of (a) unemployment rates by industry with the rate for all experienced
wage and salary workers, and (b) unemployment rates by occupation with the rate for all experienced workers, using data for the period 1948-57 in both cases.
Sources: Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers.

We do not conclude from this evidence, nor from similar findings by Edward Denison and Otto Eckstein 2 as to the geographic distribution of
unemployment, that a reduction in structural unemployment has occurred.
Similarly, however, we do not conclude that the unusually high unemployment rates experienced by teenagers this year, or the rather low rates experienced by adult males, prove an adverse structural shift. In some labor market areas, imbalances have lessened; in others they have increased. But this
does not suggest that the over-all rate of structural unemployment has risen
significantly.
One similar piece of evidence relates to job vacancies. Since structural
unemployment is a form of joblessness that persists over a protracted period
even if unfilled jobs are available, an increase in structural unemployment
would be clearly suggested if it were found that the number of job vacancies
were rising along with the number of unemployed men.
Unhappily we have no comprehensive and adequate series designed to
measure job vacancies in the United States. The Department of Labor currently is proposing experimental work leading toward the eventual establishment of such a series. This is a proposal we strongly endorse, although
we share the Labor Department's awareness that such a series involves many
technical problems and will need to be interpreted with care, especially in
its early years.
2
Edward F. Denison, The Incidence of Unemployment by States and Regions, 1950
and I960, and The Dispersion of Unemployment Among Standard Metropolitan
Statistical Areas, 1950 and 1960. Mimeograph. Otto Eckstein, The Unemployment
Problem in Our Day, paper delivered before the Conference on Unemployment and
the American Economy, Berkeley, California, April 1963.




177

But meanwhile the only available indicator that bears upon the jobvacancy situation is the National Industrial Conference Board's index of the
number of help-wanted advertisements published in the classified section of
a leading newspaper in each of 33 leading labor market areas. While this
series does a good job of reporting what it is designed to report, obviously
it provides a comparatively sketchy and imperfect indication of job vacancies. All the same, it is interesting that, after adjustment for changes in the
size of the labor force, the help-wanted index was substantially lower in
1960 and 1962 than in 1955-57, when the total unemployment rate was
about 4 percent. We have further adjusted the index for changes in the total
unemployment rate in order to screen out the effects of slack demand. Even
in this form the index fails to rise significantly since 1957—as one would
expect it to do if underlying structural unemployment had broadened.
The evidence reviewed above does not yield persuasive indications that
structural elements are today a significantly larger factor in our unemployment than in 1957. Nevertheless, it would not be surprising if some particular aspects of structural unemployment have intensified. One would
assume that the longer a period of slack persists, the more likely it would be
that the detailed structure of skills, experience, and training of the labor
force would fail to reflect fully the pattern of job requirements at high
levels of employment. High employment in 1967 will call for a somewhat
different pattern of jobs than existed in 1957, and a slack labor market does
not accurately foretell what that pattern will be. Moreover, there is danger
that, after a long period of slack, new hiring standards, habits of mind, and
expectations appropriate to an "easy" labor market will have become
entrenched, rationalizing increased discriminations against disadvantaged
groups. Thus, after the period of prolonged slack since 1957, there is more
need than in the usual "cyclical" recovery for an effective program of specific
labor-market policies to assist demand-stimulating policies in tailoring men
to jobs and jobs to men.
IV.

SHIFTING EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND POSSIBLE

SKILLED

MANPOWER BOTTLENECKS

In recent weeks—partly before this Committee, partly elsewhere—particular attention has been given to one aspect of the problem of structural
maladjustments. This is the question of whether a recent shift in the pace
and character of technological change has accelerated the long-term rise
in job educational and skill requirements in a way that imposes a new bottleneck an expansion. The issue merits special discussion because of the
obstacle to the employment-expanding effects of the tax program that this
skilled-manpower bottleneck is alleged to present.
The argument is that the nature of recent technological change has caused
a rapid shift in the pattern of manpower demand, pushing down the demand
for workers with little training and pushing up the demand for the highly




educated. Everyone agrees that the educational level of the Nation's
population has continued to advance, causing the supply of highly educated
manpower to grow rapidly, and the supply of relatively uneducated manpower to decline. Thus the concern expressed is not about keeping pace
with an absolute increase in job educational requirements—which have been
rising right along—but about being unable to keep pace with an abrupt
recent rise in such requirements.
It is feared that as demand increases, there will not be enough highly
educated workers to fill the key technical and professional positions that
must be manned if production is to expand to levels consistent with 4-percent unemployment; that, in consequence, expansion of output will be frustrated; and that, because of this, high percentages of the remainder of
the labor force—including poorly educated workers—will be left unemployed.
It is important to distinguish this quite specific point about near-term
bottlenecks from other propositions about the economic importance of education. It is unquestionably true, we believe, that greatly reinforced education is needed to press the attack on the pockets of long-term structural
unemployment that have plagued the economy for a long time.
It is unquestionably true, moreover, that educational attainment enormously affects the employment prospects of the individual. Whether the
economy is booming or stagnating, the poorly educated always come off
second best. A grade school graduate is 5 times likelier to be unemployed
than is a college graduate. Today's school dropouts are tomorrow's
unemployed.
It is further well-known that long-term shifts, which can be projected to
continue, in the relative importance of various industries, and long-term
trends in technological development, are, on the whole, raising (as well as
altering) educational requirements. The Report on Manpower Requirements, Resources, Utilization, and Training by Secretary Wirtz last March
indicated the nature of these continuing shifts, including projections by
broad groups to 1970 and 1975. The clearly indicated rise in the requirement for professional, technical, and kindred workers—teachers, scientists,
physicians, engineers, technicians, and nurses—pose obvious demands on
education in general and higher education in particular. And increased
demands for many special skills create needs for expanded programs of
vocational education and for more persons with a basic high school education. These long-term trends are not at issue in the present discussion.
Likewise, there can be little doubt about the enormous importance of
education as an engine for stimulating the long-term growth of our productive potential. Edward Denison has estimated that 42 percent of the increase in output per worker between 1929 and 1957 was the result of education and another 36 percent the result of the general advance in the application of scientific and technological knowledge to which our educational




179

process and institutions clearly were heavy contributors. All of these are
extremely important—in fact, conclusive—reasons for strengthening our
educational programs. But they should not be confused with the view that
educational deficiencies prevent the solution of our current problem of
excessive unemployment, and, specifically, that near-term manpower bottlenecks will significantly restrain a demand expansion—stimulated by a tax
cut—from accomplishing its employment objective.
The statistical testing of the educational bottleneck hypothesis turns out,
if properly done, to be a very complex undertaking. There are problems of
the noncomparability between Decennial Census data and information
drawn from Current Population Surveys; of the lack of appropriate annual
series; of calculating appropriate current full-employment labor-force participation rates for particular age and educational-attainment groups instead
of arbitrarily projecting the rates of a remote year; and of including not
merely the male but the female components of our population . . .
. . . however, some reliable impressions already have emerged from the
figures at hand. One is that, while there does appear to have been some rise
in the demand for highly educated workers relative to their supply during
the postwar period as a whole, the timing of this change is crucial for purposes of evaluating the bottleneck thesis. Since the economy operated at
approximately a 4-percent unemployment rate in the mid-fifties without
encountering serious skilled-manpower bottlenecks the key question is
whether most of this shift occurred before or after the 1955-57 period.
Hence a shift in job educational requirements relative to supply that had
occurred before those years, and was not serious enough to obstruct expansion then, poses little threat to a new move back toward 4-percent unemployment now.
The available unemployment data seems to show that whatever shift may
have occurred in job educational requirements relative to supply did occur
prior to 1957. Indeed it may have been partially reversed since that time.
From 1957 to 1962, for example, the unemployment rate for male workers
with an 8th grade education or less rose by about one-half, roughly the same
as the rate of overall unemployment. But the unemployment rate for college
graduates rose from 0,6 percent to 1.4 percent.
In addition to unemployment rates, the percentages of labor-force participation by groups of different educational attainments also have changed
during the postwar period. Here the data currently in hand do not permit
us to locate the timing of these changes to the degree that has been possible
with the unemployment rates. And so we simply do not know whether here,
too, the shift toward greater participation by the well-educated, and lesser
participation by the poorly educated, may largely have occurred before
1957.*
* From data examined since the Testimony was prepared, it appears that the shift
toward greater participation by the well educated primarily occurred before 1957; as
to the poorly educated, roughly half of the shift toward lower participation occurred
prior to and half after 1957.




180

If, in the absence of information, one assumes that the shift in relative
participation rates occurred more recently, one might conclude that there
have been some withdrawals from the labor force by poorly educated male
workers. Whenever they occurred, they present an obvious challenge to
both public and private training programs. But the magnitude of these
shifts is easily exaggerated—especially if one fails to make adequate allowance for the improvements in retirement programs during the past dozen
years. It is clear that the vast majority of the so-called "losses" of less
educated workers from the male labor force were concentrated in the 65and-older age group.
In any event . . . none of this goes to the real nub of the issue. That
nub is the failure of the bottleneck hypothesis to make any allowance for the
proven capacity of a free labor market—especially one endowed with a
high average level of education and enterprise and expanding programs
to improve labor skills and mobility—to reconcile discrepancies between
particular labor supplies and particular labor demands.
If relative shortages of particular skills develop, the price system and the
market will moderate them, as they always have done in the past. Employers will be prompted to step up their in-service training programs and,
as more jobs become available, poorly skilled and poorly educated workers
will be more strongly motivated to avail themselves of training, retraining,
and adult education opportunities. Government manpower programs begun in the 1961-63 period will also be operating to help ease the adjustment
of specific shortages.
As for the personnel with the very highest skills, many—for the very
reason that they are scarce—have been "stockpiled" by their employers
and are not working to capacity when business is slack. As business picks
up, they will be used more fully—and they will be used more efficiently.
As engineers become scarce, and more expensive, their talents will be concentrated on engineering assignments, leaving drafting (for example) for
draftsmen, who can be trained more quickly.
Naturally, most college graduates will have jobs no matter how high
the unemployment rate in the whole economy, even if they have to work
below the level for which they are qualified. If they are already in the
supervisory or technical jobs for which they are best qualified, their employers will not have to increase by 10 percent the number of such jobs in
order to increase total employment by 10 percent. And to the extent that
they are not already in such jobs, they are a hidden reservoir of superior
talent.
The highly-educated-manpower-bottleneck argument arrives at its alarming conclusion by projecting to new situations a perfectly static set of educational requirements. The argument makes no allowance for flexibility in
the system. Flexibility, of course, is not unlimited. If we were talking about
accomplishing a massive increase in output within a few months, manpower
bottlenecks might indeed become critical. But we find it unrealistic to be-




181

lieve that they represent a major constraint upon an extra $30 billion of
output in what will soon be a $600 billion economy—especially when (a)
there are virtually no current signs of tension in either labor markets or
product markets and (b) the demand expansion that will accomplish the
closure will be spread over 2 or more years in which continuing new supplies of highly trained manpower will be entering the labor market.
At the beginning of Section III the question was raised whether structural elements in unemployment have grown so much since 1957 that they
threaten to impede an economic expansion induced by the tax cut. In Sections I I I and IV we have examined this question from a number of directions, and we now summarize our answer.
The answer is clear: The evidence we have assembled and the tests we
have made do not support the thesis that, over-all, the incidence of structural unemployment has increased in importance since we last achieved high
employment. There may be some problems that seem more serious today
than earlier; but in other areas we have probably progressed.
Expansion of the economy in response to a stepping-up of the growth of
demand will not be impeded by pockets of surplus labor existing in a limited
number of categories—we have always had distressing surpluses in certain
categories, and the tax cut will not fully eliminate them. Economic expansion could eventually be impeded by shortages in strategic categories of skills
and training, but the statistical evidence reveals no such shortages enroute to
4-percent unemployment.
It is difficult to believe that an economy that was able to absorb the
dramatic shifts needed to convert to war production in World War II,
and that operated at unemployment levels as low as 1.2 percent during that
war and more recently (1953) at 2.9 percent, could not move rather
readily, over the space of 2 or 3 years, to our interim target of 4-percent
unemployment.
Unsatisfied as we all must be with our Nation's achievements in education—and with the distressing problem of school dropouts—we must not
disregard the fact that our labor force today is better educated and, as a
result, more flexible than ever before. The median level of education
among the adult male members of the labor force has risen by an astonishing 50 percent since the beginning of the Second World War. New
entrants into the labor force are on the average better equipped than ever
before to respond to a changing pattern of demand. By 1966, when the
full effects of the tax cut will be apparent, the ranks of trained workers
will have been swelled by two more annual graduating classes from our high
schools, colleges, and professional and graduate schools. In each case, the
size of the groups will dwarf all previous records.3
8
For example, the projected numbers graduating from college (bachelors or first
professional-degrees) in 1964 and 1965 will be about 30 percent above the numbers
graduated in 1959 and 1960. By 1970, the estimated number will exceed 1960 by
85 percent.




182

Our own recent economic history assures us of the economy's ability to
adapt to rapid change. Additional assurance along this line is found in the
experience of other countries whose systems and values are similar to our
own. During the past decade, the Western European economy has undergone staggering structural changes. France and Belgium have adjusted
to the decline of important mining areas, Germany to the inflow of millions
cf refugees from the East, and Italy to the problem of absorbing large
numbers of poorly educated rural migrants into urban occupations. And
all of Western Europe has adjusted to the replacement of obsolete capital,
and of productive methods often unchanged for a century or more with
machinery and methods geared to the most advanced technology in the
world. The advance of productivity has been revolutionary. During the
19505s, output per manufacturing worker increased 2^4 times as fast in
Germany as in the United States, 3 times as fast in France, and 4 times as
fast in Italy. In their adjustment to these changes the Europeans, though
they may have other advantages, did not have the advantage of a labor
force nearly as well educated, as well trained, as mobile, or as flexible as
ours.
Nonetheless, the Europeans have maintained unemployment rates considerably lower than ours. After adjustment for conceptual differences,
the unemployment rate in 1960 was 1.0 percent in Germany, 1.9 percent
in France, and 4.3 percent in Italy. In Italy and Germany these low rates
represented a considerable improvement over earlier postwar experience,
and the higher Italian rate has subsequently declined materially.
The major explanation for such low unemployment rates in economies
undergoing such profound transitions lies in the maintenane of a very high
level of demand. During the 1950's the average annual growth rate in
France was 4 percent, in Italy, 6 percent, and in Germany, over 7 percent—
and both Italy and France have had even higher rates so far in the 1960's.
This experience demonstrates beyond any doubt that, under the stimulus of
adequate demand, and with the aid of active labor market policies, modern
economies are sufficiently resilient to absorb poorly educated workers, to
adapt to skill shortages, and to adjust to rapid technological change in a
manner which maintains extremely low unemployment rates. This European experience—which in broad outline has been matched in Japan—
reassures us that, once high and growing demand presses our capacity, we
too will adapt to rapid change and maintain our economic health.
Structural unemployment is a human and an economic problem that we
must attack by every means available. But the expansion of total demand
through tax reduction remains the crucial central element in our attack upon
unemployment.




V. T H E RATE OF GROWTH OF PRODUCTIVITY*
VI.

T H E CHALLENGE OF AUTOMATION**

In a way it is surprising how reluctant we are to embrace the higher
productivity levels and living standards which "automation" makes possible. Some of the more popular literature on the subject treats it as a new
and frightening development. But in fact, it is only the most recent aspect
of a continuing process of technological advance that dates back to the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Taking full advantage of this process,
the United States has built the most productive and most remunerative
economy in the world. Through time, brute strength has been progressively replaced by simple machines, mechanical power, complex machines,
assembly lines, and today increasingly by sophisticated automatic feedback
systems. At each stage of the process individuals were temporarily displaced from existing jobs, new skills were found to be needed and were acquired, and total output and employment expanded as demand increased
in line with the new higher production capabilities.
Ultimately the total effect has always in the past been a higher standard
of living for almost everyone—higher pay for workers, cheaper and better
products for consumers, and larger profits for businessmen and stockholders.
On the basis of our historical experience, automation should be recognized
for what it is—an open door to a more productive economy, to higher
levels of private consumption, to more effective public services, and to
larger resources for the support of our international objectives.
Despite this historical record, it is occasionally argued that the newest
techniques are becoming so much more productive than those they replace
that we cannot possibly adjust to them as smoothly as in the past. As indicated earlier, the evidence available to date does not enable us to draw
firm conclusions about the prospective rate of increase in productivity.
Yet, it is clearly possible that as the newest production techniques are increasingly embodied in new capital, the future growth of productivity will
speed up.
Should this possibility be a source of concern? Rather than viewing it
with concern or alarm, we would argue that we should work as hard as
we can for faster productivity growth—indeed, it holds the key to success
of our national policies for faster economic growth and for the cost-cutting
that is essential to our international competitive position. It is a prime
objective of this year's tax bill as well as last year's special tax stimulants
to investment.
Doubts about our ability to adjust to automation seem to be based on two
questions: Can we really use the enlarged output of goods and services
*The text of this section has been deleted because the same material is covered—
using more recent data—in Chapter 3 of the Report, especially in the subsection
headed "The Trend of Labor Productivity."
**Parts of this section overlap with material contained in the text of the Report.




184

made possible by a rising rate of productivity advance? Will the new speed
and character of technological change create impossible problems of adjustment for the labor force?
Those who raise the first question sometimes argue that we cannot possibly
consume all that the new techniques can produce—that the persistent high
level of unemployment over the past few years is evidence of "satiation"—
that the fantastic productivity of the American economy has outdistanced
the needs of the American people. What do the facts show?
First and most obvious, it is impossible to square this notion with the
persistence of poverty in the American economy. We are indeed an affluent
society, by every comparative standard. Nonetheless, even in this age of
affluence, one-fifth of American families still have annual incomes below
$3,000—that is, they live in poverty. To them, the suggestion that we are
economically satiated must seem ridiculous, if not cruel. Until our society
has met the challenge of poverty in the midst of plenty, it is in no danger of
being satiated with goods and services.
But—quite apart from the persistence of poverty—there is nothing in the
economic behavior of even the more affluent American consumers to support the satiation hypothesis. At all income levels—except perhaps in the
top 2 or 3 percent of the income-wealth distribution—the ratio of consumption to disposable income is one of our most stable economic relationships.
Year-in, year-out—ever since 1950—American consumers have continued
to spend from 92 to 94 percent of their aggregate disposable income—their
income after taxes—on consumer goods and services. During this period
total income and average family income have both risen markedly; but there
is no evidence of any growing disinclination to spend a stable and high
percentage of each additional dollar of income on consumption. Even those
in the upper "middle" income groups who are already able to meet without
strain the basic requirements for food, clothing, housing, and transportation
find that they have ample, and often urgent uses, for additional incomes.
This may take the form of an improved quality or manner in which basic
requirements are satisfied—a larger house, a newer car—or it may take the
form of meeting new and different demands: longer and more rewarding
vacations, better education for one's children, better medical care, more
books and more concerts, and more expensive hobbies.
This does not, of course, rule out the possibility that—as in the past—
some, many, or even all of us will prefer to forego still higher income in favor
of greater leisure in the form of shorter hours, longer vacations, or earlier
retirements. (There are indications, incidentally, that many people find it
easier to become satiated with leisure than with income!)
In addition to unsatisfied private consumption needs, there are pressing
needs for goods and services which are ordinarily and in some cases inevitably provided by the public sector. Admittedly there is disagreement
as to just which of these "public goods" most need to be increased. There
are also differences of opinion as to which levels of government should under-




take expanded activities. Nevertheless, almost all major segments of the
American community support increases in the level of one or another of such
"public" goods and services, whether they be, for example, urban renewal,
or improved health services, or better schools, or better roads and airports,
or purer water and air, or more adequate facilities in national parks. Certainly none of this bespeaks a satiated society.
In a somewhat different vein, it should also be noted that technologically
advancing societies also generate high levels of investment demand, demand
for producer goods like machines, equipment, buildings. In large part, of
course, this reflects the favorable impact of new technological developments
on the profitability of investment. During most of our history, American
business has responded to such opportunities by enlarging its investment outlays. Postwar Western Europe and Japan provide examples of economies
with impressive rates of productivity increase along with buoyant demand,
reflecting—more than anything else—extremely high quotas of investment.
Clearly, we need not fear that the increasing productivity associated with
even a speeded-up rate of technological progress will founder upon a contradiction between our needs and our ability to satisfy them. As people continue to receive the extra incomes which our enlarging production can generate, they will also continue to use those extra incomes to buy the enlarged
output—for private and public consumption and for investment.
The second question raised about our ability to adjust to automation concerns the labor force adjustments it necessitates.
If the advance of technological progress has speeded up, it is reasonable
to suppose that, as a by-product, the rate at which particular skills are
rendered obsolescent is also increasing. But a further and different point
is sometimes made, namely, that automation (in its narrower technical
sense) is shifting not merely the rate but the character of skill requirements
generated by technological change. Previously, it is suggested, technological change simplified the work process and hence created many semiskilled jobs, which could be filled by workers with little training. Automation, however, reintegrates the production process and thus eliminates many
unskilled and semi-skilled jobs.
Whether this interpretation is correct is a highly complex empirical
question. Many of the jobs displaced by automation are low-skilled and
some of the jobs added are extremely high-skilled. The design and installation of automation equipment surely requires highly trained personnel.
Yet the need for these people is clearly limited, and they do not stay with
the equipment long after installation. Once in operation, the equipment
may actually diminish rather than raise skill requirements. Examples of
highly automated installations have been cited where all of the maintenance
is done by high school graduates with a fairly short trade school course in
electronic repair. High skills are required for the programming function,
but this also tends to be concentrated in the initial stages and "canned"
programs are increasingly available in some applications. A good deal




186

more study and experience is needed before we can safely generalize about
the impact of automation on skill requirements for the labor force as a
whole.
Beyond the question of how automation (in the narrow sense) affects
average skill requirements lies the broader question of the impact on labor
markets of any general acceleration that may occur in the rate of technological advance. This broader question involves at least two dimensions.
A "vertical" dimension relates to the impact of speeded technological
change on the long-term rate of increase in the average educational content
of jobs. As noted repeatedly, our past rapid increase in educational levels
has both responded to and helped bring about our steady technological
advance and rising productivity. The exact nature of the complex interrelationships between the average educational accomplishment of the labor
force, job educational requirements, and a further speeding up of the pace
of technological advance is a matter for some speculaion. But whatever
the answer, more and better education will continue to have one of the
highest priorities among the values of American society.
The "horizontal" dimension of our question requires less speculation. We
can be certain that a speeded pace of technological change will increase the
rate of job displacement, and will require even greater attention to measures
for improving labor mobility, for training and retraining of workers, and
for an effective level of basic education to promote adaptability and flexibility. The possibility of an accelerated pace of technical change thus
underscores an already powerful case for stonger labor market policies to
meet existing problems of displacement.
Our past economic growth has brought unparalleled levels of well-being
for all in our society. Today we need and we actively seek even higher levels
of productivity, to help us solve both domestic and international problems.
If, as a result of our policies to stimulate investment and improve efficiency,
or as an unexpected bonus from autonomous developments in technology,
the U.S. rate of productivity growth accelerates, we may encounter problems,
but we will reap large rewards. If we pursue appropriate policies, we can
meet the challenge of automation.
VII.

CONCLUSIONS

This statement has been long and necessarily complex. But the issues
involved are of the highest urgency and significance for the economic future
of our Nation, and they are far from simple. In so characterizing them we
know we share the view of this Subcommittee, which has been so tirelessly
pursuing all aspects of this subject.
We have tried to draw our conclusions from the evidence as we have gone
along, and therefore need only pull them together here. These are our
principal conclusions:

187
715-113 O-64-13



1. Enactment of the major tax reduction program which is now before the
Senate is a necessary condition for solution of the problems that concern
this Subcommittee. It will directly add $30 billion to total output and create
2 to 3 million extra jobs. Without the continuing lift in total demands for
goods and services that the tax program is designed to accomplish, little
progress can be expected in reducing and eliminating problems of excessive
unemployment for the Nation as a whole. Had this lift in demand been
effective in the years 1958 through 1963, it would have overcome economic
slack; achieved a considerably higher level of output of needed goods and
services; maintained unemployment rates comparable with those realized in
the years before 1957; and—in the process—reduced or eliminated our
budget deficits.
2. Although tax reduction will alleviate, it will not by itself cure, longstanding problems of structural unemployment, of incomplete adaptation
of the structure of our labor force to the structure of demand, of regional imbalances, and of consequent hardship, inequity, and inefficiency. The need
to attack these problems stems, first, from our concern to alleviate unnecessary human distress. Second, it stems from the desire to convert unproductive and unwanted idleness into productive employment, so that we
can increase our output of needed goods and services even beyond the potential output associated with our interim target of a 4-percent rate of unemployment. And third, if the rate of technological displacement of workers
is in the process of accelerating, it will need to be matched by a similar
increase in the mobility and adaptability of our labor force.
This Administration has placed high priority upon measures to accelerate
our productivity gains—through the stimulation of investment by tax measures, the improvement of technology in lagging sectors of the civilian economy, and in other ways—with the urgent purpose of improving the competitive position of American producers in world markets and of stepping
up our long-term growth rate. It has promoted policies designed to realize
the benefits of maximum productive efficiency—policies which may require
shifts in our resource use and consequent displacement of labor.
It would be irresponsible not to complement these policies with others
designed to facilitate the transfer of resources and to ease necessary burdens
of adjustment—as, indeed, was done in the "adjustment" provisions of the
Trade Expansion Act.
Without attempting to be comprehensive, we can indicate some of the
important channels of attack on structural problems:
—improved labor market information services;
—improved guidance and placement services;
—improved programs of apprenticeship;
—strengthened programs to reduce discriminatory hiring and employment practices by race, sex, or national origin;
—expanded and more effective programs of vocational education, general adult education, and retraining;




188

—basic improvements in the quality of our educational system at all
levels;
—measures to enlarge educational opportunities for children of low income families and minority groups;
—programs to assist the geographical movement of workers;
—expanded policies to strengthen the economic base and to speed the
economic growth of distressed communities and regions.
The tax cut and other measures to expand total demand are no substitute
for policies like these; while these policies, in turn, are no substitute for a
tax cut. Yet a more vigorous expansion of demand will release forces that
will powerfully aid in the solution of structural problems. The existence
of a stronger demand for labor will by itself strengthen the incentives for
workers to undertake training or retraining and for employers to help provide it; will attract workers to move to the places where jobs are plentiful
and stimulate employers to assist such movement; will ease the financial
burdens on local communities in undertaking improvements in their educational systems; will reduce discriminatory practices both by employers and
by unions; and will increase the effectiveness of the free-market price system in encouraging appropriate adjustments of both labor supply and labor
demand, the need for which is now partly obscured by slack markets.
3. Important as is the attack on structural problems, we need not fear
that structural obstacles will block a healthy expansion of jobs and output resulting from the tax cut. The feasibility of our 4-percent interim
target assumes not some newly perfected system of labor market adjustment but the labor market as it exists today with its present adjustment
mechanism. Possible and desirable improvements in our labor market adjustment processes can smooth and accelerate achievement of the interim
target. And they can permit us to penetrate beyond it to even lower unemployment rates. But it is on demand stimulus that we must rely to get
to the provisional 4-percent objective.
4. There are hopeful hints in the most recent evidence that we may be
achieving a somewhat higher rate of average productivity growth than in
the past, although it is too early to be sure. If our potential output per
worker should grow more rapidly in the future than in the past, it would
mean that an even more rapid expansion of total demand would be required to reach and maintain reasonably full employment of the labor force.
But we see no basis for fears that our wants and needs are already satiated,
or that total spending will fail to rise with potential output and thus thwart
faster expansion. It is true that demand does not automatically adjust, yearby-year, to the growth of potential output. But there is no reason to suppose
that demand is more likely to be deficient when potential output is more
rapidly growing, than when growth in potential output is less dynamic.
On the contrary, the conditions that are conducive to faster productivity
growth are also conducive to more rapid expansion in private demands.




Instead of fearing an accelerated growth of productivity, we should and
do seek it
—to achieve more fully our private and public domestic economic goals;
—to help us correct our balance-of-payments deficit;
—and to raise the standard and quality of life for all of our citizens.




190

Appendix B
REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF
THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING 1963




191

LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
DECEMBER 31,

1963.

The PRESIDENT.

SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year 1963 in accordance with the requirements of
Congress, as set forth in Section 4(d) of the Employment Act of 1946.
Respectfully,
WALTER W. HELLER, Chairman.




GARDNER AGKLEY
J O H N P. LEWIS

192

Report to the President on the Activities of the
Council of Economic Advisers During 1963
COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP

During 1963 the Council remained under the direction of Walter W.
Heller, who has served as Chairman since the change of Administration
in January 1961. Gardner Ackley, who joined the Council in August
1962, continued as a member throughout 1963, and John P. Lewis, the
third Council member, took office on May 17, 1963. All three were
asked by President Johnson to continue in office following the assassination of President Kennedy.
Mr. Heller is on leave from his post as Professor and Chairman of the
Department of Economics at the University of Minnesota; Mr. Ackley from
his post as Professor of Economics at the University of Michigan; and
Mr. Lewis from his post as Professor and Chairman of the Department of
Business Economics and Public Policy in the Graduate School of Business
at Indiana University.
Following is a list of all past Council members and their dates of service:
Position

Name
Edwin O. Nourse
Leon H. Keyserling
John D. Clark.
Roy Blough
Robert C. Turner
Arthur F . Burns
Neil H. Jacoby
Walter W. Stewart.
Joseph S. Davis
Raymond J. Saulnier
Paul W. McCracken
Karl Brandt
Henry C. Wallich
James Tobin
Kermit Gordon

._.

Chairman
Vice Chairman
Acting Chairman
Chairman
Member
Vice Chairman
Member
__
Member
Chairman
Member
_
_ Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
_ Member
Member
Member
Member

Oath of office date
August 9,1946
August 9, 1946
November 2,1949
___ May 10,1950
August 9,1946
__ May 10,1950
June 29,1950
September8,1952
March 19,1953
September 15,1953. _
_ December 2,1953
May 2,1955
April 4,1955
December 3,1956
December 3,1956
November 1,1958
May 7,1959
January 27,1961
January 27,1961

Separation date
November 1,1949.
November 1,1949.
May 9,1950.
January 20,1953.
May 9,1950.
February 11,1953.
August 20,1952.
January 20,1953.
December 1,1956.
February 9,1955.
April 29,1955.
October 31,1958.
December 2,1956.
January 20,1961.
January 31,1959.
January 20,1961.
January 20,1961.
July 31,1962.
December 27,1962.

COUNCIL STAFF

The Council members are currently assisted by a professional staff of
18. These staff members are W. H. Locke Anderson, Richard M. Bailey,
Eugene A. Birnbaum, James T. Bonnen, William M. Capron, Frances M.




193

James, Myron L. Joseph, Edward D. Kalachek, Marshall A. Kaplan, Susan
J. Lepper, David W. Lusher, Timothy W. McGuire, Fredric Q. Raines,
Robert Solomon, Penelope H. Thunberg, Joseph J. Walka, Burton A. Weisbrod, and Betty J. Willis.
In addition, the Council draws on the expertise of leading members of
the economics profession by making frequent use of outside consultants.
During 1963 the following served the Council in this capacity: Kenneth
J. Arrow, Robert E. Asher, E. Cary Brown, Richard E. Caves, Charles A.
Cooper, Richard N. Cooper, Robert Dorfman, James Duesenberry, Otto
Eckstein, Rashi Fein, W. Lee Hansen, Robert J. Lampman, David D.
Martin, John R. Meyer, Richard A. Musgrave, Richard R. Nelson, Arthur
M. Okun, Joseph A. Pechman, George L. Perry, Lee E. Preston, Jr., Paul
A. Samuelson, Warren L. Smith, Robert M. Solow, Charles A. Taff, James
Tobin, Robert Triffin, and Lloyd Ulman.
Every year a number of staff members who have joined the Council on
a leave-of-absence basis return to their posts in private life or in government.
Those leaving the Council in 1963 were: Michael F. Brewer, Charles A.
Cooper, Richard N. Cooper, Rashi Fein, Robert J. Lampman, Richard R.
Nelson, George L. Perry, Vernon W. Ruttan, Paul S. Sarbanes, Norman J.
Simler, Warren L. Smith, and Nancy H. Teeters.
Each summer, for the last three years, the Council has conducted a student intern program. Those selected in 1963 were Leslie Aspin, Peter A.
Diamond, Donald A. Nichols, and Robert N. Stearns.
In addition, under an arrangement with the Great Lakes College Association, a group of 12 liberal arts colleges, the Council in 1963 also had
a summer faculty intern, Maurice L. Branch, Professor of Economics at
Albion College.
COUNCIL ACTIVITIES

The Council is charged by the Employment Act of 1946 with responsibility for analyzing and interpreting current and prospective economic developments and trends and for developing and recommending economic
policies that will promote the goals of "maximum employment, production,
and purchasing power." This charge, and the increased responsibilities
as an economic staff agency that have been assigned to it in recent years
by the President, require the Council to consider a wide range of policy
problems and areas. As a consequence, the Council consults and works
closely with other members of the Executive Office and White House staff
and with numerous other Government departments and agencies in analyzing domestic and international economic issues and in formulating appropriate recommendations.
Participation in Interagency Activities
In addition to discharging its advisory duties through informal consultations with other Government agencies, the Council also participates
on a formal basis in a number of interagency activities:




194

1. The Chairman regularly attends meetings of the Cabinet, where he
frequently briefs the President and Cabinet members on the current economic situation.
2. He is Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Growth.
This Committee was established in August 1962 to coordinate Federal
activities and policies in this field and to advise the President on steps to
accelerate the growth of the U.S. economy. Other members are the
Secretaries of the Treasury, Commerce, and Labor, and the Director of
the Bureau of the Budget.
3. He is a member of the Cabinet Committee on the Balance of Payments.
4. He is Vice-Chairman of the Interdepartmental Energy Study, undertaken by a group of 9 agencies organized in February to study the development and use of our total energy resources in order to help determine the
most effective allocation of research and development efforts.
5. The Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the Bureau of the
Budget, and the Chairman of the Council form a coordinating committee on economic, budgetary, and revenue developments and forecasts,
which reports its findings to the President from time to time.
6. The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System joins the above officials and their associates to form an advisory
group which meets periodically with the President to discuss domestic and
international monetary matters.
7. Mr. Ackley serves as Chairman of the Interagency Committee on the
Economic Impact of Defense and Disarmament, which also includes
representatives of the Departments of Defense, Commerce, and Labor; the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Bureau of
the Budget, and the Office of Emergency Planning. This Committee,
which functioned on an informal basis for most of the year, was formally
established by President Johnson on December 21. In his memorandum
the President stated: "The Committee will be responsible for the review
and coordination of activities in the various departments and agencies designed to improve our understanding of the economic impact of defense
expenditures and of changes either in the composition or in the total
level of such expenditures."
8. Mr. Lewis serves as a member of the Interagency Committee on Transportation Mergers, which advises the President as to positions the Government should take with respect to merger proposals that transportation companies have submitted to Federal regulatory agencies.
9. Mr. Ackley serves as Chairman of an interagency committee, including representatives of the Department of Labor and Commerce and the
Bureau of the Budget, which is responsible for developing and supervising
an integrated program of studies and projections of United States economic
growth.




195

10. Members or staff of the Council served on a number of other interagency committees dealing with a wide variety of domestic economic matters:
a. the Advisory Committee on Domestic Federal Credit Programs;
b. the Interagency Committee to Review the Civil Aeronautics
Board Local Airline Subsidy Reduction Program;
c. the Interagency Committee on Air User Charges;
d. the Natural Resources Committees of both the Federal Council
for Science and Technology and the National Academy of Sciences;
e. the Water Resources Research Committee of the Federal Council for Science and Technology;
f. the Army-Interior Advisory Board on Passamaquoddy and Upper
St. John River;
g. the Committee on Federal Mental Health Programs;
h. the Interdepartmental Advisory Committee on the U.S. National
Health Survey.
11. The Council continued its work with the President's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy, attending meetings of the Committee
and participating in planning a study of automation as part of its agenda
for the coming year.
12. Along with the Bureau of the Budget and members of the White
House staff, the Council reviewed measures proposed for inclusion in the
President's 1964 legislative program. The Council had primary responsibility for analysis and coordination of proposals for an assault on the problem of poverty in the United States.
Consumer Advisory Council
Acting for the President, the Council of Economic Advisers was advised
on consumer matters by the Consumer Advisory Council. It had been established by the Chairman in July 1962 pursuant to the Presidential Message
on Consumers' Protection and Interest Programs. The Consumer Advisory
Council made its First Report on September 30, 1963. It reviewed the history of Federal activities on behalf of the consumer, noted recent progress
in Federal consumer protection programs, and made numerous recommendations on behalf of consumers.
Dr. Helen G. Canoyer, Dean of the New York State College of Home
Economics at Cornell University, was the first Chairman of the Consumer
Advisory Council from its inception in July 1962 until November 1963.
Mrs. John G. Lee, Past President of the League of Women Voters, then
served as Acting Chairman.
At year-end, acting on recommendations made by the Council of Economic Advisers and concurred in by the other agencies concerned, the
President approved the appointment of a White House Special Assistant
for Consumer Affairs and the establishment by executive order of the




196

President's Committee on Consumer Interests. This Committee will consist of (1) high-level representatives of 9 Federal agencies concerned with
consumer affairs, including the Council of Economic Advisers; (2) such
other governmental representatives as the President may name; and (3)
private citizens especially qualified to represent the consumer interest.
The third group will retain its identity as the Consumer Advisory Council,
serving as the successor to the present group of that title. The Council of
Economic Advisers will continue to look to this group for advice from a
consumer point of view on broad matters of economic policy.
Committee on Financial Institutions
President Kennedy established three interagency committees in 1962 to
examine the issues raised by the Report of the Commission on Money and
Credit. The Council was represented on the two groups that reported
to the President late in 1962—the Committee on Federal Credit Programs
and the Committee on Corporate Pension Funds and Other Private Retirement and Welfare Programs. The latter committee's report was referred in turn to the President's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy, which reported recently to the President.
The Chairman of the Council chaired the Committee on Financial
Institutions, which made its report in April 1963. Other members of the
Committee were the Secretaries of the Treasury; Agriculture; and Health,
Education, and Welfare; the Attorney General; the Administrator of
the Housing and Home Finance Agency; the Chairman of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System; the Chairman of the Federal
Home Loan Bank Board; the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation; the Comptroller of the Currency; and the Director of the
Bureau of the Budget.
The Committee on Financial Institutions formulated goals and objectives of Federal policy designed to enable private financial institutions to
function more effectively. It thereby indicated desirable directions of legislative action, but did not attempt to lay out a specific legislative program.
The topics covered were reserve requirements, interest rate and portfolio
regulations, Federal charters for financial institutions, deposit insurance,
structural changes and competition, conflicts of interest, and supervision
and examination of institutions.
A number of bills have been introduced in the Congress this year which
would implement some of the conclusions of the Committee.
International Economic Activities
Economic policy decisions in the United States must be made increasingly
in an international context. The Council participates in a number of international activities in order to exchange views with foreign officials and
to obtain the necessary cooperation in economic matters among the countries of the free world:




197

1. The Chairman was a member of the U.S. delegation to:
a. The eighth annual meeting of the Cabinet-level United StatesCanada Joint Committee on Trade and Economic Affairs, which
met in Washington on September 20-21;
b. The third annual meeting of a similar United States-Japan
Cabinet-level Committee, whose scheduled meeting in Japan in
late November was postponed until January 1964 because of
the death of President Kennedy;
c. The September-October meetings in Washington of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
2. The Council participated actively in the work of the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD):
a. Mr. Heller continued to serve as Chairman of the U.S. delegation to meetings of the Economic Policy Committee of the
OECD;
b. Mr. Ackley and Messrs. Robert Solomon, Richard Cooper, and
Warren Smith of the Council staff were members of the U.S.
delegation to the Committee's Working Party on Balance-of-Payments Equilibrium;
c. Mr. Lewis was Chairman of the U.S. delegation to the Committee's Working Party on Costs of Production and Prices;
d. Mr. Ackley served as Chairman of the U.S. delegation to the
Committee's Working Party on Policies for the Promotion of
Economic Growth;
e. Mr. Ackley headed the U.S. delegation for the review of the U.S.
economy carried on annually by the Economic Development and
Review Committee of the OECD.
3. In addition to its participation in the work of the Cabinet Committee on Balance of Payments, the Council was represented on the Committee on Balance-of-Payments Information, the Interagency Committee
on Foreign Trade Statistics, the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems and other groups concerned
with our foreign trade, our balance of payments, and international monetary
reform.
4. In January the Brookings Institution transmitted to the Council
its five-year outlook for the U.S. basic balance of payments. This report
was financed in 1962 by the Council, in conjunction with the Treasury
Department and the Bureau of the Budget. The Report provides a detailed five-year outlook on factors that will affect the U.S. balance of payments and was the subject of hearings by the Joint Economic Committee
of the Congress this year.




CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY

In addition to its testimony before Appropriations Committees in support of its own budget request, the Council appeared before Congressional Committees as follows during 1963:
1. On January 28 Mr. Heller, accompanied by Mr. Ackley, opened
testimony on the 1963 Economic Report of the President before the Joint
Economic Committee.
2. On May 1 Mr. Heller appeared before the Education Subcommittee
of the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare as a participant in
the discussion on the proposed National Education Improvement Act of
1963.
3. On July 25 Mr. Heller, accompanied by Mr. Ackley and Mr. Lewis,
testified before the House Committee on Banking and Currency in their
hearings on Recent Changes in Monetary Policy and the Balance-of-Payments Problem.
4. On the same day Mr. Lewis, accompanied by Mr. Capron and Mr.
Lusher of the Council's staff, appeared before the Senate Commerce Committee to discuss the economic impact of a possible railroad strike.
5. On October 28 Mr. Heller, accompanied by Mr. Ackley and Mr.
Lewis, testified at hearings on the Nation's Manpower Revolution conducted by the Subcommittee on Employment and Manpower of the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare.
6. On November 12 Mr. Heller, accompanied by Mr. Ackley and Mr.
Lewis, appeared before the Senate Committee on Finance in support of
the tax bill, H.R. 8363.
Also, in response to a request from the Chairman of the Joint Economic
Committee, Senator Paul H. Douglas, the Council provided the Committee
in October with a Summary Analysis of the Probable Effects of the Proposed Quality Stabilization Act on Prices, Incomes, Employment, and
Production.
NONGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS AND ACTIVITIES

The Council attempts to contribute to the process of informing public
opinion as it bears on current economic issues. The members and staff of
the Council spoke during 1963 before a number of private and public
organizations and institutes, appeared on radio and television programs,
and wrote articles for popular and professional publications.
The Employment Act of 1946 explicitly provides for consultation with
"representatives of industry, agriculture, labor, consumers, State and local
governments, and other groups . . ." The Council has frequent informal
interchanges with such representatives and also meets from time to time
with four advisory groups (in addition to the Consumer Advisory Council):
1. The Economic Policy Committee of the AFL-CIO, including—in
addition to George Meany, President, and William F. Schnitzler, Secretary-




199

Treasurer, of the AFL-CIO—the following: Walter P. Reuther, Chairman,
James B. Carey, David Dubinsky, George Harrison, A. J. Hayes, Joseph
Keenan, O. A. Knight, David J. McDonald, Paul L. Phillips, Emil Rieve,
Joseph Rourke, Peter T. Schoemann, and James Suffridge.
2. The Liaison Committee of the Business Council, including—in addition to Roger Blough, past Chairman, and Frederick Kappel, present Chairman, of the Business Council—the following: Chairman of the Liaison Committee, Donald K. David, Vice-Chairman, Ford Foundation; Paul C. Cabot,
Chairman, State Street Investment Corporation; John Cowles, President,
Minneapolis Star and Tribune; Joseph B. Hall, Chairman, Kroger Company; and W. B. Murphy, President, Campbell Soup Company.
3. The Conference of Business Economists, an organization of almost
50 members, chaired in 1963 by Ira T. Ellis of E. I. DuPont de Nemours &
Company.
4. The AFL-CIO economists and research directors.
PUBLICATIONS

In January the Council transmitted to the Congress its 1963 Annual Report, together with the Economic Report of the President. As in the past,
copies of the Report were distributed to members of the Congress, government officials, the press, and depository libraries. The Superintendent of
Documents sold an additional 35,374 copies to the public, a 60 percent increase over the previous record sale of 22,125 copies of the 1962 Report.
The monthly Economic Indicators, an important source of current economic statistics, has been prepared since 1948 at the Council under the direction of Miss Frances M. James. It is published by the Joint Economic
Committee of the Congress, and, under authority of a Joint Resolution of
the Congress, copies are furnished to members of the Congress and to depository libraries. The Superintendent of Documents sells about 9,000
copies a month to the public.
APPROPRIATIONS

The Council received an appropriation of $615,000 for fiscal year 1964.
The Council's request for 1965, which assumes no increase in staff, is the
same as 1964 except for adjustments made necessary by the salary increases
resulting from the pay legislation of 1962 and by the increased cost to the
Council of overtime, communications, printing, and other services.




200

Appendix C
STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME,
EMPLOYMENT, AND PRODUCTION




201




CONTENTS
income or expenditure:
Gross national product or expenditure, 1929-63
Gross national product or expenditure, in 1963 prices, 1929-63
Gross national product or expenditure, in 1954 prices, 1929-63
Gross national product by major type of product, 1947-63
Gross national product by major type of product, in 1954 prices,
1947-63
C-6. Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-63
C-7. Gross national product: Receipts and expenditures by major economic
groups, 1929-63
C-8. Gross private and government product, in current and 1963 prices,
1929-63
C-9. Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-63
C-10. Gross private domestic investment, 1929-63
O i l . National income by type of income, 1929-63
C-l2. Relation of gross national product and national income, 1929-63 . . . .
C-l 3. Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-63
C-l 4. Sources of personal income, 1929-63
C-15. Disposition of personal income, 1929-63
C-l 6. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures, in current and 1963 prices, 1929-63
C-l 7. Financial saving by individuals, 1939-63
C-l 8. Sources and uses of gross saving, 1929-63
Employment, wages, and productivity:
C-l 9. Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-63
C-20. Employment and unemployment, by sex and age, 1947-63
C-21. Employed persons not at work, by reason for not working, and special
groups of unemployed persons, 1946—63
C-22. Selected measures of unemployment and part-time employment,
1948-63
C-23. Unemployed persons, by duration of unemployment, 1947-63
C-24. Unemployment insurance programs, selected data, 1940-63
C-25. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments,
1929-63
C-26. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries, 1929-63
C-27. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries, 1929-63
C-28. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929-63
C-29. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings, gross and excluding overtime, in manufacturing industries, 1939-63
C-30. Average weekly earnings, gross and spendable, in manufacturing
industries, in current and 1963 prices, 1939-63
C-31. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries, 1930-63
C-32. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data, 1947-63
Production and business activity:
O 3 3 . Industrial production indexes, market groupings, 1947-63
C-34. Industrial production indexes, industry groupings, 1947-63
C-35. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1939 and 1945-64.
O 3 6 , New construction activity, 1929-63

National
C-l.
C-2.
O3.
G-4.
C-5.

715-113 O-64-14



203

Page
207
208
210
212
213
214
216
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
226
227
228
229
230
232
233
234
235
236
237
239
240
241
242
243
244
245
246
247
249
250

Production and business activity—Continued
Page
C-37. New public construction activity, 1929-63
251
C-38. New housing starts and applications for financing, 1929-63
252
G-39. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade, 1947-63
254
C-40. Manufacturers' sales, inventories, and orders, 1947-63
255
Prices:
C-41. Wholesale price indexes, 1929-63
256
C-42. Wholesale price indexes, by stage of processing, 1947-63
258
G-43. Consumer price indexes, by major groups, 1929-63
260
C-44. Consumer price indexes, by special groups, 1935-63
261
Money supply, credit, and finance:
C-45. Money supply, 1947-63
262
C-46. Bank loans and investments, 1929-63
263
C-47. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves, 1929-63
264
C-48. Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-63
265
C-49. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding, 1929-63..
267
C-50. Instalment credit extended and repaid, 1946-63
268
C-51. Mortgage debt outstanding, by type of property and of financing,
1939-63
269
C-52. Net public and private debt, 1929-63
270
Government finance:
C-53. U.S. Government debt, by kind of obligation, 1929-63
271
C-54. Estimated ownership of U.S. Government obligations, 1939-63
.
272
C-55. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt, 1946-63
273
C-56. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt, 1929-65. 274
C-57. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function, fiscal
years 1946-65
275
C—58. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public, 1946—65. 276
C-59. Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts, 1929-63
277
C-60. Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income
accounts, 1946-65
278
C—61. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in
the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with
receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts, fiscal
years 1961-65
279
C-62. State and local government revenues and expenditures, selected fiscal
years, 1927-62
280
Corporate profits and finance:
C-63. Profits before and after taxes, all private corporations, 1929-63
281
C-64. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales,
private manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1959-63. . .
282
C-65. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity and
to sales, private manufacturing corporations, by asset size class,
1959-63
284
C-66. Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1952-63
285
C-67. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations, 1939-63.. 286
C-68. State and municipal and corporate securities offered, 1934-63
287
C-69. Common stock prices, earnings, and yields and stock market credit,
1939-63
288
C-70. Business population and business failures, 1929-63
289




204

Agriculture:
Page
G-71. Income from agriculture, 1929-63
290
C-72. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, and parity ratio,
1929-63
291
G-73. Farm production indexes, 1929-63
293
C-74. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs, 1929-63
294
G-75. Farm population, employment, and productivity, 1929—63
295
C-76. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture, 1929-64
296
International statistics:
G-77. United States balance of payments, 1947-63
297
C-78. Major U.S. Government foreign assistance, by type and by area,
total postwar period and fiscal years 1959-63
299
C-79. United States merchandise exports and imports, by economic category,
1949 and 1958-63
300
C-80. United States merchandise exports and imports, by area, 1949 and
1958-63
301
C-81. Gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international organizations, 1949, 1953, and 1958-63
302
C—82. U.S. gold stock and holdings of convertible foreign currencies by
U.S. monetary authorities, 1949-63
303
C-83. Price changes in international trade, 1955-63
304

Note.—Detail in these tables will not necessarily add to totals because of
rounding.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii are not included unless specifically noted.
Unless otherwise noted, all dollar figures are in current prices.




205




NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE
TABLE G-l.—Gross national product or expenditure, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars]

Gross private domestic investment 8
Year or
quarter

Total
gross
national
product

Net
exports
of
goods
and Total
services'

Personal
New construccontion
sumption
expendi- Total
tures1

3.6
2.1
1.6

1929..
1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..
1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939..
1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..
1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..
1950..
1951.
1952.
1953..
1954..
1955..
1956..
1957..
1958..
1959.
I960..
1961..
1962..
1963«.

104.4
91.1
76.3
58.5
56.0
65.0
72.5
82.7
90.8
85.2
91.1
100.6
125.8
159.1
192.5
211.4
213.6
210.7
234.3
259.4
258.1
284.6
329.0
347.0
365.4
363.1
397.5
419.2
442.8
444.5
482.7
502.6
518.2
554.9
585.0

79.0
71.0
61.3
49.3
46.4
51.9
56.3
62.6
67.3
64.6
67.6
71.9
81.9
89.7
100.5
109.8
121.7
147.1
165.4
178.3
181.2
195.0
209.8
219.8
232.6
238.0
256.9
269.9
285.2
293.2
313.5
328.2
336.8
355.4
373.2

16.2
10.3
5.5
.9
1.4
2.9
6.3
8.4
11.7
6.7
9.3
13.2
18.1
9.9
5.6
7.1
10.4
28.1
31.5
43.1
33.0
50.0
56.3
49.9
50.3
48.9
63.8
67.4
66.1
56.6
72.7
71.8
69.0
78.8
82.3

8.7
6.2
4.0
1.9
1.4
1.7
2.3
3.3
4.4
4.0
4.8
5.5
6.6
3.7
2.3
2.7
3.8
11.0
15.3
19.5
18.8
24.2
24.8
25.5
27.6
29.7
34.9
35.5
36.1
35.5
40.
40.7
41.6
44.4
46.6

1.1
4.8
7.5
10.1
9.6
14.1
12.5
12.8
13.8
15.4
18.7
17.7
17.0
18.0
22.3
21.1
21.0
23.2
25.0

1961: I
II--.
III...

500.4
512.5
521.9
537.8
544.5
552.4
556.8
565.2
571.8
579.6
588.7
600.0

330.7
334.9
337.9
343.8
348.8
352.9
356.7
362.9
367.4
370.4
374.9
380.0

59.6
66.6
72.0
77.6
77.3
79.6
78.9
78.8
77.8
80.7
83.7
87.0

39.3
41.0
42.6
43.2
41.7
44.5
46.0
45.0
43.7
45.8
47.9
49.1

19.0
20.1
21.9
22.8
21.2
23.3
24.2
23.7
22.7
24.8
25.9
26.7

1.0
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.7
3.0
3.5
1.7

Government purchases of goods
and services

5.1
4.1
2.4
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.7
2.5
2.0
2.1
2.5
3.1
2.0
1.4
1.9
2.7
6.3
7.7
9.3
9.2
10.1
12.3
12.7
13.8
14.3
16.:
17.8
19.0
17.4
17.9
19.7
20.5
21.2
21.6

5.8
4.5
2.8
1.6
1.6
2.3
3.1
4.2
5.1
3.6
4.2
5.5
6.9
4.3
4.0
5.4
7.7
10.7
16.
18.9
17.
18.9
21.3
21.3
22.3
20.8
23.1
27.
28.5
23.1
25.9
27.6
25.5
28.8
31.0

1.7
-.4
-1.3
-2.6
-1.
-1.1

State
and
local

0.8
.7
.2
.2
.2
.4
-.1
-.1
.1
1.1
.9

1.0
2.2
-.9
.4
2.2
1.5
4.5
1.1
1.8
- . 8 -2.
-1.0 -2.1
-1.1 -1.4
6.4
4.9
-.5
9.0
4.7
3.5
3.8
-3.1
6.8
.6
2.4
10.2
1.3
3.1
4
.4
-1.6
i!o
5.8
1.1
4.
2.9
1.6
4.9
-2.0
1.2
6.6 - . 8
3.0
3.5
4.4
1.9
3.8
5.5
4.4
4.

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

1962: I

nil I!
IV—
1963: I
II....

rv«Il

1
2 See

20.3
20.8
20.7
20.4
20.5
21.2
21.7
21.2
21.0
21.0
22.0
22.4

24.6 - 4 . 3
1.1
24.5
3.5
25.8
7.2
27.1
27.4
8.1
6.5
28.7
3.6
29.3
4.0
29.9
29.0
5.1
4.3
30.7
4.2
31.6
32.6
5.3

Table C-9 for major components.

5.4
4.3
4.1
4.0
3.3
4.4
4.1
3.3
3.6
4.8
4.3
5.0

104.7
106.8
107.9
112.3
115.1
115.5
117.0
120.2
123.0
123.8
125.7
128.0

55.4
57.1
57.1
59.8
61.8
61.9
62.4
63.6
65.5
66.5
66.4
67.0

47.5 8.5
49.0 8.7
48.6 9.1
50.9 9.5
52.5 9.9
52.9 9.8
53.5 9.7
54.3 10.4
56.4 10.1
56.7 10.6
56.7 10.8
57.3 10.8

0.6
.6
.6
.6

.7
.8
.8
1.1
1.0
.8
1.2
1.0

49.3
49.7
50.8
52.5
53.3
53.6
54.6
56.6
57.5
57.3
59.4
61.0

See Table C-10 for further detail and explanation of components.
8 For 1929-45, net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated, since foreign
net transfers by Government were negligible during that period. See Table C-7 for exports and imports
separately.
* Prior to 1959, this category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the Budget of the
United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO, 1965. Beginning with 1959, they differ because
of inclusion of space program expenditures in this table; these expenditures, small in 1959-61, amounted
to $1.6 billion in 1962 and $3.0 billion in 1963. See also Table C-57.
» Less than $50 million.
«Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




207

TABLE G-2.—Gross national product or expenditure, in 1963 prices, 1929-63 1
[Billions of dollars, 1963 prices]
Personal consumption
expenditures

Year or quarter

Gross private domestic investment

Total
New
gross
national
Dura- Nonproduct Total
lurablc
ble durable Services Total
goods goods
Total

construction

Producers'
Eesidurable
dential Other equipnonment
farm

Change
in business
inventories

1929.

214.2

145.2

15.7

72.0

57.4

42.9

26.1

10.3

15.7

13.5

3.4

1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934.

194.6
180.3
153.8
149.9
164.2

136.6
132.4
120.5
117.7
123.7

12.5
10.9
8.2
8.0
9.1

68.5
68.2
62.8
60.9
65.0

55.5
53.4
49.5
48.8
49.6

29.5
18.4
5.3
5.8
10.0

6.1
5.0
2.5
1.9
2.2

13.3
8.6
5.1
3.9
4.2

10.7
7.2
4.2
4.5
6.1

-.6
-2.4
-6.5
-4.4
-2.5

1935.
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.

179.8
204.9
215.6
206.3
223.2

131.3
144.5
149.6
147.1
155.3

11.3
13.9
14.6
11.8
14.1

68.6
76.4
79.0
80.4
84.7

51.4
54.2
56.0
54.9
56.6

19.0
26.0
32.1
19.1
26.4

19.4
13.6
7.6
5.8
6.4
8.4
11.7
14.1
12.5
15.1

3.7
5.4
5.9
6.1
8.1

4.7
6.3
8.2
6.5
7.0

8.1
11.1
12.7
8.8
10.3

2.5
3.1
5.4
-2.3
1.1

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

242.0
281.8
323.2
364.4
391.1

163.5
174.3
170.8
175.4
181.8

16.2
18.7
11.5
10.0
9.1

88.6
94.5
96.4
99.4
103.7

58.8
61.1
62.9
66.1
68.9

34.9
44.1
22.6
13.5
15.2

16.8
18.9
9.7
5.5
6.1

8.7
9.4
4.3
2.1
1.7

8.1
9.5
5.4
3.4
4.3

13.2
15.6
9.0
8.3
11.1

4.9
9.6
3.9
-.3
-2.0

1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949.

383.1
332.0
331.3
344.4
345.5

194.4
217.5
221.1
225.3
231.0

10.4
20.5
24.7
26.0
27.9

112.0
118.8
116.2
116.0
117.3

72.1
78.2
80.2
83.3
85.8

21.0
51.2
51.2
59.9
47.8

8.4
21.6
24.7
28.1
27.7

2.2
8.7
11.5
13.6
13.4

6.2
12.9
13.3
14.5
14.3

15.4
19.5
26.3
27.6
24.0

-2.9
10.1
.2
4.3
-3.8

1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.

374.0
404.9
420.8
440.1
431.4

244.9
247.2
253.7
265.8
269.3

34.0
30.9
30.1
35.0
34.3

120.5
122.7
126.9
130.6
131.7

90.4
93.6
96.7
100.2
103.3

67.5
70.0
61.5
62.2
59.8

33.8
32.3
32.2
34.2
36.8

18.5
15.3
15.3
16.2
18.3

15.3
17.0
16.9
18.0
18.5

25.8
26.6
26.4
27.3
25.2

7.9
11.0
2.9
.8
-2.2

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

464.9
474.7
483.9
476.7
508.4

289.3
299.0
307.0
309.7
327.2

41.9
40.3
40.8
37.6
43.4

138.4
143.8
146.3
147.1
153.1

109.0
114.9
119.8
125.0
130.7

75.8
75.3
70.8
59.9
74.9

41.9
40.1
39.5
38.4
42.5

21.6
19.3
18.3
19.3
23.3

20.3
20.7
21.2
19.1
19.2

27.3
30.2
29.8
23.5
25.9

6.6
5.0
1.6
-2.0
6.5

1960.
1961.
1962

521.3
531.2
563.6
585.0

337.8
344.3
360.1
373.2

44.7
43.9
48.2
51.5

156.0
158.1
163.1
167.2

137.1
142.3
143.7
154.5

73.4
70.3
79.4
82.3

42.5
43.0
45.3
46.6

21.7
21.6
23.6
25.0

20.8
21.4
21.7
21.6

27.4
25.5
28.9
31.0

3.4
1.8
6.3
4.7

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I—II—
ILL.
IV..

514.9
526.0
534.5
549.5

338.6
342.7
345.3
350.5

41.6
43.3
44.0
46.7

156.6
157.8
158.4
159.7

140.4
141.7
142.9
144.1

61.0
67.9
73.1
78.8

41.0
42.4
43.9
44.5

19.8
20.7
22.4
23.4

21.2
21.7
21.5
21.1

24.5
24.5
25.8
27.2

-4.4
1.0
3.4
7.2

1962: I . . . .
II...
III..
IV..

555.2
562.2
564.6
571.4

354.9
358.2
361.2
366.0

47.4
47.3
47.6
50.6

161.2
162.7
164.2
164.3

146.3
148.2
149.4
151.1

78.3
80.2
79.3
79.5

42.9
45.5
46.7
45.6

21.8
23.7
24.5
24.0

21.1
21.8
22.2
21.6

27.5
28.6
29.3
30.1

7.9
6.1
3.4
3.7

1963: I..._
II...
III..
IV e.

575.7
580.8
587.5
595.7

369.0
370.8
374.3
378.1

50.9
50.9
50.8
53.6

165.6
166.1
168.4
168.2

152.4
153.8
155.2
156.4

78.4
80.9
83.4
86.4

44.2
46.0
47.6
48.6

22.9
24.9
25.8
26.4

21.2
21.1
21.9
22.2

29.0
30.6
31.6
32.5

5.1
4.3
4.2
6.3

See footnotes at end of table.




208

1

TABLE C-2.—-Gross national product or expenditure, in 1963 prices> 1929-63

—Continued

[Billions of dollars, 1963 prices]
Government purchases of goods and services
Net
exports
of goods
and
services 2

Year or quarter

Federal
Total
Total»

National
defense 8 *

Other

State and
local

1929

1.0

25.0

3.9

09

09

21.2

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

.8
.3

27.7
29.2
27.7
26.8
30.6

4.4
4.8

09
09

09

23.3
24.3
22.6
19.9
21.6

31.0
36.1
34.9
38.7
40.5

8.8
13.5
12.6
15.0
14.4

41.7
63.4
132.1
181.5
200.3

17.2
40.3
111.1
162. 4
181.5

32.7
105.4
159.5
178.4

172.7
58.4
49.6
56.2
63.0

153.6
37.0
25.4
30.0
33.1

60.3
84.3
103.2
111.8
100.1

_
_

_

.2
-.4

-.1

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

-1.4
-1.6
-1.0
1.5

.

.9

_

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

1.8
.1

-2.4
-6.1
-6.2
-4.9
4.9
9.4

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

3.0
3.7

-

.

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

1.2
3.4

2.4
.2
2.2
2.3

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

4.1
5.5
1.3

r

-.6
3.4

I960
1961
1962
1963 •

—

4.0

_

3.6
4.4

5.1
6.9

9.1

09
09

(5)

C
O

09

(*)

09

(6)
3.5

(5)

09
09

(5)

10.9

22.2
22.6
22.3
23.6
26.1

3.0
3.2

24.5
23.1
21.0
19.1
18.8

151.5
28.9
16.6
17.2
20.0

2.1
8.1
8.8
12.8
13.2

19.1
21.4
24.2
26.2
29.9

28.3
51.5
69.8
77.1
62.4

20.7
44.6
61.0
65.1
53.6

7.6
6.9

8.9
12.0

32.0
32.8
33.3
34.7
37.7

97.4
96.3
100.6
105.7
106.9

57.1
54.7
56.7
58.3
57.6

48.8
47.8
50.2
49.1
49.1

6.8
6.5

106.6
112.6
120.4
125.1

55.5
58.8
64.2
66.4

47.1
49.6
54.0
55.8

6.2

11.0
7.6
5.7

8.3
9.2

8.5
8.4
9.2

10.3
10.6

40.4
41.7
43.9
47.4
49.3
51.1
53.8
56.2
58.8

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
5.4
3.6
3.6
3.5

109.9
111.7
112.4
116.7

56.6
58. 5
58.5
61.7

47.9
49.6
49.2
51.9

8.7
8.9
9.3
9.8

53.3
53.3
53.8
55.0

-

2.7
4.4
4.2
3.3

119.3
119.4
119.9
122.7

63.9
64.0
64.0
65.0

53.6
53.8
54.0
54.4

10.3
10.2
9.9
10.6

55.5
55.4
56.0
57.6

-

3.6
4.8
4.3
5.0

124.7
124.3
125.5
126.2

66.3
66.9
66.4
65.8

56.1
56.3
55.6
55.2

10.2
10.7
10.8
10.6

58.4
57.4
59.1
60.4

1961: I
II
III
IV
1962: I
II
III

IV
1963: I
II
HI
.
IV •

--

1
These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in 1954
prices. (See Tables C-3 and C-6.) This was done by major components, using the implicit price indexes
converted to a 1963 base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components, this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II, and
for the series on change in business inventories.
For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in 1954 prices, see U. S. Income and
Output, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, 1958.
2
For 1929-45, net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated, since foreign
net transfers by Government were negligible during that period.
3
Net of Government sales, which are not shown separately in this table. See Table C-l for Government
sales in current prices.
* See footnote 4, Table O-l.
5
8
Not available separately.
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




209

TABLE G-3.—Gross national product or expenditure, in 1954 prices, 1929-63

l

[Billions of dollars, 1954 prices]
Gross private domestic investment
Personal consumption
expenditures
Total
gross
Year or quarter national
product

New construction

Total

ProChange
ducers' in busiResiness
durable
Dur- Non- Serv- Total
dential
invenTotal non- Other equipable durable ices
tories
ment
goods goods
farm

1929..

181.8

128.1

14.9

65.3

48.0

35.0

20.9

8.7

12.2

11.1

3.0

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

164.5
153.0
130.1
126.6
138.5

120.3
116.6
106.0
103.5
108.9

11.8
10.3
7.8
7.5
8.6

62.1
61.8
56.9
55.2
58.8

46.4
44.6
41.4
40.8
41.5

23.6
15.0
3.9
4.0
7.4

15.4
10.9
6.0
4.6
5.1

5.1
4.2
2.1
1.6
1.9

10.4
6.6
3.9
3.0
3.2

5.9
3.5
3.7
5.0

-.7
-1.8
-5.6
-4.2
-2.8

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939..

152.9
173.3
183.5
175.1

115.8
127.7
132.1
129.9
137.3

10.7
13.1
13.8
11.2
13.3

62.1
69.2
71.6
72.8
76.7

42.9
45.3
46.8
45.9
47.2

16.1
21.0
27.0
15.5
21.6

6.7
9.4
11.3
10.1
12.2

3.1
4.6
5.0
5.1
6.8

3.6
4.9
6.3
5.0
5.4

6.7
9.2
10.5
7.3
8.5

2.6
2.4
5.2
-1.8
1.0

1940..
1941..
1942_.
1943..
1944..

205.8
238.1
266.9
296.7
317.9

144.6
154.3
150.8
154.6
160.2

15.3
17.6
10.9

80.2
85.6
87.3
90.0
94.0

49.1
51.1
52.6
55.2
57.6

29.0
36.7
18.8
10.7
12.3

13.6
15.3
7.8
4.4
4.8

7.3
7.9
3.6
1.7
1.4

6.3
7.4
4.2
2.7
3.4

10.9
12.9
7.4
6.9
9.2

4.5
8.6
3.6
-.6
-1.7

1945..
1946..
1947-.
1948..
1949..

314.0
282.5
- 282.3
293.1
292. 7

171.4
192.3
195.6
199.3
204.3

9.8

19.4
23.3
24.6
26.3

101.4
107.6
105.3
105.1
106.3

60.2
05.3
67.0
69.6
71.7

17.0
42.4
41.5
49.8
38.5

17.3
19.9
22.7
22.3

1.8
7.3
9.6
11.4
11.2

4.8
10.0
10.3
11.2
11.1

12.7
16.1
21.7
22.8
19.8

-2.4
9.0
-.1
4.4
-3.6

1950..
1951-.
1952..
1953..
1954..

318.1
- 341.8
353. 5
-369.0
- 363.1

216.8
218.5
224.2
235.1
238.0

32.1
29.2
28.5
33.1
32.4

109.2
111.2
115.0
118.3
119.3

75.5
78.2
80.8
83.7
86.3

55.9
57.7
50.4
50.6
48.9

27.4
26.0
26.0
27.6
29.7

15.5
12.9
12.8
13.6
15.4

11.9
13.2
13.2
14.0
14.3

21.3
22.0
21.8
22.5
20.8

7.2
9.7
2.6
.5
-1.6

1955..
1956..
1957..
1958-.
1959..

392. 7
400.9
408.6
.4.01.3
428.6

256.0
264.3
271.2
273.2
288.9

39.6
38.0
38.5
35.5
41.0

125.4 91.0
130.3 96.0
132.6 100.1
133.3 104.4
138.7 109.2

62.5
61.7
58.1
49.0
61.7

33.9
32.3
31.8
31.1
34.4

18.2
16.2
15.3
16.2
19.5

15.7
16.1
16.5
14.8
14.9

22.5
25.0
24.6
19.4
21.4

6.1
4.5
1.6
-1.5
5.9

I960..
1961..
1962..
1963 8

- 439.9
447.7
474.8
493.0

298.1
303.6
317.6
329.1

42.2
41.5
45.6
48.7

141.4
143.3
147.8
151.4

60.2
57.5
65.2
67.7

34.4
34.7
36.7
37.7

18.2
18.2
19.8
21.0

16.2
16.6
16.8
16.8

22.7
21.0
23.8
25.5

3.1
1.7
4.8
4.4

9.4
8.6

114.5
118.9
124.3
129.0

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I — .
II—
III..
IV..

434.0
443.4
450.4
463.1

298.5
302.2
304.5
309.2

39.3
40.9
41.6
44.1

141.9
142.9
143.5
144.7

117.3
118.4
119.4
120.4

49.7
55.6
59.9
64.7

33.1
34.2
35.5
36.0

16.6
17.4
18.8
19.6

16.5
16.9
16.7
16.4

20.2
20.2
21.3
22.4

-3.6
1.2
3.1
6.3

1962: I....
II—
III..
IV..

467.8
474.0
475.6
481.4

313.0
315.9
318.6
322.9

44.7
44.7
45.0
47.8

146.0
147.4
148.8
148.9

122.3
123.8
124.8
126.2

64.4
66.0
64.8
65.2

34.7
36.8
37.8
36.9

18.3
19.9
20.6
20.2

16.4
16.9
17.2
16.8

22.7
23.6
24.2
24.8

7.0
5.7
2.9
3.4

1963: I—.
II...
III..
IV 5

485.3
489.4
495.1
502.3

325.5
327.0
330.1
333. 6

48.1
48.0
48.0
50.6

150.1
150.5
152.6
152.4

127.3
128.5
129.6
130. 6

64.6
66.4
68.6
71.3

35.7
37.3
38.6
39.4

19.2
20.9
21.6
22.1

16.5
16.4
17.0
17.2

24.0
25.3
26.1
26.9

4.9
3.8
4.0
5.0

See footnotes at end of table.




210

TABLE C-3.—Gross national product or expenditure, in 1054 prices,

1929-631—Continued

[Billions of dollars, 1954 prices]

Year or quarter

Net exports of goods and
services*
Net
exports

Exports

Imports

Government purchases of
goods and services
Total

State
Federal 3 and local

Gross
private
product *

0.2

11.1

10.9

18.5

2.9.

15.6

171.5

1930.
1931..
1932.
1933.
1934.

.2
-.3
-.3
-.8
-.6

9.9
8.4
6.8
6.8
6.9

9.7
8.7
7.1
7.7
7.5

20.5
21.6
20.5
19.9
22.8

3.4
3.7
3.9
5.3
6.9

17.1
17.9
16.6
14.6
15.8

153.7
142.0
119.4
115.0
125.1

1935..
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.

-1.9
-2.2
-1.6
.8
.3

7.3
7.7
9.3
9.3
9.5

9.2
9.8
10.9
8.5
9.2

23.0
26.9
26.0
28.8
30.1

6.7
10.3
9.6
11.4
11.0

16.3
16.6
16.4
17.4
19.1

138.7
156.6
167.8
158.0
172.1

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

i.i
-.6
-2.9
-6.6
-6.7

10.5
10.6
7.6
6.7
7.4

9.4
11.3
10.5
13.2
14.1

31.1
47.7
100.1
137.9
152.2

13.1
30.7
84.7
123.9
138.4

18.0
16.9
15.4
14.0
13.8

188.1
216.0
234.8
246.4
259.8

1945..
1946-.
1947..
19481949_.

-5.6
3.8
8.0
2.0
2.6

9.8
15.8
19.2
14.7
15.1

15.3
12.0
11.1
12.8
12.4

131.2
43.9
37.2
42.1
47.2

117.1
28.2
19.4
22.9
25.3

14.0
15.8
17.8
19.2
21.9

257.0
252.7
259.6
270.3
268.7

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..

.2
2.2
1.2
-.9
1.0

14.5
17.3
16.9
16.4
17.5

14.2
15.1
15.7
17.3
16.5

45.1
63.3
77.7
84.3
75.3

21.6
39.3
53.3
58.8
47.5

23.5
24.1
24.5
25.5
27.7

293.3
311.1
320.4
336.2
330.8

1955...
1956.-.
1957...
1958...
1959...

.9
2.5
3.8
-.2
-2.1

19.2
22.4
24.4
21.4
21.9

18.3
19.8
20.6
21.6
24.1

73.2
72.3
75.5
79.3
80.1

43.5
41.7
43.2
44.5
43.9

29.7
30.6
32.2
34.8
36.2

360.4
368.2
375.4
367.9
394.8

1960...
1961...
1962...
1963*..

1.7
2.3
1.8
2.5

24.9
25.5
27.0
28.7

23.2
23.3
25.2
26.2

79.9
84.3
90.2
93.8

42.3
44.8
49.0
50.6

37.6
39.5
41.2
43.2

405.2
412.1
437.7
455.1

1929.

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I...
II
III
IV

3.6
1.9
1.9
1.7

25.9
24.5
25.8
26.0

22.3
22.5
23.9
24.3

82.3
83.7
84.2
87.4

43.1
44.6
44.6
47.0

39.1
39.1
39.5
40.4

398.9
408.1
414.6
426.6

1962: I...
II
III
IV_

.9
2.6
2.3
1.4

25.7
27.6
27.6
26.9

24.8
25.1
25.3
25.5

89.4
89.5
89.9
91.9

48.7
48.8
48.8
49.6

40.7
40.7
41.1
42.3

430.7
436.8
438.3
444.2

1963: I...
II
III
IV

1.8
2.8
2.3
3.0

26.7
28.7
29.4
29.9

24.9
25.9
27.1
26.9

93.4
93.2
94.1
94.5

50.6
51.0
50.7
50.2

42.9
42.1
43.4
44.4

447.9
451.6
457.0
464.0

1
For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in 1954 prices, see U.S. Income and
Output, A Supplement to the Survey of Current BuMness, 1958. See Table C-6 for implicit price deflators.
2
For 1929-45, net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated, since foreign
net transfers by Government were negligible during that period.
8
Net of Government sales.
* Gross national product less compensation of general government employees; i.e., gross product accruing
from domestic business, households, and institutions, and from the rest of the world.
* Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




211

TABLE C-4.—Gross national product by major type of product, 7947-63
[Billions of dollars]
Goods output

Year or quarter

Total
gross
na- Final Inventory
tional
change
prod
uct

Durable
goods

Total

Nondurable
goods

1947.
1948..
1949.

234.3 234.8
259.4 254.7
258.1 261.1

--0. 5 143. 8 144.3 -0.5 47.4 46.0 1 4
0.
:
.
98.2 -1.8 71.8 18.7
.
4.7 157.0 152.3 4.7 49.8 48.9
7.2
9 107. 103.4 3.8 78.1 24.3
-3.1 149.3 152.4 -3.1 47.9 49.9 -2.1 101.5 102.4 -1.0 83.5 25.2

1950..
1951.
1952.
1953..
1954..

284.6
329.0
347.0
365.4
363.1

277.8
318.7
343.9
364.9
364.8

163. 6 156.8
10. 2 191. 8 181. 610.2
3.1 198.2 195.2 3.1
4 206. 9 206. 4 .4
>
.
-1.6 197.4 199.0 - 1 .

60.7
74.4
75.6
79.8
71.6

56.7 4.0 102.9 100.1 2.8 89.8
3.3 102.9
67.5 6. 117.4
6.9
74.5 1.2 122. 120. 7 1.9 112.3
2.6
78.9
9 127. i 127. 5 - . 5 119.5
7.0
74.1 -2. 5 125.9 125.0 , 9 124.1

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959..

397.5 391.7
419.2 414.5
442.8 441.2

8 217. 211.4 5.8
7.2
7 227. 223.0 4.7
7.6
6 238. 2 236.6 1.6
8.
-2.0 229.4 231. 4- 2 . 0
6. 6 250. 6 244.0 6.6

84.3
89.6
94.5
80.4
95.0

81.3 3.0 132.9 130.2 2.7 133.4 46.9
86.7 2.8
136.2 1.8 143.3 48.2
93.4 1.0 143. 7143.2
5 154.5 50.1
83.3 - 2 . 8 149.0 148.1
9 164.2 50.9
91.5 3. 5 155. 6 152. 5 3.1 175.8 56.3

1960.
1961.
1962.
19631

502.6
518.2
554.
585.0

444. 5 446.5
482.7 476.1
499.1
516.3
549.3
580. 3

3. 5 257.1 253.7
1.9 259. 1 257. 3
>
.
5. 5 278. 3 272. 8
;
.
4. 7 291 . 7 286. 9
.

3.5 96.5
1.9 93.4
5. 5 104.4
4.7 111.7

1.1
2.2
2.6
2.8

188.8
200.
214.
228.0

56.7
58.6
62.1
65.3

162.2
162.5
163.3
165.8

2.3
2. 6
1. 5
2. 5

195.3
199.
201
205.

56.7
57.7
59.2
60.9

94.2 2.3 160. 6 159.5
93.8 - . 4 165.7 163.5
101. 5
109.8

31.2
34.2
36.4
39.0
41.6

2.9 173.9 171.3
1.9 179.9 177.1

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

II.
III
IV

500.4
512.5
521.9
537.8

504.7
511.4
518.3
530.5

L
- 4 .. 3 248. 5 252. 8
4
1. 1255.» 7 254. 6
.
3.5 261.1 257.6
7. 2 271.2 264.0

1962: I__
II.
III
IV

544.5
552.4
556.8
565.2

536.3
546.0
553.1
561.2

8.1 276.3 268.1
6. 5 277.2 270. 7
I.
6 278. 4 274. 8
..
0 281. 4 277. 4

8.1 104.8
6. 5 102.9
1.9
3. 6 105.1 102.6
4. 0 104.8 103. 5

4. 8
3.1
2. 5
1.3

171. 5 168.2
174.2 170.8
72
173. 3 172.1
176.6 174.0

3.3
3.4
1.2
2.6

209.0 59.2
213. 5 61.8
215.2 63.1
220.2

1963: I . .
II.
III
IV

571.8
579.6
588. 7
600.0

566.6
575.4
584.5
594.7

5.1
» 8 281. 7
.
4. 3 289. 8 285. 6
I.
4.2 292.4 288. 2
5. 3 297. 7 292. 3

5.1
4. 3
4.
5.3

1.1 179.4 175.3
3. 0 177. 3 176.0
'.
1. 8 180. 178.3
1.8 182. 5 178. 9

4.0
1.3
2.4
3.6

222.5 62.5
226. 5 63.3
229.6 66.7
233. 5

1961: I . .

-4.3
1.1
3.5
7.2

84.0
90.5
96.4
102.9

107. 5
112.6
111.8
115.2

i Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




212

90.6 - 6 . 6
92.1 - 1 . 5
94.3 2.0
98.2 4. 7

106. 3
109. 6
110.0
113.4

164.5
165.2
164.8
168.3

TABLE C-5.—Gross national product by major type of product, in 1954 prices, 1947-63 l
[Billions of dollars, 1954 prices]

Year or
quarter

Gocds output
Total
gross
Total
Durable goods
Nondurable goods Serv- Conna- Final Inventory
tional
ices struction
change
prodInvenInvenInvenuct
Total Final tory Total Final tory Total Final tory
goods sales change
change
change
282.3 282.4 - 0 . 1
293.1 288.7 4.4
292.7 296.3 - 3 . 6

163.3 163.4 - 0 . 1
167.7 163.4
4.4
162.3 165.9 - 3 . 6

55.8
55.4
51.9

1.5
54.3
54.6
.8
54.3 - 2 . 4

107.5 109.2 - 1 . 6
112.3 108.8
3.5
110.5 111.6 - 1 . 2

94.7
97.2
100.7

24.3
28.2
29.7
35.4
36.0
36.9
38.8
41.6

318.1
341.8
353.5
369.0
363.1

7.2
310.9
332.1 9.7
350.9
2.6
368.5
.5
364.8 - 1 . 6

177.6
191.7
196.8
207.7
197.4

170.4
7.2
182.0 9.7
194.2
2.6
207.2
.5
199.0 - 1 . 6

4.3
65.3 61.0
7.1
74.6 «7.4
1.2
75.1 73.9
80.8 79.8 1.0
71.6 74.1 - 2 . 5

112.3
117.1
121.8
126.9
125.9

109.4
114.5
120.3
127.4
125.0

2.9
2.6
1.5
.9

105.0
114.2
119.8
122.5
124.1

392.7
400.9
403.6
401.3
428.6

386.6
6.1
4.5
396.4
1.6
406.9
402.8 - 1 . 5
5.9
422.7

216.9
221.4
223.4
211.5
228.8

210.8 6.1
217.0
4.5
221.7
1.6
213.1 - 1 . 5
222.9
5.9

83.1
84.9
85.5
71.7
82.9

80.1
3.0
82.3
2.7
84.5
1.0
74.1 - 2 . 4
80.0
3.0

133.8
136.5
137.9
139.8
145.9

130.7
134.7
137.2
139.0
143.0

3.1
1.8
.7
.8
2.9

130.2
135.5
141.2
145.2
151.4

45.6
43.9
44.0
44.5
48.3

439.9
447.7
474.8
493.0

436.8
446.0
470.1
488.6

3.1
1.7
4.8
4.4

233.0
233.2
249.1
259.6

229.9
231.5
244.4
255.1

84.2
81.3
91.0
97.3

82.2
81.6
88.5
95.6

148.8
151.9
158.1
162.3

147.7
149.8
155.9
159.5

1.1
2.0
2.2
2.8

158.8
165.3
174.4
180.7

48.1
49.2
51.4
52.8

3.1
1.7
4.8
4.4

2.1
-.3
2.6
1.7

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I
I
III—
IV..

434.0
443.4
450.4
463.1

437.6 - 3 . 6
442.2
1.2
447.3 3.1
456.8
6.3

223.9
230.4
234.7
243.8

227.5 - 3 . 6
229.2
1.2
231.6 3.1
237.5 6.3

73.2
78.8
83.7
89.7

78.9 - 5 . 7
80.1 - 1 . 3
81.9
1.8
85.6
4.0

150.7
151.6
151.0
154.1

148.6
149.2
149.8
151.8

2.1
2.5
1.3
2.3

162.2
164.3
166.1
168.5

47.9
48.6
49.6
50.8

1962: I
II—
Ill—
IV..

467.8
474.0
475.6
481.4

460.7
468.3
472.7
478.0

7.0
5.7
2.9
3.4

247.5
248.5
248.8
251.7

240.5
242.8
245.9
248.2

7.0
5.7
2.9
3.4

91.2
89.6
91.4
91.9

87.1
86.9
89.2
90.7

4.1
2.7
2.2
1.2

156.3
158.8
157.5
159.8

153.4
155.9
156.7
157.6

2.9
2.9
.8
2.2

170.9
174.2
174.8
177.5

49.3
51.3
52.0
52.2

485.3 480.4
_ — 489.4 485.6
II—
495.1 491.1
I I I — 502.3 497.3
IV 2 -

4.9
3.8
4.0
5.0

256.4
257.8
259.8
264.3

251.4
254.0
255.8
259.2

4.9
3.8
4.0
5.0

94.0
97.8
97.1
100.2

93.0
95.2
95.5
98.6

1.0
2.5
1.6
1.6

162.4
160.0
162.7
164.1

158.4
158.8
160.4
160.6

3.9
1.3
2.3
3.5

177.8
180.2
181.8
183.0

51.2
51.4
53.5
55.0

1963:

1
For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in 1954 prices, see U.S. Income and
utput, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, 1958.
2
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




213

TABLE C-6.—Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-63
[Index numbers, 1954=100]
Pe rsonal consumption
expenditures

Year or quarter

Gross
national
prodTotal
uct'

Gross private domestic
investment 1
New construction

NonDurable durable Services
goods goods
Total

Residential
nonfarm

Producers'
durable
Other equipment

1929

57.4

61.6

62.0

57.7

66.8

41.7

41.8

41.6

52.5

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

55.4
49.9
44.9
44.2
46.9

59.0
52.6
46.5
44.8
47.6

60.5
53.5
47.0
46.1
48.8

54.8
46.9
40.0
40.3
45.3

64.2
60.3
55.3
50.7
50.7

40.0
36.5
31.1
31.2
33.3

40.8
37.1
30.1
29.8
33.1

39.7
36.2
31.7
31.9
33.4

50.5
47.9
45.5
43.1
45.9

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

47.4
47.7
49.5
48.7
48.1

48.6
49.1
50.9
49.8
49.2

47.9
47.9
50.3
50.8
50.2

47.2
47.4
49.1
46.7
45.8

50.9
51.9
53.8
54.5
54.5

34.1
34.8
39.0
39.1
39.0

32.6
34.3
37.8
39.2
39.5

35.4
35.2
39.9
39.1
38.4

45.6
45.4
48.7
50.2
49.4

48.9
52.9
59.6
64.9
66.5

49.7
53.1
59.5
65.0
68.6

50.7
54.8
64.2
70.3
78.7

46.4
50.5
58.8
65.8
69.5

54.8
56.8
59.8
62.8
65.5

40.1
43.4
47.6
53.0
56.3

40.9
44.6
47.7
51.4
56.2

39.1
42.2
47.6
54.0
56.3

50.6
54.0
58.5
58.4
59.3

-.

68.0
74.6
83.0
88.5
88.2

71.0
76.5
84.6
89.5
88.7

82.8
82.0
88.4
92.4
93.5

72.2
78.8
88.7
94.0
90.9

67.1
71.1
76.8
81.7
83.6

57.8
63,7
76.6
85.9
84.3

60.0
65.3
78.4
88.6
85.9

56.9
62.6
74.8
83.1
82.6

60.0
66.7
76.8
83.1
87.0

-

89.5
96.2
98.1
99.0
100.0

89.9
96.0
98.0
99.0
100.0

94.6
101.1
102.2
99.4
100.0

91.4
99.0
100.1
99.7
100.0

85.9
89.8
93.6
97.7
100.0

88.3
95.3
98.4
100.1
100.0

90.9
97.5
100.3
101.3
100.0

85.1
93.1
96.5
98.9
100.0

89.0
96.8
97.5
99.0
100.0

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

101.2
104.6
108.4
110.8
112.6

100.4
102.1
105.1
107.3
108.5

100.1
101.3
104.7
104.9
106.3

99.5
100.9
103.9
106.3
106.0

101.7
104.1
107.0
109.4
112.5

103.1
109.8
113.5
114.2
116.8

103.0
109.0
111.2
111.2
114.3

103.2
110.7
115.7
117.6
120.1

102.6
109.0
115.7
118.9
121,4

1960
1961
1962
19633

114.2
115.7
116.9
118.7

110.1
111.0
111.9
113.4

106.3
105.3
105.9
105.8

107.4
108.3
109.2
110.4

114.8
116.1
117.3
119.7

118.4
119.7
121.1
123.5

115.5
115.9
117.1
119.2

121.6
123.8
125.9
128.8

121.6
121.3
121.0
121.1

1961: I —
IIIII.
IV.

115.3
115.6
115.9
116.1

110.8
110.8
111.0
111.2

105.0
105.4
105.6
105.2

108.5
108.1
108.2
108.4

115.6
116.0
116.3
116.7

118.9
119.6
120.0
120.2

114.4
115.9
116.5
116.6

123.4
123.5
124.0
124.4

121.7
121.5
121.3
•120.9

1962: I —
IIIII.
IV_.

116.4
116.6
117.1
117.4

111.4
111.7
112.0
112.4

105.7
106.3
106.0
105.6

108.8
108.9
109.2
109.9

116.7
117.0
117.5
118.0

120.3
120.8
121.7
121.7

116.0
116.9
117.9
117.6

125.1
125.4
126.2
126.7

120.8
121.5
121.5
120.3

1963: I . . .
IIIIIIV*

117.8
118.4
118.9
119.4

112.9
113.2
113.6
113.9

105.3
106.2
106.0
105.8

110.2
110.2
110.5
110.8

118.9
119.4
120.0
120.7

122.2
122.7
124.2
124.6

117.7
118.6
119.9
120.5

127.4
127.9
129.6
129.9

120.7
121.3
121.2
121.3

-.

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

-.

See footnotes at end of table.




214

TABLE C-6.—Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-63—Continued
[Index numbers, 1954= 100]
Exports and imports of
goods and services *

Government purchases of goods
and services

Year or quarter
Exports

Imports

Total

Federal

State and
local

1929. .

63.1

57.3

45.8

44.5

46.1

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934...

55.0
43.2
36.2
35.2
'43.0

48.9
39.7
32.3
29.3
33.8

44.9
42.7
39.4
40.3
42.9

41.8
41.7
38.2
38.3
43.2

45.5
43.0
39.7
41.1
42.8

44.7
46.0
48.9
46.5
46.9

36.0
36.9
41.1
38.0
38.6

43.4
44.0
45.1
44.5
44.2

43.7
46.9
47.3
46.1
46.8

43.3
42.2
43.8
43.4
42.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

51.2
56.1
64.9
68.1
73.3

40.9
43.0
48.9
51.3
53.3

45.2
51.9
59.6
64.3
63.4

47.0
55.1
61.4
65.6
64.3

43.9
46.2
49.8
52.7
54.6

1945. .
1946
1947
1948 .
1949

75.3
80.8
93.4
98.6
92.7

57.4
65.5
79.7
86.3
82.0

63.2
69.4
76.4
82.0
85.1

63.9
73.0
80.8
84.4
88.0

57.4
63.0
71.5
79.3
81.7

1950
1951
1952
1953i
1954

90.3
103.3
103.0
101.0
100.0

87.8
102.8
102.8
98.2
100.0

86.5
95.5
97.8
98.3
100.0

89.6
98.7
99.2
98.6
100.0

83.7
90.2
94.8
97.5
100.0

1955
1956 —
1957
1958
1959...

100.7
103.4
107.4
105.9
104.3

99.9
101.8
103.2
99.2
98.2

103.3
109.2
114.6
117.9
121.4

104.1
109.7
114.9
118.3
122.2

102.2
108.6
114.2
117.3
120.3

I960,
19611962
1963 * .

105.5
107.7
107.1
106.8

100.5
99.2
99.7
99.9

124.7
127.9
129.7
133.4

125.5
127.9
127.4
131.1

123.8
127.9
132.3
136.1

_

106.1
108.2
107.8
108.8

99.1
98.6
99.1
99.8

127.3
127.6
128.2
128.4

128.4
128.1
127.8
127.2

126.1
127.0
128.6
129.9

_

108.4
106.8
106.4
106.8

99.2
100.0
99.8
99.9

128.7
129 1
130.1
130.8

126.9
126.9
127.9
128.2

130.9
131.7
132.8
133.8

106.8
106.8
106.8
106.8

99.9
99.9
99.9
99.9

131.6
132.9
133.7
135.5

129.6
130.4
131.0
133.7

134.0
135.9
136.8
137.6

1935
1936
1937...
1938
1939 . .

_

. -

1961: I .
II
III
1962: I._
II
III

_

rv
1963: I
II
Ill

1
Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment, change in business
inventories, and net exports of goods and services.
For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in 1954 prices, see U.S. Income and

Output, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, 1958.
a
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.

NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




215

T A B L E C-7.—Gross national product: Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups,
1929-63
[Billions of dollars!
Business

Persons

International
For- Net exports of goods
eign
and services 2
net
transfers by
govNet
ExImern- exports ports ports
ment 2

Disposable
personal
income

Personal
consumption
expenditures

Personal
saving
or dissaving

Gross
retained
earnings^

Gross
private
domestic
investment

Excess
of receipts
or investment

1929..

83.1

79.0

4.2

11.5

16.2

-4.7

0.8

7.0

6.3

-0.8

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

74.4
63.8
48.7
45.7
52.0

71.0
61.3
49.3
46.4
51.9

3.4
2.5
—.6
-.6
.1

8.8
5.2
2.7
2.6
4.9

10.3
5.5
.9
1.4
2.9

-1.5
-.3
1.8
1.2
2.0

.7
.2
.2
.2
.4

5.4
3.6
2.5
2.4
3.0

4.8
3.4
2.3
2.3
2.5

-.7
-.2
-.2
-.2
-.4

1935..
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.

58.3
66.2
71.0
65.7
70.4

56.3
62.6
67.3
64.6
67.6

2.0
3.6
3.7
1.1
2.9

6.5
7.8
7.8
8.3

8.4
11.7
6.7
9.3

.1
-1.9
-4.0
1.2
-1.0

-.1
-.1
.1
1.1

3.3
3.5
4.6
4.3
4.4

3.3
3.6
4.5
3.2
3.5

.1
.1
-.1
-1.1

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

76.1
93.0
117.5
133.5
146.8

71.9
81.9
89.7
100.5
109.8

4.2
11.1
27.8
33.0
36.9

10.4
11.5
14.1
16.3
17.2

13.2
18.1
9.9
5.6
7.1

-2.8
-6.6
4.3
10.7
10.1

1.5
1.1
-.2
-2.2
-2.1

5.4
6.0
4.9
4.5
5.4

3.8
4.8
5.1
6.8
7.5

-1.5
-1.1
.2
2.2
2.1

1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949.

150.4
160.6
170.1
189.3
189.7

121.7
147.1
165.4
178.3
181.2

28.7
13.5
4.7
11.0
8.5

15.6
13.1
18.9
26.6
27.6

10.4
5.2
28.1 - 1 5 . 1
31.5 -12.6
43.1 -16.5
33.0 - 5 . 4

-1.4
4.9
9.0
3.5
3.8

7.4
12.8
17.9
14.5
14.0

7.9
8.9
11.0
10.2

1.4
-4.6
-8.9
-1.9
-.5

1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.

207.7
227.5
238.7
252.5
256.9

195.0
2,09.8
219.8
232.6
238.0

12.6
17.7
18.9
19.8
18.9

27.7
31.5
33.2
34.3
35.5

50.0
56.3
49.9
50.3

-22.3
-24.8
-16.6
-16.0
-13.4

.6
2.4
1.3
-.4
1.0

13.1
17.9
17.4
16.6
17.5

12.5
15.5
16.1
17.0
16.5

2.2
-.2
.2
2.0
.4

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958..
1959.

274.4
292.9
308.8
317.9
337.1

256.9
269.9
285.2
293.2
313.5

17.5
23.0
23.6
24.7
23.6

42.1
43.0
45.6
44 8
51.3

63.8
67.4
66.1
56 6
72.7

-21.8
-24.3
-20.5
-11.9
-21.4

1.1
2.9
4.9
1.2
-.8

19.4
23.1
26.2
22.7
22.9

18.3
20.2
21.3
21.5
23.6

.4
-1.5
-3.5
.1
2.3

I960..
1961..
1962..
1963 f

349.9
364.4
384.4
402.6

328.2
336.8
355.4
373.2

21.7
27.6
29.1
29.4

50.7
50.8
57.6
60. 6

71.8 - 2 1 . 1
69.0 -18.2
78.8 - 2 1 . 1
82.3 8 -21.7

3.0
4.4
3.8
4.4

26.3
27.5
28.9
30.6

23.3
23.1
25.1
26.2

-1.4
-2.9
-2.2
-2.7

Year or quarter

8

Excess
of
transfers or
net exports
()

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

1961: I...
II.
III
IV

355.3
362.0
367.2
373.1

330.7
334.9
337.9
343.8

24.5
27.1
29.2
29.3

48.0
50.8
51.1
53.5

59.6
66.6
72.0
77.6

-11.6
-15.8
-20.9
-24.1

1.6
L.5
L.5
L.6

5.4
4.3
4.1
4.0

27.5
26.5
27.8
28.3

22.1
22.2
23.7
24.2

-2.7
-2.6
-2.4

1962: I._
II
III
IV

377.3
382.7
386.5
391.4

348.8
352.9
356.7
362.9

28.5
29.8
29.7
28.5

56.6
57.2
57.4
59.4

77.3
79.6
78.9
78.8

-20.7
-22.4
-21.5
-19.5

L.8
L.5
L.5
L.5

3.3
4.4
4.1
3.3

27.9
29.5
29.4
28.8

24.6
25.0
25.3
25.5

-1.4
-3.0
-2.6
-1.7

1963: L II.
III
IV

394.5
400.0
404.4
411.3

367.4
370.4
374.9
380.0

27.1
29.6
29.5
31.3

59.3
59.6
61.9

77.8 - 1 8 . 5
80.7 - 2 1 . 1
83.7 - 2 1 . 9
87.0
(6)

1.5
1.8
1.7
2.0

3.6
4.8
4.3

28.6
30.7
31.4
31.9

24.9
25.9
27.1
26.9

-2.2
-3.1
-2.6
-3.0

(6)

See footnotes at end of table.




216

5.0

TABLE C—7.—Gross national product: Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups,
7929-63—Continued
[Billions of dollars]
Government

Expenditures

Receipts
Year or quarter

Net
receipts

1929.
1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934.
1937..
1938..
1939..
1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..
1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..
1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..
1955..
1956..
1957..
1958..
1959..
1960..
1961..
1962..
1963*.

Tax Trans- PurTransand
fers, chases
fers,
non- inter- of Total interextax re- est, goods pendi est,
ceipts and and tures and
subor ac- sub- ; servsidies !
cruals sidies ices

9.5
11.3
8.9
10.8
6.4
9.5
6.4
8.9
6.7
9.3
7.4
10.5
8.0
11.4
12.9
8.9
15.4
12.3
15.0
11.2
15.4
11.2
17.7
13.3
25.0
21.0
32.6
28.3
49.2
44.4
51.2
44.6
43.1
53.2
34.6
51.1
41.6
57.1
42.8
59.2
37.0
56.4
47.2
66.6
85.5
72.2
90.6
75.7
94.9
68.5
90.0
78.4
101.4
84.2
109.5
87.5
116.3
82.0
115.1
95.7
130.2
103.5
140.6
103.2
145.5
113.0
156.8
«123.4 «168.8

1.7
1.8
3.1
2.5
2.6
3.1
3.4
4.1
3.1
3.8
4.2
4.4
4.0
4.3
4.8
6.5
10.1
16.5
15.4
16.5
19.4
22.1
18.9
18.4
19.2
21.5
23.0
25.3
28.7
33.1
34.4
37.1
42.2
43.8
45.3

8.5
9.2
9.2
8.1
8.0
9.8
10.0
11.8
11.7
12.8
13.3
14.1
24.8
59.7
88.6
96.5
82.9
30.5
28.4
34.5
40.2
39.0
60.5
76.0
82.8
75.3
75.6
79.0
86.5
93.5
97.2
107.9
117.0
125.1

10.2
11.0
12.3
10.6
10.7
12.8
13.3
15.9
14.8
16.6
17.5
18.5
28.8
64.0
93.4
103.1
92.9
47.0
43.8
51.0
59.5
61.1
79.4
94.4
102.0
96.7
98.6
104.3
115.3
126.6
131.6
136.7
150.2
160.7
170.5

1.7
1.8
3.1
2.5
2.6
3.1
3.4
4.1
3.1
3.8
4.2
4.4
4.0
4.3
4.8
6.5
10.1
16.5
15.4
16.5
19.4
22.1
18.9
18.4
19.2
21.5
23.0
25.3
28.7
33.1
34.4
37.1
42.2
43.8
45.3

Surplus or
deficit
(-) on
income
and
product
account
1.0
-.3
-2.8
-1.7
-1.4
-2.4
-2.0
-3.0
.6
-1.6
-2.1
-.7
-3.8
-31.4
-44.2
-51.9
-39,7
4.1
13.3
8.2
-3.1
8.2
6.1
-3.9
-7.1
-6.7
2.9
5.2
1.0
-11.4
-1.5
-4.7
-3.9
-1.7

Gross
naTotal Statis- tional
income tical prodor re- disuct
ceipts crep- or exancy penditure

104.2
92.1
75.4
57.7
55.0
64.2
72.7
81.6
91.0
84.8

0.3
-1.0

125.4
.4
160.0
-.8
194.2 - 1 . 7
208.6
2.8
209.1
4.5
208.6
2.1
230.7
3.5
260.3
-.8
257.5
.5
285.3
327.7
L2
345.6
1.4
364.1
1.3
362.3
.9
1.0
396.5
421.6 - 2 . 4
443.4
-.6
446.0 - 1 . 5
485.7 - 3 . 0
505.6 - 3 . 0
520.1 - 1 . 9
556.7 - 1 . 8
588.3 6-3.3

104.4
91.1
76.3
58.5
56.0
65.0
72.5
82.7
90.8
85.2
91.1
100.6
125.8
159.1
192.5
211.4
213.6
210.7
234.3
259.4
258.1
284.6
329.0
347.0
365.4
363.1
397.5
419.2
442.8
444.5
482.7
502.6
518.2
554.9
585.0

.7

-.2
1.1
-.2
.5
1.2

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I....
IE...
III.
IV..

98.4
101.4
103.9
109.5

138.7
144.0
146.6
152.6

40.3
42.6
42.7
43.1

104.7
106.8
107.9
112.3

145.1
149.4
150.6
155.4

40.3
42.6
42.7
43.1

-6.4
-5.4
-4.0
-2.8

503.2
515.7
523.6
537.7

-2.8
-3.2
-1.8

500.4
512.5
521.9
537.8

1962:

109.7
113.6
114.0
114.8

153.5
156.7
157.3
159.7

43.9
43.1
43.3
44.9

115.1
115.5
117.0
120.2

159.0
158.6
160.2
165.1

43.9
43.1
43.3
44.9

-5.4
-1.9
-3.0
-5.4

545.4
554.9
559.4
567.1

-.9

-2.5
-2.6
-1.9

544.5
552.4
556.8
565.2

118.8
122.5
125.1

164.0
167.2
170.1

45.2
44.7
45.0
46.5

123.0
123.8
125.7
128.0

168.2
168.5
170.7
174.5

45.2
44.7
45.0
46.5

-4.2
-1.3

574.1
583.8
593.1

-2.3
-4.1
-4.4

III.
IV..
1963: I.....
II....
III...
IV«-.

(6)

1

-.6
(6)

(8)

.0

(«)

571.8
579.6
588.7
600.0

Undistributed corporate profits, corporate inventory valuation adjustment, capital consumption allowances, and excess of wage accruals over disbursements.
* For 1929-45, foreign net transfers by Government were negligible; therefore, for that period, net exports
of 1goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated.
Government transfer payments to persons, foreign net transfers by Government, net interest paid by
government, and subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises.
* Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
« Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole; data for fourth quarter are not
available. All other data incorporating or derived from thesefiguresare correspondingly approximate.
«Not available.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




217

TABLE C-8.—Gross private and government product', in current and 7963 prices, 7929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Current prices
Total
gross
national
product

Year or quarter

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933.
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938...
1939.
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946...
1947
1948
1949
1950...
1951
1952
1953...
1954
1955
1956_.__
1957. —
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963«

1963 prices«

Gross private product
Total

Nonfarm

Total

Farm 2

Nonfarm

Gross
government
product 3

4.3

78.8
65.4
49.6
46.7
55.1
59.6
69.2
75.8
70.9
77.0
86.0
107.0
130.6
151.7
163.5
162.2
170.7
196.9
218.2
219.4
243.2
278.2
293.2
312.7
310.5
343.9
363.5
384.5
381.2
418.6
434.4
446.3
478.7
505.3

4.5
4.7
4.4
4.7
5.6

214.2
194.6
180.3
153.8
149.9
164.2

198.3
178.0
163.4
137.2
132.2
143.7

15.8
14.5
16.9
15.9
15.7
13.0

5.9
7.3
6.9
7.6
7.6

179.8
204.9
215.6
206.3
223.2

158.0
179.3
191.4
180.1
196.7

15.8
13.5
16.9
17.1
17.1

7.8
9.4
15.1
25.6
32.2
35.2
20.7
16.7
17.4
19.4
20.8
27.3
31.0
31.8
32.3
34.0
36.4
38.9
42.0
44.1
47.3
50.8
54.6
58.3

242.0
281.8
323.2
364.4
391.1

214.8
247.9
273.9
287.1
301.7

16.8
18.0
19.6
18.0
18.4

182.5
163.5
146.5
121.3
116.5
130.8
142.1
165.7
174.5
163.0
179.7
198.0
229.9
254.3
269.1
283.3

383.1
332.0
331.3
344.4
345.5
374.0
404.9
420.8
440.1
431.4
464.9
474.7
483.9
476.7
508.4
521.3
531.2
563.6
585.0

295.6
286.1
296.3
309.3
308.8
335.9
357. 6
369.8
389.6
381.7
415.3
424.4
432.8
425.3
456.4
468.0
476.4
506.4
526.7

17.4
17.6
16.2
18.5
17.6

278.2
268.5
280.1
290.8
291.2

18.6
17.3
18.0
18.7
19.5
20.5
20.1
19.8
20.0
19.9

317.4
340.3
351.7
370.9
362.2
394.8
404.4
413.1
405.2
436.5

87.6
45.9
35.0
35.1
36.8
38.1
47.3
51.0
50.5
49.6
49.5
50.2
51.1
51.4
51.9

20.9
20.9
21.0
21.4

447.1
455.5
485.4
505.3

53.3
54.8
57.1
58.3

(6)

(6)

II.
III
IV.

451.1
462.4
470.8
485.3

(6)

(6)
(6)

1962: I . .
II.
III.
IV.

544.5
552.4
556.8
565.2

490.8
498.2
502.0
509.5

(6)
(6)
(6)
(6)

(8)
(8)

1963: I . .
II.
Ill
IV

571.8
579.6
588.7
600.0

515.0
522.0
530.2
539.7

(6)

(fl)

(6)
(8)
(8)

(8)
(8)
(8)

-

Gross private product'

90.3

500.4
512.5
521.9
537.8

-

Total
gross
national
product

7.7
6.2
4.4
4.6
4.3

3G3.5
382.8
403.8
402.6
438.6
455.3
467.4
500.3
526.7

--

Gross
government
product s

9.8

104.4
91.1
76.3
58.5
56.0
65.0
72.5
82.7
90.8
85.2
91.1
100.6
125.8
159.1
192.5
211.4
213.6
210.7
234.3
259.4
258.1
284.6
329.0
347.0
365.4
363.1
397.5
419.2
442.8
444.5
482.7
502.6
518.2
554.9
585.0

,.—

100.1
86.6
71.6
54.0
51.3
59.4
66.6
75.5
83.9
77.6
83.5
92.8
116.4
144.0
167.0
179.2
178.4
189.9
217.6
242.0
238.7
263.8
301.7
316.0
333.6
330.8

Farm 2

l

6.3
8.1
6.7
6.5
6.8
9.4
13.4
15.3
15.7
16.2
19.3
20.7
23.8
19.3
20.5
23.6
22.8
20.9
20.3
19.6
19.3
19.4
21.3
20.0
20.9
21.2
21.6
21.4

15.9
16.6
16.9
16.5
17.7
20.5
21.9
25.7
24.2
26.2
26.4
27.2
33.9
49.3
77.3

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I . .

8

( )
(6)

(9)
(6)
(6)

49.3
50.1
51.1
52.5

514.9
526.0
534.5
549.5

460.9
471.7
479.5
493.5

(6)

53.7
54.2
54.8
55.7

555.2
562.2
564.6
571.4

498.3
505.0
507.4
514.1

(6)
(6)
(6)

56.8
57.6
58.5
60.3

575.7
580.8
587.5
595.7

518.1
522.7
529.0
536.8

(6)
(6)

(6)
(6)
(6)

(8)

8

( )
(8)

li
(6)
(8)
(8)
(6)
(6)
(8)
(8)
(8)

54.0
54.3
55.0
56.0
56.9
57.2
57.2
57.2
57.6
58.1
58.5
58.9

1
Gross national product less compensation of general government employees, i. e., gross product accruing
from domestic business, households, and institutions, and from the rest of the world.
2
See Survey of Current Business, October 1958, for description of series and estimates in current and constant prices and implicit deflators for 1910-57.
3
Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in
government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs
are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services, in contrast to theSgeneral activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises, in other words, conduct operations essentially commercial in character, even though they perform
them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of
government enterprises. On the other hand, State universities and public parks, where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs, are part of general government activities.
* See footnote 1, Table O-2.
• Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
«Not available.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




218

TABLE C-9.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Durable goods

a*

3
"o

3
o

o
3

i!

a>

3
"o

H

o

1
•s

O

Services

1
CO

"•§
O

O

3
o

•§
o

p

O

'©

le and

1

!§•

^1

thiitig and

quarter

1excludi
c bevei

or

house-

d parts

1
Year

Nondurable goods

Lent

o

o

"o

I
o

t1

o

<<
£
O

o

H

1929

79.0

9.2

3.2

4.8

1.2

37.7

19.5

9.4

1.8

7.0

32.1

11.4

4.0

2.6

14.0

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

71.0
61.3
49.3
46.4
51.9

7.2
5.5
3.6
3.5
4.2

2.2
1.6
.9
1.1
1.4

3.9
3.1
2.1
1.9
2.2

1.1
.9
.6
.5
.6

34.0
28.9
22.8
22.3
26.7

18.0
14.7
11.4
10.9
12.2

8.0
6.9
5.1
4.6
5.7

1.7
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.6

6.3
5.7
4.8
5.3
7.2

29.8
26.9
22.9
20.7
21.0

11.0
10.3

2.2
1.9
1.6
1.5
1.6

12.7
11.2

9.0
7.9
7.6

3.9
3.5
3.0
2.8
3.0

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

56.3
62.6
67.3
64.6
67.6

5.1
6.3
6.9
5.7
6.7

1.9
2.3
2.4
1.6
2.2

2.6
3.2
3.6
3.1
3.5

.7
.8
1.0
.9
1.0

29.3
32.8
35.2
34.0
35.1

13.6
15.2
16.4
15.6
15.7

6.0
6.6
6.8
6.8
7.1

1.7
1.9
2.1
2.1
2.2

7.9
9.1
9.8
9.5

10.1

21.9
23.5
25.1
25.0
25.8

7.6
7.9
8.4
8.8
9.0

3.2
3.4
3.7
3.6
3.8

1.7
1.9
2.0
1.9
2.0

10.3
11.1
10.7
11.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

71.9
81.9
89.7
100. 5
109.8

7.8
9.7
7.0
6.6
6.8

2.7
3.4
.7
.8
.8

3.9
4.9
4.7
3.9
3.8

1.1
1.4
1.6
1.9
2.2

37.2
43.2
51.3
59.3
65.4

16.7
19.4
23.7
27.8
30.6

7.4
8.8

10.8
12.3
14.5
16.7
18.7

26.9
29.0
31.5
34.7
37.7

9.3

11.0
13.4
14.6

2.3
2.6
2.1
1.3
1.4

10.0
10.8
11.3
11.9

4.0
4.3
4.8
5.2
5.9

2.1
2.4
2.7
3.4
3.7

11.4
12.3
13.1
14.7
16.3

1945....

121.7
147.1
165.4
178.3
181.2

8.1

1946
1947
1948
1949

15.9
20.6
22.7
24.6

1.0
3.9
6.3
7.4
9.8

4.6
8.7

11.0
11.9
11.5

2.5
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.3

73.2
84.8
93.4
98.7
96.6

34.1
40.7
45.8
48.2
46.4

16.5
18.2
18.8
20.1
19.3

1.8
3.0
3.6
4.4
5.0

20.8
22.9
25.2
26.0
25.9

40.4
46.4
51.4
56.9
60.0

12.4
13.8
15.6
17.6
19.3

6.4
6.7
7.4
7.9
8.4

4.0
5.1
5.5
6.0
6.1

17.5
20.8
23.0
25.4
26.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

195.0
209.8
219.8
232.6
238.0

30.4
29.5
29.1
32.9
32.4

13.0
11.6
11.0
14.0
13.4

14.0
14.2
14.1
14.7
14.8

3.4
3.7
3.9
4.1
4.3

99.8
110.1
115.1
118.0
119.3

47.4
53.4
55.8
56.6
57.7

19.6
21.1
21.9
21.9
21.9

5.4
6.0
6.7
7.5
8.0

27.4
29.5
30.7
31.8
31.7

64.9
70.2
75.6
81.8
86.3

21.2
23.2
25.4
27.5
29.1

9.3

10.1
10.8
11.7
12.1

6.3
6.9
7.4
8.0
7.9

28.1
29.9
32.0
34.6
37.1

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

256.9
269.9
285.2
293.2
313.5

39.6
38.5
40.4
37.3
43.6

18.3
15.8
17.3
13.9
18.1

16.6
17.4
17.4
17.4
18.9

4.8
5.3
5.8
6.0

124.8
131.4
137.7
141.6
6.6 147.1

59.2
62.2
65.2
67.4
68.1

23.4
24.5
25.4
25.7
27.5

8.8
9.6

10.4
10.5
11.1

33.4
35.2
36.7
38.0
40.5

92.5
100.0
107.1
114.3
122.8

30.7
32.7
35.2
37.7
39.6

13.5
14.8
15.8
16.9
18.1

39.9
43.8
47.0
50.6
10.0 55.1

1960
1961
1962

328.2
336.8
355.4
373.2

44.9
43.6
48.2
51.5

18.8
17.1
20.4
22.3

19.1
19.2
20.2
21.3

7.1
7.3
7.6
7.9

151.8
155.1
161.4
167.2

69.7
70.9
73.6
75.5

28.1
28.6
29.8
30.3

11.7
11.9
12.3
13.0

42.3
43.8
45.8
48.3

131.5
138.0
145.7
154.5

41.9
44.1
46.6
49.2

19.5
20,4
21.5
22.6

10.7
10.7
11.3
12.1

59.5
62.8
66.2
70.6

1963*__.

w

9.3
8.5
8.8
9.4

8.3
8.6
9.0
9.2

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961:

I
II
III—_
IV—

330.7
334.9
337.9
343.8

41.2
43.1
43.9
46.4

15.7
16.7
17.0
18.9

18.3
19.1
19.6
20.0

7.2
7.3
7.3
7.5

153.9
154.5
155.3
156.9

70.5
70.8
71.0
71.2

28.2
28.2
28.6
29.3

11.9
11.7
11.9
11.9

43.3
43.8
43.8
44.5

135.6
137.3
138.8
140.5

43.3
43.8
44.4
45.0

20.0
20.4
20.6
20.8

10.7
10.6
10.7
10.8

61.6
62.5
63.1
63.9

1962:
I
II
Ill—.
IV—

348.8
352.9
356.7
362.9

47.3
47.5
47.7
50.5

19.7
20.1
19.8
22.2

20.0
19.8
20.3
20.6

7.6
7.6
7.6
7.7

158.9
160.6
162.5
163.6

72.2
73.3
74.3
74.4

29.7
29.5
29.9
29.9

12.1
12.2
12.3
12.6

44.9
45.6
46.0
46.7

142.6
144.8
146.6
148.9

45.6
46.3
46.9
47.6

21.3
21.5
21.5
21.8

11.1
11.3
11.4
11.6

64.6
65.7
66.8
67.9

1963:
I
II
Ill—
IV «...

367.4
370.4
374.9
3S0.0

50.6
51.0
50.8
53.5

22.0
22.3
21.5
23.2

20.9
20.7
21.3
22.3

7.7
8.0
8.0
8.0

165.3
165.9
168.6
168.8

74.8
75.2
75.9
76.1

30.2
29.7
30.9
30.5

12.8
13.0
13.1
13.2

47.5
48.0
48.7
49.0

151.4
153.5
155.5
157.6

48.2
48.8
49.5
50.2

22.2
22.4
22.8
23.0

11.8
12.1
12.2
12.4

69.2
70.2
71.0
72.1

* Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
* Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel.
»Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings.
« Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

219
715-113 O-64-15




TABLE C-10.—Gross private domestic investment, 7929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Change in business
inventories

Fixed investment

Year or
quarter

Total
gross
private
domestic invest- Total
ment

New construction l

Total

Producers' durable
equipment

Resi
Other 2
Total
dential
NonnonTotal farm Farm
farm Total Nonfarm Farm

Nonfarm Farm

1929

16.2

14.6

8.7

3.6

5.1

4.8

0.3

5.8

5.2

0.6

1.7

1.8

-0.2

1930
1931

10.6
6.8
3.5
3.0
4.0

6.2
4.0
1.9
1.4
1.7

2.1
1.6
.6
.5

4.1
2.4
1.2
1.0
1.1

3.9
2.3
1.2
.9
1.0

.2
.1

4.5
2.8
1.6
1.6
2.3

4.0
2.6
1.4
1.5
2.1

.5
.3
.1
.1
.3

-.4
-1.3
-2.6
-1.6
-1.1

—. 1
-1.6
-2.6
-1.4

1934

10.3
5.5
.9
1.4
2.9

-.3
.3
(8)
-.3
-1.3

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

6.3
8.4
11.7
6.7
9.3

5.4
7.4
9.5
7.6
8.9

2.3
3.3
4.4
4.0
4.8

1.0
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.7

1.3
1. 7
2.5
2.0
2.1

1.2
1.6
2.3
1.8
1.9

3.1
4.2
5.1
3.6
4.2

2.7
3.6
4.5
3.1
3.7

.4
.5
.6
.5
.5

.9

1.0
2.2
-.9
.4

.4
2.1
1.7
-1.0
.3

.6
-1.1
.5
.1
.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

13.2
18.1
9.9
5.6
7.1

11.0
13.6
8.1
6.4
8.2

5.5
6.6
3.7
2.3
2.7

3.0
3.5
1.7

2.5
3.1
2.0
1.4
1.9

2.2
2.8
1.7
1.2
1.6

5.5
6.9
4.3
4.0
5.4

4.9
6.1
3.7
3.5
4.7

.6
.8
.7
.6
.7

2.2
4.5
1.8
-.8
-L0

1.9
4.0
.7
-.6
-.6

.3
.5
1.2
-.2
-.4

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

10.4
28.1
31.5
43.1
33.0

11.5
21.8
31.9
38.4
36.0

3.8
11.0
15.3
19.5
18.8

1.1
4.8
7.5
10.1
9.6

2.7
6.3
7.7
9.3
9.2

2.5
5.4
6.3
7.8
7.7

7.7
10.7
16.7
18.9
17.2

9.8
14.9
16.4
14.4

1.8
2.6
2.9

-1.1
"6.4
-.5
4.7
-3.1

-.6
6.4
1.3
3.0
-2.2

-.5
(8)
-1.8
1.7
-.9

19.50
1951
1952
1953
1954

50.0
56.3
49.9
50.3
48.9

43.2
46.1
46.8
49.9
50.5

24.2
24.8
25.5
27.6
29.7

14.1
12.5
12.8
13.8
15.4

10.1
12.3
12.7
13.8
14.3

8.5
10.4
10.8
12.1
12.7

18.9
21.3
21.3
22.3
20.8

16.2
18.4
18.6
19.5
18.5

2.7
2.9
2.7
2.8
2.3

6.8
10.2
3.1
.4
-1.6

6.0
9.1
2.1
1.1
-2.1

.8
1.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

63.8
67.4
66.1
56.6
72.7

58.1
62.7
64.6
58.6
66.2

34.9
35.5
36.1
35.5
40.2

18.7
17.7
17.0
18.0
22.3

16.2
17.8
19.0
17.4
17.9

14.6
16.3
17.5
15.9
16.2

1.6
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.7

23.1
27.2
28.5
23.1
25.9

20.6
25.0
26.2
20.3
23.1

2.5
2.2
2.3
2.8
2.9

5.8
4.7
1.6
-2.0

5.5
5.1
.8
-2.9

.3
-.4
.8
.9
.1

1960
1961
1962
1963 *._._

71.8
69.0
78.8
82.3

68.3
67.1
73.2
77.6

40.7
41.6
44.4
46.6

21.1
21.0
23.2
25.0

19.7
20.5
21.2
21.6

18.0
18.6
19.5
19.8

1.6
1.9
.1.7
1.8

27.6
25.5
28.8
31.0

25.1
22.9
26.0
27.9

2.4
2.6
2.9
3.1

3.5
1.9
5.5
4.7

3.2
1.5
4.9
4.2

.3
.3
.7
.5

0.3
.3
.4
.4

1932
1933

.7

.5

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I
II
III—
IV...

59.6
66.6
72.0
77.6

63.9
65.5
68.4
70.3

39.3
41.0
42.6
43.2

19.0
20.1
21.9
22.8

20.3
20.8
20.7
20.4

18.9
18.5
18.5
18.6

1.5
2.3
2.3
1.8

24.6
24.5
25.8
27.1

21.7
21.9
23.4
24.5

2.8
2.6
2.4
2.6

-4.3

-4.6

1.1
3.5
7.2

.8
3.2
6.9

1962: I
II..._
III...
IV....

77.3
79.6
78.9
78.8

69.1
73.2
75.3
74.9

41.7
44.5
46.0
45.0

21.2
23.3
24.2
23.7

20.5
21.2
21.7
21.2

19.0
19.4
19.8
19.5

1.6
1.8
1.9
1.7

27.4
28.7
29.3
29.9

24.7
25.8
26.6
26.8

2.7
2.8
2.8
3.1

8.1
6.5
3.6
4.0

7.6
5.8
2.8
3.2

1963: I
II...

77.8
80.7
83.7
87.0

72.7
76.5
79.5
81.6

43.7
45.8
47.9
49.1

22.7
24.8
25.9
26.7

21.0
21.0
22.0
22.4

19.4
19.1
20.2
20.6

1.6
1.9
1.8
1.8

29.0
30.7
31.6
32.6

25.9
27.6
28.8
29.3

3.1
3.0
2.8
3.3

5.1
4.3
4.2
5.3

4.3
3.6
3.7
5.]

1

.5
.7

.5
.3

Revisions in series on new construction shown in Table C-36 have not yet been incorporated into these

»Includes petroleum and natural gas well drilling, which are excluded from estimates in Table 0-36.
» Less than $50 million.
* Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1060.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




220

TABLE C-ll.—National income by type of income, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Business and proCorporate profits
fessional income
and inventory
and inventory
valuation
valuation
In- Rentadjustment
Comadjustment
come al inTotal penof come
na- sation
In- InIn- Net
intional of emcome ven- farm of
pro- perCor- ven- terest
in- 1 ploytory prieof
tory
come ees »
porate valuunin- valu- tors 3 sons
Total corpo- ation
Total profits ation
before adrated adtaxes* justenter- justprises ment
ment

Year or quarter

87.8
75.7
59.
42.5
40.2
49.0
57.1
64.9
73.6
67.6
72.8
81.6
104.
137.
170.
182.
181.
180.
198.
223.
217.
241.
279.
292.
305.6
301.8
330.2
350.8
366.9
367. 4
400.5
414.5
426.1
453.7
7
478. 4

1929-_
1930-.
1931-_
1932_.
1933-.
1934-.
1935..
1936-1937._
1938..
1940..
1941__
1942..
1943..
1944..
1945..
1946..
1947-.
1948-.
1949..
1950- .
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..
1955..
1956...
1957...
1958..
1959...
I960-..
1961...
1962...
1963 6..

51.1
46.8
39.
31.1
29.5
34.
37.3
42.9
47.9
45.0
48.1
52.1
64.8
85.3
109.6
121.3
123.2
117.
128.8
141.0
140.8
154.2
180.3
195.0
208.8
207.6
223.9
242.5
255.5
257.1
278.5
293.6
302.1
322.9
340.4

8.8
7.4
5.6
3.4
3.2
4.6
5.4
6.5
7.1
6.8
7.3
8.4
10.9
13.9
16.8
18.0
19.0
21.3
19.9
22.4
22.
23.5
26.0
26.9
27.4
27.8
30.4
32.1
32.7
32.5
35.1
34.2
35.3
36.5
37.7

411.1
423.2
429.0
441.0
444.7
452.4
455.5
462.2
466.7
474.6
482.0
()

294.0
300.1
304.4
309.9
316.0
322.5
325.3
327.7
332.0
338.7
342.8
347.9

34.2
35.0
35.7
36.3
36.0
36.5
36.6
36.9
37.2
37.4
37.8
38.2

8.6
0.1
6.7
.8
5.0
.6
3.1
.3
3.7
4.6 - ! l
5.4 - . 1
6.6 - . 1
7.1
6.6
7.5
8.S 0)
ll.fi
14.3 —. 4
17.0 —. 2
18.1 - . 1
19.1 - . 1
23.0 - 1 . 7
21.4 - 1 .
22.8 - . 4
22.2
24.6
26.3
26.7
27.6
27.8

30.6
32.6
33.0
32.6
35.2
34.2
35.3
36.5
37.7

-1.1
-.3

- .2
-.5
-.3
-.1
-.1

0)
(5)

6.0
4.1
3.2
1.9
2.4
2.4
5.0
4.0
5.6
4.3
4.3
4.6
6.5
10.0
11.4
11
11.8
15.3
15.5
17.8
12.9
14.0
16.3
15.3
13.3
12.7
11.8
11.6
11.8
13.5
11.4
12.0
12.8
13.3
12.8

5.4 10.1
6.6
4.8
1.6
3.8
2.7 - 2 . 0
2.0 - 2 . 0
1.1
1.7
2.9
1.7
5.0
1.8
6.2
2.1
4.3
2.6
5.7
2.7
9.1

3.5 14.5
4.5 19.7
5.1 23.8
5.4 23.0
5.6 18.4
6.2 17.3
6.5 23.6
7.3 30.8
8.3 28.2
9.0 35.7
9.4 41.0
10.
37.7
10.5 37.3
10.9 33.7
43.1
10.
10.9 42.0
11.9 41.7
12.2 37.2
11.9 47.2
12.1 44.5
12.1 43.8
12.0 47.0
12.1 7 51.3

6.4
6.0
5.8
5.4
5.0
4.9
4.8
3.1
4.7
5.7
4.7
6.2
4.6
3.3
4.6
6.4
4.5
9.3
4.5
17.0 - 2 .
4.3
20.9 - 1 .
3.7
24.6 - . 8
3.3
q
23.3
3.2
19.0 - . 6
3.1
22.6 - 5 .
3.8
29.5 - 5 . 9
4.2
33.0 - 2 . 2
4.8
1.9
26.4
5.5
40.6 - 5 . 0
6.3
42.2 - 1 . 2
7.1
1.0
36.7
8.2
38.3 - 1 . 0
9.1
34.1 - . 3
44.9 - 1 . 7 10.4
44.7 - 2 . 7 11.7
43.2 - 1 . 5 13.4
q
14.8
37.4
47.7 - . 5 16.4
18.1
44.3
.2
20.0
43.8
22.0
.2
46.8
7 51.7 - . 4 24.1
9.6
3.3
-.8

0.5
3.3
2.4
1.0
-3.0
.2 -2.1
-.6
1.7

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I
II
III
IV
1962: I
II
Ill
IV
1963: I
II
III
IV 6

. .

34.2
34.8
35.8
36.3
36.1
36.5
36.7
36.6
37.0
37.5
37.8
38.4

(5)
0.2
-.1
(«)
-.1
(5)
.3
.2
-.1
(8)
-.2

12.8
12.6
12.6
13.2
13.5
13.1
13.2
13.4
13.5
12.6
12.7
12.6

12.1
12.1
12.1
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0
12.1
12.2

38.8
43.6
44.0
48.6
46.1
46.5
46.1
49.3
48.8
50.1
52.2

C
O

38.5
43.4
44.3
48.9
45.9
46.7
46.2
48.4
48.3
51.0
52.2

(8)

0.3
.2
-.3
-.3
.1
-.2
-.1
.9
.4
-.9
(5)
(8)

19.1
19.8
20.3
21.0
21.2
21.7
22.3
23.0
23.3
23.7
24.3
25.0

i National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product
mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods, and indirect business taxes. See Table C-12.
a Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries (employer contributions for social insurance;
employer contributions to private pension, health, and welfare funds; compensation for injuries; directors'
fees; pay of the military reserve; and a few other minor items).
3 Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing
ncome to net additions to farm inventories during the period. Data for 1929-45 differ from those shown in
Table C-71 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national
Income accounts.
* See Table C-63 for corporate tax liability (Federal and State income and excess profits taxes), corporate
profits after taxes and footnote 3.
* Less than $50 million.
« Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
i Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole; data for fourth quarter are not
available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate.
8 Not available.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




221

TABLE C-l 2.—Relation of gross national product and national income, 7929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Less:
Plus:
Subsidies
Equals: less
Gross
Net current Indirect business Businanational
taxes
ness
tional surplus
prodDepreof govtransuct Total ciation Other* prodernfer
uct
charges
ment
Fed- State payenter- Total eral and ments
local
Less: Capital consumption allowances

Year or quarter

Sta- Equals:
tisti- Nacal tional
dis- income
crepancy

1929..

104.4

8.6

7.7

95.8

-0.1

7.0

1.2

5.8

0.6

0.3

87.8

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

91.1
76.3
58.5
56.0
65.0

8.5
8.2
7.6
7.2
7.1

7.7
7.6
7.0
6.7
6.6

82.6
68.1
50.9
48.8
57.9

-.1

7.2
6.9
6.8
7.1
7.8

1.0
.9
.9
1.6
2.2

6.1
6.0
5.8
5.4
5.6

.5
.6
.7
.7
.6

-1.0

.7

75.7
59.7
42.5
40.2
49.0

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938-.
1939-

72.5
82.7
90.8
85.2
91.1

7.2
7.5
7.7
7.8
7.8

6.7
6.7
6.9
6.9
7.1

65.3
75.2
83.0
77.4
83.3

8.2
8.7
9.2
9.2
9.4

2.2
2.3
2.4
2.2
2.3

6.0
6.4
6.8
6.9
7.0

.6
.6
.6
.4
.5

-.2
1.1
-.2
.5
1.2

57.1
64.9
73.6
67.6
72.8

1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..

100.6
125.8
159.1
192.5
211.4

8.1
9.0
10.2
10.9
12.0

7.3
8.1
9.2
9.9
10.8

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.2

92.5
116.8
149.0
181.6
199.4

10.0
11.3
11.8
12.7
14.1

2.6
3.6
4.0
4.9
6.2

7.4
7.7
7.7
7.8
8.0

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5

.8
.4
-.8

81.6
104.7
137.7
170.3
182.6

1945..
1946-.
1947-.
1948..
1949..

213.6
210.7
234.3
259.4
258.1

12.5
10.7
13.0
15.5
17.3

11.2
9.0
11.1
13.1
15.1

1.3
1.7
2.0
2.4
2.2

201.0
200.0
221.3
244.0
240.8

.9
-.2
-.2
-.2

15.5
17.3
18.6
20.4
21.6

7.1
7.9
7.9
8.1
8.2

8.4
9.4

10.8
12.3
13.5

.5
.6
.7
.7
.8

4.5
2.1
3.5
-.8

1950..
19511952..
1953..
1954..

284.6
329.0
347.0
365.4
363.1

19.1
22.0
24.0
26.5
28.8

16.5
18.8
20.9
23.1
25.2

2.6
3.2
3.1
3.5
3.6

265.5
307.0
323.0

23.7
25.6
28.1
30.2
30.2

9.0
9.5

10.5
11.2
10.1

14.7
16.1
17.6
19.0
20.1

.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.3

—. 7

334.3

.2
.2
-.2
-.4
-.2

1955..
1956..
19571958..
1959..

397.5
419.2.
442.8
444.5
482.7

32.0
34.4
37.4
38.6
41.0

27.9
30.5
33.4
35.2
37.3

4.0
3.9
4.0
3.4
3.7

365.5
384.8
405.3
405.9
441.7

1.0
1.1
.4

32.9
35.7
38.2
39.3
42.6

11.0
11.6
12.2
11.9
13.0

21.8
24.1
26.0
27.4
29.6

1.5
1.6
1.8
1.8
2.1

1.0
-2.4
-1.5
-3.0

330.2
350.8
366.9
367.4
400.5

I960..
1961..
1962._
1963 3

502.6
518.2
554.9
585.0

43.0
44.3
49.4
51.6

39.1
40.5
45.3
47.7

3.8
4.1
3.9

459.6
473.9
505.5
533.4

46.4
49.1
53.0
56.6

14.0
14.2
15.2
16.2

32.5
34.9
37.8
40.5

2.2 - 3 . 0
2.3 - 1 . 9
2.3 - 1 . 8
2 . 3 *-3.3

414.5
426.1
453.7
•478.4

0.9

8

.5
1.7
1.7

.8
.8
.9

-1.7
2.8

r

1.2
1.4
1.3
.9

—.6

181.2
180.9
198.2
223.5
217.7
241.9
279.3
292.2
305.6
301.8

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

I I . ..
III..
IV..

500.4
512.5
521.9
537.8

43.5
44.1
44.5
45.3

(5)
(5)
(5)
(8)

(5)
(s)
(5)
(5)

456.9
468.4
477.4
492.5

0.7
2.2
1.9
2.1

47.1
48.4
49.7
51.2

13.3
13.9
14.5
15.0

33.7
34.5
35.2
36.2

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3

-2.8
-3.2
-1.8

411.1
423.2
429.0
441.0

1962: I.._.
II...
III.
IV..

544.5
552.4
556.8
565.2

48.5
49.2
49.7
50.1

(s)
(s)
(6)
(*)

(5)
(*)
(«)
(')

496.0
503.2
507.1
515.1

2.2
1.7
1.4
1.6

52.0
52.7
53.3
54.1

15.1
15.2
15.2
15.4

36.9
37.6
38.1
38.7

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3

-.9

444.7
452.4
455. 5
462.2

1963: I.._.
II...
III.
IV 3

571.8
579.6
588.7
600.0

50.6
51.3
52.1
52.7

(5)
(5)
(5)
(8)

(8)
(5)

521.2
528.3
536.6
547.3

.7

A

55.2
56.0
57.2
58.2

15.7
16.0
16.4
16.5

39.5
40.0
40.5
41.7

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3

1961: I — .

8

.5
.8

.0

-2.5
-2.6
-1.9
-2.3
-4.1
-4.4
<6)

466.7
474.6
482.0
(*)

1
Accidental damage to fixed capital and capital outlays charged to current account.
* Less than $50 million.
3 Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
* Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole; data for fourth quarter are not
available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate.
«Not available.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.

Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




222

TABLE C-l 3.—Relation of national income and personal income^ 792Q-G3
[Billions of dollars]

Year or quarter

Equals:

Plus:

Less:
CorpoExcess
rate
of
profits
National and in- Contri- wage
butions acincome
venfor
tory
social cruals
over
valu- insurdisation
ance burseadjustments
ment

Government
transfer
payments
to
persons

Net
interest
paid
by
government

Dividends

Business
transfer
payments

Personal
income

87.8

10.1

0.2

0.9

1.0

5.8

0.6

85.8

75.7
59.7
42.5
40.2
49.0

6.6
1.6
-2.0
-2.0
1.1

.3
.3
.3
.3
.3

1.0
2.1
1.4
1.5
1.6

1.0
11
L.I
.2

5.5
4 1
2.6
2.1
2.6

.5
6
.7
.7
.6

76.9
65.7
50.1
47.2
53.fi

57.1
64.9
73.6
67.6
72.8

2.9
5.0
6.2
4.3
5.7

.3
.6
1.8
2.0
2.1

1.8
2.9
1.9
2.4
2.5

.1
L.I
L.2
1.2
L.2

2.9
4.5
4.7
3.2
3.8

.6
.6
.6
.4
.5

60.2
68.5
73.9
68.6
72.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

81.6
104.7
137.7
170.3
182.6

9.1
14.5
19.7
23 8
23.0

2.3
2 8
3.5
4 5
5.2

2.7
2.6
2.6
2.5
3.1

L.3
2.1
2.8

4.0
4 5
4.3
4 5
4.7

.4
.5
.5
5
.5

78.7
96.3
123.5
151.4
165.7

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

181.2
180.9
198.2
223.5
217.7

18.4
17.3
23.6
30.8
28.2

6.1
6.0
5.7
5.2
5.7

5.6
10.9
11.1
10.5
11.6

3.7
4.5
4.4
4.5
4.7

4.7
5.8
6.5
7.2
7.5

.5
.6
.7
.7
.8

171.2
179.3
191.6
210.4
208.3

241.9
279.3
292.2
305.6
301.8

35.7
41.0
37.7
37.3
33.7

6 9
8.2
8.6
8.7
9.7

14.3
11.6
12.0
12.9
15.0

4.8
5.0
5.0
5.2
5.4

92
9.0
9.0
9.2
9.8

8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.3

228.5
256.7
273.1
288.3
289.8

330.2
350.8
366.9
367.4
400.5

43.1
42.0
41.7
37.2
47.2

11.0
12.6
14.5
14.8
17.6

16.0
17.2
20.1
24.5
25.4

5.4
5.7
6.2
6.2
7.1

11.2
12.1
12.6
12.4
13.7

1.5
1.6
1.8
1.8
2.1

310.2
332.9
351.4
360.3
383.9

414.5
426.1
453.7
2 478.4

44.5
43.8
47.0
251.3

20.6
21.4
23.9
27.2

27.3
31.3
32.5
34.6

7.8
7.7
8.0
8.4

14.5
15.3
16.6
17.8

2.2
2.3
2.3
2.3

401.3
417.4
442.1
463.0

1929

- -

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

...

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

,

_

1960
1961
1962
1963 1

0.2
-.2

.1

—.1

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I
II
III
IV

411.1
423.2
429.0
441.0

38.8
43.6
44.0
48.6

20.9
21.3
21.6
21.9

30.4
31.3
31.7
31.7

7.7
7.6
7.6
7.7

15.0
15.1
15.2
15.8

2.3
2.3
2.3

2.3

406.6
414.5
420.2
428.0

1962: I
II . . .
Ill
IV

444.7
452.4
455.5
462.2

46.1
46.5
46.1
49.3

23.5
23.9
24.0
24.2

32.1
32.1
32.3
33.6

7.8
7.9
8.1
8.2

16.2
16.4
16.5
17.1

2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3

433.5
440.7
444.5
449.9

1963: I
II .
III.
IV».

466.7
474.6
482.0

48.8
50.1
52.2

26.5
27.0
27.4
27.8

34.7
34.2
34.4
35.2

8-8
i;.4
i15
i1.5

17.1
17.6
17.6
18.8

2.3

453.9
459.9
465.2
473.0

1
8

2.3
2.3
2.3

Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole; data for fourth quarter are not
available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate.
8
Not available.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




223

TABLE C-14.—Sources of personal income, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Proprietors'
income3

Wage and salary disbursements *

Year or quarter

Total
personal
income Total

Commodityproducing
Other
Distrib- Service Gov- labor 1 Busiindustries
utive indus- ern- income ness
indus- tries ment
and Farm*
profesManu- tries
sional
Total facturing
0.6

8.8

6.0

.5
.5
.4
.4

7.4
5.6
3.4
3.2
4.6

4.1
3.2
1.0
2.4
2.4

.5
..6

5.4
6.5
7.1
6.8
7.3

5.0
4.0
5.6
4.3
4.3

.7
.7
.9
1.5
1.8
1.9
2.3
2.7
3.0

8.4
10.9
13.9
16.8
18.0

4.6
6.5
10.0
11.4
11.5

19.0
21.3
19.9
22.4
22.7

11.8
15.3
15.5
17.8
12.9

22.3
28.8
32.9
33.9
34.4

3.8
4.8
5.3
6.0
6.2

23.5
26.0
26.9
27.4
27.8

14.0
16.3
15.3
13.3
12.7

27.8
30.5
32.8
34.8
37.7

36.0
38.0
40.2
43.2
45.3

7.1
8.1
9.1
9.4
10.4

30.4
32.1
32.7
32.5
35.1

11.8
11.6
11.8
13.5
11.4

40.7
43.4
46.4
49.5

48.4
51.8
55.6
59.3

11.0
11.4
12.1
12.6

34.2
35.3
36.5
37.7

12.0
12.8
13.3
12.8

1929.

85.8

50.4

21.5

16.1

15.6

8.4

4.9

1930.
1931..
1932_
1933.
1934-

76.9
65.7
50.1
47.2
53.6

46.2
39.1
30.5
29.0
33.7

18.5
14.3

14.5
12.5
9.8
8.8

12.1

13.8
10.8
7.7
7.8
9.6

8.0
7.1
5.8
5.2
5.7

5.2
5.3
5.0
5.1
6.1

19351936..
1937..
1938..
1939..

60.2
68.5
73.9
68.6
72.9

36.7
41.9
46.1
43.0
45.9

13.5
15.8
18.4
15.3
17.4

10.8
12.4
14.6
11.8
13.6

10.7
11.8
13.2
12.6
13.3

5.9
6.5
7.1
6.8
7.1

6.5
7.9
7.5
8.2
8.2

19401941194219431944-

78.7
96.3
123.5
151.4
165.7

49.8
62.1
82.1
105.6
117.0

19.7
27.5
39.2
49.0
50.4

15.6
21.7
30.9
40.9
42.9

14.2
16.3
18.0
20.1
22.7

7.5
8.1
9.0
9.9
10.9

8.4
10.2
16.0
26.6
33.0

19451946194719481949-

171.2
179.3
191.6
210.4
208.3

117.6
111.9
122.8
135.2
134.4

45.9
46.0
54.3
60.3
56.9

38.2
36.5
42.5
46.5
43.9

24.8
30.9
35.2
38.8
39.0

12.0
14.3
16.0
17.3
17.9

34.9
20.6
17.3
18.8
20.5

19501951..
195219531954-

228. 5
256.7
273.1
288.3

146.4
170.7
184.9
198.1
196.3

63.5
74.9
80.5
88.1
84.1

49.4
58.3
63.0
69.9
66.1

41.3
46.0
48.7
51.8
52.3

19.3
21.1
22.6
24.3
25.5

19551956195719581959..

310.2
332.9
351.4
360.3
383.9

210.9
227.6
238.5
239.8
258.5

91.4
98.7
102.2
97.9
107.2

72.3
77.7
80.6
76.7
84.7

55.8
60.3
63.4
63.8
68.2

1960..
1961..
1962,.
1963«

401.3
417.4
442.1
463.0

271.3
278.8
297.1
312.3

110.4
110.8
118.5
123.8

87.4
87.5
94.2
98.3

71.8
72.9
76.6
79.8

i. r

Seasonally adjusted annual rat«s
II.
III
IV.
1962: I..
II.
III
IV.

406.6
414.5
420.2
428.0

271.2
276.9
281.0
286.1

106.8
110.3
111.7
114.3

84.0
87.1
88.2
90.7

71.7
72.4
73.4
73.9

42.3
43.1
43.8
44.3

50.4
51.2
52.2
53.6

11.2
11.3
11.4
11.6

34.2
35.0
35.7
36.3

12.8
12.6
12.6
13.2

433.5
440.7
444.5
449.9

290.7
296.8
299.4
301.5

115.8
119.2
119.5
119.6

92.1
S4.8
95.0
94.8

75.1
76.4
77.3
77.8

45.2
46.2
47.0
47.3

54.6
55.1
55.7
56.8

11.8
12.0
12.2
12.3

36.0
36.5
36.6
36.9

13.5
13.1
13.2
13.4

1963: I..
IIIII
IV

453. 9
459.9
465.2
473.0

304.5
310.8
314.6
319.4

120.1
123.6
124.9
126.5

95.5
98.2
99.0
100.5

78.4
79.6
80.3
81.0

48.2
49.1
50.0
50.6

57.8
58.6
59.5
61.3

12.4
12.6
12.7
12.8

37.2
37.4
37.8
38.2

13.5
12.6
12.7
12.6

1961: I..

See footnotes at end of table.




224

TABLE C-14.—Sources of personal income, 7929-63—Continued
[Billions of dollars]

Transfer payments
Year or
quarter

Rental
income Divi- Personal
of per- dends interest
income
sons

Old-age
State
and sur- unemVetvivors
ployTotal insur- ment in- erans'
benefits
ance
surance
benefits benefits

1929.

5.4

5.8

7.4

1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

6.9
6.9
6.6
6.2
6.1

1.7
1.8
2.1
2.6
2.7

2.9
4.5
4.7
3.2
3.8

5.9
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.8

2.4
3.5
2.4
2.8
3.0

1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..

2.9
3.5
4.5
5.1
5.4

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

5.8
5.8
5.8
5.8
6.2

3.1
3.1
3.1
3.0
3.6

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..

5.6
6.2
6.5
7.3
8.3

4.7
5.8
6.5
7.2
7.5

6.9
7.6
8.2
8.7
9.4

1950..
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.

9.0
9.4
10.2
10.5
10.9

9.2
9.0
9.0
9.2

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959..

10.7
10.9
11.9
12.2
11.9

1960
1961
1962
1963 6

12.1
12.1
12.0
12.1

Nonagricultural
personal
income *

0.4
.4

0.9

0.1

77.7

1.6
.8
.5
.4

1.5
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.2

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939..

0.6

1.5

4.8
3.8
2.7
2.0
1.7

Less:
Personal
contributions
Other for social
insurance

1.1
1.4
1.6
1.8

.1
.2
.2
.2
.2

70.8
60.9
46.9
43.6
49.8

.5
1.9
.6
.5
.5

1.9
1.6
1.8
1.9
2.0

.2
.2

53.9
63.2
67.0
62.8
67.1

.5
.3
.3
.1
.1

.5
.5
.5
.5

2.0
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.4

.7
.8
1.2
1.8
2.2

72.6
88.0
111.5
137.6
151.6

6.2
11.4
11.8
11.3
12.4

0.1
.1
.2
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7

.4
1.1
.8
.8
1.7

2.8
6.8
6.7
5.8
5.1

2.7
3.2
3.8
4.2
4.9

2.3
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.2

156.8
161.2
172.8
189.2
192.1

10.3
11.2
12.1
13.4
14.6

15.1
12.6
13.2
14.3
16.2

1.0
1.9
2.2
3.0
3.6

1.4
.8
1.0
1.0
2.0

4.9
3.9
3.9
3.7
3.8

7.9
6.0
6.2
6.6
6.7

2.9
3.4
3.8
3.9
4.6

211.3
237.0
254.3
271.5
273.8

11.2
12.1
12.6
12.4
13.7

15.8
17.5
19.6
21.0
23.5

17.5
18.8
21.9
26.3
27.5

4.9
5.7
7.3
8.5
10.2

1.4
1.4
1.8
3.9
2.5

4.2
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.5

7.0
7.5
8.4
9.4
10.3

5.2
5.8
6.7
6.9
7.9

295.0
317.9
336.1
343.0

14.5
15.3
16.6
17.8

25.8
27.7
30.0
32.5

29.5

11.1
12.6
14.3
15.3

2.8
4.0
2.9
2.8

4.5
4.8
4.8
5.0

11.1
12.2
12.8
13.8

9.2
9.5
10.2
11.8

385.1
400.3
424.5
445.7

36.9

()

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

III...
IV—

12.1
12.1
12.1
12.0

15.0
15.1
15.2
15.8

26.8
27.4
27.9
28.7

32.6
33.5
33.9
34.0

11.8
12.5
12.8
13.4

3.8
4.4
3.9
3.7

4.7
4.9
4.7
4.7

12.3
11.7
12.5
12.1

9.3
9.5
9.6
9.8

389.6
397.7
403.2
410.4

1962: I . . . .
II—_
III..
IV—

12.0
12.0
12.0
12.0

16.2
16.4
16.5
17.1

29.0
29.7
30.3
31.1

34.4
34.4
34.6
35.9

13.6
14.3
14.5
14.8

3.3
2.7
2.7
3.2

4.7
4.7
4.7
4.9

12.7
12.6
12.8
13.0

10.1
10.2
10.3
10.3

415.7
423.1
427.1
432.1

1963: I
II....
III..
IV«.

12.0
12.0
12.1
12.2

17.1
17.6
17.6
18.8

31.6
32.1
32.8
33.5

37.0
36.5
36.7
37.5

14.8
15.4
15.5
15.5

3.0
2.6
2.6
3.1

4.9
5.0
5.0
5.1

14.2
13.5
13.6
13.8

11.5
11.7
11.9
12.0

435.9
442.8
448.1
456.1

1961: I

* The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table C-ll in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess
of 3wage accruals over wage disbursements.
Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to
net additions to inventories during the period.
» Data for 1929-45 differ from those in Table C-71 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture
not yet incorporated into the national income accounts.
* Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises,
farm wages, agricultural net interest, and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations.
* Less than $50 million.
« Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




225

TABLE G-15.—Disposition of personal income, 7929-63
Percent of disposLess:
able personal income
Equals: Personal
Less:
conPersonal
DisposEquals:
sumption Personal Personal
able
income Personal
taxes i personal expendi- saving consump- Personal
tures
income
tion exsaving
penditures

Year or quarter

Billions of dollars

Percent

1929

85.8

2.6

83.1

79.0

4.2

95.1

5.1

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

76.9
65.7
50.1
47.2
53.6

2.5
1.9
1.5
1.5
1.6

74.4
63.8
48.7
45.7
52.0

71.0
61.3
49.3
46.4
51.9

3.4
2.5
—.6
—.6
.1

95.4
96.1
101.2
101.5
99.8

4.6
3.9
—1.2
—1.3
.2

1935
1936.
1937
1938
1939

60.2
68.5
73.9
68.6
72.9

1.9
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.4

58.3
66.2
71.0
65.7
70.4

56.3
62.6
67.3
64.6
67.6

2.0
3.6
3.7
1.1
2.9

96.6
94.6
94.8
98.3
96.0

3.4
5.4
5.2
1.7
4.1

78.7
96.3
123.5
151.4
165.7

2.6
3.3
6.0
17.8
18.9

76.1
93.0
117.5
133.5
146.8

71.9
81.9
89.7
100.5
109.8

4.2
11.1
27.8
33.0
36.9

94.5
88.1
76.3
75.3
74.8

5.5
11.9
23.7
24.7
25.1

1945.
1946
1947
1948..
1949

171.2
179.3
191.6
210.4
208.3

20.9
18.7
21.5
21.1
18.7

150.4
160.6
170.1
189.3
189.7

121.7
147.1
165.4
178.3
181.2

28.7
13.5
4.7
11.0
8.5

80.9
91.6
97.2
94.2
95.5

19.1
8.4
2.8
5.8
4.5

1950
1951
1952
1953.
1954

228.5
256.7
273.1
288.3
289.8

20.8
29.2
34.4
35.8
32.9

207.7
227.5
238.7
252.5
256.9

195.0
209.8
219.8
232.6
238.0

12.6
17.7
18.9
19.8
18.9

93.9
92.2
92.1
92.1
92.6

6.1
7.8
7.9
7.8
7.4

1955
1956
1957
19581959

310.2
332.9
351.4
360.3
383.9

35.7
40.0
42.6
42.3
46.8

274.4
292.9
308.8
317.9
337.1

256.9
269.9
285.2
293.2
313.5

17.5
23.0
23.6
24.7
23.6

93.6
92.1
92.4
92.2
93.0

6.4
7.9
7.6
7.8
7.0

401.3
417.4
442.1
463.0

51.4
52.9
57.7
60.4

349.9
364.4
384.4
402.6

328.2
336.8
355.4
373.2

21.7
27.6
29.1
29.4

93.8
92.4
92.5
92.7

6.2
7.6
7.6
7.3

1940.
1941
1942.
1943
1944

1960
1961
1962
1963 a

.

_.__
_

_

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I
II
III...
IV

406.6
414.5
420.2
428.0

51.3
52.5
53.0
54.9

355.3
362.0
367.2
373.1

330.7
334.9
337.9
343.8

24.5
27.1
29.2
29.3

93.1
92.5
92.0
92.1

6.9
7.5
8.0
7.9

1962: I
II
III.

433.6
440.7
444.5
449.9

56.2
57.9
58.1
58.5

377.3
382.7
386.5
391.4

348.8
352.9
356.7
362.9

28.5
29.8
29.7
28.5

92.4
92.2
92.3
92.7

7.6
7.8
7.7
7.3

1963: I II—
III 2
IV

453.9
459.9
465.2
473.0

59.4
59.9
60.8
61.7

394.5
400.0
404.4
411.3

367.4
370.4
374.9
380.0

27.1
29.6
29.5
31.3

93.1
92.6
92.7
92.4

6.9
7.4
7.3
7.6

1
Includes also such items as fines and penalties.
* Preliminary estimates b y Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning4960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




226

TABLE C-16.—Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption
expenditures, in current and 1963 prices, 7929-63
Total disposable
personal income

Current 1963
prices prices'

Year or quarter

(billions of
dollars)

Per capita disposable personal
income (dollars)
Current 1963 :
prices prices

Total personal
consumption
expenditures
(billions of
dollars)

Per capita personal consumption expenditures (dollars)

Population
(thousands) *

Current 1963 a Current 1963 3
prices prices
prices prices

1929

83.1

152.8

682

1,254

79.0

145.2

648

1,191

121,875

1930
1931.
1932
1933.
1934

74.4
63.8
48.7
45.7
52.0

143.1
137.8
119.1
116.0
123.8

604
514
390
364
411

1,162
1,110
953
923
979

71.0
61.3
49.3
46.4
51.9

136.6
132.4
120.5
117.7
123.7

576
494
395
369
410

1,109
1,066
964
936
978

123,188
124,149
124,949
125,690
126,485

1935
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939

58.3
66.2
71.0
65.7
70.4

135.9
152.9
157.8
149.7
161.8

458
516
551
506
537

,067
,193
,224
,152
,235

56.3
62.6
67.3
64.6
67.6

131.3
144.5
149.6
147.1
155.3

442
488
522
497
516

1,031
1,127
1,160
1,132
1,185

127,362
128,181
128,961
129,969
131,028

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944-

76.1
93.0
117.5
133.5
146.8

173.0
197.9
223.8
233.0
243.0

576
697
871
976
1,061

71.9
81.9
89.7
100.5
109.8

163.5
174.3
170.8
175.4
181.8

544
614
665
735

1,237
1,307
1,266
1,283
1,314

132,122
133,402
134,860
136,739
138,397

1945.
19461947.
1948
1949

150.4
160.6
170.1
189.3
189.7

240.3
237.6
227.4
239.3
242.0

1,075
1,136
',180
,291
,272

121.7
147.1
165.4
178.3
181.2

194.4
217.5
221.1
225.3
231.0

870
1,040
1,148
1,216
1,215

1,389
1,538
1,534
1,537
1,548

139,928
141,389
144,126
146,631
149,188

1950
1951
1952
19531954-

207.7
227.5
238.7
252.5
256.9

268.0
275.6
288.6
290.6

,475
,521
,582
,582

195.0
209.8
219.8
232.6
238.0

244.9
247.2
253.7
265.8
269.3

1,286
1,360
1,400
1,458
1,466

1,614
1,602
1,616
1,666
1,658

151,689
154,283
156,947
159, 559
162,388

1955
1956
1957.
19581959

274.4
292.9
308.8
317.9
337.1

309.0
324.4
332.4
335. 7
351.9

,660
,741
,803
, 825
,904

256.9
269.9
285.2
293.2
313.5

289.3
299.0
307.0
309.7
327.2

1,554
1,604
1,665
, 684
,770

1,750
1,777
1,792
1,778
1,848

165,276
168,225
171,278
174,154
177,080

1960.
19611962.
1963 8

364.4
384.4
402.6

360.0
372.6
389.5
402.6

328.2
336.8
355.4
373.2

337.8
344.3
360.1
373.2

,817
,833
,905
,972

1,870
1,874
1,930
1,972

180,676
183,742
186,591
189,278

2,060
2,127

1,993
2,028
2,087
2,127

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I...
II
III.
IV..

355.3
362.0
367.2
373.1

363.7
370.5
375.1
380.3

1,945
1,974
1,994
2,017

1,991
2,020
2,037
2,056

330.7
334.9
337.9
343.8

338.6
342.7
345.3
350.5

1,810
1,826
1,835
1,859

1,854
1,869
1,879
1,895

182,666
183,375
184,150
184,952

1962: I...
II..
III.
IV-

377.3
382.7
386.5
391.4

383.8
388.5
391.2
394.6

2,033
2,055
2,067
2,085

2,068
2,086
2,092
2,102

348.8
352.9
356.7
362.9

354.9
358.2
361.2
366.0

1,879
1,895
1,908
1,933

1,912
1,923
1,932
1,950

185,607
186,258
186,980
187,738

1963: I...
II-.
III.
IV».

394.5
400.0
404.4
411.3

396.1
400.4
403.6
409.3

2,094
2,117
2,132
2,160

2,102
2,119
2,128
2,150

367.4
370.4
374.9
380.0

369.0
370. 8
374.3
378.1

1,951
1,960
1,977
1,996

1,959
1,962
1,974
1,986

188,356
188,953
189,654
190,388

1
Estimates in current prices divided by the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditures on a 1963 base.
2 See Table C-2 for explanation.
»Total expenditures in 1963 prices divided by population.
4 Population of the United States including armed forces abroad. Annual data are for July 1; quarterly
data are for middle of period.
• Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




227

T A B L E G-17.—Financial saving by individuals, 1939-63l
[Billions of dollars]
Securities
Currency Savand ings
Year or quarter Total bank shares
U.S. Other
desavTotal ings governposits
bonds ment3
1939

.

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
r956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
19631°
1961: I

4.2
4.2

. . —
_.

10.5
29.3
38.7
41.4
37.3
14.1
6.5

2 8
2.2
.8

11.1
13.1
10.9

-. _

9.5
7.1

14.1
15.5
16 9
13.3
8.1

...

.

._

II
III
IV

1962: I

II-..
III
IV—.
1963: I
II

III

IV io

15.9
19.6
19.3
4.4
3.2

61
2.2
7.0
4.0
6.4
2.3
6.6
3.3
5.2
4.2

0.7
0.1 - 0 . 8
.3 - . 4
.9
.4
2.6
2.8
. 3 10.3
8.0
10.9
. 6 14.1 11.1
16.2
.9 15.7 11.8
17.5
6.9
1.1
9.9
19.0
1.2 - 1 . 4
1.0
10.6
2.4
2.0
1.3
2.0
1.6
— 1.8 1 3 3.1
2.4
-1.4
1.5
1.6
.9
.3
3.5
1.7
.5
2.3
-.5
5.9
3.5
.1
3.3
7.0
3.4
4.7
.2
4.0
.4
5.4
.6
4.8
6.4
5.2
.3
3.3
-.1
5.2
5.4
4.7
4.6 - 1 . 9
5.2
4.9
1.3 - . 5
10.2
6.3
9.9 - 1 . 8
4.4
7.2
-.1
-.2
2.8
8.3
1.2
9.3
9.4
.8
.4
19.1 10.1 - . 7
.3
1.2
15.0 12.0
1.2
.3
2.0 - 1 . 1
.1
2.0
2.7 - . 8
2
32 15 17
.2
2.9
3.2
1.3
.1
.2
2.1
4.3
.1
3.4
2.8 - 1 . 0
.2
.3
6.0
1.7
5.4
3.5 - . 2
3.2 - 1 . 2
.4
3.5
.2
2.4
3.3 - . 3
1.1
.3
4.6
1.7
.3
4.5
.8
3.8
3.0
2.9
4.8

Private Nonininsur- sured
Cor- ance penporate re- sion
and serves funds
other (*)

-0.9 -0.6
-.4
-.8
.4
-.5
2.3
3.2
-.3
4.6 - . 7
4.2 - 1 . 2

-2.4

-.3
.4
.2
-.1
-.4
1.3
2.0
-.9
3.9
3.3
3.7
-.8

10.8
-1.0

.7

1 l
.7
.7
1.4
2.2
1.2
.7
2.2
2.0
2.8
2.6
.9
1.1
.8

-.4
.4 - 1 . 5
1.1 - 2 . 0
-1.2 - . 2
1.1
-2.1

16

1.3
.4
-.6
.4
.2

-.9

-.1
1.6
.7

-.2

— 5
-.5
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.4
-.7
-.2

1.7
1.8
2.1
2.5
2.8
3.2
3.5
3.4
3.6
3.7
3.7
3.9
4.1
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.5
5.5
5.1
5.6
5.5
5.5
5.9
6.2
6.4
.3
1 .2
.8
.3
.6
.7
.7
.5
.5
.7
L.8

0.1
.1
.1
.1
.2
.6
.9
.3
.3
.4
.6
.9
1.4
1.5
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.4
2.9
3.1
3.4
3.7
4.0
4.0
4.3
1.1
.9
.9
1.0
1.0
1.0
.9
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.2

Government
insurance
and
pension
reserves8
1.3
1.3
1.9
2.6
3.9
5.0
5.1
3.5
3.5
3.6
2.3
1.1
4.2
4.4
3.2
2.6
3.1
3.6
3.2
.6
2.3
3.4
1.2
2.8
4.4
-.2
1.5
6
-.8
—.1
2.0
1.0
-.1
.4
2.7
1.4
-.1

Less Increase In
debt

Mort- Con- Secugage sumer rities
debt« debt* loans 8
0.5
0.8 - 0 . 2
.9
1.0 - . 2
.8
.7 - . 1
. 1 —3.0
.3
- . 4 -1.0
.6
-.1
1.4
.1
.2
.5
1.5
3.6
2.3 - 2 . 3
4.6
2.8 - . 8
4
4.7
2.4
4.1
2.6
.3
7.3
3.6
.2
6.6
1.0 —.3
6.5
4.4
.6
3.6
7.3
.4
9.0
1.0
.9
11.8
6.1
.6
10.3
3.1
-.8
-.1
7.9
2.5
.4
.2
9.3
13.2
6.1
.2
4.2
11.0
.3
12.5
1.5
1.0
5.3
1.1
15.4
.9
5.7
16.7
2.8 - 1 . 8 - 1 . 0
.6
8
2.8
2
.3
2 9
2.2
4.0
1.1
3.3 - 1 . 1
—.5
-.4
2.5
3.8
3.9
1.0
.2
2.9
4.4
1.8
4.1 - . 9 - 1 . 3
4.0
2.3
.9
4.1
.8
1.5
.5
4.5
2.8

1
Individuals' saving, in addition to personal holdings, covers saving of unincorporated business, trust
funds, and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified.
2 Includes shares in savings and loan associations and shares and deposits in credit unions.
3 "Other government" includes U.S. Government issues (except savings bonds), State and local government securities, and beginning 1951, nonguaranteed Federal agency issues, which are included in "corporate
and other" for years prior to 1951.
* Includes insured pension reserves.
«Includes Social Security funds, State and local retirement systems, etc.
fl
Mortgage debt to institutions on one- to four-family nonfarm dwellings.
7
Consumer debt owed to corporations, largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumer goods, although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. Policy
loans on Government and private life insurance have been deducted from those items of saving.
8
Change in bank loans to brokers and dealers and others for the purpose of purchasing cr carrying securities.
» Less than $50 million.
10
Preliminary.
NOTE.—Figures beginning 1960 have been revised since the Economic Report of the President, January
1963.
In addition to the concept of saving shown above, there are other concepts of individuals' saving, with
varying degrees of coverage, currently in use. The personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce are derived as the difference between disposable personal income and expenditures. Conceptually,
Commerce saving includes the following items not included in Securities and Exchange Commission
saving: housing, farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment,
net of depreciation, and increase in debt. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving
series. For a reconciliation of the two series, see Securities and Exchange Commission Statistical Bulletin,
July 1963, and Survey of Current Business, July 1963.
Theflow-of-fundssystem of accounts of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System includes
capital investments as well as financial components of saving and covers saving of Federal, State, and local
governments, businesses, financial institutions, and consumers. While the Federal Reserve's estimates of
consumer saving in financial form are similar to the Securities and Exchange Commission estimates of
individuals' saving, there are some statistical and conceptual differences in the two sets of data.
Revisions for 1960-63 in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System have not yet been incorporated into these estimates.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods.
8ource: Securities and Exchange Commission.




228

TABLE C-18.—Sources and uses of gross saving, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Gross private saving and government surplus or
deficit on income and product transactions
Government surplus
or deficit (-)

Private saving

Year or quarter
Total

Total

Personal
saving

Gross
busi- Total
ness
saving

Federal

State
and
local

Gross investment
Statis
tical
Gross
private Net for- disTotal domes- eign in- ancy
tic in- vest- l
vest- ment
ment

1929

16.7

15.7

4.2

11.5

1.0

1.2

-0.1

17.0

16.2

0.8

0.3

19301931
1932
1933.
1934

11.9
4.9

12.2
7.7

3.4
2.5

8.8
5.2

-.3
-2.8
-1.7
-1.4
-2.4

.3
-2.1
-1.5
-1.3
-2.9

-.5
-.7
-.2

11.0
5.7

10.3
5.5
.9
1.4
2.9

.7
.2

-1.0
.8
8
.9
.7

-2.0
-3.0

-2.6
-3.5
-.2

-1.6
-2.1

-2.0
-2.2

.6
.5
.7
.4
.1

11.8
10.2

6.3
8.4
11.7
6.7
9.3

-.1

.6

2.0

-.6

2.7

.6
2.6

1.9
5.0

-.6
.1

2.6
4.9

6.4

2.0

6.3

12.1

8.4
10.1
11.5

7.3
9.0

11.2

3.6
3.7
1.1
2.9

6.5
7.8
7.8
8.3

13.9
18.8
10.5
5.1
2.3

14.6
22.6
41.9
49.3
54.2

4.2

11.1
27.8
33.0
36.9

10.4
11.5
14.1
16.3
17.2

rj
-1.4
-3.8 -5.1
-31.4 -33.2
-44.2 -46.7
-51.9 -54.6

.7
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.7

14.7
19.2
9.7
3.4
5.0

13.2
18.1
99
5.6
7.1

1.1
— 2
-2.2
-2.1

.8
.4
— 8
-1.7
2.8

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

45
30.6
36.8
45.9
33.0

44.3
26.5
23.6
37.6
36.1

28.7
13.5
4.7
11.0
8.5

15.6 -39.7 -42.3
2.2
4.1
13.1
12.2
13.3
18.9
8.0
8.2
26.6
27.6 - 3 . 1 -2.5

2.6
1.9
1.1
.3
-.6

9.0
32.7
40.4
45.0
33.5

10.4
28.1
31.5
43.1
33.0

-1.4
4.6
8.9
1.9
.5

4.5
2.1
3.6
-.8
.5

1950
1951
19521953
1954

48.5
55.3
48.3
47.0
47.6

40.3
49.2
52.2
54.1
54.4

12.6
17.7
18.9
19.8
18.9

27.7
31.5
33.2
34.3
35.5

8.2
6.1
-3.9
-7.1
-6.7

9.2
6.4
-3.9
-7.4
-5.8

-1.0
-.3

50.0
56.3
49.9
50.3
48.9

-2.2
.2

.3
-.9

47.8
56.6
49.7
48.3
48.5

-.7
1.2
1.4
1.3
.9

62.4
71.3
70.2
58.1
73.4

59.6
66.1
69.2
69.5
74.9

17.5
23.0
23.6
24.7
23.6

2.9
42.1
5.2
43.0
1.0
45.6
44.8 —11.4
51.3 - 1 . 5

3.8

5.7
2.0
-9.4
-1.1

-1.0
-.5
-1.0
-2.1
-.3

63.4
68.8
69.6
56.6
70.4

63.8
67.4
66.1
56.6
72.7

—.4

1.0

1.5
3.5

-2.4
—.6
—1.5
-3.0

72.3
76.2
78.4
73.8
82 8 86.7
4 88.3 4 90.0

21.7
27.6
29.1
29.4

3.9
3.5
50.7
50.8 - 4 . 7 - 4 . 5
3.9
57.6
-4.3
4 60.6 4-1.7 4-2.8

.4
-.1
.4

73.2
71.9
81.0
85.0

71.8
69.0
78.8
82.3

1.4
2.9

63.4
69.3
74.6
80.1

59.6
66.6
72.0
77.6

3.8

.3
.

1935
1936
1937.
1938
1939

_

7.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

__.

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959.

. _

1960
1961
1962
1963 3

8.9

!

.5

.1

1.1

1.5
3.3
6.2
8.3
7.8

.2

.2
.4
—.1
.1
1.1
.9
1.5

—.2

-2.0
—.4

—.1

-2.3

2 2
2.7

-.2
1 l
-.2
.5
1.2

-3.0
-1.9
—1.8
4-3.3

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
-6.4

II
III
IV

66.1
72.5
76.3
80.0

72.5
77.9
80.3
82.8

24.5
27.1
29.2
29.3

48.0
50.8
51.1
53.5

-4.0
-2.8

-6.0
-5.4
-4.0
-2.5

1962: I
II
Ill
IV

79.7
85.0
84.1
82.4

85.1
86.9
87.1
87.8

28.5
29.8
29.7
28.5

56.6
57.2
57.4
59.4

-5.4
-1.9
-3.0
-5.4

-5.6
-3.0
-3.6
-5.3

.2
1.1
.6
— 1

78.7
82.6
81.6
80.5

77.3
79.6
78.9
78.8

1.4

-.9

3.0
2.6

-2.5
-2.6
-1.9

1963: I
II
Ill
IVK

82.3
87.9
90.8

86.4
89.2
91.4

27.1
29.6
29.5
31.3

59.3
59.6
61.9

-4.2
-1.3
-.6

-4.6
-3.0
-1.8

.4
1.7
1.2

79.9
83.7
86.3
90.0

77.8
80.7
83.7
87.0

2.2
3.1
2.6
3.0

1961: I

.

.

5.4

-0.4
(5)

(0)

1

2.7
2.6
2.4

1.7

-2.8
-3.2
-1.8

-2.3
-4.1
-4.4

Net exports of goods and services less foreign net transfers by Government. For 1929-45, net foreign
investment and net exports of goods and services have been equated, since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period.
* Deficit of $35 million.
8
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
4
Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole; data for fourth quarter are not
available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate.
* Less than $50 million.
6
Not available.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




229

EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY
TABLE Q-\9—Noninstitutional

population and the labor force, 1929-63
Civilian labor force

Total
Nonin- labor
stitu- force Armed
tional (includl
popu- ing forces Total
lation 1 armed

Year or month

forces) 1

Total Unemlabor ployforce as ment
percent as perof nonUnem- institu- cent of
civilian
ployAgri- Non- ment 2 tional labor
agripopu- force
Total culcullation
tural tural
Employment 2

Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over
Old definitions: 2
1929.

Percent

49,440

260 49,180 47,630 10,450 37,180

1,550

3.2

1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934.

50,080
50,680
51,250
51, 840
52,490

260
260
250
250
260

49,820
50,420
51,000
51, 590
52,230

45,480
42,400
38,940
38,760
40,890

10,340
10,290
10,170
10,090
9,900

35,140 4,340
32,110 8,020
28,770 12,060
28,670 12,830
30,990 11,340

8.7
15.9
23.6
24.9
21.7

1935.
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.

53,140
53, 740
54,320
54,950
55,600

270
300
320
340
370

52, 870
53,440
54,000
54,610
55,230

42,260
44, 410
46,300
44,220
45,750

10,110
10,000
9,820
9,690
9,610

32,150
34,410
36,480
34, 530
36,140

10,610
9,030
7,700
10,390
9,480

20.1
16.9
14.3
19.0
17.2

56,180
57, 530
60,380
64,560
66,040

540
1,620
3,970
9,020
11,410

55,640
55, 910
56,410
55, 540
54,630

47, 520 9,540 37,980
50,350 9,100 41.250
53,750 9,250 44,500
54,470
45,390
8,950 45,010

8,120
5,560

2, f'"
1,070
670

56.0
56.7
58.8
62.3
63.1

14.6
9.9
4.7
1.9
1.2

105, 530 65,300 11,440 53,860 52,820
106, 520 60,970 3,450 57, 520 55,250
107,608 61,758 1,590 60,168 58,027

8,580 44,240 1,040
8,320 46,930 2,270
8,266 49, 761 2,142

61.9
57.2
57.4

1.9
3.9
3.6

107, 608 61,758 1,590 60,168 57,812
108,632 62, 898 1,456 61, 442 59,117
109, 773 63,721 1,616 62,105 58,423

1940 _
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

8,256 49, 557 2,356
7,r" 51,156 2,325
8,017 50,406

57.4
57.9
58.0

3.8
5.9

J00,380
101,520
102,610
103,660
104,630

1945
1946
1947
New definitions:
1947.1948
1949
1950 _
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.

110,929
112,075
113, 270
115,094
116,219

64, 749
65,983
66, 560
67,362
67, 818

1,650
3,099
3,594
3,547
3,350

63,099
62, 884
62,966
63,815
64,468

59, 748
60,784
61,035
61,945
60,890

7,497
7,048
6,792
6,555
6,495

52.251
53,736
54,243
55,390
54,395

3,351
2,099
1,932
1,870
3,578

58.4
58.9
58.8
58.5
58.4

5.3
3.3
3.1
2.9
5.6

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

117, 388
118, 734
120,445
121, 950
123,366

70,387
70,744
71,284
71,946

3,048
2,857
2,798
2,637
2,552

65,848
67,530
67, 946
68,647
69,394

62,944
64,708
65,011
63,966
65, 581

6,718
6,572
6,222
5,844
5,836

56,225
58,135
58,789
58,122
59,745

2,904
2,822
2,936
4,681
3,813

58.7
59.3
58.7
58.5
58.3

4.4
4.2
4.3
6.8
5.5

124,878

72, 820 2,514 70,306 66,392

5,696

3,913

58.3

5.6

125, 368
127,852
130.117
130,081
132,125

73,126
74,175
74,839
74,681
75,712

2,514
2,572
2,828
2,827
2,737

70,612
71,603
72,011
71,854
72,975

66,681
66,796
67,999
67,846
68,809

5,723
5,463
5,255
5,190
4,946

60, 958
61,333
62, 744
62,657
63,863

3,931
4,
4,012
4,007
4,166

58.3
58.0
57.5
57.4
57.3

5.6
6.7
5.6
5.6
5.7

129.118
129,290
129,471
129.641
129,587
129,752
129,930

72,564
73,218
73,582
73,864
73,654
74,797
76,857

2,843
2,886
2,885
2.885
2,885
2,875
2,856

69,721
70,332
70,697
70.979
70,769
71,922
74,001

65,058
65,789
66,316
67,027
66,824
68,203
69,539

4,417
4,578
4,782
5,048
4,961
5,428
6,290

60,641

4,663
4,543
4,382
3,952
61,863 3,946
62, 775 3,719
63,249 4,463

56.2
56.6
56.8
57.0
56.8
57.6
59.2

6.7
6.5
6.2
5.6
5.6
5.2
6.0

130,183
130,359
130,546
130, 730
130,910
131,096

76,437
76,554
74,914
74,923
74,532
74,142

2,855
2,859
2,735
2,736
2,750
2,764

73, 582 69,564
73,695 69,762
72,179 .68,668
72,187
71,782 67, 981
71,378 67,561

6,064
5,770
5,564
5,475
4,883
4,066

63,500

58.
58.7
57.4
57.3
56.9
56.6

5.5
5.3
4.9
4.6
5.3
5.3

1960

Including Alaska
Hawaii
1960
1961
1962*....
1062
1963

and

1962: January...
February.
March
April

ApriP.
MayJune. .
July
August
SeptemberOctober
November..
December..

See footnotes at end of table.




23O

61,211
61, 533
61,979

63,103
63,418
63,098
63,495

4,018
3,932
3,512
3,294
3,801
3,817

TABLE C-19.—Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-63—Continued

Year or month

Total
Nonin- labor
stitu- force Armed
tional (includ- forces i
popuing
Total
lation i armed
forces) *

Total
labor
force as
Employment
percent
Unem- of nonAgri- Non- ploy- instituagri- ment 2 tional
Total culcultural tural
lation
Civilian labor force
i

Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over

Unemployment
as percent of
civilian
labor
force

Percent

1963: January. _.
February..
March
April
May
June

131,253
131,414
131,589
131, 739
131, 865
132,036

73,323
73, 999
74,382
74,897
75, 864
77,901

2,716
2,724
2,732
2,736
2,737
2,736

70,607
71,275
71,650
72,161
73,127
75,165

65,935
66,358
67,148
68,097
69,061
70,319

4,206
4,049
4,337
4,673
5,178
5,954

61,730
62,309
62,812
63,424
63,883
64,365

4,672
4,918
4,501
4,063
4,066
4,846

55.9
56.3
56.5
56.9
57.5
59.0

6.9
6.3
5.6
5.6
6.4

July
August
September.
October....
November.
December.

132,196
132,345
132,497
132,682
132,853
133,025

77, 917
77,167
75,811
76,086
76,000
75,201

2,744
2,749
2,749
2,742
2,739
2,740

75,173
74,418
73,062
73,344
73,261
72,461

70,851
70, 561
69, 546
69, 891
69,325
68,615

5,969
5,496
5,326
5,350
4.777
4,039

64,882
65,065
64,220
64,541
64, 548
64,576

4,322
3,857
3,516
3,453
3,936
3,846

58.9
58.3
57.2
57.3
57.2
56.5

5.7
5.2
4.8
4.7
5.4
5.3

Seasonally adjusted 6
1962: January...
February.
March
April «.„_
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November
December
1963: January..
February.
March
April.
MayJuly
August
September..
October
November..
December..

74,599
74,688
74,470
74,657
74, 529

71,434
71,713
71,803
71,585
71,782
71,673

67,262
67,629
67,860
67,591
67,821
67,731

5,380
5,481
5,504
5,296
5,269
5,190

61,882
62,148
62,356
62,295
62,552
62,541

4,172
4,084
3,994
3,961
3,942

5.8
5.7
5.5
5.6
5.5
5.5

74,585
75,056
74,989
74,651
74,577
74,848

71,730
72,197
72,254
71,915
71,827
72,084

67,833
68,104
68,188
68,076
67,691
68,091

3,897
4,093
4,066
3,839
4,136
3,993

5.4
5.7
5.6
5.5
5.8
5.5

75,064
75,225
75,430
75,738
75,726
75,456

72,348
72,501
72,698
73,002
72,989
72,720

68,171
68,874
68,676
68,602

5,118 62,715
5,087 63,017
5,114 63,074
5,040
4,r~ 62,708
63,248
4,843
5,183
4,841 63,245
5,008 63,628
5,023 63,851
5,033 63,643
4,909 63,693

4,177
4,415
4,062
4,128
4,313
4,118

5.8
6.1
5.6
5.7
5.9
5.7

76,013
75,664
75,885
75,843
76,076
76,003

73,269
72,915
73,136
73,101
73,337
73,263

69,161
68,917
69,076
69,075
69,045
69,206

5,024
4,838
4,884
4,919
4,892
4,883

4,108

5.6
5.5
5.6
5.5
5.9
5.5

74,277

64,137
64,079
64,192
64,156
64,153
64,323

4,060
4,026
4,292
4,057

1
Data for 1940-52 revised to include about 150,000 members of the armed forces who were outside the
United States in 1940 and who were, therefore, not enumerated in the 1940 Census and were excluded from
the 1940-52 estimates.
a See Note.
»Not available.
* Averages have been adjusted by the Council of Economic Advisers for comparison with previous
data. See Note.
* Beginning April 1962, not comparable with prior data. See Note.
»Seasonally adjusted totals may differ from the sum of components because totals and components have
been seasonally adjusted separately.
NOTE.—Civilian labor force data beginning with January 1963 are based on a 357-area sample. For
January 1960-December 1962 on a 333-area sample; for May 1956-December 1959 on a 330-area sample;
for January 1954-April 1956 on a 230-area sample; for 1946-53 on a 68-area sample; for 1940-45 on a smaller
sample; and for 1929-39 on sources other than direct enumeration.
Effective January 1957, persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within 30 days
of layoff and persons waiting to start new wage and salary jobs within the following 30 days are classified
as unemployed. Such persons had previously been classified as employed (with a job but not at work).
The combined total of the groups changing classification has averaged about 200,000 to 300,000 a month in
recent years. The small number of persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new
jobs are classified as not in the labor force instead of employed, as formerly. Persons waiting to open new
businesses or start new farms within 30 days continued to be classified as employed.
Beginning July 1955, monthly data are for the calendar week ending nearest the 15th of the month; previously, for week containing the 8th. Annual data are averages of monthly figures.
Beginning April 1962, estimating procedures made use of 1960 Census data; January 1953-March 1962,
1950 Census data and 1940-52,1940 Census data were used. For the effects of this change on the historical
comparabilitylof the data, see Employment and Earnings, May 1962, p. xiv.
Source: Department of Labor (except as noted).




231

TABLE C-20.—Employment and unemployment, by sex and age, 1947-63
[Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over]
Employed
Males

Unemployed
Females

Males

Females

Year or month
Total

Old definitions: *
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955.
1956
New definitions:
1957—
1958
_
1959
19602
1961
1962 3
1963

20 Total
20
20
20
14-19 years
14-19 years
14-19 years
14-19 years
Total years and Total years and
Total years and Total years and
over
over
over

58,027 41,677 2,795 38,883 16,349 1,92114,429 2,142 1,595 279 1,316
59,378 42,428 2,911 39, 518 16,950 1,930 15,020 2,064 1,430 262 1,171
58,710 41,660 2,687 38,97417,049 1,826 15,225 3,395 2,415 367 2,048
59,957 42,287 2,787 39,499 17, 670 1,777 15,893
61,005 42,490 2,753 39, 738 18,5151,86316,,652
""
61,293 42,391 2,674 39,717 18,9021,857 17,
,047
62; 213 43; 125 2,686 40; 440 19,088 1,829 17,259
61,238 42,377 2,550 39,827 18,8611,73617,125

3,142
1,879
1,673
1,602
3,230

2,155
1,123
1,062
1,069
2,161

63,19343,290 2,642 40,64619,9041,80318,101 2,654 1,752
64,979 44,148 2,802 41,345 20,8311,96218,869 2,551 1,608

146
153
228

402
480
753

339 1,816 987 204
206 917 756 150
222 840 611 140
195 875 533 117
318 1,842 1,069 197

784
609
471
416
873

292 1,460
296 1,314

724
730

547
633
981

903
943

179
214

65,01143,990 2,750 41,239 21,0211,970 19,
1,050 2,936 1,8
351 1,541 1,043 222 820
966 43,042 2,631 40,410 20,924 1,
1,043 4,681 3,155 473 2,680 1,526 284 1,242
58144,089 2,82141,268 21,492 1,968 Vd, 3,813 2,473 451 2,022 1,340 276 1,064
1,523
66,681 44,485 2, 941 41,543 22,196 2,091 20,104 3,931
66, 796 44,318 2,976 41,342 22,478 2,181 20,2954,806
67,846 44, 892 3, 077
41,815 22,954 2,262 20,693 4,007
68,809 45,330 3,079 42; 259 23,479 2,223 21,2574,166

2,541
3,060
2,488
2,537

480
542
472
566

2,058
2,518
2,016
1,971

1,390
1,747
1,519
1,

310
379
344
413

1,078
1,366
1,176
1,216

Seasonally adjusted *
1962:
January...
February..
March
Aprils
May
June

67,262 44,533 3,000 41,533 22,729 2,203 20, 526
4,172
67,629 44, 765 3,041 41,724 22,864 2,213 20,651 4,084
67,860 44,930 3,110 41,820 22,930 2,239 20,6913,943
67, 591 44,770 3,046 41,724 22,821 2,216 20,6053,994
67,821 44,949 3,151 41,798 22,872 2,307 20,565 3,961
67, 731 44,899 3,135f41, 764 22,832 2,336 20, 496
3,942

2,564
2,561
2,450
2,497
2,490
2,521

490
519
458
481
509
469

2,074
2,042
1,992
2,016
1,981
2,052

1,608
1,523
1,493
1,497
1,471
1,421

354
359
354
387
356

,254
,164
,139
,110
,115
,113

67,833 44,908 3,124 41,784 22,925 2,305 20,620 3,897
2,
"1,755 4,093
68,104 45; 037 3,089 4i; 948 23,151 % 272 20,879
68; 18845,006 3,112 41,894 23,098 2,343 20,',
4,066
68,076 45,091 3,067 42,024 22,985 2,192 20,793 3,839
67,691 44,722 2,862 41, 860 22,969 2,198 20,771 4,136
68,091 44,969 3,110 41,859 23,122 2,248 20,874

2,442
2,496
2,471
2,338
2,529
2,469

465
430
549
411

1,981
2,057
2,006
1,908
1,980
2,058

1,455
1,597
1,595
1,501
1,607
1,524

330
305
340
384
382

,118
,267
,290
,161
,223
,142

1963:
January
February. _.
March
April
May
June

953 3,023 41,930 23, 218 2,222 20,996
799 2,892 41,907 23,287 2,240 21,047
21,274
,344
68; 676 45; 170 3,077 42; 093 23, 506 2, 287 21,219
68,602 45,352 3,035 42,317 23,250 2,120 21,130

4,177
4,415
4,062
4,128
4,313
4,118

2,594
2,789
2,572
2,581
2,633
2,508

462
556
547
612
692
569

2,132
2,233
2,025
1,
1,941
1S

1,583
1,6
1,490
1,547
1,680
1,610

387
393
358
373
467
413

,196
,233
132
174
213
197

July
August
SeptemberOctober
November.
December..

69,161 45,650 3,108 42, 542 23, 511 2,250 21, 261
,
68,917 45, 597 3,202 42,395 23,320 2,247 21,073
69,076 45,619 3,184 42,435 23,457 2,252 21,205
6 9 075 45495 3167 42328 23 580 2197 21
69; 7 5 45,495 3,167 42,328 23,
2,197 21,383
729
1,045 45,316 3,,040 42,276 23,' 2,18121,548
1,20645,360 3,,055 42,305 23,8462,307 21,539
5

4,108
3,998
4,060
4,026
4,292
4,057

2,498
2,373
2,362
2,329
2,533
2,440

605
538
562
508
614
504

1,?
1,835
1,800
1,821
1,919
1,

1,610
1,625
I, 1 ""
1,
1,759
1,617

179
431
358 267
397 ,301
471 ,226
468 ,291
427 1,190

July
August
September..
October
November..
December..

1 See Note, Table C-19, for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions.
2 Beginning January 1960, data for Alaska and Hawaii are included.
3 Beginning April 1962, not comparable with prior data; see Note, Table C-19.
* Seasonally adjusted totals may differ from the sum of components because totals and components have
been seasonally adjusted separately.
Note.—See Note, Table C-19, for information on area sample used and reporting periods.
Source: Department of Labor.




232

T A B L E C—21.—Employed persons not at work, by reason for not working, and special groups of
unemployed persons, 1946—63
[Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over]
Employed persons not at work,
by reason for not working
Year or month
Total

Bad
weather

Industrial
dispute

Vacation

Special groups of unemployed persons l

Illness

All
other
reasons

Tempo- New wage
rary
and salary
layoff 8
job»

New definitions: *
2,103
2,259
2,489
2,244

211
197
110

95
97
79

662
834
1,044
1,044

819
847
844
719

273
308
291

97
123
141
185

58
92
121
101

2,440
2,460
2,555
2.530
2,688

151
111
68
96
73

85
57
164
73
53

1,137
1,073
1,130
1,171
1,361

718
782
775
827
776

349
436
418
362
425

92
117
142
167
221

116
103
117
101
127

2,682
2,889
3,017
3,076
3,161

103
103
139
182
115

61
76
45
59
160

1,268
1,346
1,447
1,479
1,494

835
901
962
882
907

416
456
425
474
484

133
124
150
166
128

117
147
110
120
134

3,231
3,146
3,281
3,501

168
143
160
106

40
56
33
41

1,576
1,492
1,533
1,655

942
898
940
1,000

505
556
615

147
149
121
120

119
129
125
138

1962: January
February. _
March
April*
May
June

2,681
2,570
2,130
1,994
2,032
3,870

275
201
104
10
40

39
37
27
40
34
61

322
396
374
428
663
2,129

1,036
1,224
1,040
949
870
832

587
639
487
474
455

186
95
115
93
107
96

100
82
80
107
111
211

July__
August
SeptemberOctober
November.
December _
1963: January....
February. _
March
April
May
June

7,477
6,839
2,780
2,263
2,174
2,559

29
3
17
29
32
476

5,637
5,132
1,448
818
618
430

862
843
811
898
916
1,002

900
849
472
499
586
621

128
183
107
114
116
117

152
248
154
95
94
63

2,421
2,677
2,737
2,172
4,085

304
318
188
75
43
17

360
404
380
1,030
643
2,266

1,040
1,291
1,403
1,005
921
861

639
656
665
603
540
897

217
130
105
120
80
71

82
103
92
141
76

July
August
SeptemberOctober
November.
December..

7,916
7,338
3,102
2,387
2,205
2,269

24
14
26
2
33
232

5,897
5,460
1,553
848
601
420

877
824
931
948
932

1,060
991
568
551
587
618

130
189
90
123
116

149
191
173
118
112
126

1946
_
1947.
1948
1949....
1950..
1951
1952..
1953..
1954-...

.._

1955.
1956..
1957
1958
1959.
I960'
1961
1962*
1963

_

()
*

()

* Under the old definitions of employment and unemployment, these groups were included in the
"employed but not at work" category.
8
Persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within 30 days of the layoff.
« Persons scheduled to start new wage and salary jobs within 30 days. Under the old definitions, the
"new job or business" group included these persons as well as persons waiting to open new businesses or
start new farms within 30 days (see "all other" category in this table) and persons in school during the
survey week and waiting to start new jobs (these are now classified as "not in the labor force").
* See Note, Table C-19 for explanation.
8
Not available.
* Beginning January 1960, data for Alaska and Hawaii are included.
NOTE.—See Note, Table 0-19 for information on area sample used and reporting periods.
Source: Department of Labor.




2

33

TABLE C—22.—Selected measures of unemployment and part-time employment, 1948-63
Unemployment rate
(percent of civilian labor force
in group)

Year or month

All
workers

Experienced
wage and
salary
workers

Married
men i

Labor force
time lost
through
unemployment and
part-time
work'

Persons employed parttime in nonagricultural industries for
economic reasons

Usually
full-time»

Usually
part-time *

Thousands of persons
14 years of age and over

Percent
New definitions:
1948...
1949

3.8
5.9

4.2
6.7

3.4

1,530

786

1950
1951
1952._.
1953
1954. .

5.3
3.3
3.1
2.9
5.6

6.0
3.7
3.3
3.2
6.0

4.6
1.5
1.4
1.7
4.0

1,032
917
958

965
694
642

1,548

866

1955 .
1956
1957
1958.. .
1959

4.4
4.2
4.3
6.8
5.5

4.8
4.4
4.5
7.2
5.6

2.6
2.3
2.8
5.1
3.6

5.1
5.3
8.1
6.6

934
1,067
1,183
1,638
1,032

876
900

I960"
1961
1962 7 .
1963

5.6
6.7
5.6
5.7

5.7
6.8
5.5
5.5

3.7
4.6
3.6
3.4

6.7
8.0
6.7
6.8

1,243
1,297
1,049
1,070

,317
L,516
,?87

086

,315

] ,304

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January. .
February.
March
April
May
Jnnp.
July
August
September
October
November
December
1963: January
February
March
April
May..
July
August
September.... __
October
November
December

5.8
5.7
5.5
5.6
5.5
5.5

5.8
5.7
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.4

3.8
3.6
3.5
3.7
3.5
3.6

6.9
6.7
6.7
6.6
6.6
6.6

939
919
1,057
998
1,099
1,039

1,267
1,285
1,320
1,202
1,253
1,289

5.4
5.7
5.6
5 3
6.8
5.5

5.4
5.7
5.6
5.2
5.6
5.5

3.5
3.5
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.5

6.7
6.7
6.8
6.6
6.9
6.6

1,085
1,124
1,143
1,072
1,145
995

1,339
1,252
1,262
1,364
1,316
1,303

5.8
6.1
5.6
5.7
5.9
5.7

5.7
6.0
5.5
5.4
5.5
5.6

3.8
4.1
3.5
3.3
3.4
3.1

6.8
7.1
6.6
6.6
6.9
7.0

1,092
965
1,000
1,080
1,010
1,067

).2/a
]L 231
t',229
]1,099
,184
L,257

5.6
5.5
5.6
5.5
5.9
5.5

5.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
5.6
5.3

3.2
3.0
2.9
2.9
3.2
3.4

6.8
6.7
6.7
6.6
6.9
6.5

1,042
1,222
1,211
1,109
1,054
1,002

,309
]

l' 245
1,180
]1,162

1 Married men living with their wives. Data for 1949 and 1951-54 are for April; 1950 for March. These
data, including 1955 and 1956, have not been adjusted to reflect the change in the definition of employment
and unemployment adopted in January 1957. See Note, Table C-19.
2
Assumes unemployed persons lost 37.5 hours a week; those on part-time for economic reasons lost difference between 37.5 hours and actual number of hours worked.
• Includes persons who worked part-time because of slack work, material shortages or repairs, new job
started, or job terminated. Data for 1949-55 are for the month of May.
4
Primarily includes persons who could find only part-time work. Data for 1949-55 are for the month of
May.
«Not available.
• Beginning with January I960, data for Alaska and Hawaii are included.
' Not comparable with prior data. See Note, Table C-19.
Source: Department of Labor.




234

TABLE C-23.—Unemployed persons, by duration of unemployment, 1947-63
Duration of unemployment
Total unemployed

Year or quarter

4 weeks
and under

5-14
weeks

15-26
weeks

Over
26 weeks

Average
duration
of unemployment
(weeks)

Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over
New definitions:
1947
1948
1949

2,356
2,325
3,682

1,255
1,349
1,804

704
669
1,195

234
193
427

164
116
256

9.S
8.6
10.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

3,351
2,099
1,932
1,870
3,578

1,515
1,223
1,183
1,178
1,651

1,055
574
517
482
1,115

425
166
148
132
495

357
137
84
79
317

12.1
9.7
8.3
8.1
11.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

2,904
2,822
2,936
4,681
3,813

1,387
1,485
1,485
1,833
1,658

815
805
890
1,397
1,113

367
301
321
785
469

336
232
239
667
571

13.2
11.3
10.4
13.8
14.5

3,931
4,806
4,007
4,166

1,798
1,897
1,754
1,847

1,176
1,375
1.134
1,231

502
728
534
535

454
804
585
553

12.8
15.5
14.7
14.0

1961: I
II
III
IV

5,528
5,103
4,589
4,005

1,997
2,043
1,831
1,724

1,922
1,188
1,314
1,079

903
953
544
512

705
919
900
691

14.0
16.1
16.4
16.0

1962: I
II*
Ill
IV

4,529
4,042
3,820
3,637

1,690
1,862
1,729
1,734

1,450
917
1,171
1,000

686
607
371
471

703
656
549
432

15.7
15.4
14.0
13.5

4,697
4,325
3,898
3,745

1,788
2,077
1,753
1,771

1,628
1,004
1,222
1,071

664
631
399
445

617
613
523
458

14.4
14.5
13.5
13.2

19601
1961 2
1962
1963

_

-

1963: I
II
III
IV

-

_

* Beginning January 1960, data for Alaska and Hawaii are included.
* Beginning April 1962, not comparable with prior data; see Note, Table C-19.
NOTE.—See Note, Table 0-19 for information on area sample used and reporting periods.
Source: Department of Labor.

235
715-113 O-64-16



TABLE G-24.—Unemployment insurance programs^ selected data, 1940-63
All programs

Year or month

State programs

Insured Total
Cov- unem- benefits Insured
ered
paid
ployem(mil- unem- Initial
ment
ployploy-1 (weekly lions m e n t 3 claims
ment
aver- of dolage) 2 3 lars)»«

Insured unem- Benefits paid
ployment as percent of covered Total
AverExemployment
age
haus(mil- weekly
tions «
Season- lions of
Unad- ally ad- dollars) check
(doljusted justed
(4)
lars) •

Weekly average,
thousands

Thousands

Percent

1944

24,291
28,136
30,819
32, 419
31,714

1.331
842
661
149
111

534.7
358.8
350.4
80.5
67.2

1,282
814
649
147
105

214
164
122
36
29

5.6
3.0
2.2
.5
.4

518.7
344.3
344.1
79.6
62.4

10.56
11.06
12.66
13.84
15.90

19-15
1946
1947
1948
1949

30,087
31,856
33,876
34, 646
33,098

720
2.804
1,805
1,468
2,479

574.9
2,878.5
1, 785.0
1,328. 7
2,269.8

589
1,295
1,009
1,002
1,979

116
189
187
210
322

2.1
4.3
3.1
3.0
6.2

445.9

1,094.9
775.1
789.9
1,736.0

18.77
18.50
17.83
19.03
20.48

1950
1951
1952
1953__
1954.._

34,308
36,334
37,006
38,072
36,617

1,605
1,000
1,069
1,065
2,048

1,467. 6
862.9
1,043. 5
1,050.6
2, 291.8

1,503
969
1,024
995
1,865

236
208
215
218
303

4.6
2.8
2.9
2.8
5.2

1,373.1
840.4
998.2
962.2
2,026.9

20.76
21.09
22.79
23.58
24.93

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

40,014
42,758
43,436
44,412
45,728

1,395
1,318
1,567
3,269
2,099

1, 560.2
1, 540. 6
1,913.0
4, 209.2
2,803.0

1,254
1,212
1,450
2,509
1,682

226
226
26S
370
281

3.5
3.2
3.6
6.4
4.4

1.350.3
1,380. 7
1,733.9
3, 512.7
2,279.0

25.04
27.02
28.17
30.58
30.41

1960
1961
1962
1963 7

46,334
46,264
47,669
48,675

2,067
2,994
1,924
1,907

3,022.7
4,358.2
3,160.0
2,994.0

1,906
2,290
1,783
1,775

331
350
302
290

4.8
5.6
4.4
4.3

2,726.7
3, 422. 7
2.675.4
2, 737.0

32.87
33.80
34.56
35.15

1962: J a n u a r y

February
March
April
May
June

46,022
46,146
46,542
47,372
47,821
48,442

3,015
2,914
2,702
2,216
1,840
1,667

395.2
353.4
381.0
297.9
254.3
215.4

2,486
2,415
2,218
1,831
1,570
1,469

429
320
273
267
250
258

6.2
6.0
5.5
4.5
3.9
3.6

16
15
IS
4.1
4.1
4-3

314.9
287.2
310.2
239.6
215.0
188.9

34.44
34.73
34.98
34.52
34.04
34.20

July
August
September
October
November
December

48,434
48,718
48,639
48,393
48,229
48,432

1,699
1,628
1,497
1,539
1,730
2,223

205.2
218.9
181.1
198.9
215.5
236.5

1,543
1,469
1,331
1,385
1,625
2,063

319
261
235
275
314
422

3.8
3.6
3.3
3.4
4.0
5.1

i

187.0
197.4
160.6
176.6
193.6
214.2

34.01
34.29
34.42
34.69
34.97
35.11

46,665
46,632
47,163
48,159
48, 592
49,285

2,778
2,726
2,465
2,089
1,799
1,628

373.0
339.6
343.0
297.8
254.6
205.0

2,591
2,546
2,298
1,918
1,624
1,468

447
325
272
273
239
240

6.3
6.2
5.6
4.7
3.9
3.5

342.4
313.3
316.4
274.8
235.9
188.2

35.53
35.72
35.82
35.54
34.91
34.34

1,493
211.8
204.8
1,419
179.8
1,261
9 190.0 9 1,333
181.3
1,542
225.0
1,972

298
246
223
9 256
292
415

3.6
3.4
3.0
3.1
3.6
4.7

195.6
186.8
163.1
172.0
165.0
205.0

34.43
34.67
34.93
35.15
35.37
35.15

1940

1941_____
1942
1943___

___
_

1963: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December *

1

()

8
8

1,651
1,568
1,409
"1,476
1,686
2,120

4.5

t?
it
4-4
4.2
4.2
4.1

V.

4.0
4.1
4.1
Includes persons under the State, UCFE (Federal employee, effective January 1955), and R R B (Rail4.4

road Retirement Board) programs. Beginning October 1958, also includes the UCX program (unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen).
2
Includes State, UCFE, RR, UCX, UCV (unemployment compensation for veterans, October 1952January 1960), and SRA (Servicemen's Readjustment Act, September 1944-September 1951) programs.
Also includes Federal and State programs for temporary extension of benefits from June 1958 through
June 1962, expiration date of program.
3 Covered workers who have completed at least 1 week of unemployment.
4
Includes benefits paid under extended duration provisions of State laws, beginning June 1958. Annual
data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts.
6 Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year.
6
For total unemployment only.
7 Preliminary.
s March 1963 is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined; workers covered by
State programs account for about 87 percent of the total.
9
Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning October 1963.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods and for Puerto Rico since January 1961.
Source: Department of Labor.




236

TABLE G-25.—Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-63X
[Thousands of employees]

Year or month

Manufacturing
TransGovernment
FiTotal
Con- porta- Whole- nance, Servwage
ice
tract tion
insur- and
and
Non- Min- con- and
and
salaryDura- dura- ing struc- pub- retail ance, mis- Fed- State
and celhe
work- Total
ble
and
ble
tion utili- trade real lane- eral local
ers
goods goods
estate ous
ties

1929..

31,339 10.702

1,087 1,497

3,916

6,123 1,509 3,440

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

29,424
26,649
23,628
23,711
25,953

9,562
8,170
6,931
7,397
8,501

1,009 1,372
873 1,214
731
970
744
809
862

3,685
3,254
2,816
2,672
2,750

1,475
1,407
1,341
1,295
1,319

3,376
3,183
2,931
2,873
3,058

560
559
565
652

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939..

27,053
29,082
31,026
29,209
30, 618

9,069
9,827
10,794
9,440
10,278

912
1,145
1,112
1,055
1,150

2,786
2,973
3,134
2,863
2,936

5,797
5,284
4,r~~
4,755
5,281
5,431
5,809
6,265
6,179
6,426

1,335
1,
1,432
1,425
1,462

3,142
3,326
3,518
3,473
3,517

753 2,728
2,842
2,923
829 3,054
905 3,090

1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..

32,376
36,554
40,125
42,452
41,883

10,985 5,363 5,622
13,192 6,968 6,225
15,280 8,823 6,458
17,602 11,084 6,518
17,328 10,856 6,472

925
957
992
925

1,294
1,790
2,170
1,567
1,094

3,038
3,274
3,460
3,647
3,829

6,750
7,210
7,118
6,982
7,058

,502
,549
,538
,502
,476

3,681
3,921
4,084
4,148
4,163

1,340
2,213
2,905
2,928

3,206
3,320
3,270
3,174
3,116

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..

40,394
41.674
43,881
44,891
43,778

15,524
14.703
15,545
15,582
14,441

6,450
6,962
7,159
7,256
6,953

836
862
955
994
930

1,132
1,661
1,982
2,169
2,165

3,906
4,061
4,166
4,189
4,001

7,314
8,376
8,955
9,272
9,264

,497
,697
,754
,829
,857

4,241
4,719
5,050
5,206
5,264

2,808
2,254
1,892
1,863
1,908

3,137
3,341
3,582
3,787
3,948

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954._

45,222
47,849
48,825
50,232
49,022

15,241 8,094 7,147
16,393 9,089 7,304
16,632 9,349 7,284
17,549 10,110 7,438
16,314 9,129 7,185

901
929
898
866
791

2,333
2,603
2,634
2,623
2,612

4,034 9,386 1,919 5,382
4,226 9,742 1,991 5,576
4,248 10,004 2,069 5,730
4,290 10,247 2,146 5,867
4,084 10,235 2,234 6,002

1,928
2,302
2,420
2,305
2,188

4,098
4,087
4,188
4,340
4,563

1955..
1956..
1957..
1958..
1959..

50.675
52,408
52,904
51,423
53,404

16,882
17,243
17,174
15,945
16, 675

9,541 7,340
9,834 7,409
9,856 7,319
7,116
9,373 7,303

792
822
828
751
732

2,802
2,999
2,923
2,778
2,960

4,141
4,244
4,241
3,976
4,011

10,535
10,858
10,886
10,750
11,127

6,274
6,536
6,749
6,811
7,115

2,187
2,209
2,217
2,191
2,233

4,727
5,069
5,409
5,702
5,957

I960..
1961..
1962..
1963 3.

54,370
54,224
55,841
57,183

16,796
16,327
16,859
17,036

9,459
9,072
9,493
9,659

712
672
652
634

2,885
2,816
2,909
3,033

4,004
3,903
3,903
3,914

7,392 2,270
11,391
11,337 2,731 7,610 2,279
11, 582 2,798 7,949 2,340
11,863 2,866 8,304 2,357

6,250
6,548
6,849
7,176

946
1,015
891"
()
()
854
4,715 5,554

9,074
7,742
8,385
8,326
7,489

7,336
7,255
7,367
7,377

2,335
2,429
2,477
2,519
2,594

533 2,532
2,622
2,704
2,666
2,601
2,647

Seasonally adjusted
1961: January
February
March
April
May._.
June
_._
July
August
September
October
November
December

16,157
16,075
16,102
16,148
16,269
16,341

8,947
8,870
8,877
8,928
9,036
9,082

7,210
7,205
7,225
7,220
7,233
7,259

681
675
674
670
671
673

2,811
2,765
2,814
2,782
2,774
2,836

3,914
3,902
3,893
3,876
3,884
3,892

11,330
11,277
11,210
11, 285
11,298
11,322

2,703
2,704
2,706
2,712
2,719
2,728

7,486
7,490
7,527
7,528
7,541
7,579

2,230
2,213
2,225
2,229
2,244
2,261

6,413
6,440
6,464
6,483
6,511
6,533

54,294 16,376
16,422
54^480 16,382
54,593 16,438
54,825 16,580
54,927 16,627

9,114
9,152
9,128
9,149
9,271
9,303

7,262
7,270
7,254
7,289
7,309
7,324

675 2,811
671 2,826
672 2,831
667 2,843
670 2,834
662 2,835

3,909
3,911
3,918
3,911
3,912
3,900

11,350
11,352
11,342
11,347
11,390
11,386

2,734
2,741
2,745
2,752
2,756
2,762

7,613
7,655
7,688
7,702
7,732
7,770

2,271
2,282
2,286
2,292
2,296
2,297

6,555
6,584
6,616
6,641
6,655

53,725
53,541
53, 615
53, 713
53,911
54,165

See footnotes at end of table.




237

T A B L E C—25.—Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments,

1929-631—

Continued
[Thousands of employees]

Year or month

Manufacturing
Total
wage
and
Non- M i n salary
Dura- dura- ing
work- Total
ble
ble
ers
goods goods

Contract
construction

FiTransGovernment
porta- Whole- nance, Servtion
sale insur- ice
and
and ance, and
State
pub- retail and mis- Fed- and
lic
trade real cel- eral local
utiliestate laneties
ous

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1963: January
February
March
___
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November33
December

54,946
55,223
55,368
55,703
55,822
55,908

16,639
16,732
16,809
16,926
16,921
16,931

9,319
9,395
9,454
9,527
9,530
9,534

7,320
7,337
7,355
7,399
7,391
7,397

662
662
660
659
659
655

2,785
2,858
2,841
2,926
2.934
2,894

3,896
3,905
3,912
3,911
3,914
3,905

11,403
11,465
11,460
11,548
11,584
11,611

2,771
2,772
2,779
2,786
2,793
2,796

7,787
7,814
7,857
7,871
7,902
7,941

2,306
2,289
2,299
2,301
2,318
2,338

6,697
6,726
6,751
6,775
6,797
6,837

56,010
56,019
56,125
56,195
56,205
56,211

16,930
16,867
16,921
16.910
16,858
16,851

9,541
9,492
9,542
9,543
9,509
9,518

7,389
7,375
7,379
7,367
7,349
7,333

653
652
647
644
640
633

2,949
2,949
2,941
2,939
2,942
2,913

3,882
3,899
3,901
3,904
3,896
3,898

11,616
11,620
11,637
11,627
11,637
11,629

2,802
2,804
2,807
2,817
2,821
2,822

7,997
8,017
8,019
8,044
8,063
8,079

2,345
2.346
2,341
2,342
2,353
2,349

6,836
6,865
6,911
6,968
6,995
7,037

56,333
56,458
56,706
56,873
57,060
57,194

16,871
16,872
16,948
17,037
17,095
17,075

9,542
9,546
9,586
9,660
9,683
9,685

7,329
7,326
7,362
7,377
7,412
7,390

631
631
631
639
640
639

2,967
2,920
2,928
3,005
3,019
3,046

3,821
3,899
3,894
3,890
3,909
3,919

11,685
11,729
11,795
11,784
11,825
11,864

2,834
2,839
2,848
2,853
2,864
2,865

8,110
8,144
8,207
8,199
8,228
8,282

2,353
2,332
2,340
2,339
2,345
2,349

7,061
7,092
7,115
7,127
7,135
7,155

57,340
57,344
57,453
57,646
57,623
57, 805

17,103
17,033
17,076
17,119
17,062
17,127

9,701
9,652
9,705
9,718
9,688
9,735

7,402
7,381
7,371
7,401
7,374
7,392

640
635
632
629
628
623

3,069
3,083
3,071
3,066
3,059
3,112

3,936
3,941
3,950
3,937
3,933
3,921

11,884
11,907
11,922
11,935
11,945
11,935

2.870
2,873
2,873
2,887
2,888
2,891

8,349
8,373
8,377
8,430
8,459
8,493

2,351
2,348
2,347
2,352
2,347
2,349

7,138
7,151
7,205
7,291
7,302
7,354

i Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked
during, or received pay for, any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes
proprietors, self-employed persons, domestic servants, and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with
estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force (Table C-19) which include proprietors,
self-employed persons, domestic servants, and unpaid family workers; which count persons as employed
when they are not at work because of industrial disputes, bad weather, etc.; and which are based on a
sample survey of households, whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing
establishments.
8
Not available.
* Preliminary.
NOTE.—Data are based on the 1957 Standard Industrial Classification and March 1962 benchmark data.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Source: Department of Labor.




238

TABLE C-26.—Average weekly hours of work in selected industries, 7929-63
Manufacturing
Year or month

1929..
1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..
1935..
1937—1938—.
1939—
1940....

1941—
1942—,
1943....
1944....
1945....

1946—
1947—
1948—

1949....
1950....

1951—
1952—

1953....
1954....
1955....
1956....

1957—.
1958....

1959—

I960....
1961....
1962....
1963 «._

Contract
conNonDurable durable strucTotal goods
tion
goods

Retail
trade
Tele(except Whole- Bitumi- Class I phone
eating
nous
comsale
railand
coal
munidrink. trade mining roads * cation a
ing
places)

44.2

42.1
40.5
38.3
38.1
34.6
36.6
39.2
38.6
35.6
37.7
38.1
40.6
43.1
45.0
45.2
43.5
40.3
40.4
40.0
39.1
40.5
40.6
40.7
40.5
39.6
40.7
40.4
39.8
39.2
40.3
39.7
39.8
40.4
40.4

38.1
33.3
28.1
27.0
29.3
26.8
26.2
28.5
27.7
23.3
26.8
27.8
30.7
32.4
36.3
43.0
42.0
41.3
40.3
37.7
32.3
34.7
34.9
33.8
34.1
32.3
37.3
37.5
36.3
33.3
35.8
35.8
35.9
«36.7
«38.8

()
()
32.5
34.7
33.8
37.2
40.9
39.9
34.9
37.9
39.2
42.0
45.0
46.5
46.5
44.0
40.4
40.5
40.4
39.4
41.1
41.5
41.5
41.2
40.1
41.3
41.0
40.3
39.5
40.7
40.1
40.3
40.9
41.1

2.9
40.0
35.1
36.1
37.7
37.4
36.1
37.4
37.0
38.9
40.3
42.5
43.1
42.3
40.5
40.2
39.6
38.9
39.7
39.5
39.7
39.6
39.0
39.9
39.6
39.2
38.8
39.7
39.2
39.3
39.6
39.6

43.4

()
38.2
38.1
37.7
37.4
38.1
38.9
37.9
37.2
37.1
37.5
37.0
36.8
37.0
36.7
36.9
37.0
37.2

43.2
42.8
41.8
40.9
41.0
40.9
41.3
41.0
40.9
41.0
41.1
40.9
40.5
39.8
39.7
39.6
39.1
38.7
38.7
38.7
38.5
38.1
37.9
37.8

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January...
February.
March
April
May
June
July
August
September .
October
November.
December..
1963: January
February..
March
April
May
_
June
July
_._.
August
September. _.
October
November 8_.
December 8 ..

40.0
40.3
40.6
40.6
40.5
40.4
40.4
40.2
40.7
40.2
40.4
40.2

40.4
40.3
40.5
40.1
40.5
40.5
40.4
40.3
40.7
40.6
40.5
40.5

40.5
40.9
41.0
41.2
41.0
40.9
40.9
40.9
41.2
40.8
40.9
41.1
40.9
41.0
41.0
40.7
41.1
41.3
41.2
41.0
41.3
41.2
41.1
41.4

39.4
39.7
39.9
40.0
39.9
39.9
39.7
39.5
39.8
39.3
39.6
39.4
39.6
39.7
39.8
39.3
39.7
39.6
39.5
39.6
39.7
39.8
39.5
39.6

34.9
36.6
37.2
36.9
37.6
36.8
37.1
37.1
37.4
36.8
36.8
36.1
37.0
36.1
37.3
37.5
37.5
37.6
37.3
37.2
37.3
37.6
36 8
(3)

38.8
38.9
39.1
39.5
40.1
40.5
41.9
42.3
«41.7
39.4
37.4
39.2
38.5
38.9
39.1
38.5
38.7
38.9
39.6
39.5
39.0
38.4
39.2
39.6
39.4
39.9
40.1

Unadjusted
37.9
37.9
38.0
37.8
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.9
37.8
37.8
37.8
37.9
37.8
37.9

40.4
40.3
40.5
40.6
40.6
40.7

37.9
37.8
37.7
37.8
37.7
(

40.8
40.7
40.6
40.7
40.6
()

40.9
40.7
40.7
40.6
40.6
40.8
40.4
40.3
40.4
40.4
40.6
40.7

37.7
37.9
37.7
37.3
35.3
37.4
(3)
36.6
36.2
36.9
36.0
38.3
39.0
39.1
36.6
38.4
39.7
41.2
(3)
38.0
39.3
39.2
38.1

42.9
42.9
42.5
41.8
43.1
42.4
42.5
43.3
41.1
43.2
42.7
41.9
43.0
43.3
41.5
43.0
43.6
41.9

39.3
39.4
39.3
39.2
39.4
39.7
40.3
40.2
40.6
40.5
40.9
39.9
39.5
39.8
39.6
39.5
39.7
40.0
40.3
40.1
40.5
40.4
41.1

1 Based upon data summarized in the M-300 report by the Interstate Commerce Commission. Hours
and earnings data relate to all employees who received pay during the month, except executives, officials
and staff assistants.
2
Prior to April 1945. data relate to all employees except executives. See footnote 2. Table C-27.
»Not available.
* Nine-month average, April through December, because of new series started in April 1945.
4
Eleven-month average, excludes data for July.
• Preliminary.
NOTE.—See Note, Table C-25.
Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, construction workers in contract
construction, and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries (except as noted). Data are for pay
period ending nearest the 15th of the month.
The annual figures for 1963 are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not
strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years, which have been weighted by data on employment.
See Table C-29 for unadjusted average weekly hours in manufacturing.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Source: Department of Labor.




239

TABLE C—27.—Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries,

Manufacturing
Year or month
Total
1929
1930
1931 .
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1965
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 7

_

_

1962: January .
February
March
April
May
June

$0.560
.546
.509
.441
.437
.526
.544
.550
.617
.620
.627
_.
.655
.726
.851
.957
1.011
1.016
_- 1.075
1 217
1.328
1.378
1 440
1.56
_— 1.65
1 74
1.78
1.86
1.95
2.05
2.11
2.19
2 26
2.32
2.39
2.46
2.38
2.37

July

August
September
October
November
December
1963: January
February
March
April

May
June
July
August
September
October
November 7
December ?___

2 39
2.39
2 39
2.38
2.37
2.39
2.39
2.41
2.42
2.43
2.43
2.44
2.44
2.45
2 46
2.45
2 43
2.47
2 47
2.49
2.50

Durable
goods

Nondurable
goods

Contract
construction

Tele-

(except Whole- minous Class I phone
eating
sale
railcomcoal
and
trade mining roads * munications
drinking
places)

(4)
$0.492
.467
.550
.571
.580
.667
.679
.691
.716
.799
.937
1.048
1.105
1.099
1.144
1.278
1.395
1.453
1.519
1.65
1.75
1.86
1.90
1.99
2.08
2.19
2.26
2.36
2.43
2.49
2.56
2.63
2.56
2.55
2.55
2.56
2.55
2.55
2.55
2.54
2.57
2.57
2.58
2.61
2.60
2.61
2.61
2.62
2.63
2 64
2.63
2.61
2.65
2 65
2.67
2.68

(*)

$0. 412
.419
.505
.520
.519
.566
.572
.571
.590
.627
.709
.787
.844
.886
.995
1.145
1.250
1.295
1.347
1.44
1.51
1.58
1.62
1.67
1.77
1.85
1.91
1.98
2.05
2.11
2.16
2.22
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.16
2.16
2.17
2.17
2.16
2.17
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.21
2 22
2.22
2.21
2.24
2 23
2.25
2.26

W

w
(4)

(4)

to
(4)

$1. 541
1.713
1.792
1.863
2.02
2.13
2.28
2.39
2.45
2.57
2.71
2.82
2.93
3.08
3.20
3.31
3.42
3.34
3.24
3.28
3.29
3.25
3.25
3.29
3.30
3.35
3.34
3.35
3.41
3.42
3.41
3.39
3.34
3.37
3 38
3.40
3.42
3.47
3 47
3.44

1929-63

Retail
trade

%
4

()
$0,484
.494
.518
.559
.606
.653
.699
.797
.901
.972
1.015
1.050
1.13
1.18
1.25
1.29
1.34
1.40
1.47
1.52
1.57
1.62
1.68
1.74
1.80
1.72
1.72
1.73
1.74
1.75
1.75
1.75
1.76
1.76
1.77
1.74
1.78
1.78
1.78
1.79
1.80
1 81
1.80
1.80
1.82
1 82
1.83

$0.610
.628
.658
.674
.688
.711
.763
.828
.898
.948
.990
1.107
1.220
1.308
1.360
1.427
1.52
1.61
1.70
1.76
1.83
1.94
2.02
2.09
2.18
2.24
2.31
2.37
2.46
2.33
2.34
2.35
2.36
2.37
2.38
2.38
2.37
2.40
2.39
2.40
2.42
2.41
2.43
2.44
2.44
2.45
2.46
2.44
2.45
2.48
2.48
2.49

$0.659
.662
.626
.503
.485
.651
.720
.768
.828
.849
.858
.854
.960
1.030
1.101
1.147
1.199
1.357
1.582
1.835
1.877
1.944
2.14
2.22
2.40
2.40
2.47
2.72
2.92
2.93
3.11
3.14
3.12
6
3.12
6
3.15
3.13
3.12
3.13
3.14
3.09
3.11
3.11
3.14
3.11
3.09
3.13
3.10
3.14
3.13
3.12
3.14
3 17
3.14
3.18
3.15
3.15

i

S4
()

$0.730
.733
.743
.837
.852
.948
.955
1.087
1.186
1.301
1.427
1.572
1.73
1.83
1.88
1.93
1.96
2.12
2.26
2.44
2.54
2.61
2.67
2.72
2.67
2.73
2.67
2.68
2.66
2.72
2.74
2.73
2.78
2.73
2.76
2.78
2.75
2.81
2.77
2.75
2.74
2.78
(4)
(4)

(4)
(4)

(4)

$0.774
.816
.822
.827
.820
.843
.870
.911
«.962
1.124
1.197
1.248
1.345
1.398
1.49
1.59
1.68
1.76
1.82
1.86
1.95
2.05
2.18
2 26
2.37
2.48
2.56
2.44
2.44
2.44
2.44
2.44
2.46
2.47
2.47
2.52
2.52
2.52
2.54
2.53
2.54
2.54
2.53
2.55
2 55
2.54
2 55
2.60
2.61
2.59

Agriculture 3

$0,241
.226
.172
.129
115
.129
.142
152
.172
166
.166
.169
206
268
.353
.423
472
.515
547
.580
.559
561
.625
.661
672
.661
.675
705
.728
757
.798
818
834
.856
.880
932
779
.848
.868
.948
.799

.872
.898

(4)

1 For coverage of series, see footnote 1, Table C-26.
2
Prior to April 1945, data relate to all employees except executives; for April 1945-May 1949, mainly to
employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act; and beginning June 1949, to nonsupervisory employees
only.
» Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis.
4
Not available.
« Nine-month average, April through December, because of new series started in April 1945.
o Eleven-month average, excludes data for July.
7 Preliminary.
NOTE.—See Note, Table C-25.
Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, construction workers in contract construction, and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries (except as noted). Data are for pay
period ending nearest the 15th of the month.
The annual figures for 1963 are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not
strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years, which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Sources: Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture.




240

TABLE C-28.—Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929-63
Manufacturing

Year or month
Total

1929
1930....
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
.
1952
1953
1954
1955.__.
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 5
1962: January...
February..
March
April
May
June
July
August
September.
October, __
November.
December.
1963: January.-.
February.
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October,. .
November
December >

Contract
conDura- Nonstrucble
durable tion
goods goods

$24. 76 $26.84 $22.47
23.00
24.42
21.40
20.64
20.98
20.09
16.89
15.99
17.26
16.65
16.20
16.76
18.20
18.59
17.73
19.91
21.24
18.77
21.56
23.72
19.57
23.82
26.61
21.17
22.07
23.70
20.65
23.64
26.19
21.36
24.96
28.07
21.83
29.48
33.56
24.39
36.68
42.17
28.57
43.07
48.73
33.45
45.70
51.38
44.20
48.36
37.48
43.32
46.22
40.30
49.17
51.76
46.03
53.12
56.36
49.50
53.88
57.25
50.38
58.32
62.43
53.48
63.34
68.48
56.88
67.16
72.63
59.95
70.47
76.63
62.57
70.49
76.19
63.18
75.70
82.19
66.63
78.78
85.28
70.09
81.59
88.26
72.52
82.71
89.27
74.11
88.26
96.05
78.61
89.72
97.44
80.36
92.34 100.35
82.92
96.56 104.70
85.54
87.91
99.38 108.09
94.49 103.17
83.85
94.80 103.53
84.28
95.91 104.04
84.93
96.56 105. 22 85.54
96.80 104.81
85.97
97.27 105.06
87.02
96 39 104.04
86.80
95. 75 103.89
86.18
97.27 105.88
96.32 105.37
85.50
97.36 105.78
86.33
98.01 107.53
86.94
97.44 105.82
86.24
97.20 106.23
85.85
98.09 106.49
86.68
97.36 106.37
85.97
99.23 108.36
87.52
100.37 109.82
88.36
99.23 108.09
88.36
98.42 107.01
88.40
100.53 109.45
89.38
100. 53 109. 71
100.85 110.00
89.10
102.00 111.22
90.17

Retail
trade
(except Whole- Bituminous Class I
eating
sale
raijcoal
and
trade mining roads *
drinking
places)
()

8

67.38
67.16
66.70
66.18
66.38
66.29
66.93
66.75
66.75
67.48
67.68
68.96

$26.75
25.19
25.44
25.38
26.96
28.36
28.51
28.76
29.36
31.36
34.28
37.99
40.76
42.37
46.05
50.14
53.63
55.49
58.08
62.02
65.53
69.02
71.28
74.48
78.57
81.41
84.02
88.51
90.72
93.56
96.22
99.88
94.13
94.30
95.18
95.82
96.22
96.87
97.34
96.46
97.68
97.03
97.44
98.74
97.36
97.93
98.58
98.58
99.47
100.12

69.30
69.30
68.61
68.25
68.26

99.55
99.72
100.69
100.94
101.09

()
(*)
$21. 01
21.34
22.17
23.37
24.79
26.77
28.59
32.92
36.94
39.75
41.62
43.16
46.22
47.79
49.75
51.21
63.06
54.74
56.89
58.82
60.76
62.37
64.01
65.95
68.04
64.84
64.67
65.22
65.42
65.98
66.68

$25.11
22.04
17.59
13.58
14.21
17.45
18.86
21.89
22.94
19.78
22.99
23.74
29.47
33.37
39.97
49.32
50.36
56.04
63.75
69.18
60.63
67.46
74.69
75.04
81.84
77.52
92.13
102.00
106.00
97.57
111.34
112.41
112. 01
114.50
122.22
118.00
118.25
118.00
117.12
109.08
116.31
102.66
113.83
113.67
114. 76
111.24
119.88
120.90
122. 77
114. 56
119.81
124.66
130.60
110.21
119.32
124.97
123.48
120.02

Telephone
communication»

(3)

8
(3)

8
$31.90
32.47
34.03
39.34
41.49
46.36
46.32
50.00
55.03
60.11
62.36
64.14
70.93
74.30
76.33
78.74
82.12
88.40
94.24
101. 50
106.43
108.84
112.94
115.87
(3)
114.54
117.12
113.48
112.02
114. 65
115.33
116.45
118.21
114.26
117.94
117.85
116.48
118.25
121.67
114.96
118.25
119.46
116.48

()
$30.03
31.74
32.14
32.67
32.88
34.14
36.45
38.54
* 40.12
44.29
44.77
48.92
51.78
54.38
58.26
61.22
65.02
68.46
72.07
73.47
76.05
78.72
85.46
89.50
93.38
98.95
102.66
95.89
96.14
95.89
95.65
96.14
97.66
99.54
99.29
102.31
102.06
103.07
101.35
99.94
101.09
100.58
99.94
101.24
102.00
102.36
102.26
105.30
105.04
106.45

1
2

For coverage of series, see footnote 1, Table C-26.
Prior to April 1945, data relate to all employees except executives; for April 1945-May 1949, mainly to
employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act; and beginning June 1949, tononsupervisory employees
only.
3
Not available.
4
Nine-month average, April through December, because of new series started in April 1945.
8
Preliminary.
NOTE.—See Note, Table C-25.
Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, construction workers in contract construction, and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries (except as noted). Data are for pay period
ending nearest the 15th of the month.
The annual figures for 1963 are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not
strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years, which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Source: Department of Labor.




241

TABLE C-29.—Average weekly hours and hourly earnings, gross and excluding overtime, in
manufacturing industries, 7939—63
All manufacturing industries
Average
weekly
hours

Average hourly
earnings

Durable goods manufac- Nondurable goods manuturing industries
facturing industries
Average

weekly
hours

Average
hourly
earnings

Average
weekly
hours

Average
hourly
earnings

Excluding
ExoverExExExtime
cludcludcludcludand Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing
interoveroveroveroverindustime
time
time
time
try shift

Year or month
Gross ing Gross
overtime

(1957
59=100)

1939
1940
1941
„
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
_
19531954
_„
1955
1956
-.
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963*
1962: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
SeptemberOctober
NovemberDecember. .
1963: January
February
March
April
May
June

$0.627
.655
.726$0.
.851 .793
.957 .881
1.011 .933
.016 ».949
.075 1.035

37.7

38.1
40.6
43.1
45.0
45.2
43.5
40.3
40.4
40.0
39.1
40.5
40.6
40.7
40.5
39.6

July
August
SeptemberOctober
November*.
December <
_

1.78

39.2
40.3

39.7
39.8
40.4
40.4
39.7
40.0
40.3
40.4
40.5
40.7
40.5
40.4
40.7
40.3
40.4
40.5
40.1
40.0
40.2
39.9
40.5
40.8
40.5
40.5
40.7
40.7
40.5
40.8

1.73
.79

40.7
40.4

37.4
37.6
37.6

37.1
37.5
37.7

37.7
37.6
37.7
37.5
37.5
37.6
37.6
37.5
37.6
37.5
37.7
37.8
37.6
37.6
37.6
37.7
37.5
37.8

2.26
2.32
2.39
2.46
2.38
2.37
2.38
2.39
2.39
2.39
2.38
2.37
2.39
2.39
2.41
2.42
2.43
2.43
2.44
2.44
2.45
2.46

2.45
2.43
2.47
2.47
2.49
2.50

.89
1.99
2.05
2.12
2.19
2.25
2.31
2.37
2.31
2.30
2.30
2.31
2.31
2.30
2.30
2.29
2.31
2.31
2.33
2.34
2.35
2.35
2.36
2.37
2.37
2.37
2.37
2.35
2.38
2.38
2.40
2.41

32.2

0)
3 33.4
3 37.5
»40.8
3 43.7
3 45.5
3 50.4
57.8
63.2
66.1
68.2
73.6
77.4
81.6
84.3
86.9
91.5
96.2
100.2
103.9
106.8
109.8
112.5
115.2
111.9
111.8
111.9
112.3
112.1
112.3
112.5
112.3
112.8
113.0
113.5
113.9
114.0
114.4
114.6
114.9
114.9
115.1
115.2
115.0
116.0
116.1
116.7

(0

1
2
3

37.9
39.2
42.0
45.0
46.5
46.5
44.0
40.4
40.5
40.4
39.4
41.1
41.5
41.5
41.2
40.1
41.3
41.0
40.3
39.5
40.7
40.1
40.3
40.9
41.1
40.3
40.6
40.8
41.1
41.1
41.2
40.8
40.9
41.2
41.0
41.0
41.2
40.7
40.7
40.8
40.6
41.2
41.6
41.1
41.0
41.3
41.4
41.2
41.5

0)

37.7
38.0
38.1
38.2
37.7
38.1
38.1
38.4
38.3
38.2
38.0
38.1
38.1
38.1
38.0
38.1
38.1
38.1
38.1
38.1
38.3
38.4
38.2
38.0
38.2
38.2
38.1
38.3

.716 (0
.799 $0,762
.937 .872
1.048 .966
1.105 1.019
1.099 31.031
1.144 1.111
1.278 1.24
1.395 1.35
1.453 1.42
1.519 1.46
1.65 1.59
1.75 1.68
1.86 1.79
1.90 1.84
1.99 1.91
2.08 2.01
2.19 2.12
2.26 2.21
2.36 2.28
2.43 2.36
2.49 2.42
2.56 2.48
2.54
2.56 2.48
2.55 2.47
2.55 2.47
2.56 2.48
2.55 2.47
2.55 2.46
2.55 2.47
2.54 2.45
2.57 2.48
2.57 2.48
2.58 2.49
2.61 2.51
2.60 2.52
2.61 2.52
2.61 2.53
2.62 2.54
2.63 2.54
2.64 2.54
2.63 2.54
2.61 2.52
2.65 2.55
2.65 2.55
2.67 2.57
2.68 2.58

37.4

37.0
38.9
40.3
42.5
43.1
42.3
40.5
40.2
39.6
38.9
39.7
39.5
39.7
39.6
39.0
39.9
39.6
39.2
38.8
39.7
39.2
39.3
39.6
39.6
39.0
39.2
39.5
39.6
39.8
40.1
40.0
39.9
40.0
39.4
39.6
39.7
39.2
39.2
39.4
38.9
39.6
39.8
39.
40.0
39.6
39.9

(0 $0,571

8
(0
0)
0)

8
8
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
37.2
37.0
36.6
37.0

36.7
36.8
36.9
36.9
36.5
36.7
36.9
37.0
37.0
37.2
37.2
37.2
37.1
36.7
36.9
37.1
36.8
36.7
36.8
36.5
37.0
37.0
37.0
37.2
36.9
37.0
36.8
37.1

.590
627
.709
.787
.844
.886
.995
1.145
1.250
1.295
1.347
1.44
1.51
1.58
1.62
1.67
1.77
1.85
1.91
1.98
2.05
2.11
2.16
2.22
2.15
2.15
2.15
2.16
2.16
2.17
2.17
2.16
2.17
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.21
2.22
2.22
2.21
2.24
2.23
2.25
2.26

(0
0)

$0.613
.684
.748
.798
».841
.962
1.11
1.21
1.26
1.31
1.40
1.46
1.53
1.58
1.62
1.72
1.80
1.86
1.91
1.99
2.05
2.09
2.15
2.09
2.08
2.08
2.09
2.09
2.09
2.10
2.09
2.09
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13
2.13
2.13
2.14
2.14
2.14
2.15
2.13
2.16
2.16
2.17
2.18

Not available.
April used. Annual average not available.
Eleven-month average; August 1945 excluded because of VJ Day holiday period.
* Preliminary.
NOTE.—Series revised; see Note, Table C-25.
Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month.
The annual figures for 1963 are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not
strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years, which have been weighted by data on employment
(in the case of hours) and man-hours (in the case of earnings).
See Table C-26 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Source: Department of Labor.




242

T A B L E C-30.—Average weekly earnings, gross and spendable, in manufacturing industries
in current and 1963 prices, 1939-63
Average gross weekly
earnings
Year or month
Current
prices

1963
prices»

Average spendable weekly earnings *
Worker with no
dependents
Current
prices

1963
prices»

Worker with three
dependents
Current
prices

1963
prices 1

$23.64

$52.07

$23.37

$51.48

$23.40

$51.54

24.96
29.48
36.68
43.07
45.70

54.62
61.29
68.95
76.23
79.48

24.46
27.96
31.80
35.95
37.99

53.52
58.13
59.77
63.63
66.07

24.71
29.19
36.31
41.33
43.76

54.07
60.69
68.25
73.15
76.10

44.20
43.32
49.17
53.12
53.88

75.17
68.01
67.45
67.67
69.25

36.82
37.31
42.10
46.57
47.21

62.62
58.57
57.75
59.32
60.68

42.59
42.79
47.58
52.31
52.95

72.43
67.17
65.27
66.64
68.06

58.32
63.34
67.16
70.47
70.49

74.29
74.69
77.46
80.72
80.38

50.26
52.97
55.04
57.59
58.45

64.03
62.46
63.48
65.97
66.65

56.36
60.18
62.98
65.60
65.65

71.80
70.97
72.64
75.14
74.86

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

75.70
78.78
81.59
82.71
88.26

86.61
88.72
88.88
87.62
92.81

62.51
64.92
66.93
67.82
71.89

71.52
73.11
72.91
71.84
75.59

69.79
72.25
74.31
75.23
79.40

79.85
81.36
80.95
79.69
83.49

1960
1961
1962
1963 s

89,72
92.34
96.56
99.38

92.88
94.51
97.73
99.38

72.57
74.60
77.86
79.63

75.12
76.36
78.81
79.63

80.11
82.18
85.53
87.37

82.93
84.11
86.57
87.37

94.49
94.80
95.91
96.56
96.80
97.27

96.52
96.54
97.47
97.93
98.17
98.55

76.20
76.45
77.34
77.86
78.05
78.43

77.83
77.85
78.60
78.97
79.16
79.46

83.83
84.09
85.00
85.53
85.73
86.11

85.63
85.63
86.38
86.74
86.95
87.24

96.39
95.75
97.27
96.32
97.36
98.01

97.46
96.81
97.86
97.00
98.05
98.80

77.72
77.21
78.43
77.67
78.50
79.02

78.58
78.07
78.90
78.22
79.05
79.66

85.39
84.87
86.11
85.33
86.19
86.72

86.34
85.81
86.63
85.93
86.80
87.42

97.44
97.20
98.09
97.36
99.23
100.37

98.13
97.79
98.58
97.85
99.73
100.47

78.11
77.92
78.63
78.04
79.51
80.38

78.66
78.39
79.03
78.43
79.91
80.46

85.78
85.58
86.31
85.72
87.25
88.18

86.38
86.10
86.74
86.15
87.69
88.27

99.23
98.42
100.53
100.53
100.85
102.00

98.83
98.03
100.13
100.03
100.15

79.51
78.89
80.51
80.51
80.75
81.63

79.19
78.58
79.83
80.11
80.19

87.25
86.58
88.31
88.31
88.58
89.52

86.90
86.24
87.96
87.87
87.96
<*)

1939
1940 ,
1941
1942
1943
1944

_-.-

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

-

1962: January
February
March.. __
April .
May
June

-

_.
__ _

July .
August.
September
October
November.
December
1963: January
February
March. ApriL
May
June
July
August
September _ OctoberNovember'
December 8

_.

.

1
2

Estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a 1963 base (using 11-month average).
Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes.
* Preliminary.
* Not available.
NOTE.—Series revised; see Note, Table C-25.
Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month.
The annual figures for 1963 are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not
strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years, which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Source: Department of Labor.




2

43

TABLE C-31.—Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries, 7030-63
[Rates per 100 employees]
Accession rates

Year or month

Total i
3.8
3.7
4.1
6.5
5.7
5.1

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

5.3
4.3
4.7

—-

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

_

__
_

1.9
1.1
.9
1.1
1.1

3.6
3.5
4.2
3 2
3.7

1.1
1.3
1.5
.8
1.0

3.0

5.9
4.8
5.2
4.5
4.9
4.3
4.0
5.2
4.8

2.4
3.5
3.9

7.7
8.1
6.2
5.4
4.3

(3)

9.6
7.2
5.7
5.4
5.0

6.1
5.2
4.1
3.4
1.9

2.6
1.4
1.1
1.6
2.9

(3)

--

4.1
5.3
4.9
5.1

2.3
2.9
2.8
2.8
1.4

1.3
1.4
1.4
1.6

(3)
(3)
(3)

4.1
4.1
3.6

1.9

2.6
2.6
1.6
1.3

.7
.7

4.2
3.6
3.6
4.2

3.0

2.8
2.2
1.7
2.6

4.1
3.9
4.2
4.2
4.1
4.1

1.9
.9
.6
.1
.5

3.8

4.1
4.1
4.0

2.2
2.2
2.5
2.5

4.3
4.0
4.1
3.9

.3
.2
.4
.4

2.4
2.2
2.0

4.2
4.2

2.6
2.6

coco

_ -

-__

8

Layoffs

5.3
5.3
5.4
4.8

_ _

-__

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

1

Quits

1.1
2.4
4.6
6.3
6.2

9.1
7.4

__

___
-

(3)

Total 2

3.7
4.0
4.7
7.8
8.6
8.1

9.3

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

New hires

?3
(3)
()

5.0
5.4
6.5

_ _

___

Separation rates

4.1
4.2
4.1
4.0

2.6
2.7
2.7
2.6

3.9
4.0
4.2
4.2

1.4
L.5
L5
,4
L.6
5

1.9
1.9
1.7
1.8
2.0
2.0

4.2

2.5

4.3

L.4

2.1

3.6
4.5

1955 .
1956
1957
1958
1959

_

I960
1961
1962
1963 *

_

.__

_ _

2.3
1.5
1.7
2.1
2.6
2.0

July

__
,

L

COCO

Seasonally adjusted
1962: J a n u a r y .
February
March
April
May
June
_.

4.5
2.4
L.5
3.9
2.3
August
4.0
2.3
L.3
1.9
4.0
September
4.0
3.9
2.3
L.4
2.0
October
_
_
3.9
2.3
L.4
1.9
3.8
November
2.2
3.8
3.8
L.3
2.0
December
4.0
2.3
L.4
2.0
1963: January
3.7
2.2
3
3.7
3.9
1.8
February
5
3.8
2.4
3.8
1.8
March
4.0
L.4
2.6
4.1
1.8
April
4.0
L.4
2.4
1.8
3.8
May.. _
]L.4
1.7
3.8
June
._
3.9
2.4
L.4
1.9
July
4.0
4.0
2.4
4.2
2.4
L.5
2.0
3.7
August
3.9
1.3
3.9
2.3
1.8
September
2.4
.4
3.7
3.9
1.7
October
.4
2.3
3.6
3.5
November 5_ _ 1.7
1
Includes rehires and other accessions, not published separately.
2 Includes discharges and miscellaneous separations, not published separately. (Prior to 1940 quits
include miscellaneous separations.)
3
Not available.
*
a January-November average.
Preliminary.
NOTE.—See Note, Table C-25.
Beginning January 1943, data relate to all employees; previously to production workers only.
Beginning January 1959, transfers between establishments of the samefirmare included in total accessions
and total separations, therefore rates for these items are not strictly comparable with prior data.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January 1959.
Source: Department of Labor




244

TABLE C-32.—Indexes of output per man-hour and related data, 1947-63
[1957-59=100]

Output per man-hour

Year

Output

Nonagricultural
industry;s
Total Agripri- culvate ture

Man-hours

l

Nonagricultural
industries

Nonagricultural
industries

Total AgriTotal AgriMan- Non- pri- culMan- NonMan- Non- pri- culufac- man- vate ture
ufac- manufac- man- vate ture
Total tur- ufacTotal tur- ufacTotal tur- ufacing
ing
ing
turturturing

ing

ing

Establishment basis3
96.5 161.8
97.0 155.8
93.8 154.8

1947
1948
1949

70.9
73.4
75.5

50.2
59.6
56.8

76.3
77.9
80.8

74.8
76.8
78.5

76.8
78.2
82.1

68.4
71.2
70.8

81.2
92.8
88.0

67.7
70.0
69.8

71.1
72.6
67.6

65.9
68.7
71.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

80.9
82.9
84.7
88.2
89.8

64.7
64.0
69.9
77.8
83.4

85.1
86.5
87.6
90.0
91.4

83.7
85.2
86.4
90.6
89.8

85.6
86.8
87.9
89.0
92.0

77.3
82.0
84.4
88.6
87.2

92.8
87.0
90.4
93.7
97.6

76.4
81.7
84.1
88.3
86.6

78.3
85.7
88.4
97.3
88.1

75.5 95.6 143.4
79.6 98.9 136.0
81.9 99.6 129.4
83.7 100.5 120.5
85.8 97.1 117.0

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

93.8 86.4 95.3 96.0 94.6 95.0
93.9 88.3 94.9 97.1 93.4 97.0
97.2 94.2 97.6 97.3 97.6 98.9
99.6 103.0 99.4 99.1 99.8 97.0
103.2 102.8 103.0 103.7 102.6 104.1

102.9 94.5 99.5 92.0
100.5 96.8 102.1 94.1
99.0 98.9 100.7 98.0
100.5 96.8 94.2 98.1
100.0 104.3 105.0 103.9

1960
1961
1962
1963 * . „ .

105.2
108.7
112.9
116.8

104.8
104.3
105.3
107.2

109.3
115.8
119.7
128.5

104.6
107.6
111.7
115.0

(3)

(3)

(3)

(3)

106.8
108.6
115.3
120.0

106.9
108.8
115.9
120.7

(3)

(3)
(3)
(3)

(3)
(3)

95.1
94.5
86.1

85.8
87.9
86.5

89.8 93.5
94.4 100.6
96.0 102.3
98.1 107.4
94.7 98.1

88.2
91.7
93.2
94.0
93.3

88.7
89.9
86.4

101.3 119.1 99.2 103.6 97.3
103.3 113.8 102.0 105.2 100.7
101.7 105.1 101.3 103.5 100.4
97.4 97.6 97.4 95.1 98.3
100.9 97.3 101.3 101.3 101.3
95.9
90.1
88.0
83.4

102.2
101.1
103.8
105.0

99.8 161.8
100.9 155.6
98.3 156.1

91.7
93.9
90.8

99.7
101.1
100.8
101.3
97.2

93.9
96.5
97.0
98.7
94.6

101.5
99.9
102.1
102.7

(3)

(3)

(3)

(3)

(8)

C
O
(8)

Labor force basis»
1947
1948
1949

68.5
70.6
72.0

50.2
59.6
56.4

73.8
74.5
76.9

(8)

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

77.5
81.1
83.7
87.5
89.7

64.5
63.6
69.4
77.3
83.0

81.4
84.7
86.7
89.5
91.5

(6)

(6)

(8)
(8)

C
O

94.1 85.9 95.8
94.4 87.8 95.7
97.5 94.2 98.0
99.1 103.1 98.8
103.4 102.7 103.2

(8)
(8)

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

104.8
1960
1961
107.4
1962
112.1
1963 <____ 115.8

109.3
116.3
119.9
128.8

104.1
106.0
110.6
113.5

(6)

(8)

C
O
C
O
(8)
(8)
(8)
C
O
(6)

(6)

(6)

(8)

((188))
(8)

(6)

68.4
71.2
70.8

81.2
92.8
88.0

67.7
70.0
69.8

(8)

77.3
82.0
84.4
88.6
87.2

92.8
87.0
90.4
93.7
97.6

76.4
81.7
84.1
88.3
86.6

(6)

(8)

C
O

(8)

C
O

1((866))
(((88)))

95.0
97.0
98.9
97.0
104.1

102.9 94.5
100.5 96.8
99.0 98.9
100.5 96.8
100.0 104.3

106.8
108.6
115.3
120.0

104.8
104.3
105.3
107.2

106.9
108.8
115.9
120.7

(8)
(8)

(6)

(8)
(6)
(8)
(6)
(8)

C
O

143.9
136.8
130.2
121.2
117.6

101.0 119.8 98.6
102.7 114.5 101.2
101.4 105.1 100.9
97.9 97.5 98.0
100.7 97.4 101.1
101.9
101.1
102.9
103.6

95.9
89.7
87.8
83.2

102.7
102.6
104.8
106.3

C
O
(6)
(8)
(8)
(6)

(6)
(8)
(*)
(6)
(8)
(6)

C
O

C
O
(8)
(8)
C
O
C
O
C
O
(8)
(•)

C
O
(8)
(6)
C
O

1 Output refers to gross national product in 1954 prices.
2 Man-hour estimates based primarily on establishment data.
3 Department of Commerce will complete revision of output data for recent years early in 1964. In view
of these revisions the Department of Labor considers it inappropriate to publish interim, revised output
per man-hour indexes for manufacturing (and nonmanufacturing) for the years 1960-63. At the same time,
it would be misleading to continue publishing the indexes previously released. Consequently, indexes
for the last few years will not be published until mid-1964, when all revised production data will be available.
* Preliminary.
* Man-hour estimates based primarily on labor force data.
* Not available.
NOTE.—For information on sources and methodology, see Bureau of Labor Statistics (Department of
Labor) Bulletin No. 1249, Trends in Output per Man-hour in the Private Economy, 1909-68.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Labor.




245

PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY
TABLE C—33.—Industrial production indexes, market groupings, 1947-63
[1957-59=100]

Final products

Year or month

Total
industrial
produc- Total
tion^

Consumer goods 2

Materials
Equipment

AutoTotal,
motive Home includ- BusiTotal prod- goods
ing
ness
ucts
defense

Total

Dur- Nonable durable
goods goods

1947_.
1948..
1949..

65.7
68.4
64.7

64.2
66.6
64.5

67.1
69.2
68.8

69.4
72.6
72.0

68.8
71.7
66.3

55.4
58.3
52.0

69.9
72.6
63.5

67.0
70.2
64.8

68.2
71.0
64.2

64.9
68.2
64.2

1950_.
19511952_.
1953-.
1954..

74.9
81.3
84.3
91.3
85.8

72.8
78.6
84.3
89.9
85.7

78.6
77.8
79.5
85.0
84.3

90.6
80.1
72.1
91.3
85.0

91.4
78.7
78.8
90,2
86.0

56.4
78.4
94.1
100.5
88.9

68.0
83.1
94.1
96.6
85.1

76.9
83.8
84.3
92.6
85.9

79.5
87.8
88.9
100.7
88.4

73.3
78.8
79.0
84.1
83.3

1955..
1956_.
1957__
19581959.-

96.6
99.9
100.7
93.7
105.6

93.9
98.1
99.4
94.8
105.7

93.3
95.5
97.0
96.4
106.6

118.3
97.8
105.2
86.7
108.1

97.3
100.9
96.6
92.8
110.7

95.0
103.7
104.6
91.3
104.1

91.9
104.7
105.3
89.8
104.9

99.0
101.6
101.9
92.7
105.4

104.7
105.3
104.8
90.0
105.1

97.7
98.9
95.4
105.7

1960_.
1961..
1962..
1963 3.

108.7
109.8
118.3
124.3

109.9
111.3
119.7
124.9

111.0
112.7
119.7
125.3

123.2
111.8
131.1
141.2

110.8
112.2
122.2
129.6

107.6
108-.3
119.6
124.2

110.2
110.1
122.1
128.3

107.6
108.4
117.0
123.7

106.6
104.8
114.1
121.2

108.7
112.1
112.0
126.3

116.7
118.2
119.0
118.2
119.9
120.9

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January
February. _
March
April
May
June
July
August
September.
October
November,
December..
1963: January
February. _
March
April
May
June
July
August
September.
October
November.
December'.

119.0
120.5
122.0
122.3
124.1
124.2

113.5
115.0
116.0
116.9
118.3
119.8

114.4
116.3
118.0

113.5
115.6
116.8

120.0
120.0

125.7
124.5
123.9
129.3
133.0
126.5

121.2
123.1

117.4
117.2

110.3
113.1
114.7
116.2
114.9
113.7

121.3
121.4
121.7
121.4
121.3
121.7

121.2
121.0
121.4
120.6
120.5
121.2

135.8
134.6
135.3
135.6
135.2
136.9

122.4
122.0
122.0
122.1
122.9
123.9

121.4
122.8
123.0
123.3
123.1
122. 4

124.4
125.6
126.2
126.1
125.9
125.1

117.3
117.4
118.2
117.2
117.8
116.9

113.8
114.3
114.9
114.0
114.1
113.2

120.8
120.6
121.6
120.6
122.4
121.1

119.2
120.2
121.3
122.5
124.5
125.8

122.3
122.6
122 A
122.1
123.5
125.2

121.8
122.9
123.1
122.5
124.1
125.9

136.5
137.7
136.3
137.6
137.1
145.3

125.8
125.9
127.3
126.9
130.3
131.0

122.0
121.5
120.7
120.4
122.1
123.8

125.0
125.0
124.9
124.3
125.9
127.8

116.8
118.0
120.2
122.9
125.7
126.6

113.3
114.4
118.0
121.2
124.5
125.8

120.5
121.8
122.6
124.7
126.9
127.3

126.5
125.7
125.7
126.5
126.7
127.2

125.9
126.2
126.5
127.7
128.0
128.6

126.4
126.7
126.7
127.8
128.2
128.8

141.1
134.8
138.0
146.8
149.1
149.0

130.1
132.0
132.3
131.3
133.0

124.8
125.3
126.2
127.6
127.6
128.5

129.0
130.1
131.0
132.0
132.0
133.0

126.7
125.1
125.0
125.6
125.6
126.1

125.2
121.9
122.1
122.6
122.3
122.0

128.3
128.4
128.0
128.6
129.0
130.0

114.6
116.3
117.3
117.8
118.3
118.4

115.4
116.8
117.8

116.2"
117.3
118.4

119.4
119.9

119.4
119.4
119.8
119.2
119.5
119.1

118.2 118.7

(<)

119.3 117.2

i Annual indexes for 1929-46 are, respectively: 38.4, 32.0, 26.5, 20.7,24.4, 26.6,30.7, 36.3,39.7, 31.4, 38.3,43.9,
56.4, 69.3, 82.9, 81.7, 70.5, and 59.5.
J
Also includes apparel and consumer staples, not shown separately.
1
Preliminary.
* Not available.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




246

TABLE G-34.—Industrial production indexes, industry groupings, 7947-63
[1957-59=100]

Manufacturing

Year or month

Durable manufactures

Total
industrial
producTotal
tion
Total

FabriTranscated Ma- portaPrimary metal chinery tion
metals prodequipucts
ment

Instruments Clay, Furniand re- glass, ture
and
and miscellated
prod- lumber laneous
ucts

1947..
1948..
1949..

65.7
68.4
64.7

66.4
68.9
65.1

64.3
67.0
60.9

90.7
94.3
79.4

75.9
77.2

65.3
66.5
59.0

42.9
46.9
47.1

53.7
55.2
49.2

75.8
79.7
72.3

73.5
77 A
71.6

1950..
1951. .
1952..
1953_.
1954.

74.9
81.3
84.3
91.3
85.8

75.8
81.9
85.2
92.7
86.3

74.1
83.5
88.5
99.9
88.4

99.9
108.7
99.3
112.5
91.3

85.4
91.2
89.0
100.3
90.2

72.7
83.0
92.1
100.5
87.7

56.4
62.9
73.1
91.7

57.3
65.7
78.1
85.3

87.7
92.0
89.3
92.7

83.7
80.2
82.4
89.7
86.8

1955..
1956._
1957..
1958..
1959..

96.6
99.9
100.7
93.7
105.6

97.3
100.2
100.8
93.2
106.0

101.9
104.0
104.0
90.3
105.6

118.4
116.4
112.2
87.5
100.4

98.3
98.8
101.5
92.9
105.5

96.5
107.1
104.2
88.8
107.1

102.0
97.4
106.4
89.5
104.0

88.7
95.4
98.0
92.1
109.9

100.7
102.0
97.5
94.1
108.5

97.9
101.0
97.6
93.3
109.0

I960...
1961...
1962...
1963 1..

108.7
109.8
118.3
124.3

108.9
109.7
118.7
124.8

108.5
107.0
117.9
124.5

101.3
98.9
104.6
113.2

107.6
106.5
117.1
123.5

110.8
110.4
123.5
129.2

108.2
103.6
118.3
126.8

116.5
115.8
123.0
130.3

105.7
104.5
109.3
114.5

113.3
114.1
124.5
129.1

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January....
February..
March
April
May
June

114.6
116.3
117.3
117.8
118.3
118.4

114.7
116.6
117.7
118.4
118.9
118.8

113.6
115.9
117.1
118.3
118.1
117.6

111.9
117.5
116.6
112.4
101.3
97.7

111.0
113.0
114.8
116.9
118.3
119.7

116.7
118.2
120.7
122.5
124.2
125.3

111.7
112.9
113.5
116.8
119.4
116.6

119.5
119.0
119.6
.21.1
123.2
124.1

103.9
108.9
108.9
108.6
109.3
109.8

117.6
118.8
121.5
124.8
127.3
127.0

July
August
September..
October
November..
December. _

119.4
119.4
119.8
119.2
119.5
119.1

119.7
119.9
120.4
119.7
119.9
119.7

118.7
118.9
119.2
118.8
119.2
118.9

96.6
98.1
99.6
98.9
100.7
99.7

119.7
119.6
119.6
117.8
117.9
117.2

125.2
125.5
125.7
126.1
125.9
125.5

122.3
121.4
121.5
121.8
121.5
121.7

124.9
125.0
124.3
124.2
125.0
125.4

109.2
110.4
110.8
108.5
110.4
111.5

127.7
126.1
126.8
125.3
125.5
124.6

1963: January
February...
March
April
May
June
...

119.2
120.2
121.3
122.5
124.5
125.8

119.8
120.6
121.9
123.1
125.2
126.4

119.0
120.0
121.5
122.8
125.6
127.4

99.6
105.2
111.9
120.1
127.4
125.8

118.4
118.5
119.3
120.2
123.3
125.1

125.2
126.4
126.2
125.9
128.4
129.4

122.4
122.3
122.1
123.7
124.5
130.4

125.7
127.0
127.2
126.6
130.2
131.6

110.9
109.8
115.0
112.7
113.3
113.9

125.0
123.6
124.8
125.8
129.3
129.3

July
August
September.
October
November..
December l.

126.5
125.7
125.7
126.5
126.7
127.2

126.8
125.9
126.1
127.1
127.3
127.8

127.0
125.0
125.3
126.3
126.5
127.1

122.8
109.4
107.7
108.4
109.1

125.6
126.4
125.6
126.8
126.2

129.6
130.5
131.3
132.2
132.8

129.3
126.8
128.7
130.8
130.5

•132.6
132.1
133.0
132.5
131.8

114.0
115.3
115.5
115.9
117.1

132.0
132.1
131.9
130.6
131.9
132

111

See footnote at end of table.




247

126

133

130

133

120

TABLE C-34.—Industrial production indexes, industry groupings, 7947-63— Continued
[1957-59=100]
Manufacturing
Nondurable manufactures
Year or month
Total

Textile,
apparel,
Paper
and
and
leather printing
products

Chemical,
petroleum,
and
rubber
products

Foods,
beverages,
and
tobacco

Mining

Utilities

1947.
1948-.
1949-.

67.2
69.5
68.3

81.0
84.5
80.6

66.7
69.4
69.3

47.5
50.8
49.4

80.7
80.0
80.8

79.9
84.0
74.5

36.5
40.8
43.4

1950..
1951..
19521953..
1954..

76.0
78.5
80.0
83.6
83.6

89.1
87.4
89.5
90.7
86.9

76.7
79.4
77.7
82.6
85.0

60.7
67.4
69.9
75.2
74.7

83.6
85.4
87.3
88.2
89.8

83.2
91.3
90.5
92.9
90.2

49.5
56.4
61.2
66.8
71.8

19551956195719581959-

91.6
95.4
96.7
96.8
106.5

95.5
98.0
96.9
95.0
108.1

92.5
97.1
97.8
97.0
105.2

86.8
91.4
95.6
95.5
108.9

93.1
96.6
96.7
99.4
103.9

99.2
104.8
104.6
95.6
99.7

80.2
87.9
93.9
98.1
108.0

1960..
19611962_.
1963 i
.

109.5
112.9
119.8
125.2

107.5
108.4
115.1
118.6

109.0
112.4
116.7
120.0

113.9
118.8
131.2
141.7

106.6
110.4
113.4
116.4

101.6
102.6
105.0
108.0

115.6
122.8
131.3
140.8

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January
FebruaryMarchApril
May
June

116.2
117.5
118.6
118.5
119.8
120.3

112.5
113.5
114.2
115.3
115.4
115.8

114.3
116.2
116.9
115.7
117.0
117.2

124.5
126.4
128.0
128.5
131.1
132.9

111.4
112.0
112.9
112.6
113.2
112.5

103.8
104.2
104.8
105.4
105.1
105.2

129.0
128.9
128.8
127.9
130.2
132.4

July
August
SeptemberOctober
November..
December—

121.0
121.1
121.8
121.0
120.9
120.8

115.6
115.7
116.8
115.8
115.5
115.2

117.4
117.9
118.2
117.2
116.9
115.4

133.4
133.2
134.8
134.1
133.6
134.2

114.5
114.4
114.3
113.6
114.2
114.5

106.5
105.4
105.7
105.2
105.7
103.2

133.8
133.1
132-6
132.5
133.4
133.8

1963: January
February-..
March
April
May
June

120.7
121.4
122.5
123.4
124.8
125.2

115.2
115.6
115.9
116.2
116.5
118.0

114.5
115.8
115.7
119.2
120.5
121.6

134.2
135.3
138.2
139.7
141.3
141.3

115.0
115.0
115.6
114.7
116.4
116.1

103.0
104.7
105.4
107.4
108.5
109.4

135.9
138.2
136.4
135.7
139.1
141.3

July
August
SeptemberOctober
November 1.
December

126.4
127.2
127.1
128.2
128.3
128.7

118.9
120.2
121.1
121.7
123.1

122.3
122.4
122.0
122.4
122.5

143.3
144.4
144.8
145.7
145.9

116.9
117.5
116.5
118.2
117.9

111.3
111.3
110.3
109.5
108.2
107.1

145.3
144.6
142.8
143.3
144.5
145.5

124

1

123

Preliminary.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




248

147

118

T A B L E C—35.—Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 7939 and

1945-64

[Billions of dollars]
Manufacturing
Year or quarter.

Total i
Total

1939—
1945—
1946...
1947...
1948—
1949—

1950—
1951—.
1952....
1953—
1954—
1955—
1956—
1957—
1958...

1959....
I960—.

1961—
1962—

1963 3..

Transportation

Dura- Non- Mining
ble durable
goods goods

Railroad

Other

Public
utilities

Commercial
and
other *

5.51

1.94

0.76

1.19

0.33

0.28

0.36

0.52

2.08

1.59
3.11
3.41
3.48
2.59

2.39
3.68
5.30
5.65
4.56

.38
.43

.55
.58
.89
1.32
1.35

.57

14.85
20.61
22.06
19.28

3.98
6.79
8.70
9.13
7.15

1.30
1.28

.50
.79
1.54
2.54
3.12

2.70
5.33
7.49
6.90
5.98

20.60
25.64
26.49
28.32
26.83

7.49
10.85
11.63
11.91
11.04

3.14
5.17
5.61
5.65
5.09

4.36
5.68
6.02
6.26
5.95

.71

1.11
1.47
1.40
1.31
.85

1.21
1.49
.50
.56
.51

3.31
3.66
3.89
4.55
4.22

6.78
7.24
7.09
8.00
8.23

28.70
35.08
36.96
30.53
32.54

11.44
14.95
15.96
11.43
12.07

5.44
7.62
8.02
5.47
5.77

6.00
7.33
7.94
5.96
6.29

.96
1.24
1.24
.94

.92
1.23
1.40
.75
.92

.60
.71
.77
.50
2.02

4.31
4.90
6.20
6.09
5.67

9.47
11.05
10.40
9.81
10.88

35.68
34.37
37.31
39.05

14.48
13.68
14.68
15.62

7.18
6.27
7.03
7.77

7.30
7.40
7.65
7.85

.99

1.03
.67
.85
1.08

1.94
1.85
2.07
1.91

5.68
5.52
5.48
5.64

11.57
11.68
13.15
13.75

.79

1.08
1.04

.92

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961: I —
II..
III.
IV..

33.85
33.50
34.70
35.40

13.75
13.50
13.65
14.00

6.50
6.20
6.10
6.40

7.25
7.30
7.55
7.60

.95
1.00
1.00
1.00

1962: I....
II...
III..
IV..

35.70
36.95
38.35
37.95

14.20
14.45
15.05
15.00

6.55
6.95
7.25
7.30

7.60
7.50
7.80
7.70

1.15
1.05
1.10
1.00

1963: I — .
II...
III..
IV a

36.95
38.05
40.00
40.75

14.85
15.30
15.95
16.25

7.35
7.65
8.00
8.05

7.50
7.65
8.00
8.20

1.05
1.00
1.05
1.05

1964: I».-.
II».

40.75
41.70

16.40
16.55

8.20

8.20

1.05

.70
.70
.65
.60

1.75
1.80
1.90
1.95

5.35
5.50
5.65
5.55

11.30
11.05
11.85
12.35

.70
.95
.80

2.05
2.25
2.00
1.90

5.15
5.40
5.75
5.45

12.45
12.85
13.40
13.80

.90
1.00
1.20
1.30

1.70
2.05
1.85
2.05

5.20
5.45
5.90
5.80

13.25
13.30
14.05
14.30

1.15

2.20
25.15

5.

14.35

1.00

1
Excludes agriculture.
* Commercial and other includes trade, service, finance, communications, and construction.
* Estimates based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in November 1963. The
quarterly anticipations include adjustments, when necessary, for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data.
NOTE.—Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures; it does not necessarily coincide with the
average of seasonally adjusted figures.
These figures do not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross
national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion
in the gross national product of investment by farmers, professionals, institutions, real estate firms,
and of certain outlays charged to current account.
This series is not available for years prior to 1939 and for 1940 to 1944.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce.




249

TABLE C-36.—New construction activity, 1929-63
[Value put In place, millions of dollars]

Private construction

Year or month

Total
new
construction

Eesidential building
(nonfarm)

Total1

New
hous-

Total * ing

units

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
—
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
New series:»
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963«
1962:
January
February
March
April
May._
June
July
August
September
October
November
December..
1963:
January
February
March
April
May._
June
July
August
September
October
November'
December •

Additions
and
alterations

Nonresidential building and other
construction
Public
construcCom- In- Public
tion
util- Other*
Total mer- duscial* trial
ity
4,682
3,808
2,203
1,046
761
884
989
1,416
2,028
1,570
1,709
2,069

949
532
221
74
176
191
158
266

1,578
1.527

2,486
2,858
2,659
1,862
1,648
2,211
2,233
3,516
3,096
3,420
3,809
3,628
5,751
10,660
6,322
3,073
2,398
2,231
3,319
4,704

387
285
292
348
409
155
33
56
203
1,153
957
1,397
1,182
1,415
1,498
1,137
1,791
2,212
3,218
3,631
3,564
3,589
3,914

3,084
3,557
2,382
2,098

4,180
4,674
5,023
5,110

2,106
2,851
2,780
2,857
3,118

4,521
4,621
4,335
4,371
4,641

4,427
4,720
4,830
5,053
5,200

16,070
15,863
17,186
17,558
18,998

Seasonally adjusted annual rates (New series«)
17,388
16,462 4,746 2,603 4,211
16,374 4,637 2,636 4,136
17,401
17,526
16,683 4,754 2,678 4,221
18,038
16,915 4,822 2,780 4,231
18, 798
17,115 4,888 2,882 4,279
18,991
17,348 5,032 2,972 4,285
19,127
17,685 5,244 3,012 4,344
19,582
17,945 5,355 3,028 4,447
19,392
17,799 5,265 2,989 4,416
18,804
17,751 5,166 2,939 4,559
18,611
17, 551 5,120 2,905 4,481
18,812
17,466 5,107 2,880 4,467

4,902
4,965
5,030
5,082
5,066
5,059
5,085
5,115
5,129
5,087
5,045
5,012

18,110
16,734
17,275
16,798
17,272
17,474
17,238
17,423
17,426
18,668
18,234
17,448

11,957
14,075
8,301
5,259
5,809
12,627
17,901
23,243
24,183
29,947
32,700
34,670
37,019
39,234
44,164
45,815
47,845
48,950
54,109

3,625
2,075
1,565
630
470
625
1,010
1,565
1,875
1,990
2,680
2,985
3,510
1,715
885
815
1,276
4,752
7,535
10,122
9,642
14,100
12,529
12.842
13,777
15,379
18,705
17,677
17,019
18,047
22,331

3,040
1,570
1,320
485
290
380
710
1,210
1,475
1,620
2,270
2,560
3,040
1,440
710
570
720
3,300
5,450
7,500
7,257
11,525
9,849
9,870
10,555
12,070
14,990
13,535
12,615
13,552
17,116

340
305
175
105
145
200
250
295
320
295
320
335
375
225
160
220
516
1,307
1,960
2,467
2,200
2,400
2.490
2,787
2,955
3,013
3,376
3,695
3,903
3,862
4,450

55,305
53,941
55,455
59,036
62,757

39,235
38,078
38,299
41,478
43,759

24,251
21,706
21,680
24,174
25,690

19,233
16,410
16,189
18,638
20,043

4,253 14,984

57,405
55,976
56,960
57,245
58,707
59,373
59,637
60,537
60,192
60,806
59,970
59,271

39,295
39,242
39,685
40,447
41,435
41,899
42,399
43,114
42,766
42,137
41,736
41,823

22,833
22,868
23,002
23,532
24,320
24,551
24,714
25,169
24,967
24,386
24,185
24,357

60,371
59,154
60,114
59,555
60,458
62,335
62,733
64,194
64,228
65,888
65,928
65,437

41,726
41,376
41,626
42,436
43,143
43,184
43,931
44,571
44,827
45,608
45,576
45,617

24,636
24,273
24,353
24,984
25,646
25,801
25,888
25,832
25,919
26,532
26,707
26,600

6,980
8,198

1,135
893
454
223
130
173
211

1,020
856
946
582
467
282
261
194
326
194
363
257
518
342
444
705
605
448
683
480
771
508
614
872
786
413
570
335
725
382
827
463
1,374 1,428
2,338 2,050
3,043 2,580
3,323 2,795
3,330 3,174
3,729 3,574
4,043 3,547
4,475 3,511
4,161 3,774
4,363 3,755
4,893 3,782
5,414 4,212
5,087 4,388
4,990 4,669

8,307
5,883
3,768
1,676
1,231
1,509
1,999
2,981
3,903
3,560
4,389
5,054
6,206
3,415
1,979
2,186
3,411
10,396
14,582
18,539
17,914
23,081
23,447
23,889
25,783
27,556
32,440
33,067
33,766
33,493
38,002

10,793
8,741
6,427
3,538
2,879
3,720
4,232
6,497

1,700
1,094
1,371
2,135
5,644
7,047
8,417
8,272
8,981
10,918
11,047
12,006
12,177
13,735
15,390
16,747
15,446
15,671

16,372
16,619
17,304
18,069

290

492
232

254
442
801
346
156
208
642
1,689
1,702
1,397
972
1,062
2,117
2,320
2.229
2,030

9,253
10,781
11,236
11,678
11,724
12,748
14,079
15,457
16,107

17,090 4,943 2,794 4,380 4,973 18,645
17,103 4,902 2,771 4,434 4,996 17,778
17,173 4,963 2,774 4,438 4,998 18,588
17,452 4,890 2,810 4,737 5,015 17,119
17,497 4,775 2,852 4,805 5,065 17,315
17,383 4,589 2,976 4,686 5,132 19,151
18,043 4,953 3,136 4,718 5,236 18,802
18,739 5,346 3,310 4,741 5,342 19,623
18,908 5,561 3,395 4,580 5,372 19,401
19,076 5,412 3,461 4,849 5,354 20,280
18,869 5,367 3,538 4,601 5,363 20,352
19,017 5,412 3,577 4,617 5,411 19,820
1
Data in this table do not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national
product. The latter data include expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas well drilling, and do
not reflect revisions in the "new series" presented above. (See Table O-l.)
I Total includes nonhousekeeping units, not shown separately. Beginning with 1960, additions and
alterations, also included in total, are not shown separately.
! Office buildings, warehouses, stores, restaurants, and garages.
* Farm, institutional, and all other.
• New series beginning January 1959 not entirely comparable with prior data. In addition to major
differences between old and new series, data for Alaska and Hawaii are included beginning January 1959.
For details, see Construction Activity, C30-25 (Supplement), July 1961, C30-53 (Supplement), December
1963, and C30-54, January 1964, Bureau of the Census.
e
Preliminary.
Source: Department of Commerce.
250




19,128
18,749
18,809
19,418
20,075
20,219
20,275
20,186
20,141
20,723
20,893
20,818

TABLE C-37.—New public construction activity, 1929-63
[Value p u t in place, millions of dollars]
Total new public construction l

Major types of new public construction

Federal
Year

All
public
sources

Direct Federal
aid

State
and
local

Highway

Sewer
Conand
Hoswater servation
and
Educa- pital
and
tional institu- miscel- and
delaneous
tional public velopservice ment

MiliAll
tary
other
facili- public *
ties

1929.

2,486

155

80

2,251

1,266

389

101

404

115

19

193

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

2,858
2,659
1,862
1,648
2,211

209
271
333
516
626

104
235
111
286
721

2,545
2,153
1,418
846
864

1,516
1,355
958
847
1,000

364
285
130
52
148

118
110
83
49
51

500
479
291
160
228

137
156
150
359
518

29
40
34
36
47

194
234
218
145
219

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

2,233
3,516
3,096
3,420
3,809

814
797
776
717
759

567
1,566
1,117
1,320
1,377

852
1,153
1,203
1,383
1,673

845
1,362
1,226
1,421
1,381

153
366
253
311
468

38
74
73
97
127

246
509
445
492
507

700
658
605
551
570

37
29
37
62
125

214
518
457
486
631

1940.
1941
1942
1943
1944

3,628
5,751
10,660
6,322
3,073

1,182
3,751
9,313
5,609
2,505

946
697
475
268
126

1,500
1,303
872
445
442

1,302
1,066
734
446
362

156
158
128
63
41

54
42
35
44
58

469
393
254
156
125

528
500
357
285
163

385
1,620
5,016
2,550
837

734
1,972
4,136
2,778
1,487

2,398
2,231
3,319
4,704
6,269

1,737
865
840
1,177
1,488

99
244
409
417
461

562
1,122
2,070
3,110
4,320

398
764
1,344
1,661
2,015

59
101
287
618
934

85
85
77
213
458

152
278
492
699
803

130
260
424
670
852

690
188
204
158
137

884
555
491
685
1,070

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

6,866
9,253
10,781
11,236
11,678

1,625
2,981
4,185
4,134
3,418

462
481
626
687
728

4,779
5,791
5,970
6,415
7,532

2,134
2,353
2,679
3,015
3,680

1,133
1,513
1,619
1,714
2,134

499
527
495
369
333

819
959
958
1,050
1,171

942
912
900
892
773

177
887
1,387
1,290
1,003

1,162
2,102
2,743
2,906
2,584

1955.
1956
1957
1958
1959 3

11,724
12,748
14,079
15,457
16,070

2,777
2,742
2.993
3,388
3,724

790
896
1,314
2,130
2,711

8,157
9,110
9,772
9,939
9,635

3,861
4,431
4,954
5,545
5,761

2,442
2,556
2,825
2,875
2,656

300
300
354
390
428

1,318
1,659
1,737
1,838
2,018

701
826
971
1,019
1,121

1,287
1,360
1,287
1,402
1,465

1,815
1,616
1,951
2,388
2,621

1960
1-961
1962
1963 «

15,863
17,156
17,558
18,998

3,622
3,805
3,818
4,262

2,269
2,425
2,553
2,923

9,972
10,926
11,187
11,813

5,437
5,855
6,156
6,737

2,818
3,052
2,984
3,046

401
369
397
456

2,136
2,168
2,232
2,431

1,175
1,384
1,465
1,573

1,366
1,378
1,269
1,560

2,530
2,950
3,055
3,195

1945--—..
1946
1947
1948
1949-

* For expenditures classified b y ownership, combine "Federal aid" and "State and local" columns to
obtain State and local ownership. " D i r e c t " column stands as it is for Federal ownership.
* Includes nonresidential buildings (other than educational and hospital and institutional), residential
buildings, and miscellaneous public construction such as parks and playgrounds, memorials, etc.
* Beginning with 1959, data include estimates for Alaska and Hawaii. Comparability with earlier data
is not seriously affected since these two States accounted for less than two-thirds of one percent of total new
public construction in 1959.
4
Preliminary; partly estimated b y Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Department of Commerce.

251
715-11J O-64-17



TABLE C-38.—New housing starts and applications for financing, 1929-63
[Thousands of units]
Housing starts

Total
private Total
and private
public (in(in- cludclud- ing
ing farm)
farm)1

Year or
month

Proposed
home construction 3

Private nonfarm
Private nonfarm
New
private
PrihousTotal
vate
ing
private
GovernReand
(inment home units plica- quests
Two
public
programs
au- tions
cludor
for
non- Total » One- more ing Total
thor- for
farm
ized FHA VA
family fami- farm)
aplies
com- praismitFHA VA
ments als

1929

509.0

509.0

316.0 193.0

509.0

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

330.0
254.0
134.0
93.0
126.0

330.0
254.0
134.0
93.0
126.0

227.0 103.0
187.0 67.0
118.0 16.0
76.0 17.0
109.0 17.0

330.0
254.0
134.0
93.0
126.0

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

221.0
319.0
336.0
406.0
515.0

215.7
304.2
332.4
399.3
458.4

182.2
238.5
265.8
316.4
373.0

33.5
65.7
66.6
82.9
85.4

215.7 13.2
304.2 48.8
332.4 57.0
399.3 106.8
458.4 144.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

602.6
706.1
356.0
191.0
141.8

529.6
619.5
301.2
183.7
138.7

447.6
533.2
252.3
136.3
114.6

82.0
86.3
48.9
47.4
24.1

529.6
619.5
301.2
183.7
138.7

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

209.3
670.5
849.0
931.6
1,025.1

208.1
662.5
845.6
913.5
988.8

184.6 23.5
590.0 72.5
740.2 105.4
763.2 150.3
792.4 196.4

1950
1951
1952.
1953
1954

1,396.0 1,352.2 1,150.7
1,091.3 1,020.1 892.2
1,127.0 1,068.5 939.1
1,103.8 1,068.3 932.8
1,220.4 1,201.7 1,077.3

201.5
127.9
129.4
135.5
124.4

1955
1956
1957

1,328.9 1,309.5 1,190.0
1,118.1 1,093.9 980.7
1,041.9 992.8 840.2
1,209.4 1,141.5 932.5
1,378.5 1,342.8 1,078.5
(*)
(*)
(*)

119.5
113.2
152.6
209.0
264.3
(*)

1,553. 5 1,516.8 1,531.3 1,494.6 1,211.9
1,296.0 1,252.1 1,274.0 1,230.1 972.3
1,365.0 1,313.0 1,336.8 1,284.8 946.4
1,492.4 1,462.8 1,468.7 1,439.1 967.8
1,619.2 1, 588. 6 1,591.7 1,561.0 985.0

282.7
257.4
338.6
471.3
576.0

1958..

._

_

1959

(*)
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 6

(*)

See footnotes at end of table.




252

3 20.6
47:8
49.8
131.1
179.8

176.6
217.1
160.2
126.1
83.6

231.2
288.5
------- 238.5
144.4
62.9

208.1 38.9 *8.8
662.6 67.1 91.8
845.6 178.3 160.3
913.5 216.4 71.1
988.8 252.6 90.8
1,352.2
1,020.1
1,068.5
1,068.3
1,201.7

(*)

56.6
121.7
286.4
293.2
327.0

328.2
186.9
229.1
216.5
250.9

191.2
148.6
141.3
156.5
307.0 1,056.5

397.7
192.8
267.9
253.7
338.6

164.4
226.3
251.4
535.4

1,309.5
1,093.9
992.8
1,141. 5
1,342.8
(*)

268.7
183.4
150.1
270.3
307.0

392.9 1,152. 6
270.7 921.9
128.3 820.3
102.1 950.8
109.3 1,081.1
C)

306.2
197.7
198.8
341.7
369.7

620.8
401.5
159.4
234.2
234.0

1,516.8 1,494.6
1,252.1 1,230.1
1,313.0 1,284.8
1,462.8 1,439.1
1,588.6 1,561.0

(*)
/j\

(*)
/8\

(*)

307.0 109.3 1,208.3 369.7 234.0
225.7 74.6 998.0 242.4 142.9
198.8 83.3 1,064.2 243.8 177.8
197.3 77.8 1,186.6 221.1 171.2
166.2 71.0 1,284. 6 190.2 139.3

TABLE C-38.—New housing starts and applications for financing, 1929-63—Continued
[Thousands of units]
Housing starts

Year or
month

Private nonfarm
Total
private Total Priand private vate
Two
public (in- and
(in- clud- public
One- or
clud- ing non- Total family more
ing farm) farm
famifarm)
lies

Proposed
home construction 3

New
private
housing Ap- Reunits plica- quests
au- tions for
thor- for VA
ized FHA apcom- praismitVA
ments als

Private nonfarm
Total
private
Govern(inment home
cludprograms
ing Total
farm)
FHA

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1962:
January. __
February..
March
April
May
June
_-

83.6
78.5
118.1
152.5
157.6
140.2

81.2
77.1
116.2
147.8
155.2
136.8

82.3
77.4
116.5
150.3
156.2
137.7

79.9
76.0
114.6
145.6
153.8
134.3

53.0
52.1
78.5
99.0
106.5
93.3

26.8
23.9
36.3
46.6
47.2
40.9

1,423
1,272

1,392
1,253
1,460
1,489
1,501
1,366

214
228
214
228
204
189

L,122
69 ]
95 :
1,198
87 1,146
94 L,216
87 ]
L,131
77 1,168

233
239
246
240
229
216

196
169
208
167
172
147

July
August
September.
October
November.
December.

140.0
149.5
117.0
138.0
122.5
94.9

136.5
147.7
114.3
135.2
120.9
93.9

138.1
146.4
114.4
134.1
121.4
93.9

134.6
144.6
111.7
131.3
119.8
92.9

93.1
98.7
73.0
88.1
77.6
54.9

41.6
46.0
38.7
43.2
42.2
37.9

1,442
1,486
1,356
1,537
1,579
1,562

1,423
1,459
1,328
1,491
1,564
1,541

205
190
178
173
183
176

74
72
70
70
72
75

]
L,185
i
1,160
:
1,202
1,195
:
1,254
]
1,248

221
195
191
207
207
199

184
148
158
176
168
172

1963:
January. __
February..
March
April
May
June

83.3
87.6
128.1
160.3
169.5
157.3

80.
86.5
124.4
158.2
166.4
153.4

82.2
86.1
126.3
157.5
166.3
155.5

79.5
85.0
122.6
155.4
163.2
151.6

46.
50.9
78.8
102.8
103.9

33.3
34.2
43.8
52.5
59.4
53.3

1,344
1,380
1,575
1,618
1,618
1,571

1,317
1,353
1,549
1,590
1,590
1,554

172
164
173
176
180
179

74
78
73
83
79
72

L,200
]

i
L,193
]
1,232
1,214
L,285
]
L,315

203
197
197
251
160
195

161
150
152
119
152
123

July
152.3
August
147.9
September. 147.3
October
166.1
November« 120.6
December
98.9

150.2
144.4
145.3
163.1
118.8
97.3

150.7
145.5
144.1
162.8
118.2
96.5

148.6
142.0
142.1
159.8
116.4
94.9

96.5
93.4
89.

52.0
48.5
52.4
7 58.4
7 44.7

1,588
1,455
1,732
1,847
1,556
1,597

1,573
1,434
1,697
1,807
1,525
1,548

164
151
159
158
153
157

72 i
1,256
63 ]
1,215
62 L,319
62 1,367
67 1,321
73 1,434

182
172
173
176
190
183

122
133
140
140
145
159

* Military housing starts, including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section 803
of the National Housing Act, are included in publicly financed starts but excluded from total private
starts and from FHA starts.
2
3 Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction.
FHA program approved in June 1934; all 1934 activity included in 1935.
* Monthly estimates for September 1945-May 1950 were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency.
8
8 Not available.
Preliminary; data for 1963 partly estimated by Council of Economic Advisers.
7 Preliminary data; not comparable with total.
*New series; see Housing Starts, C20-11 (Supplement), May 1960 and C20-50, August 1963, Bureau of the
Census, for detailed description.
NOTE.—Census series beginning with the new series in 1959 include Alaska and Hawaii. FHA and VA
data include Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Federal Housing Administration (FHA), and Veterans Administration (VA), except as noted.




2

53

TABLE C-39.—Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade, 1947-63
[Amounts in millions of dollars)
Total manufacturing and t r a d e l

Manufacturing

Merchant
wholesalers i

Retail trade

Year or month
Sales 3 Inven- Ratio
tories'

InvenInvenSales» tories" Ratio * Sales 2 Inven- Ratio * Sales) tories* Ratio*
tories*

1947...
1948...
1949...

35,411 51,995
33,115 48,925

1.41
1.54

15,500 25,897
18.105 28,543
16,092 26,321

1.58
1.50
1.75

6,171
5,874

7,445
7,134

1950...
1951...
1952...
1953...
1954...

37,853
42,470
43,953
47,080
45,570

59,022
69,519
71,488
75,167
72,066

1.37
1.57
1.59
1.59
1.61

18,620
21,702
22,581
24,823
23,351

31,078
39,306
41,136
43,948
41,612

1.48
1.66
1.78
.76
.81

6,965
7,722
7,843
8,166
8,124

8,484
9,163
9,321
9,731
9,528

1.07
1.19
1.16
1.19
1.19

1955...
1956...
1957...
1958...
1959...

50,883
53,240
55,014
53,404
58,646

78,595
86,018
88,100
85,940
90,823

1.47
1.55
1.59
1.60
1.51

26,486
27,740
28,736
27,280
30,219

45,069
50,642
51,871
50,070
52,707

.62
.73
.80
.84
.70

9,076
9,689
9,611
9,428
10,477

10,757
11,974
11,778
11,757
12,811

1960«..
19616..
1962..._.
1963 i«_.

59,557 93,512
59,756 94,456
64,107 99,272
66,916 102,512

1.57
1.55
1.51
1.50

30,796
30,884
33,308
34,717

53,814
55,087
57, 753
59,727

.76
.74
.70

10,466
10,638
11,187
11,613

12,885
13,131
13,581
14,245

10,200 14,241
11,135 16,007
11,149 15,470

1.26
1.39
1.41

12,268
13,046
13,529
14,091
14,095

19,460
21,050
21,031
21,488
20,926

1.38
1.64
1.52
1.53
1.51

1.11
1.18
1.22
1.23
1.18

15,321
15,811
16,667
16,696
17,951

22,769
23,402
24,451
24,113
25,305

1.43
1.47
1.44
1.43
1.40

1.25
1.21
1.18
1.19

18,294
18,234
19,613
20,586

26,813
26,238
27,938
28,540

1.45
1.43
1.38
1.37

Seasonally adjusted
1962:
January
February...
March
April
May
June

62,995
63,217
63,942
64,239
64,180
63,423

94,814
95,365
95,805
95,951
96,505
96,987

L.51
1.51
1.50
L.49
L.50
L.53

32,937
33,044
33,643
33,663
33,476
33,046

55,396
55,695
56,003
56,075
56,435
56,660

1.68
1.69
1.66
1.67
1.69
1.71

11,068
11,034
10,979
11,187
11,119
11,066

13,086
13,135
13,126
13,083
13,105
13,206

1.18
L.19
L.20
L.17
]
L.18
]
L.19

18,990
19,139
19,320
19,389
19,585
19,311

26,332
26,535
26,676
26,793
26,965
27,121

.39
.38
38
.38
.40

July...
August
September.
October
November.
December..

64,185
64,287
64,414
64,312
65,171
64,653

97,337
97,617
98,208
98,664
98,774
99,272

1.52
1.52
L.52
L.53
L.52
L.54

33,329
33,462
33,167
33,241
33,673
32,945

56,875
57,035
57,316
57,442
57,608
57,753

1.71
1.70
1.73
1.73
1.71
1.75

11,198
11,154
11,403
11,234
11,386
11,455

13,176
13,252
13,399
13,475
13,437
13,581

L.18
L.19
1.18
1.20
1.18
1.19

19,658
19,671
19,844
19,837
20,112
20,253

27,286
27,330
27,493
27,747
27,729
27,938

.39
.39
.39
.40
.38

65,212 99,378
66,036 99,588
66,213 99,765
66,326 99,963
66, 511 100,295
67,090 100,610

L.52
1.51
1.51
L.51
L.51
L.50

33,542
34,114
34,244
34, 578
34,836
34,942

57,883
58,021
58,126
58,309
58,507
58,706

1.73
1.70
1.70
1.69
1.68
1.68

11,283
11,548
11,619
11,472
11,475
11,662

13,493 1.20
13,542 1.17
13,573 1.17
13, 593 L.18
13,726 L.20
13,780 L.18

20,387
20,374
20,350
20,276
20,200
20,486

28,002
28,025
28,066
28,061
28,062
28,124

.37
38
.38
.38
1.39
1.37

68,066 100,974
67,072 101,017
67,048 101,356
67,921 101,897
67,441 102,512

1.48
1.51
1.51
1.50
1.52

35,641
34,736
34,672
35,214
35,162

58,884
58,917
59,087
59,322
59,727

1.65
1.70
1.70
1.68
1.70

11,706
11,670
11,950
11,991
11,657

13,831
13,952
14,122
14,202
14,245

20,719
20,666
20,426
20,716
20,622
21,548

28,259
28,148
28,147
28,373
28,540

1.36
1.36
1.38
1.37
1.38

1963:
January
February..
March
April
May
June
July
August
September.
October
November»
December K
1
2
3
4

1.18
1.20
1.18
1.18
1.22

Excludes m e r c h a n t wholesalers of f a r m products, r a w m a t e r i a l s .
Monthly average shown for year and total for month.
Seasonally adjusted, end of period.
Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods, ratio of weighted average inventories to
average monthly sales; for monthly data, ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for
month.
5
Beginning January 1960, retail sales and inventories include data for Alaska and
Hawaii.
6
Beginning January 1961, wholesale sales and inventories include data for Alaska and
Hawaii.
7
Where December data not available, data for year calculated on basis of no change
from November.
8
Preliminary.
NOTE.—The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change In
business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only
manufacturing and trade rather than all business, and show inventories in terms of current
book value without adjustment for revaluation.
Source: Department of Commerce.




254

TABLE C—40.—Manufacturers^ sales, inventories, and orders, 7947-63
[Billions of dollars]
Inventories a

Sales *

Year or
month

New orders l

Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Dura- Nonindustries
industries
UnDura' Non- filled
ble durable
ble durable
goods goods Mateorders 8
goods goods
indus- indus- rials Work Fin- Mate- Work Fin- Total indus- indus- i
rials
tries
tries
ished
in
and
ished
in
tries
tries
and
sup- process goods sup- process goods
plies

1947..
1948..
1949..

6,683
8,337
7,167

8,817
9,768
8,925

15,256
17,692
15,614

6,388
8,126
6,633

19501951..
1952..
19531954..

8,835
10,483
11,338
13,335
11,827

9,785
11,219
11,243
11,488
11,524

8,966 10,720
7,894 9,721

6,206
6,040

8,317
8,167

20,110
23,907
23,203
2,472 7,409 23,533
2,440 7,415 22,313

10,165
12,841
12,061
12,105
10,743

9,045
11,066
11,142
11,428
11,570

41,166
66,862
75,478
60,346
48,195

19551956195719581959..

14,080
14,715
15,237
13,572
15,544

12,406 9,194 10, 756
13,025 10,417 12,317
13,499 10,608 12,837
13,708 9,847 12,294
14,675 10, 585 12,952

6,348
7,565
8,125
7,749
8,143

8,556
8,971
8,775
8,671

2,571
2,721
2,864
2,800
2,928

7,666 27,423
8,622 28,383
8,624 27,514
8,498 26,901
8,857 30,679

14,954
15,381
14,073
13,170
15,951

12,469
13,002
13,441
13, 731
14,728

60,044
67,473
53,251
48,785
54,101

1960..

15,817
15,532
17 184
18,065

14,979
15,352
16,124
16,652

9,113
9,511
9,770
9, 794

2,935
3,120
3,304
3,456

9,353 30,115
9,707 31,061
10,246 33,167
10,817 35,049

15,223
15,664
17,085
18,349

14,892
15,397
16,082
16,700

45,820
47, 868
46,242
49,688

48, 951
49, 546
48, 880
48, 538
48,064
47, 596

1963 * «_.

10,286
10,234
10, 571
10,881

12,780 9,190
13,225 9,088
14,129 9,593
14,623 10,156

34,266
9,566 30,552
8,981 23,877

Seasonally adjusted
1962:
January
February...
March
April
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November. _
December. _

10,319
10, 485
10,642
10, 728
10, 778
10,787

13,352
13, 555
13,652
13,664
13,697
13, 742

9,194
9,203
9,257
9,307
9,308
9,340

9,587
9,668
9,735
9,712
9,745
9,754

3,122 9, 790 33, 558 17,699
3,163 9,870 33,597 17, 703
3,221 9,892 33,204 17,150
3,213 9,869 33,167 17,019
3,225 9,993 33,297 17,215
3,242 10,034 32, 586 16,648

15,859
15,894
16,054
16,148
16,082
15,938

16,162
16,137
16,174
16,122
16, 511

10, 719
10,665
10,696
10, 636
10,603
16,113 10, 571

13,786
13,868
13,955
14,055
14,126
14,129

9,397
9,420
9,457
9,507
9,558
9,593

9,623
9,649
9,765
9,806
9,877
9,770

3,249 10,105 32,
1,997
3,284 10,102 32,809
3,303 10,196 32i
1,633
3,312 10,212 33,
1,400
3.291 10,201 33,165
,
3,304 10,246 33,355

16,910
16, 592
16, 547
17,288
16,732
17,330

16,087 47,291
16,217 46,730
16,086 46,338
16,112 46,479
16,433 45,972
16,025 46,784

17,027
17,123
17, 578
17,505
17,401
16,937

15,910
15,921
16,065
16,158
16,075
16,109

17,167
17,325
16,993
17,119
17,162
16,832

1963:
January
February...
March
April
May
June

17,301
17,636
17,622
17,892
18,112
18,242

16,241
16,478
16,622
16,686
16,724

10, 555
10, 521
10,558
10, 646
10, 679
16, 700 10, 766

14,173
14,156
14,213
14.349
14,602
14,629

9,650
9,687
9,752
9,758
9,805
9,847

9,858
9,886
9,837
9,805
9,726
9,679

3,383 10,211 34,
18,466
3,373
18,228
3.380
18, 776
3,389 10,300 35^ 752 19,037
3,389 10, 320 35,438 18, 736
""
3,328 10, 452 34, 425 17,682

16,276 47, 809

16, 408
16,588
16, 715
16,702
16, 743

48, 424
49,353
50, 246
50, 565
50,052

July
August
September .
October
November 6

18,746
18,160
17,937
18,590
18,348

16,895
16, 576
16,735
16,624
16,814

14, 740
14, 591
14,579
14,639
14,623

9,852
9,949
10,040
10,064
10,156

9,718
9,694
9,660
9,844
9,794

3,354 10, 559 35,207
3,364 10,648 33,938
3,347 10,544 34,991
33
0 3 9 1
3,344 10,553 35,354
3,456 10,817 35,144

16,932
16,870
16,747
16,732
16,998

49, 542
49, 552
49,982
50,140
50,127

10,810
10,981
10,917
10,878
10,881

i Monthly average for year and total for month.
»Book value, seasonally adjusted, end of period.
• End of period.
4
Based on data through November.
»Preliminary.
NOTE.—See Table C-39 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers.
Source: Department of Commerce.




255

18,275
17,068
18,244
18,622
18,146

PRICES
TABLE C-41.—Wholesale price indexes, 7929-63
[1957-59=100]
All commodities other than farm products
and foods (industrials)
All
commodities

Year or month.

Farm
products

Processed
foods
Total

Textile
products
and
apparel

Chemicals
and
allied
products

Rubber Lumber
and
and
rubber
wood
prodproducts
ucts

1929

52.1

63.9

54.3

51.7

67.8

(<)

57.6

26.4

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

47.3
39.9
35.6
36.1
41.0

54.0
39.6
29.4
31.3
39.9

49.5
41.6
33.9
33.7
39.6

48.1
42.4
39.7
40.2
44.2

60.3
49.8
41.2
48.6
54.7

(«)
(4)
(«)

46.6
48.8

50.4
42 8
37.1
39.0
45.5

24.1
19 6
16.9
20.0
23.5

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

43.8
44.2
47.2
43.0
42.2

48.0
49.4
52.7
41.9
39.9

48.3
46.4
48.6
42.3
40.2

44.0
44.9
48.1
46.1
46.0

53.3
53.7
57.3
50.1
52.3

50.9
51.2.
53.6
51.0
50.7

45.8
49.4
58.1
57.1
59.3

22.6
23.6
27.9
25.4
26.1

1940
1941
1942
1948
1944

43.0
47.8
54.0
56.5
56.9

41.3
50.1
64.6
74.8
75.3

40.4
46.7
54.8
57.2
56.0

46.8
50.3
53.9
54.7
55.6

55.4
63.7
72.8
73.1
73.9

51.6
56.1
62.3
63.1
63.8

55.3
59.6
69 4
71.3
70.4

28.9
34.5
37.5
39.7
42.8

1945
1946
1947
1948 „
1949

57.9
66.1
81.2
87.9
83.5

78.3
90.6
109.1
117.1
101.3

56.4
71.7
91.1
98.4
88.8

56.3
61.7
75.3
81.7
80.0

75.1
87.3
105.7
110.3
100.9

64.2
69.4
92 2
94.4
86.2

68.3
68.6
68 3
70.5
68.3

43.4
49.7
77.4
88.5
81.9

1950
1951
1952 . .
1953
1954 -

86.8
96.7
94.0
92.7
92.9

106.4
123.8
116.8
105.9
104.4

92.6
103.3
100.9
97.0
97.6

82.9
91.5
89.4
90.1
90.4

104.8
116.9
105.5
102.8
100.6

87.5
100.1
95.0
96.1
97.3

83.2
102.1
92.5
86.3
87.6

94.1
102.5
99.5
99.4
97.6

93.2
96.2
99.0
100.4
100.6

97.9
96.6
99.2
103.6
97.2

94.3
94.3
97.9
102.9
99.2

92.4
96.5
99.2
99.5
101.3

100.7
100.7
100.8
98.9
100^4

96.9
97.5
99.6
100.4
100.0

99.2
100.6
100.2
100.1
99.7

102.3
103.8
98.5
97.4
104.1

100.7
100.3
100.6
100.3

96.9
96.0
97.7
95.7

100.0
100.7
101.2
101.1

101.3
100.8
100.8
100.7

101.5
99.7
100.6
100.5

100.2
99.1
97.5
96.3

99.9
96.1
93.3
93.8

100.4
95.9
96.5
98.6

100.8
100.7
100.7
100.4
100.2
100.0

97.9
98.2
98.4
96.9
96.2
95.3

102.0
101.8
101.6
100.2
99.6
99.8

101.0
100.8
100.8
100.9
100.9
100.7

100.3
100.4
100.5
100.5
100.7
100.8

98.4
98.1
98.0
97.9
97.7
97.6

94.1
93.5
93.6
92.9
93.2
93.0

94.7
95.2
96.2
96.8
97.1
97.3

100.4
100.5
101.2
100.6
100.7
100.4

96.5
97.6
100.6
98.7
99.3
97.3

100.8
101.5
103.3
101.5
101.3
100.9

100.8
100.6
100.8
100.7
100.7
100.7

100.9
100.8
100.6
100.5
100.5
100.6

97.2
97.0
96.9
97.1
97.0
96.8

92.7
92.7
92.8
93.1
93.7
94.4

97.5
97.4
97.0
96.6
96.3
95.8

100.5
100.2
99.9
99.7
100.0
100.3

98.5
96.5
95.4
95.4
94.4
94.9

100.8
100.5
99.0
99.3
101.7
102.4

100.7
100.6
100.6
100.4
100.5
100.7

100.4
100.3
100.2
100.1
100.2
100.3

96.9
96.7
96.8
96.3
96.4
96.3

94.3
94.2
94.1
94.1
93.2
93.1

95.9
96.1
96.5
97.0
97.5
98.3

100.6
100.4
100.3
100.5
100.7
100.3

96.8
96.3
95.5
95 1
96 2
93.3

102.2
100.9
100.9
102.2
102.5
100.4

100.8
100.8
100.7
100.9
100.9
101.2

100.4
100.4
100.5
100.7
101.1
101.2

96.0
96.0
96.0
96.2
96.3
96.2

93.0
93.7
93.4
94.2
94.2
93.8

101.6
102.6
99.9
99.2
99.2
99.1

, _
__

_

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

.

.

1960 . _
1961
1962
1963»
1962: January
February
March .
April
May
June

« .
.

July
August- .
September _. . . _.
October
November
December..
_ ..
1963: January
February
March
April
May.
JuneJuly
August
September.
October
November
December • _
See footnotes at end of table.




256

TABLE G-41.—Wholesale price indexes, 1929-63—Continued
[1957-59=100]
All commodities other than farm products and foods (industrials)—continued

Year or month

Fuels
Hides,
and
skins,
leather, related
prodand
ucts,
leather
and
products
power *

1929.....
1930....
1931....
1032....
1933....
1934....

56.6
52.0
44.7
38.0
42.0
44.9

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

46.5
49.5
54.3
48.2
49.6
52.3
56.1
61.1
61.0
60.5
61.3
70.7
96.5
97.5
92.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 8
1962: January
February. __
March
April
May
June-July
August
September-.
October
November. _
December
1963: January
February. _.
March
April
May...
June
July
August
September..
October
November..
December «_

61.5
58.2
50.0
52.1
49.3
54.3
54.5
56.5
57.5
56.6
54.2
53.2
56.6
58.2
59.9
61.6
62.3
66.7
79.7
93.8

114.8
92.8
94.1
89.9

90.2
93.5
93.3
95.9
94.6

89.5
94.8
94.9
96.0
109.1

94.5
97.4
102.7
98.7
98.7

105.2
106.2
107.4
104.2
108.2
107.7
107.4
106.9
107.2
108.0
107.5
107.0
107.5
107.4
107.3
106.9
106.0
105.1
105.1
104.5
104.8
104.5

99.6
100.7
100.2

104.3
103.6
103.1
103.4
103.5
102.9

101.0
100.4
98.9
100.2
99.7
99.6
100.0
99.5
100.8
100.8
100.7
100.8
100.4
100.3
100.8
100.3
100.4
100.9
100.4
98.9
99.0
98.8
97.9
99.3

Pulp,
paper,
and
allied
products

Metals
and
metal
products

(*)

44.1

(*)

Machinery and
motive
products

39.7
35.7
32.8
33.6
37.1
37.0
37.8
43.2
41.6
41.2

()

(*)
(4)

<*)
(*>
(*)
75.3
78.6
75.2
77.1
91.3
89.0
88.7
88.8
91.1
97.2
99.0
100.1
101.0
101.8
98.8
100.0
99.2
99.9
99.9
101.0
101.3
100.8
100.5
100.0
99.7
99.5
99.3
99.1
99.0
99.0
99.1
99.0
99.0
99.1
99.4
99.0
99.1
99.1
99.5
99.4
99.4

56.4
55.5
51.1
45.0
45.1
49.0

53.4

67.4

67.8
67.2
63.3
56.6
59.2

48.6
49.3
54.7
53.4
53.2

53.2
49.7
46.5
49.2
52.6
52.6
52.7
53.9
52.2
51.2
51.2
52.4
54,5
54.7
55.8
58.1
61.8
69.1
74.7
76.7

60.1
60.8
61.5
64.6
64.9

69.0

54.4
57.8
62.5
62.1
63.8
63.9
67.8
77.8
82.5
83.8

72.7
80.9
81.0
83.6
84.3

85.6
92.8
91.1
92.9
93.9

90.0
97.8
99.7
99.1
101.2
101.3
100.7
100.0
100.1

94.3
96.9
99.4
100.2
100.4

78.6
83.5
83.5
86.9
88.8
91.3
95.2
98.9
99.9
101.2
101.4
101.8
101.8
101.3

80.5
85.1
87.0
89.8
93.8
94.6
95.1
98.0
99.7
102.2

104.1
113.1
116.7
105.4
1 0.5
99.1
98.1
96.6
101.5
101.9

102.5
103.2
104.1
106.1

99.3
103.9
107.3
110.4

100.7
100.6
100.4
100.3
100.2
99.8
99.7
99.8
99.7
99.4
99.3
99.3
99.5
99.4
99.4
99.4
99.9
100.0
100.0
100.1
100.3
100.9
101.0
101.3

99.3
99.1
99.0
98.9
99.0
98.9
98.8
98.7
98.6
98.5
98.6
98.4

101.9
102.1
102.2
102.4
102.1
101.9
101.6
101.6
101.5
101.6
101.6
101.5
101.4
101.5
101.5
101.5
101.3
101.2

103.8
103.8
104.0
104.0
104.1
104.1

106.7
105.6
105.6
106.0
106.0
105.4
107.6
107.2
109.1
108.7
109.8
110.2
111.6
111.5
110.8
108.0
107.6
108.1

41.4
42.2
42.8
42.7
42.7
43.4
48.5

1
Formerly titled "Fuel, power, and lighting materials." *
' Formerly titled "Nonmetallic minerals—structural."
« Formerly titled "Tobacco manufactures and bottled beverages."
* Not available.
»Preliminary.
Source: Department of Labor.




Furniture
Tobacco
Nonme- products Misceland
tallic
other mineral
laneous
and
houseprodprod- bottled
2
beverhold
ucts
ucts
durables

257

100.1
99.5
98.8
98.1

98.2
98.2
98.1
98.0
98.1
98.0
98.1
98.1
98.1
98.1
98.0

100.9
101.0
101.1
101.3
101.2
101.3

59.1
59.0
59.5
59.4
59.4

66.7
69.8
75.6
78.2
79.6

104.0
104.2
104.2
104.5
104.5
104.3
104.3
104.3
104.3
104.4
105.2
105.8
107.5
107.5
107.5
107.5
107.5
107.5

*)
()
4

(4
(4
(*
(*)

111.2
103.5

110.4
111.1
111.8
111.2
110.9
112.2

TABLE C-42.—Wholesale price indexes, by stage of processing, 1947-63
[1957-59=100]

Intermediate materials, supplies, and components *
Crude materials

Year or
month

All
commodities

Materials and components for
manufacturing

Food- Nonstuffs food
maTotal and terials, Fuel
feedexcept
stuffs
fuel

Total

Materials
for
Total food
manufacturing

Materials
for
nondurable
manufacturing

Materials
for
durable
manufacturing

Components
for
manufacturing

Materials
and
components
for
construction

1947.
1948
1949

81.2
87.9
83.5

100.8
110.5
95.6

113.0
122.2
101.5

86.5
96.2
87.5

73.6
87.0
86.5

76.5
82.7
79.4

75.5
81.5
78.0

102.6
105.8
91.0

94.0
99.5
90.7

58.8
66.4
68.2

63.0
68.0

69.6
77.0
77.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

86.8
96.7
94.0
92.7
92.9

104.2
119.6
109.9
101.5
100.6

108.9
126.0
118.6
106.2
106.2

100.0
115.3
99.9
95.6
93.8

86.1
87.7
88.3
91.4
87.3

83.0
93.0
90.3
90.8
91.3

81.8
92.7
88.8
90.2
90.4

94.7
105.5
101.4
101.6
100.7

95.2
110.3
99.3
98.5

72.1
80.1
80.3
83.9
85.7

71.9
81.6
81.8
83.3
83.7

81.2
88.8
88.2
89.7
90.1

1955
1956
1957.
1958
1959

93.2
96.2
99.0
100.4
100.6

96.7
97.2
99.4
101.6
99.0

96.2
94.2
98.4
104.2
97.4

99.1
102.8
101.4
97.6
101.0

87.1
93.3
98.6
99.8
101.6

93.0
97.1
99.4
99.6
101.0

92.6
96.9
99.3
99.7
101.0

97.5
97.9
99.7
102.0
98.3

97.3
98.8
100.1
99.1
100.8

90.0
95.7
98.8
99.5
101.8

87.4
95.4
99.1
99.9
101.1

93.7
98.5
99.1
99.1
101.8

1960
1961
1962
1963*

100.7
100.3
100.6
100.3

96.6
96.1
97.1
95.0

96.2
94.9
96.8
94.0

96.8
97.9
97.4
96.2

102.5
102.3
101.8
103.0

101.0
100.3
100.2
100.5

101.0
99.8
99.2
99.4

99.5
102.6
100.5
105.5

100.8
98.6
98.0
97.1

101.9
100.5
100.4
100.5

100.6
99.6
98.8
98.8

101.1
99.7
99.3
99.5

January
February.._
March
April
May
June

100.8
100.7
100.7
100.4
100.2
100.0

97.8
97.5
97.6
96.5
95.8
95.2

96.7
96.3
96.9
95.5
94.7
94.0

99.5
99.3
98.7
98.3
97.9
97.3

102.7
104.0
103.1
99.7
99.6
98.7

100.3
100.2
100.3
100.5
100.4
100.2

99.5
99.4
99.5
99.4
99.3
99.3

102.2
101.9
101.5
100.4
99.6
99.5

98.4
98.2
98.3
98.5
98.4

100.3
100.4
100.6
100.7
100.7
100.6

99.1
99.0
99.1

99.2
99.4
99.7
99.8
99.7
99.5

July
August
September.
October
November.
December..

100.4
100.5
101.2
100.6
100.7
100.4

96.5
97.2
99.2
97.4
97.6
96.8

96.0
97.4
100.6
97.9
98.2
97.1

97.0
96.6
96.3
96.0
95.9
95.8

101.0
100.6
102.0
103.2
103.4
104.0

100.3
100.1
100.2
100.1
100.1
100.1

99.2
99.1
99.0
98.9
98.8
98.7

99.4
99.8
100.4
100.8
100.2

98.1
97.8
97.7
97.6
97.4
97.3

100.6
100.5
100.4
100.1
100.1

98.7
98.7
98.7
98.6
98.6
98.8

99.3
99.3
99.2
99.1
99.0

1963:
January
February. _.
March
April
May
June

100.5
100.2
99.9
99.7
100.0
100.3

96.8
95.6
94.5
95.0
94.2
94.8

97.1
94.7
92.8
93.9
92.8
93.7

95,8
96.4
96.7
96.5
96.6
96.4

103.3
105.6
105.4
102.3
100.5
101.0

100.2
100.1
100.0
99.9
100.5
100.6

98.8
98.7
98.6
98.8
99.7
99.7

101.0
101.2
101.2
103.5
110.2
109.8

97.3
97.2
97.1
97.1
97.1
97.0

100.0
99.8
99.7
99.6
100.1
100.4

98.5
98.2
98.2
98.6
98.7

98.8
98.9
98.9
99.0
99.2
99.4

July
August
September..
October
November •
December *.

100.6
100.4
100.3
100.5
100.7
100.3

96.1
95.7
94.8
94.8
95.1
92.6

96.1
95.4
94.0
93.8
94.2
90.1

95.9
95.6
95.6
96.1
96.1
96.3

101.9
102.0
102.9
103.3
103.7
104.5

100.6
100.5
100.5
100.9
101.0
101.1

99.4
99.1
99.1
100.1
100.4
100.2

106.4
102.9
103.7
108.8
110.6
107.1

96.8
96.6
96.6
97.2
97.4
97.5

100.8
101.0
100.8
101.3
101.4
101.6

98.6
98.7
99.0
99.2
99.4
99.6

100.1
100.4
99.8
100.0
100.0
1004

1962:

See footnotes at end of table.




258

98.9

TABLE C-42.—Wholesale price indexes, by stage of processing, 1947- 63— Continued
[1957-59=100]
Special groups of industrial
products

Finished goods

Consumer finished goods
Year or month
Total
Total

Other
DunonFoods durable rable
goods
goods

Producer
finished
goods

Inter- ! Conmediate
sumer
Crude materials, finished
mate- supplies, goods exrials a and com- cluding
ponents 3
foods

1947—
1948—
1949...

80.1
86.4
84.0

86.1
92.6
88.3

90.7
99.0
91.0

86.5
92.0
88.2

75.9
81.1
83.2

61.8
67.4
70.7

79.2
92.5
84.0

73.4
79.8
77.8

83.1
88.4
86.5

19501951195219531954-

85.5
93.6
93.0
92.1
92.3

89.8
98.2
97.0
95.4
95.3

92.8
104.2
103.3
97.9
97.1

89.6
96.5
94.1
95.0
95.3

84.1
89 7
90.4
91.1
91.8

72.4
79.5
80.8
82.1
83.1

102.9
93.1
92.4
88.0

81.4
91.2
88.3
89.4
89.8

87.8
94.2
92.9
93.7
94.1

1955—
1956—
1957—
1958—
1959—

92.5
95.1
98.6
100.8
100.6

94.7
96.1
98.9
101.0
100.1

94.7
94.5
97.8
103.5
98.7

95.8
97.7
99.9
99.3
100.8

92.8
95.9
98.7
100.1
101.3

85.6
92.0
97.7
100.2
102.1

96.6
102.3
100.9
96.9
102.3

92.5
97.0
99.6
99.4
101.0

94.8
97.1
99.5
99.6
100.9

1960—
1961...
1962...
1963 * .
.

101.4
101.4
101. 7
101.4

101.1
100.9
101.2
100.7

100.8
100.4
101.3
100.1

101.5
101.5
101.6
101.9

100.9
100.5
100.0
99.5

102.3
102.5
102.9
103.1

98.3
97.2
95.6
94.3

101.4
100.1

101.3
101.2
101.0
101.0

1962: January...
FebruaryMarch
April
May
June

102.1
102.1
101.8
101.4
101.2
101.1

101.7
101.7
101.3
100.7
100.5
100.4

101.9
102.3
101.9
100.1
99.5
99.3

102.0
101.8
101.3
101.6
101.5
101.4

100.2
100.1
100.0
99.9
100.0
100.0

102.8
102.8
102.8
102.9
102.9
102.8

98.5
98.2
97.1
95.8
95.3
94.4

100.0
99.9
100.0
100.3
100.2
100.1

101.3
101.1
100.8
101.0
101.0
101.0

101.5
101.7
102.6
101.9
102.0
101.6

100.8
101.1
102.3
101.5
101.5
101.0

100.3
101.3
103.9
101.9
102.1
100.7

101.5
101.4
101.7
101.8
101.7
101.8

100.2
100.1
100.1
99.9
100.0

103.0
103.0
102.9
102.8
102.9
103.0

94.4
94.8
95.1
94.8
94.6
94.8

100.0

99.5

101.0
100.9
101.1
101.1
101.1
101.1

101.8
101.5
101.1
100.8
101.1
101.5

101.2
100.9
100.3
99.9
100.4
100.8

101.4
100.4
99.0
98.2
99.4
100.1

101.7
101.7
101.8
101.6
101.8
102.1

99.8
99.7
99.5
99.4
99.3

103.0
103.0
102.9
102.9
102.9
103.0

94.7
94.9
94.9
94.3
94.1
93.9

99.5
99.4
99.3
99.3
99.5
99.7

101.0
101.0
101.1
100.8
100.9
101.1

101.8
101.4
101.5
101.6
101.8
101.4

101,2
100.8
100.8
100.9
101.1
100.6

101.0
100.3
100.3
100.4
101.1
99.3

102.3
101.9
101.9
102.0
101.7
102.2

103.0
103.0
103.0
103.2
103.4
103.5

93.9
93.9
93.9
94.4
94.5
94.5

99.7
99.7
99.6
99.8
99.9
100.1

101.3
100.9
101.0
101.1
100.9
101.2

July.._
August
September..
October
NovemberDecember..
1963: January-_.
FebruaryMarch
April
May
June
July
AugustSeptember
October...
November 4
December

-_
_

99.4
99.3
99.4

1
Includes, i n addition to subgroups shown, processed fuels a n d l u b r i c a n t s , containers,
a n 2d supplies.
Excludes crude foodstuffs a n d feedistuffs, plaint a n d a n i m a l fibers, oilseeds, a n d leaf
tobacco.
8
Excludes i n t e r m e d i a t e m a t e r i a l s for food m a n u f a c t u r i n g a n d m a n u f a c t u r e d animal
feeds.
* Preliminary.
N O T E . — F o r a l i s t i n g of t h e commodities included in each sector, see Table 7B, Wholesale
Prices and Price Indexes, 1958 ( B L S Bulletin 1 2 5 7 ) .
S o u r c e : D e p a r t m e n t of Laibor.




259

TABLE C—43.—Consumer price indexes, by major groups, 1929—63
For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families
[1957-59=100]

All
items Food

Year or month

1929

59.7

55.6

1980
1931
1932
1933
1934

58.2
53.0
47.6
45.1
46.6

52.9
43.6
36.3
35.3
39.3

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

47 8
48 3
50.0
49.1
48.4

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

Housing
Total Rent

Read- Other
Ap- Trans- Medi- Per- ing and goods
cal
parel porta- care sonal recrea- and
care
tion
tion services

85.4

56.2

0)
0)

83.1
78.7
70.6
60.8
57.0

54.9
50.0
44.3
42.8
46.8

42.1
42.5
44.2
41.0
39.9

56.3
57.1
59.1
60.1
59.7

56.9
58.3
60.9
62.9
63.0

47 2
47.6
50.1
49.8
49.0

49.4
49.8
50.6
51.0
49.8

49.4
49.6
50.0
50.2
50.2

43.2
42.6
45.7
46.7
46.5

50.2
51.0
52.5
54.3
54.4

52.7
52.6
54.0
54.5
55.4

48 8
51.3
56 8
60.3
61.3

40.5
44.2
51.9
57.9
57.1

59.9
61.4
64 2
64.9
66.4

63.2
64.3
65.7
65.7
65.9

49.6
51.9
60 5
63.2
67.7

49.5
51.2
55.7
55.5
55.5

50.3
50.6
52.0
54.5
56.2

46.4
47.6
52.2
57.6
61.7

55.4
57.3
60.0
65.0
72.0

57.1
58.2
59.9
63.0
64.7

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

62.7
68.0
77 8
83.8
83.0

58.4
66.9
81.3
88.2
84.7

67.5
69.3
74.5
79.8
81.0

66.1
66.5
68.7
73.2
76.4

71.2
78.1
90.6
96.5
92.7

55.4
58.3
64.3
71.6
77.0

57.5
60.7
65.7
69.8
72.0

63.6
68.2
76.2
79.1
78.9

75.0
77.5
82.5
86.7
89.9

67.3
69.5
75.4
78.9
81.2

1950
1951
1952 .
1953
1954 .

83.8
90.5
92.5
93.2
93.6

85.8
95.4
97.1
95.6
95.4

83.2
88.2
89.9
92.3
93.4

79.1
82.3
85.7
90.3
93.5

91.5
99.7
98.7
97.8
97.3

79.0
84.0
89.6
92.1
90.8

73.4
76.9
81.1
83.9
86.6

78.9
86.3
87.3
88.1
88.5

89.3
92.0
92.4
93.3
92.4

82.6
86.1
90.6
92.8
94.3

93.3
94 7
98.0
100.7
101.5

94.0
94.7
97.8
101.9
100.3

94.1
95.5
98.5
100.2
101.3

94.8
96.5
98.3
100.1
101.6

96.7
98.4
99.7
99.8
100.7

89.7
91.3
96.5
99.7
103.8

88.6
91.8
95.5
100.1
104.4

90.0
93.7
97.1
100.4
102.4

92.1
93.4
96.9
100.8
102.4

94.3
95.8
98.5
99.8
101.8

1960
1961
1962
1963 2

103.1
104.2
105.4
106.7

101.4
102.6
103.6
105.0

103.1
103.9
104.8
105.9

103.1
104.4
105. 7
106.7

102.1
102.8
103.2
104.1

103.8
105.0
107.2
107.7

108.1
111.3
114.2
116.6

104.1
104.6
106.5
107.8

104.9
107.2
109.6
111.3

103.8
104.6
105.3
107.0

1962: January.
_
February... _ _
March.

104.5
104.8
105.0
105.2
105.2
105.3

102.5
103.1
103.2
103.4
103.2
103.5

104.4
104.6
104.6
104.6
104.7
104.8

105.1
105.2
105.3
105.4
105.5
105.6

101.8
102.0
102 7
102.7
102 7
102.8

106.0
106.0
105.9
107.2
107.3
107.3

112.6
113.0
113.6
113.9
114.1
114.4

105.6
105.8
105.9
106.3
106.4
106.1

108.5
109.1
109.2
109.4
109.5
109.2

104.9
105.0
105.1
105.1
105.1
105.2

105.5
105.5
106.1
106.0
106.0
105.8

103.8
103.8
104.8
104.3
104.1
103.5

104.8
104.8
104.9
105.0
105.1
105.2

105.7
105.8
105.9
106.1
106.2
106.2

102.9
102.5
104.6
104.9
104.3
103.9

106.8
107.4
107.8
108.1
108.3
108.0

114.6
114.6
114.7
114.9
115.0
115.3

106.8
106.8
106.8
106.9
107.1
107.6

110.0
110.3
110.0
109.5
110.1
110.0

105.6
105.5
105.6
105.6
105.6
105.6

106.0
106.1
106.2
106.2
106.2
106.6

104.7
105.0
104.6
104.3
104.2
105.0

105.4
105.4
105.7
105.8
105.7
105.9

106.3
106.4
106.4
106.5
106.6
106.7

103.0
103.3
103.6
103.8
103.7
103.9

106.6
106.8
107.0
107.0
107.4
107.4

115.5
115.6
115.8
116.1
116.4
116.8

107.4
107.3
107.3
107.6
107.8
107.8

110.2
110.0
110.1
111.0
110.7
110.9

105.7
105.7
105.7
105.8
106.0
107.6

107.1
107.1
107.1
107 2
107.4

106.2
106.0
105.4
104.9
105.1

106.0
106.0
106.2
106.3
106.6

106.7
106.8
107.0
107.1
107.2

103.9
104.0
104.8
105.4
105.6

107.8
108.3
107.9
109.0
109.1

116.9
117.1
117.2
117.4
117.5

108.0
108.0
108.2
108.4
108.4

111.5
112.1
112.3
112.7
112.8

108.0
108.0
108.0
108.2
108.3

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

_

. .
.
_

April

May_
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1963: Janulry
February
March
April
May
June. _
July
August
September
October
November

..

__.
.
.

0)
0)
(i)
(i)

»Not available.
»January-November average.
Source: Department, of Labor.




260

(0
0)

(0
(l)
(i)

(i)

to

(0

to
(>)

(i)

0)
0)

8

0)
0)

0)

0)
0)
(i)
0)
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
C1)
0
0)

TABLE C—44.—Consumer price indexes, by special groups, 1935-63
For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families
[1957-59=100}
iServices

Commodities

Year or month

All
All
Commodities less food
All items items All
less
items less
All
shel- com- Food
food
moditer
Non- servDura- dura- ices
ties
All
bles
bles

Rent

All
services
less
rent

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

47 8
48.3
50.0
49.1
48.4

52 5
53.0
54.9
55.5
55.1

46.1
46.7
48.2
46.8
46.0

45.0
45.6
47.4
45.6
44.7

42.1
42.5
44.2
41.0
39.9

50.4
51.0
53.2
53.2
52.3

48.1
48.8
51.9
52.8
51.7

48 8
49.2
51.2
50.9
50.1

53 2
53.8
55.4
56 5
56.6

56 9
58 3
60.9
62 9
63 0

50
50
50
61
51

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

48.8
51.3
56.8
60.3
61.3

55.3
56.9
60.9
62.6
65.0

46.3
49.1
55.3
59.5
60.5

45.1
48.2
55.2
60.1
60.8

40.5
44.2
51.9
57.9
57.1

52.6
55.2
61.4
64.0
67.5

51.3
54.8
62.2
64.3
70.2

50.6
52.8
58.4
60.9
64.0

56 8
57.5
59.3
60 4
61.9

63 2
64 3
65.7
65 7
65.9

51 4
52 0
54.3
56 7
59.5

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

62.7
68 0
77.8
83.8
83.0

66.5
69.4
75.8
81.3
82.1

62.1
68.4
79.4
85.6
84.1

62.6
69.4
83.4
89.4
87.1

58.4
66.9
81.3
88.2
84.7

70.2
74.6
84.2
90.6
89.3

75.5
79.0
85.6
91.9
93.2

66.3
71.1
81.7
88.0
86.3

62.7
63 9
66.5
70.7
74 0

66.1
66 5
68 7
73.2
76 4

60 7
62 9
66 1
69 9
73 4

19.50
1951
1952
1953
1954

83.8
90.5
92.5
93.2
93.6

83.1
88.4
90.5
92.3
92.8

84.7
91.8
93.6
93.9
93.9

87.6
95.5
96.7
96.4
95.4

85.8
95.4
97.1
95.6
95.4

89.2
95.9
96.7
96.8
95.6

94.2
101.4
102.7
101.6
97.7

86.2
92.7
93.2
94.0
94.4

76 4
80.4
84.0
87.5
89.8

79 1
82.3
85.7
90.3
93.5

75 4
80 0
83.8
87 0
89.1

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

93.3
94.7
98.0
100.7
101.5

93.1
94.7
97.9
100.1
102.0

93.4
94.7
97.8
100.7
101.5

94.4
95.3
98.4
100.7
101.0

94.0
94.7
97.8
101.9
100.3

94.6
95.9
98.9
99.8
101.3

94.9
94.9
98.2
99.7
102.0

94.4
96.5
99.1
99.8
101.0

91.4
93.4
97.0
100.3
102.7

94.8
96.5
98 3
100.1
101.6

90.8
92.8
96 7
100.3
102.9

103.1
104.2
105.4
_ 106.7

103.7
104.8
106.1
107.3

103.0
104.2
105.4
106.6

101.7
102.4
103.2
104.2

101.4
102.6
103.6
105.0

101.8
102.1
102.8
103.4

100.7
100.5
101.5
101.3

102.6
103.2
103.8
104.7

105.6
107.6
109 5
111.3

103.1
104.4
105 7
106.7

106.1
108 3
110 2
112 2

104.5
104.8
105.0
. .
105.2
_. 105.2
_. 105.3

105.3
105.5
105.7
106.0
106.0
106.1

104.4
104.8
105.0
105.2
105.2
105.3

102.3
102.7
102.8
103.1
103.0
103.1

102.5
103.1
103.2
103.4
103.2
103.5

102.0
102.2
102.4
102.8
102.6
102.6

100.8
100.8
100.9
101.4
101.5
101.6

102.9
103.3
103.5
103.8
103.5
103.4

108.7
108.9
109 0
109.2
109.4
109.5

105.1
105.2
105 3
105.4
105.5
105.6

109 3
109.5
109 6
109.8
110.1
110.2

105.5
105.5
106.1
106.0
106.0
105.8

106.1
106.2
106.6
106.7
106.7
106.7

105.4
105.5
106.1
106.1
106.0
105.8

103.1
103.2
104.1
104.0
103.9
103.6

103.8
103.8
104.8
104.3
104.1
103.5

102.5
102.6
103.4
103.6
103.5
103.4

101.5
101.7
101.6
102.0
102.2
101.7

103.3
103.2
104.6
104.6
104.4
104.6

109.8
109.9
109.8
109.8
110.0
110.1

105.7
105.8
105.9
106.1
106.2
106.2

110 5
110.6
110 5
110.5
110.6
11Q.8

106.0
106.1
106.2
106.2
106.2
106.6

106.5
106.6
106.8
107.0
107.0
107.3

105.9
106.1
106.1
106.1
106.1
106.6

103.6
103.8
103.7
103.6
103.6
104.1

104.7
105.0
104.6
104.3
104.2
105.0

102. 6
102.7
IQ2.9
103.0
103.0
103.3

100.4
100.6
100.8
100.9
101.0
101.3

104.0
104.1
104.2
104.3
104.2
104.5

110.5
110.5
110.8
111.1
111.1
111.3

106.3
106.4
106.4
106.5
106.6
106.7

111.2
111.2
111.6
111.9
111.9
112.2

107.1
107.1
._ 107.1
107.2
107.4

107.5
107.6
107.8
108.1
108.4

107.1
107.2
107.1
107.2
107.4

104.7
104.7
104.6
104.7
104.8

106.2
106.0
105.4
104.9
105.1

103.5
103.6
103.8
104.3
104.5

101.3
101.4
101.5
102.2
102.5

104.8
105.0
105.2
105.6
105.8

111.5
111.7
111.9
112.1
112.3

106.7
106.8
1Q7.0
107.1
107.2

112.4
112.6
112.8
112.9
113.2

.

I960 .
1961
1962
1963 i

._

1962: January
February
March
April
May
June. . July
August-September
October
Novfimhfir
December
1963: January
February _.
March
April
May
June _ .
July..
August
September
October
November

* January-November average.
Source: Department of Labor.




26l

7
4
9
3
3

MONEY SUPPLY, CREDIT, AND FINANCE
TABLE C-45.—Money supply, 1947-63
[Averages of daily figures, billions of dollars]
1

Year and month

Total
money
supply
and
time
deposits
adjusted

Money supply i
U.S.
Total
/\Y*I ATT
Time GovTime moii6y
supply
erndedeCurposits ment
De- posits and
detime
mand adrency mand addeposit just- depos- Total com- deposit just- mand
deits
com- ed a
com- ed*
poposadponent
nent ponent
its'
justed 2

Money supply *

•H*

Total

Currency
component

1
Unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted
1947: December
1948: December
1949: December
1950: December
1951: December
1952: December
1953: December....
1954: December
1955: December
1956: December....
1957: December
1958: December.
1959: December
1960: December
1961: December
1962: December
1963: December*
1962: January
February
March
April
May

June
July
. .
August
September-_.
October
November. . .
December
1963: January
February
March
April
_
May
June
July
August.
September. _
October
November...
December *__

148.5
147.5
147.5
152.9
160.9
168.6
173.4
180.7
185.4
189.0
193.4
206.7
209.4
213.9
228.2
245.3
265.0
230.0
231.3
233.1
234.7
235.2
236.2
237.4
237.6
238.7
240.8
242.9
245.3
247.9
248.9
250.7
252.0
253.1
254.3
256.2
257.3
258.4
260.9
263.8
265.0

113.1
111.5
111.2
116.2
122.7
127.4
128.8
132.3
135.2
136.9
135.9
141.2
142.0
141.2
145.7
147.9
153.3
145.9
145.5
145.7
146.1
145.7
145.6
145.7
145.1
145.3
146.1
146.9
147.9
148.7
148.6
148.9
149.4
149.4
149.8
150.7
150.5
150.9
152.0
153.1
153.3

26.4
25.8
25.1
25.0
26.1
27.3
27.7
27.4
27.8
28.2
28.3
28.6
28.9
28.9
29.6
30.6
32.4
29.7
29.7
29.9
30.0
30.0
30.1
30.2
30.2
30.2
30.3
30.5
30.6
30.7
30.9
31.1
31.2
31.3
31.6
31.6
31.8
31.8
32.0
32.3
32.4

86.7
85.8
86.0
91.2
96.5
100.1
101.1
104.9
107.4
108.7
107.5
112.6
113.2
112.2
116.1
117.3
120.9
116.3
115.8
115.8
116.0
115.7
115.4
115.5
114.9
115.1
115.8
116.4
117.3
118.1
117.7
117.8
118.2
118.1
118.2
119.1
118.8
119.1
120.1
120.9
120.9

35.4
36.0
36.4
36.7
38.2
41.2
44.6
48.4
50.2
52.1
57.5
65.5
67.4
72.7
82.5
97.5
111.7
84.1
85.8
87.5
88.7
89.6
90.7
91.8
92.5
93.4
94.6
96.0
97.5
99.1
100.3
101.8
102.6
103.7
104.5
105.5
106.7
107.6
108.9
110.7
111.7

151.1
150.0
150.0
155.6
163.8
171.7
176.4
183.6
188.2
191.7
196.0
209.3
212.2
216.8
231.2
248.2
267.9
232.5
230.7
231.6
235.1
233.5
235.1
236.6
236.7
238.8
241.4
243.6
248.2
250.3
248.3
249 1
252.4
251 3
253.2
255 3
256.4
258.6
261.7
264.5
267.9

115.9
114.3
113.9
119.2
125.8
130.8
132.1
135.6
138.6
140.3
139.3
144.7
145.6
144.7
149.4
151.6
157.2
149.0
145.3
144.2
146.2
143.6
144.0
144.3
143.8
145.0
146.5
148.2
151.6
151.8
148.3
147 4
149.5
147.3
148.2
149 4
149.1
150.5
152.4
154.5
157.2

26.8
26.2
25.5
25.4
26.6
27.8
28.2
27.9
28.4
28.8
28.9
29.2
29.5
29.6
30.2
31.2
33.1
29.5
29.3
29.6
29.8
29.8
30.0
30.3
30.3
30.3
30.4
30.8
31.2
30.5
30.5
30 8
30.9
31.1
31.4
31 8
31.9
32.0
32.1
32.6
33.1

89.1
88.1
88.4
93.8
99.2
103.0
103.9
107.7
110.2
111.5
110.4
115.5
116.1
115.2
119.2
120.4
124.0
119.5
115.9
114.6
116.4
113.8
113.9
114.0
113.5
114.6
116.1
117.5
120.4
121.3
117.8
116.7
118.6
116.2
116.7
117 6
117.2
118.6
120.3
121.9
124.0

35.1
35.7
36.1
36.4
38.0
40.9
44.2
48.0
49.6
51.4
56.7
64.6
66.6
72.1
81.8
96.6
110.7
83.5
85.4
87.4
88.9
89.9
91.1
92.2
93.0
93.8
94.9
95.4
96.6
98.4
99.9
101.7
102.9
104.0
105.0
106 0
107.3
108.1
109.3
110.0
110.7

1.0
1.8
2.8
2.4
2.7
4.9
3.8
5.0
3.4
3.4
3.5
3.9
4.9

4; 7
4.9
5.6

5.3
3.8
4.6
5.1
3.8
7.0
7.2
7.1
6.8
7.2

7.3

6.0
5.6
4.8
5.6
5.9
4.2
7.0
7.4
7.7
6.2
6.5
5.3
4.6

5.3

1 Money supply consists of (1) currency outside the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and vaults of all
commercial banks; (2) demand deposits at all commercial banks, other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government, less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float;
and (3) foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks.
2
Time deposits adjusted are time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic
commercial banks and the U.S. Government.
* Deposits at all commercial banks.
4
Preliminary.
NOTE.—Between January and August 1959, the series were expanded to include data for all banks in
Alaska and Hawaii.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




262

TABLE C-46.—Bank loans and investments, 7929-63
[Billions of dollars]
All commercial banks
Year or month 1

1929: June 8
1930* June 8 8
1931- June 8
1932: J u n e 8
1933- June 8~ .
1934: June
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947

49.4
48.9
44.9
36.1
30.4
32.7
36.1
39.6
38.4
38.7
40.7
43.9
50.7
67.4
85.1
105.5
124.0
114.0
116.3

. . .

_
...

1948
1949
1950 .
1951.. .
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
_
1959
1960
1961.. _
1962
1963 7

.

.

.
.

1962: January _
_
February
MarchApril
May .
June
. .
July
August
September
October
November
December -_ . _
1963: January
February
March
April
MayJune
July7 7
August
September 7 . . .
October 7
November77
December

_
_

113.0
118.7
124.7
130.2
139.1
143.1
153.1
157.6
161.6
166.4
181.0
185.7
194.5
209.6
228.1
246 3
210.7
213.3
215.2
215.0
216.4
220.3
217 8
220.3
222.0
224.4
225 9
228.1
228 9
232.3
235.0
232 5
234.8
240.3
237.8
238 5
240.7
241.0
244 0
246.3

Loans,
excluding
interbank *

Weekly reporting member banks 8

Investments
U.S. Government
securities

35.7
4.9
5.0
34.5
6.0
29.2
6.2
21.8
16.3
7.5
15.7
10.3
13.8
15.2
15.3
16.4
17.2
14.2
16.4
15.1
17.2
16.3
18.8
17.8
21.7
21.8
19.2
41.4
59.8
19.1
77.6
21.6
26.1
90.6
31.1
74.8
69.2
38.1
Seasonally adjusted
41.5
62.3
42.0
66.4
61.2
51.1
60.4
56.5
62.2
62.8
66.1
62.3
67.7
69.0
60.4
80.5
57.3
88.0
91.4
57.0
64.9
95.6
107.8
57.6
114.2
59.6
121.1
64.7
64.3
134.7
150.6
60.8
65.7
120.8
66.1
122.6
66.1
123.8
124.5
64.6
65.5
124.8
66.6
126.6
64.1
126 1
127.3
65.0
64.3
129.7
131.6
64.2
64.6
132.2
64.3
134.7
64.6
134.7
65.4
136.8
66.7
137.8
137 4
63.9
64.2
138.9
66.0
141.8
62.4
142.4
142.5
62.1
61.7
145.0
60.2
146.3
60.8
148.8
60.8
150.6

Other
securities
8.7
9.4
9.7
8.1
6.5
6.7
7.1
7.9
7.0
7.2
7.1
7.4
7.2
6.8
6.1
6.3
7.3
8.1
9.0
9.2

10.2
12.4
13.4
14.2
14.7
16.4
16.7
16.3
17.9
20.5
20.4
20.7
23.8
29.1
34.9
24.2
24.6
25.3
25.9
26.1
27.1
27.6
28.0
28.0
28.6
29.1
29.1
29.6
30.1
30.5
31.2
31.7
32.5
33.0
33.9
34.0
34.5
34.4
34.9

Business
loans *
(«}

33333 C

Total
loans
and
investments

(6)

5.1
4.2
4.7
5.3
7.1
6.3
6.4
6.5
7.3
11.3
14.7
15.6
13.9
17.9
21.6
23.4
23.4
22.4
26.7
30.8
31.8
31.7
30.7
32.2
32.9
35.2
38.7
32.0
32.2
33.0
32.8
32.9
33.4
33.0
33.4
34.1
34.3
34.7
35.2
34.3
34.6
35.2
35.0
35.0
35.6
35.0
35.2
35.9
36.3
37.3
38.7

i Data are for last Wednesday of month (except June 30 and December 31 call dates) for all commercial
banks and for last Wednesday for weekly reporting member banks.
* Include interbank loans prior to 1948.
s Member banks are all national banks and those State banks which have taken membership in the
Federal Reserve System. Weekly reporting member banks comprise about 350 large banks in over 100
leading cities.
* Commercial and industrial loans and prior to 1956, agricultural loans. Beginning July 1959, loans to
financial institutions excluded. Series revised beginning July 1946, October 1955, July 1958, and July 1959.
Prior to 1944 published data adjusted to include open market paper.
* June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to 1935 for U.S. Government
obligations and other securities.
9
Not available.
' Preliminary; data for December are estimates for December 31,1962 and 1963.
NOTE.—Series for all commercial banks have been revised to show seasonally adjusted data.
Between January and August 1959, series for all commercial banks expanded to include data for all banks
in Alaska and Hawaii. Data for all member banks include Alaska and Hawaii beginning 1954 and 1959,
respectively.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




263

TABLE G-47.—Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves^ 1929^63
[Averages of daily figures, millions of dollars]
Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Year and month
Total

1929: December

1,643

Member
U.S.
Governbank
ment se- borrowcurities

Member bank reserves

All
other,
mainly
float

Total

Required

Excess

Member
bank free
reserves
(excess
reserves
less borrowings)

446

801

396

2,395

2,347

48

-753

292
410
57
142
32

2,415
2,069
2,435
2,588
4,037

2,342
2,010
1,909
i 1,822
2,290

73
60
526
1766
1,748

-264
-703
245
671
1,738

57
47
47
99

5,716
6,665
6,879
8,745
11,473

2,733
4,619
5,808
5,520
6,462

2,983
2,046
1,071
3,226
5,011

2,977
2,039
1,055
3,219
5,008

1930:
1931:
1932:
1933:
1934:

December
December
December
December
December

1,273
1,950
2,192
2,669
2,472

644
777
1,854
2,432
2,430

337
763
281
95
10

1935:
1936:
1937:
1938:
1939:

December
December
December
December
December

2,494
2,498
2,628
2,618
2,612

2,430
2,434
2,665
2,564
2,510

6
7
16
7

1940:
1941:
1942:
1943:
1944:

December
December
December
December
December

2,305
2,404
6,035
11,914
19,612

2,188
2,219
5,549
11,166
18,693

5
4
90
265

114
180
483
659
654

14,049
12,812
13,152
12,749
14,168

7,403
9,422
10,776
11,701
12,884

6,646
3,390
2,376
1,048
1,284

6,643
3,385
2,372
958
1,019

1945:
1946:
1947:
1948:
1949:

December
December
December
December
December

24,744
24,746
22,858
23,978
19,012

23,708
23,767
21,905
23,002
18,287

334
157
224
134
118

702
821
729
842
607

16,027
16, 517
17,261
19,990
16,291

14,536
15,617
16,275
19,193
15,488

1,491
900
986
797

1,157
743
762

1950:
1951:
1952:
1953:
1954:

December
December
December
December
December....

21,606
25,446
27,299
27,107
26,317

20,345
23,409
24,400
25,639
24,917

142
657
1,593
441
246

1,119
1,380
1,306
1,027
1,154

17,391
20,310
21,180
19,920
19,279

16,364
19,484
20,457
19,227
18,576

1,027
826
723
693
703

885
169
-870
252
457

1955:
1956:
1957:
1958:
1959:

December
December
December
December
December

26,853
27,156
26,186
28,412
29,435

24,602
24,765
23,982
26,312
27,036

839
688
710
557
906

1,412
1,703
1,494
1,543
1,493

19,240
19, 535
19,420
18,899
»18,932

18,646
18,883
18,843
18,383
18,450

594
652
577
516
482

-245
-36
-133
-41
-424

1960:
1961:
1962:
1963:

December
December
December
December « - -

29,060
31,217
33,218
36,610

27,248
29,098
30,546
33,729

87
149
304
327

1,725
1,970
2,368
2,554

19,283
20,118
20,040
20,699

18,514
19,550
19,468
20,194

568
572
505

419
268
178

1962: January
February.—
March..
Ap
AprilM ayd June-

30,468
29,839
30,063
30,634
30,991
31,265

28,519
28,384
28, 570
29,143
29,503
29,568

70
68
91
69
63
100

1,879
1,387
1,402
1,422
1,425
1,597

20,089
19,571
19,550
19,723
19,823
19,924

19,464
19,069
19,077
19,213
19,320
19,433

625
502
473
510
503
491

555
434
382
441
440
391

July
August
SeptemberOctober
November—
December..

31,475
31,600
31,807
32,057
32,053
33,218

29,581
30,088
29,921
30,241
30,195
30,546

127
80
65
119
304

1,805
1,385
1,806
1,751
1,739
2,368

20,043
19,924
20,034
20,205
19,604
20,040

19,514
19,358
19,579
19,721
19,012
19,468

529
566
455
484
592
572

440
439
375
419
473
268

: January
February...
March
April
May
June

32,663
32,287
32,477
32,692
32,972
33,454

30,198
30,541
30,613
30,897
31,138
31,540

172
155
121
209
236

2,366
1,574
1,709
1,674
1,625
1,678

20,035
19,581
19,516
19,574
19,676
19,735

19,552
19,109
19,090
19,140
19,219
19,358

483
472
426
434
457
377

300
271
313
248
141

34,262
34,080
34,440
34,628
35,353
36,610

32,158
32,233
32,341
32,648
33,126
33,729

322
330
321
313
376
327

1,782
1,517
1,778
1,667
1,851
2,554

20,017
19,721
19,945
20r004
20,119
20,699

19,537
19,254
19,532
19,596
19,704
20,194

480
467
413
408
415
505

158
137
92
95
39
178

July
August
SeptemberOctober
NovemberDecember K.

* Data from March 1933 through April 1934 are for licensed banks only.
s Beginning December 1959, total reserves held include vault cash allowed.
» Preliminary.
NOTE.—Data for member banks in Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1954 and 1959, respectively.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




264

TABLE C-48.—Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-63

[Percent per annuml
Corporate
bonds
(Moody's)

1
U.S. Government

securities

Year or month

3-month 9-12
3-5
Treas- month year
ury
3
bills i issues issues

Taxable- Aaa
bonds 4

(•)

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

-

-

<•)

4.73 5.90

4.27

(•)

1929

(8)
8

4.55
4.58
5.01
4.49
4.00

5.90
7.62
9.30
7.76
6.32

4.07
4.01
4.65
4.71
4.03

3.60
3.24
3.26
3.19
3.01

5.75
4.77
5.03
5.80
4.96

3.40
3.07
3.10
2.91
2.76

4.75
4.33
4.28
3.91
3.61

2.50
2.10
2.36
2.06
1.86

1.402
.879
.515
.256

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

.137
.143
.447
.053
.023

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

.014
.103
.326
.373
.375

_

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

.375
.375
.594
1.040
1.102

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956 _
1957
1958
1959

3

Highgrade
municipal
bonds
(StandBaa ard &
Poor's)

(6)
(«)
(6)

2.66
2.12

(6)
(6)

1.29
1.11
1.40

(«)
(6)

.83
.59

(6)
(8)

0.75
.79
.81
.82
.88

1.14
1.14

(7)

Federal
Reserve
Bank
discount
rate

5.85

5.16

3.59
2.64
2.73
1.73
1.02

3.04
2.11
2.82
2.56
1.54

2.1

.75
.75
.94
.81
.59

1.50
1.50
1.33
1.00
1.00

2.1
2.0
2.2
2.6
2.4

.56
.53
.66
.69
.73

1.00
1.00
8 1.00
«1.00
8 1.00

.75
.81

8 1.00
8 1.00
1.00

(7)
(7)
n\

(7)
(7)
(7)
(7)

1.46
1.34
1.33

2.46
2.47
2.48

2.84
2.77
2.83
2.73
2.72

1.18
1.16
1.32
1.62
1.43

2.37
2.19
2.25
2.44
2.31

2.62
2.53
2.61
2.82
2.66

3.29
3.05
3.24
3.47
3.42

1.67
1.64
2.01
2.40
2.21

2.2
2.1
2.1
2.5
2.7

1.03
1.44
1.49

2.32
2.57
2.68
2.94
2.55

2.62
2.86
2.96
3.20
2.90

3.24
3.41
3.52
3.74
3.51

1.98
2.00
2.19
2.72
2.37

2.7
3.1
3.5
3.7
3.6

1.45
2.16
2.33
2.52
1.58

1 ,59
75
75
1 .99
60

.50
.73

34

,m

1.218
1.552
1.766
1.931
.953

__

1.753
2.658
3.267
1.839
3.405

1.89
2.83
3.53
2.09
4.11

2.50
3.12
3.62
2.90
4.33

2.84
3.08
3.47
3.43
4.08

3.06
3.36
3.89
3.79
4.38

3.53
3.88
4.71
4.73
5.05

2.53
2.93
3.60
3.56
3.95

3.7
4.2
4.6
4.3
9
5.0

2.18
3.31
3.81
2.46
3.97

1.89
2.77
3.12
2.16
3.36

3.55
2.91
3.02
3.28

3.99
3.60
3.57
3.72

4.02
3.90
3.95
4.00

4.41
4.35
4.33
4.26

5.19
5.08
5.02
4.86

3.73
3.46
3.18
3.24

5.2
5.0
5.0

3.85
2.97
3.26
3.55

3.63
3.00
3.00
3.23

2.302
2.408
2 420
2.327
2.288
2.359

-

.92

1.50
1.93
2.13
2.56
1.82

2.778
3.219

-

1960
1961
1962
1963

1.26
1.73
1.81
2.07

2.928
2.378

_

1961* January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

()

Average
rate on Prime
shortcomterm
merbank
cial
loans
to busi- paper,
4-6
nessselected months
cities

2.70
2.84
2 86
2.83
2.82
3.02

3.53
3.54
3.43
3.39
3.28
3.70

3.89
3.81
3.78
3.80
3.73
3.88

4.32
4.27
4.22
4.25
4.27
4.33

5.10
5.07
5.02
5.01
5.01
5.03

3.44
3.33
3 38
3.44
3.38
3.53

4 97

2 98
3.03
3.03
2.91
2.76
2.91

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

2.268
2.402
2.304
2.350
2.458
2.617

2.87
3.03
3.03
2.97
2.95
3.03

3.69
3.80
3.77
3.64
3.68
3.82

3.90
4.00
4.02
3.98
3.98

4.41
4.45
4.45
4.42
4.39
4.42

5.09
5.11
5.12
5.13
5.11
5.10

3.53
3.65
3.54
3.46
3.44
3.49

4.99

2.72
2.92
3.05
3.00
2.98
3.19

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3 00
3.00

4.06

See footnotes at end of table.




265

5.0

4.97

4.96

TABLE C-48.—Bondyields and interest rates, 7929-63— Continued
[Percent per annum]
Corporate
bonds
(Moody's)

U.S. Government
securities
Year or month

3-month £-12
3-5
Treas- month year Taxable Aaa
ury
issues 8 issues' bonds*
bills *
1962: January
February
March
April
May
June
- __
July..
.
August
September
October
November
December

.

1963: January
February
March
April
May . . .
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

Highgrade
municipal
bonds
(StandBaa a r d *
Poor's)

Average
rate on Prime
shortcomterm
bank
cial
loans paper,
to busi- 4-6
nessselected months
cities

2.746
2.752
2.719
2.735
2.694
2.719

3.08
3.11
2.99
2.94
2.98
3.02

3.84
3.77
3.55
3.48
3.53
3.51

4.08
4.09
4.01
3.89
3.88
3.90

4.42
4.42
4.39
4.33
4.28
4.28

5.08
5.07
5.04
5.02
5.00
5.02

3.32
3.28
3.19
3.08
3.09
3.24

4.98

2.945
2.837
2.792
2.751
2.803
2.856

3.23
3.13
3.00
2.90
2.92
2.95

3.71
3.57
3.56
3.46
3.46
3.44

4.02
3.98
3.94
3.89
3.87
3.87

4.34
4.35
4.32
4.28
4.25
4.24

5.05
5.06
5.03
4.99
4.96
4.92

3.30
3.31
3.18
3.03
3.03
3.12

4.99

2.914
2.916
2.897
2.909
2.920
2.995

2.97
2.89
2.99
3.02
3.06
3.17

3.47
3.48
3.50
3.56
3.57
3.67

3.89
3.92
3.93
3.97
3.97
4.00

4.21
4.19
4.19
4.21
4.22
4.23

4.91
4.89
4.88
4.87
4.86
4.84

3.12
3.18
3.11
3.11
3.15
3.27

5.00

3.143
3.320
3.379
3.453
3.522
3.523

3.33
3.41
3.54
3.59
3.70
3.77

3.78
3.81
3.88
3.91
3.97
4.04

4.01
3.99
4.04
4.07
4.11
4.14

4.26
4.29
4.31
4.32
4.33
4.35

4.84
4.83
4.84
4.83
4.84
4.85

3.31
3.22
3.27
3.32
3.41
3.41

5.01

5.01

5.02

5.01

5.00

Federal
Reserve
Bank
discount
rate

3.26
3.22
3.25
3.20
3.16
3.25

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

3.36
3.30
3.34
3.27
3.23
3.29

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3 00
3.00

3.34
3.25
3.34
3.32
3.25
3.38

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

3.49
3.72
3.88
3.88
3.88
3.96

3.24
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50
3.50

1 Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March 1, 1941, and fully taxable
thereafter. For the period 1934-37, series includes issues with maturities of more than 3 months.
2 Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues (fully taxable).
* Selected note and bond issues. Issues were partially tax exempt prior to 1941, and fully taxable thereafter.
* First issued in 1941. Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of
years as follows: April 1953 to date, 10 years; April 1952-March 1953, 12 years; October 1941-March 1952,
151years.
Treasury bills were first issued in December 1929 and were issued irregularly in 1930.
* Not available before August 1942.
* Not available on same basis as for 1939 and subsequent years.
« From October 30, 1942, to April 24, 1946, a preferential rate of 0.50 percent was in effect for advances
secured by Government securities maturing or callable in 1 year or less.
* Series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial Institutions.
NOTE.—Yields and rates computed for New York City, except for short-term bank loans.
Sources: Treasury Department, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Moody's Investors
Service, and Standard & Poor's Corporation.




266

TABLE C-49.—Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding, 1929-63
[Millions of dollars]
Instalment credit
End of year or month

Total

Total

Other
conAutomobile sumer
paper» goods
paper *

Noninstalment credit

Repair
and
Permodern- sonal
ization loans
Loans 2

Total

iharge
acOther»
counts

1,544

27

569

3,592

1,996

1,596

1,432
1,214
834
799

25
22
18
15
37

579
543
464
416
459

3,329
2,852
2,354
2,162
2,219

1,833
1,635
1,374
1,286
1,306

1,496
1,217
980
876
913

4,503

992
1,372
1,494
1,099
1,497

1,000
1,290
1,505
1,442
1,620

253
364
219
218
298

572
721
900
927
1,088

2,373
2,628
2,830
2,684
2,719

1,354
1,428
1,504
1,403
1,414

1,019
1,200
1,326
1,281
1,305

9,172
5,983
4,901
5,111

5,514
6,085
3,166
2,136
2,176

2,071
2,458
742
355
397

1,827
1,929
1,195
819
791

371
376
255
130
119

1,245
1,322
974
832

2,824
3,087
2,817
2,765
2,935

1,471
1,645
1,444
1,440
1,517

1,353
1,442
1,373
1,325
1,418

1945...
1946...
1947...
1948—
1949...

5,665
8,384
11,598
14,447
17,364

2,462
4,172
6,695
8,996
11,590

495
981
1,924
3,018
4,555

816
1,290
2,143
2,901
3,706

182
405
718
853

1,009
1,496
1,910
2,224
2,431

3,203
4,212
4,903
5,451
5,774

1,612
2,076
2,381
2,722
2,854

1,591
2,136
2,522
2,729
2,920

1950..
19511952..
19531954-

21,471
22,712
27,520
31,393
32,464

14,703
15,294
19,403
23,005
23,568

6,074
5,972
7,733
9,835
9,809

4,799
4,880
6,174
6,779
6,751

1,016
1,085
1,385
1,610
1,616

2,814
3,357
4,111
4,781
6,392

6,768
7,418
8,117

3,367
3,700
4,130
4,274
4,485

3,401
3,718
3,987
4,114
4,411

19551956..
195719581959-

42,334
44,970
45,129
51, 542

28,906 13,460
31,720 14,420
33,867 15,340
33,642 14,152
39,245 16,420

7,641
8,606
8,844
9,028
10,630

1,693
1,905
2,101
2,346
2,809

6,112
6,789
7,582
8,116

9,924
10,614
11,103
11,487
12,297

4,795
4,995
6,146
5,060
5,104

5,129
5,619
5,957
6,427
7,193

1960—
1961—
1962...
1963 4.

56,028
57,678
63,164
69,775

42,832 17,688
43,627 17,223
48,034 19,540
53,675 22,125

11,525
11,857
12,605
13,725

3,139
3,191
3,246
3,400

10, 480
11,256
12,643
14,425

13,196
14,151
15,130
16,100

5,329
5,324
5,684
5,800

7,867
8,827
9,446
10,300

1962: January
February.
March
April.
May
June

56,689
56,084
56,210
57,215
58,173
58,959

43,188
42,979
43,075
43,711
44,338
45,056

17,128 11,681
17,157 11,456
17,339 11,308
17,710 11,373
18,075 11,450
18,479 11,567

3,148
3,112
3,099
3,106
3,143
3,171

11,231
11,254
11,329
11, 522
11,670
11,839

13,501
13,105
13,135
13,504
13,835
13,903

4,846
4,292
4,168
4,375
4,644

8,655
8,813
8,967
9,129
9,239
9,259

45,490 18,770
46,020 19,018
46,145 18,972
60,441 46,526 19,193
61,203 47,052 19,416
63,164 48,034 19,540

11,574
11,637
11,691
11,777
11,960
12,605

3,193
3,226
3,239
3,250
3,259
3,246

11,953
12,139
12,243
12,306
12, 417
12,643

13,715
13,817
13,885
13,915
14,151
15,130

4,511
4,580
4,642
4,768
4,884
5,684

9,204
9,237
9,243
9,147
9,267
9,446

19,582
19,678
19,930
20,376
20,794
21,236

12,453
12,250
12,149
12,197
12,272
12,422

3,211
3,185
3,177
3,200
3,245
3,281

12,674
12,739
12,819
13,033
13,173
13,368

14,542
14,137
14,074
14,361
14,651
14,680

5,071
4,511
4,374
4,581
4,793
4,783

9,471
9,626
9,700
9,780
9,858
9,897

50,894 21,593
51,526 21,819
51,718 21,725
52,257 21,971
52,695 22,107
53,675 22,125

12,459
12,607
12,702
12,845
13,046
13,725

3,316
3,357
3,377
3,400
3,407
3,400

13,526 14,597
13,743 14,782
13,914 14,820
14,041 14,831
14,135 15,051
14,425 16,100

4,760

9,837
9,943
9,987
9,933
10,052
10,300

1929—

7,116

3,524

1930—.
1931—
1932—.
1934..

6,351
5,315
4,026
3,885
4,218

3,022
2,463
1,672
1,723
1,999

1935—
1936—
1937—
1938—
1939—

5,190
6,375
6,948
6,370
7,222

2,817
3,747
4,118

1940...
1941..
1942-.
1943-.
1944..

July
August
September..
October
November..
December...
1963: January
February__.
March
April
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November. _
December *.

1,384
684
356
493
614

59,205
59,837

62,462 47,920
61,989 47,852
62,149 48,075
63,167 48,806
64,135 49,484
64,987 50,307
65,491
66,308
66,538
67,088
67,746
69,775

4,833
4,898
4,999
5,800

1
Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer
goods.
* Includes only such loans held byfinancialinstitutions; those held by retail outlets are included in "other
consumer goods paper."
' Single-payment loans and service credit.
* Preliminary; December by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Series revised beginning 1962. For details, see Federal Reserve Bulletin, November 1963.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August 1959, respectively.
Sourcs: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).

267
715-113 O - 6 4 - 1 8




TABLE C-50.—Instalment credit extended and repaid, 1946-63
[Millions of dollars]
Total

Repair and
Other consumer modernization
goods paper
loans

Automobile
paper

Year or month
Repaid

Extended

Repaid

5,217
6,967

1,443
2,749
4,123
5,430

3,077
4,498
5,383
5,865

2,603
3,645
4,625
5,060

423
704
714
734

200
391
579

3,026
3,819
4,271
4,542

2,539
3,405
3,957
4,335

18,445
22,985
25,405
27,956

8,530
8,956
11,764
12,981
11,807

7,011
9,058
10,003
10,879
11,833

7,150
7,485
9,186
9,227
9,117

6,057
7,404
7,892
8,622
9,145

835
841
1,217
1,344
1,261

717
772
917
,119
,255

5,043
6,294
7,347
8,006
8,866

4,660
5,751

38,972
39,868
42,016
40,119
48,052

33,634
37,054
39,868
40,344
42,603

16,734
15,515
16,465
14,226
17,779

13,082
14,555
15,545
15,415
15,579

10,642
11,721
11,807
11,747
13,982

9,752
10,756
11,569
11,563
12,402

1,393
1,582
1,674
1,871
2,222

,316
,370
,477
,626
1,765

10,203
11,051
12,069
12,275
14,070

9,484
10,373
11,276
11,741
12,857

49,560
48,396
55,126
60,575

45,972
47,700
50,620
54,900

17,654
16,007
19,796
21,925

16.384
16,472
17,478
19,300

14,470
14,578
15,685
16,900

13,574
14,246
14,939
15,800

2,213
2,068
2.051
2,175

1,883
2,015
1,996
2,025

15,223
15,744
17,594
19,575

14,130
14,967
16,206
17,775

Extended

Repaid

1946..
1947..
1948..
1949-

8,495
12,713
15,585
18,108

6,785
10,190
13,284
15,514

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..

21,558
23,576
29,514
31,558
31,051

1955..
1956..
1957.
1958..
1959.
1960..
1962...
1963L

Extended

Extended

Personal

Repaid

Extended

Repaid

7,336
8,255

Seasonally adjusted
1962: January
February
March. _
April
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November. _
December. _
1963: January
February
March
April
May.
June
July
August
September..
October
November...
December i_.

4,278
4,357
4,418
4,604
4,644
4,579

4,092
4,097
4,106
4,119
4,224
4,190

1,511
1,553
1,592
1,645
1,687
1,638

1,436
1,408
1,405
1,397
1,460
1,435

1,229
1,279
1,238
1,335
1,314
1,299

1,195
1,238
1,220
1,232
1,248
1,246

160
157
170
170
182
179

166
167
167
166
171
168

1,378
1,368
1,418
1,454
1,481
1,463

1,295
1,284
1,314
1,324
1,345
1,341

4,640
4,651
4,543
4,639
4,855
4,826

4,266
4,263
4,293
4,271
4,372
4,341

1,671
1,691
1,566
1,700
1,776
1,739

1,464
1,480
1,467
1,494
1,523
1,509

1,309
1,292
1,306
1,280
1,364
1,415

1,271
1,258
1,276
1,238
1,268
1,262

177
179
165
169
167
164

169
168
164
163
165
166

1,483
1,489
1,506
1,490
1,548
1,508

1,362
1,357
1,386
1,376
1,416
1,404

4,899
4,957
4,973
5,008
4,985
5,054

4,414
4,462
4,496
4,487
4,544
4,568

1,807
1,809
1,811
1,870
1,847
1,820

1,564
1,566
1,546
1,585
1,611
1,588

1,360
1,395
1,406
1,359
1,357
1,408

1,277
1,289
1,324
1,276
1,294
1,317

172
169
180
187
188
186

167
165
170
170
170
167

1,560
1,584
1,576
1,592
1,593
1,640

1,406
1,442
1,456
1,456
1,469
1,496

5,100
5,100
5,093
5,311
4,979
5,095

4,591
4,619
4,752
4,780
4,596
4,670

1,854
1,802
1,730
1,910
1,792
1,800

1,603
1,607
1,659
1,676
1,638
1,675

1,409
1,441
1,425
1,457
1,432
1,475

1,330
1,326
1,347
1,362
1,324
1,325

191
185
181
188
168
170

171
170
174
170
167
170

1,646
1,672
1,757
1,756
1,587
1,650

1,487
1,516
1,572
1,572
1,467
1,500

i Preliminary; December by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Series revised beginning 1962. For details, see Federal Reserve Bulletin, November 1963.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August 1959, respectively. Therefore, the
difference between extensions and repayments for January and August 1959 and for the year 1959 does not
equal the net change in credit outstanding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




268

TABLE C-51.—Mortgage debt outstanding, by type of property and offinancings1939^63
[Billions of dollars]
Nonfarm properties
1- to 4-family houses
E n d of year or quarter

All
properties

Government underwritten

Total
Total

Total

1939

- -

FHA
insured

VA
guaranteed

Multifamily
and
comCon- mercial
venproptional i erties *

Farm
properties

35.5

28.9

16.3

1.8

1.8

14.5

12.5

6.6

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

36.5
37.6
36.7
35.3
34.7

30.0
31.2
30.8
29.9
29.7

17.4
18.4
18.2
17.8
17.9

2.3
3.0
3.7
4.1
4.2

2.3
3.0
3.7
4.1
4.2

15.1
15.4
14.5
13.7
13.7

12.6
12.9
12.5
12.1
11.8

6.5
6.4
6.0
5.4
4.9

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

35.5
41.8
48.9
56.2
62.7

30.8
36.9
43.9
50.9
57.1

18.6
23.0
28.2
33.3
37.6

4.3
6.1
9.3
12.5
15.0

4.1
3.7
3.8
5.3
6.9

0.2
2.4
5.5
7.2
8.1

14.3
16.9
18.9
20.8
22.6

12.2
13.8
15.7
17.6
19.5

4.8
4.9
5.1
5.3
5.6

72.8
82.3
91.4
101.3
113.7

66.7
75.6
84.2
93.6
105.4

45.2
51.7
58.5
66.1
75.7

18.9
22.9
25.4
28.1
32.1

8.6
9.7
10.8
12.0
12.8

10.3
13.2
14.6
16.1
19.3

26.3
28.8
33.1
38.0
43.6

21.6
23.9
25.7
27.5
29.7

6.1
6.7
7.2
7.7
8.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

129.9
144.5
156.5
171.8
190.8

120.9
134.6
146.1
160.7
178.7

88.2
99.0
107.6
117.7
130.9

38.9
43.9
47.2
50.1
53.8

14.3
15.5
16.6
19.7
23.8

24.6
28.4
30.7
30.4
30.0

49.3
55.1
60.4
67.6
77.0

32.6
35.6
38.5
43.0
47.9

9.0
9.8
10.4
11.1
12.1

I960
1961»
1962 »
1963 3

206.8
226.3
251.6
281.3

194.0
212.4
236.4
264.4

141.3
153.1
166.5
182.4

56.4
59.1
62.0
(4)

26.7
29.5
32.3
(*)

29.7
29.6
29.7
(«)

84.8
93.9
104.5
(«)

52.7
69.3
69.9
82.1

12.8
13.9
15.2
16.8

1962: 13
113
Ill 3
IV 3

231.1
237.8
244.5
251.6

216.8
223.1
229.6
236.4

155.3
159.1
162.9
166.5

59.9
60.4
61.0
62.0

30.3
30.9
31.5
32.3

29.6
29.5
29.5
29.7

95.4
98.7
101.9
104.5

61.5
64.0
66.7
69.9

14.2
14.7
14.9
15.2

257.1
265.2
273.3
281.3

241.6
249.1
256.8
264.4

169.2
173.7
178.3
182.4

62.8
63.5
64.3
(4)

33.0
33.5
34.3
(*)

29.8
30.0
30.0
(*)

106.4
110.2
114.1
(4)

72.4
75.4
78.5
82.1

15.5
16.1
16.6
16.8

1950
1951
1952 ,
1953
1954

_

1963: 13
113
HI 3
IV 3

..

__

»Derived figures.
«Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations.
* Preliminary.
«Not available.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, estimated and compiled from data supplied
by various Government and private organizations.




269

TABLE C-52.—JVet public and private debt, 1929-63 1
[Billions of dollars]
Private
Individual and noncorporate

Corporate
End of
year 3

Fed- State
and
Nonfann
eral
Total Gov- local
government ern- 2 Total
Comand ment
merTotal Long- Short- Total Farm 3
term term
agency
cial
ConTotal Mort- and sumer
gage
financial*

1929....

190.9

16.5

13.2 161.2

88.9

47.5

41.6

72.3

12.2

60.1

31.2

22.4

6.4

1930—
1931—
1932....
1933—
1934—

191.0
181.9
174.6
168.5
171.4

16.5
18.5
21.3
24.3
30.4

14.1
15.5
16.6
16.7
15.9

160.4
147.9
136.7
127.5
125.1

89.3
83.5
80.0
76.9
75.5

51.1
50.3
49.2
47.9
44.6

38.2
33.2
30.8
29.1
30.9

71.1
64.4
56.7
50.6
49.6

11.8
11.1
10.1

69.3
63.3
46.6
41.5
40.6

32.0
30.9
29.0
26.3
25.5

21.6
17.6
14.0
11.7
11.2

5.8
4.8
3.6
3.5
3.9

1935—
1936—
1937—
1938—
1939....

174.7
180.3
182.0
179 6
183.2

34.4
37.7
39.2
40.5
42.6

16.0
16.2
16.1
16.0
16.3

124.2
126.4
126.7
123.1
124.3

74.8
76.1
75.8
73.3
73.5

43.6
42.5
43.5
44.8
44.4

31.2
33.5
32.3
28.4
29.2

49.4
50.3
50.9
49.8
50.8

9.1

40.5
41.7
42.3
40.9
42.0

24.8
24.4
24.3
24.5
25.0

10.8
11.2
11.3
10.1

4.9
6.1
6.7
6.3
7.2

1940—
1941
1942....
1943—
1944—

189.9
211.6
259.0
313.6
370.8

44.8
56.3
101.7
154.4
211.9

16.5
16.3
15.8
14.9
14.1

128.6
139.0
141.5
144.3
144.8

75.6
83.4
91.6
95.5
94.1

43.7
43.6
42.7
41.0
39.8

31.9
39.8
49.0
54.5
54,3

53.0
55.6
49.9
48.8
50.7

9.1
9.3
9.0

43.9
46.3
40.9
40.5
42.9

26.1
27.1
26.8
26.1
26.0

9.5

11.8

8.3
9.2
6.0
4.9
5.1

1945....
1946—
1947—
1948—
1949....

406.3
397.4
417.4
433.6
448.4

252.7
229.7
223.3
216.5
218.6

13.7
13.6
14.4
16.2
18.1

139.9 85.3
154.1 93.5
179.7 108.9
200.9 117.8
211.7 118.0

38.3
41.3
46.1
52.5
56.5

47.0
52.2
62.8
65.3
61.5

54.6
60.6
70.8
83.1
93.7

7.3
10.8
12.0

47.4
63.0
62.3
72.4
81.8

27.0
32.5
38.8
45.1
50.6

14.7
12.1
11.9
12.9
13.9

11.6
14.4
*7.3

1950—
1951—
1952....
1953—
1954

490.3
524.0
555.2
586.5
612.0

218.7
218.5
222.9
228.1
230.2

20.7
23.3
25.8
28.6
33.4

250.9
282.2
306.5
329.8
348.4

142.1
162.5
171.0
179.5
182.8

60.1
66.6
73.3
78.3
82.9

81.9
95.9
97.7
101.2
100.0

108.8
119.7
135.5
150.3
165.6

12.3
13.6
15.2
16.9
17.6

96.6
106.2
120.4
133.6
147.9

59.4
67.4
75.2
83.8
94.6

15.8
16.2
17.8
18.4
20.8

21.4
22.6
27.4
31.4
32.5

1955—
1956—
1957—
1958....
1959—

672.3
707.5
738.9
782.6
846.2

231.5
225.4
224.4
232.7
243.2

38.4
42.7
46.7
50.9
55.6

402.5
439.4
467.8
499.1
547.4

212.1
231.7
246.7
259.5
283.3

90.0
100.1
112.1
121.2
129.3

122.2
131.7
134.6
138.4
154.0

190.4
207.7
221.1
239.5
264.1

18.8
19.5
20.3
23.3
23.0

171.6
188.2
200.8
216.2
241.1

108.7
121.3
131.6
144.6
160.8

24.0
24.4
24.3
26.5
28.7

38.9
42.5
44.8
45.1
51.5

1960
889.4
1961— 944.1
1962
1,017.3
1963 «... 1,095. 9

241.0
248.1
255.9
260.9

60.0
65.0
73.7
82.1

588.4
631.0
687.6
752.9

301.7
321.5
346.0
371.6

139.1
149.1
161.2
175.5

162.7
172.4
184.8
196.1

286.6
309.5
341.7
381.3

25.3
27.8
30.5
32.8

261.3
281.7
311.2
348.5

174.5
190.1
210.9
237.6

30.8
33.9
36.8
41.1

56.0
57.7
63.5
69.8

9.1

8.9
8.6
8.6
9.0
8.8

8.2
7.7
7.6
8.6

9.8

10.0
8.1
9.5

5.7
8.4

i Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers
after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept, see Survey of Current Bu%int8», October 1950.
» Data for State and local government debt are for June 30.
> Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers' financial and consumer debt is included in the
nonfarm categories.
« Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities, customers' debt to brokers,
and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders.
• Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Revisions for 1929-39 and 1955-63 in the consumer credit data of the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System have not yet been fully incorporated into this series.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Treasury Department, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, and Federal Home Loan Bank Board (except as noted).




270

GOVERNMENT FINANCE
TABLE C-53.—US. Government debt, by kind of obligation, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars}

End of year or month

Interest-bearing public debt
Gross Marketable public
public
Nonmarketable public issues
issues
debt and
guaranteed
Short- Treasury United Treasury InvestStates tax and
issues1
ment
term
issues * bonds savings savings bonds3
bonds
notes

1929
1930
1931
1932 _
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943 .
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954 .
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

_._

1960
1961
1962
1963
1962: January

FebruaryMarch
April
May
.

June
July
August
September
October .
November
December.»

.

1963: January
February
March
April

16.3
16 0
17.8
20.8
24 0
31.5
35.1
39 1
41.9
44.4
47.6
60.9
64 3
112.5
170 1
232.1
278.7
259.5
257.0
252.9
257.2
256.7
259.5
267 4
275.2
278.8
280 8
276.7
275.0
283 0
290.9
290 4
296.5
304.0
310.1
296.9
297.4
296.5
297.4
299.6
298.6
298.3
302 3
300.0
302.6
305.9
304.0
303.9
305.2
303.5
303.7
305 8
306 5
305.5
307.2
307 3
307.1
308.9
310.1

3.3
2.9
2.8

5.9
7.5
11.1
14.2
12.5
12.5
9.8
7.7
7.5
8.0
27.0
47.1
69.9
78.2
57.1
47.7
45.9
60.2
58.3
65.6
68.7
77.3
76.0
81.3
79.5
82.1
92.2
103.5
109.2
120.5
124.6
121.2
121.0
121.0
120.0
120.3
122.7
121.0
121.9
122.1
118.2
121.6
124.2
124.6
125.4
123.7
123.7
124.2
124.0
121.5
121.5
122.8
117.8
118.9
120.1
121.2

11.3
11.3
13.5
13.4
14.7
15,4
14.3
19.5
20.5
24.0
26.9
28.0
33.4
49.3
67 9
91.6
120.4
119.3
117.9
111.4
104.8
94.0
76.9
79.8
77.2
81.8
81.9
80.8
82.1
83.4
84.8
79 8
75.5
78.4
86.4
76.6
76.6
76.6
77.8
75.5
75.0
75.0
77.2
79.8
79.7
80.0
78.4
78.6
81.1
79.8
80.1
80.1
82.0
81.9
80.5
86.5
86.4
86.4
86.4

Special
issues *

0.6
.8
.4

.4
.4

0.2
.5
1.0
1.4
2.2
3.2
6.1
15.0
27.4
40.4
48.2
49.8
52.1
55.1
56.7
58.0
57.6
57.9
57.7
57.7
57.9
56.3
52.5
51.2
48.2
47.2
47.5
47.5
48.8
47.5
47.5
47.6
47.6
47.6
47.6
47.7
47.7
47.7
47.7
47.7
47.5
47.7
47.9
48.0
48.1
48.2
48.3
48.4
48.5
48.6
48.7
48.8
48.8

2.5

6.4
86
9.8

8.2
5.7
5.4
4.6
7.6
8.6
7.5
5.8
6.0
4.5

8
(8)
(«)

8
(•)
m

m
(')
(6)
(6)
(8)

(fl)

1.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
13.0
13.4
12.9
12.7
12.3
11.6
10.3
9.0
7.6
6.2
5.1
4.4

3.7
5.0
5.0
4.8
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.7
4.6

4.6
4.5
4.5
4.4

4.4
4.4
4.2
4.0
3.9

.6
.7
.6
2.2
3.2
4.2
5.4
7.0
9.0
12.7
16.3
20.0
24.6
29.0
31.7
33.9
33.7
35.9
39.2
41.2
42.6
43.9
45.6
45.8
44.8
43.5
44.3
43.5
43.4
43.7
42.3
42.8
42.8
42.1
44.3
44.9
43.8
45.4
44.6
43.9
44.2
43.4
42.2
42.5
42.2
41.6
43.6
44.8
43.7
45.5
44.7
43.3
43.6
43.7

May
- -(8)
3.9
June
July
3.9
3.9
August
(6)
3.8
September
_.
3.7
October
3.7
(6)
November
6
3.7
December
( )
1 Total includes non-interest-bearing debt, fully guaranteed securities (except those held by the Treasury), Postal Savings bonds, prewar bonds, adjusted service bonds, depositary bonds, armed forces leave
bonds, Rural Electrification Administration series bonds, foreign series certificates and notes, foreign
currency certificates and bonds, Treasury certificates, and U.S. retirement plan bonds, not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation.
2
8 Bills, certificates of indebtedness, and notes.
Series A bonds and, beginning April 1951, series B convertible bonds.
* Issued to U.S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held $14.4 billion of public
marketable and nonmarketable issues on December 31,1963.
» Less than $50 million.
«The last series of Treasury savings notes matured in April 1956.
Source: Treasury Department.




271

TABLE C-54.—Estimated ownership of US. Government obligations, 1939-63
[Par values,* billions of dollars]
Gross public debt and guaranteed issues a

End of year or
month

1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

-

1960

1961
1962_
1963 8
1962: January
February...
March
April.May...
June
July
August
September..
October
November..
December..
1963: January
February...
March
April
May
June
July
August
September. _
October
November..
December 8_

Held
by U.S.
Government
Total investment
accounts

Held by "the public"
Held
Mutual
by
savings
State
Federal
Com- banks Other
and
Reserve Total mercial and in- corpora- local Individ6
banks
banks' surance tions « govern uals
comments •
panies

47.6
50.9
64.3
112.5
170.1
232.1
278.7
259.5
257.0
252.9
257.2
256.7
259.5
267.4
275.2
278.8
280.8
276.7
275.0
283.0
290.9

6.5
7.6
9.5
12.2
16.9
21.7
27.0
30.9
34.4
37.3
39.4
39.2
42.3
45.9
48.3
49.6
51.7
54.0
56.2
54.4
53.7

2.5
2.2
2.3
6.2
11.5
18.8
24.3
23.3
22.6
23.3
18.9
20.8
23.8
24.7
25.9
24.9
24.8
24.9
24.2
26.3
26.6

290.4
296.5
304.0
310.1
296.9
297.4
296.5
297.4
299.6
298.6
298.3
302.3
300.0
302.6
305.9
304.0
303.9
305.2
303.5
303.7
305.8
306.5
305.5
307.2
307.3
307.1
308.9
310.1

55.1
54.5
55.6
58.1
53.8
54.2
54.5
53.7
55.9
56.5
55.5
67.1
56.4
56.1
57.9
55.6
54.5
55.1
55.1
54.3
57.1
58.4
57.1
58.9
58.3
57.2
57.7
58.1

27.4
28.9
30.8
33.6
28.5
28.4
29.1
29.2
29.6
29.7
29.8
30.4
29.8
30.2
30.5
30.8
30.3
30.6
31.0
31.2
31.3
32.0
32.5
32.4
32.6
32.8
33.7
33.6

38.6
41.1
52.5
94.0
141.6
191.6
227.4
205.2
200.1
192.2
198.9
196.8
193.4
196.9
201.0
204.2
204.3
197.8
195.5
202.2
210.6
207.9
213.1
217.6
218.4
214.6
214.8
213.0
214.4
214.1
212.5
213.0
214.9
213.7
216.3
217.5
217.6
219.1
219.5
217.4
218.2
217.4
216.1
215.9
215.9
216.4
217.2
217.5
218.4

15.9
17.3
21.4
41.1
59.9
77.7
90.8
74.5
68.7
62.5
66.8
«1.8
61.6
63.4
63.7
69.2
62.0
59.5
59.5
67.5
60.3

9.4
10.1
11.9
15.8
21.2
28.0
34.7
36.7
35.9
32.7
31.5
29.6
26.3
25.5
25.1
24.1
23.1
21.3
20.2
19.9
19.5

2.2
2.0
4.0
10.1
16.4
21.4
22.2
15.3
14.1
14.8
16.8
19.7
20.7
19.9
21.5
19.2
23.5
19.1
18.6
18.8
22.8

0.4
.5
.7
1.0
2.1
4.3
6.5
6.3
7.3
7.9
8.1
8.8
9.6
11.1
12.7
14.4
15.3
16.3
16.6
16.5
18.0

10.1
10.6
13.6
23.7
37.6
53.3
64.1
64.2
65.7
65.5
66.3
66.3
64.6
65.2
64.8
63.4
64.7
65.5
64.0
63.0
68.0

62.1
67.2
67.2
63.5
67.8
66.6
64.1
65.4
65.4
65.2
64.8
65.0
65.2
66.5
66.1
67.2
66.7
65.8
64.7
65.1
63.9
64.4
63.3
61.7
63.0
63.1
62.7
63.5

18.1
17.5
17.5
16.7
17.8
17.8
18.0
17.8
17.8
17.6
17.8
17.8
17.7
17.6
17.6
17.5
17.6
17.5
17.5
17.2
17.1
16.9
17.1
17.0
17.0
16.8
16.8
16.7

20.1
19.7
20.1
20.8
20.6
21.6
20.4
20.6
21.1
19.6
20.0
21.1
19.0
19.9
21.8
20.1
21.0
21.6
20.7
21.0
22.2
20.2
20.5
21.3
19.6
20.4
21.5
20.8

18.7
18.7
19.5
20.6
19.0
19.1
19.5
19.6
19.7
19.7
19.9
19.9
19.8
19.6
19.3
19.5
19.9
19.9
20.1
20.5
20.5
20.7
20.9
21.2
20.9
20.7
20.3
20.6

64.7
65.0
65.2
67.1
65.1
65.1
65.4
65.2
64.7
64.7
65.1
65.0
65.1
64.9
65.0
65.2
65.6
65.8
66.3
65.8
65.4
65.5
66.0
66.1
66.5
66.6
66.8
67.1

Miscellaneous
investors »

0.7
.7
.9
2.3
4.4
7.0
9.1
8.1
8.4
8.9
9.4
io.fi
10.6
11.7
13.2
J3.9
15.6
16.1
16.6
16.6
22.1
24.2
25.0
28.0
29.8
24.1
24.5
25.6
25.9
25.4
25.7
25.4
26.1
27.0
27.8
27.7
28.0
28.2
29.0
28.1
28.6
28.3
28.3
28.3
28.7
29.5
29.5
29.3
29.8

1
United States savings bonds, series A-F and J, are included at current redemption value.
» Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory
debt limitation.
3
Includes commercial banks, trust companies, and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and islandpossessions; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this
table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions,
they do not agree with the estimates in Table C-46, which are based on book values and relate only to banks
within the United States.
* Exclusive of banks and insurance companies.
* Includes trust, sinking, and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies, and
of Territories and possessions.
•Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts.
7
Includes savings and loan associations, nonprofit institutions, corporate pension trust funds, dealers
and brokers, and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning
with December 1946, the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the International Development Association, the Inter-American Development Bank, and various U.N. funds, in special non-interest-bearing notes
issued by the U.S. Government. Beginning with June 30, 1947, includes holdings of Federal land banks.
8
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Treasury Department (except as noted).




272

T A B L E C-55.—Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing
public debt, 7946-63
Maturity class
End of year or month

Amount
outstanding Within
lyear

1 to 5
years

years Average length
5 to 10 10 to 20 20and
years
years
over

Millions of dollars
Fiscal year:
1946
1947
1948
1949

189,606
168,702
160,346
155,147

Years Months

61,974 24,763 41,807 17,461 43,599
51,211 21,851 35,562 18,597 41,481
48,742 21,630 32^264 16,229 41,481
48,130 32,562 16,746 22,821 34,888

1950
1951
1952
1953.
1954

155,310 42,338 51,292 7,792
137,917 43,908 46,526 8,707
140,407 46,367 47,814 13,933
147,335 65,270 36,161 15,651
150,354 62,734 29,866 27,515

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

155,206
154,953
155,705
166,675
178,027

1960
1961
1962
1963

183,845 70,467 72,844 20,246
187,148 81,120 58,400 26,435
196,072 88,442 57,041 26,049
203,508 85,294 58,026 37,385

12,630
10,233
9,319
8,360

7,658
10,960
15,221
14,444

11
1

64,921 20,918
62,910 20,916
59,679 23,720
59,206 24,976
55,549 26,178
57,041 26,049

11,959
11,954
10,677
10,670
10,664
9,319

13,414
13,411
15,239
15,232
15,225
15,221

7
11
10
11
11

1962: January . .
February.
March
April
May
June
July
August....
September
October. __
November.
December.
1963: January...
February.
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October. __
November.
December-

28,035
29,979
25,700
28,662
28,634

25,853
8,797
6,594
1,592
1,606

49,703 39,107 34,253 28,613
58,714 34,401 28,908 28,578
71,952 40,669 12,328 26,407
67,782 42,557 21,476 27,652
72,958 58,304 17,052 21,625

3,530
4,351
4,349
7,208
8,088

197,628 86,416
197,609 88,417
196,524 87,209
198,138 88,055
198,193 90,577
196,072 88,442

10
4
9

196,870 89,244 57,055
199,295 93,728 52,806
197,951 84,467 58,158
201,311 88,284 57,728
204,222 88,580 61,614
203,011 87,284 61,640

26,045
27,885
32,411
32,403
31,140
33,983

9,313
9,309
7,353
7,348
7,342
4,565

15,213
15,567
15,562
15,548
15,545
15,539

10
10
0
11
11
11

203,959 87,978
204,751 88,951
203,472 81,647
204,323 82,469
204,101 87, 797
203,508 85,294

61,657
59,003
61,328
61,079
58,007
58,026

33,975
36,458
37,962
37,952
35,485
37,385

4,566
4,566
6,770
6,770
6,769
8,360

15,782
15,774
15,764
16,054
16,043
14,444

10
10
1
1
1
1

203,491
203,233
204,282
205,347
206, 551
207,571

58,035
60,856
58,085
57, 678
56,660
58,487

37,376
33,622
39,100
39,097
37, 500
35,682

8,359
8,359
8,358
8,358
8,358
8,357

14,435
14,420

0
0
3
2
2
1

85,286
85, 976
83,070
84,556
88,385
89,403

15,658
15,648
15,642

NOTE.—All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds, which are classified to
earliest call date.
Source: Treasury Department.




273

TABLE C-56.—Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt, 1929-65
[Millions of dollars]

Surplus Public debt
at end of
or
year *
deficit (-)

Net
budget
receipts 1

Budget
expenditures

Fiscal year:
1929

3,861

3,127

734

16,931

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

4,058
3,116
1,924
1,997
3,015

3,320
3,577
4,659
4,598
6,645

738
-462
-2,735
—2,602
-3,630

16,185
16,801
19,487
22,539
27,053

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

3,706
3,997
4,956
6,588
4,979

6,497
8,422
7,733
6,765
8,841

-2,791
-4,425
-2,777
-1,177
-3,862

28,701
33,779
36,425
37,165
40,440

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

5,137
7,096
12,547
21,947
43,563

9,055
13,255
34,037
79,368
94,986

-3,918
-6,159
-21,490
-57,420
-51,423

42,968
48,961
72,422
136,696
201,003

1945
1946
1947
1948.
1949

44,362
39,650
39,677
41,375
37,663

98,303
60,326
38,923
32,955
39,474

-53,941
-20,676
754
8,419
-1,811

258,682
269,422
258,286
252,292
252,770

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

36,422
47,480
61,287
64,671
64,420

39,544
43,970
65,303
74,120
67,537

-3,122
3,510
—4,017
-9,449
-3.117

257,357
255,222
259,105
266,071
271,260

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

60,209
67,850
70,562
68,550
67,915

64,389
66,224
68,966
71,369
80,342

-4,180
1,626
1,596
—2,819
-12,427

274,374
272,751
270,527
276,343
284,706

1960
1961
1962
1963.
1964*

77,763
77,659
81,409
86,376
88,400

76,539
81,515
87,787
92,642
98,405

1,224
-3,856
-6,378
-6,266
-10,005

286,331
288,971
298,201
305,860
311,800

1965*

93,000

97,900

-4,900

317,000

1948
1949

40,800
37,464

35,559
41,056

5,241
-3,592

252,800
257,130

1950
1951.
1952
1953
1954

37,235
52,877
64,705
63,654

37,657
56,236
70,547
72,811
64,622

-422
-3,358
-5,842
-9,157

256,708
259,419
267,391
275,168
278,750

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

63,119
70,616
71,749
68,262
72,738

65,891
71,157
75,349
79,778

-2,771
3,779
592
-7,088
-7,040

280,769
276,628
274,898
282,922
290,798

1960
1961
19621963«

79,518
78,157
84,709
87,516

77,565
84,463
91,907
94,188

1,953
—6,306
-7,199
-6,672

290,217
296,169
303,470
309,347

Fiscal or calendar year

Calendar year:

* Gross receipts less refunds of receipts and transfers of tax receipts to the old-age and survivors insurance
trust fund, the disability insurance trust fund, the railroad retirement account, the unemployment trust
fund, and the highway trust fund.
2
Excludes guaranteed issues; therefore, differs from total shown in Tables C-53 and C-54. The change
in the public debt from year to year reflects not only the budget surplus or deficit but also changes in the
Government's cash on hand, and the use of corporate debt and investment transactions by certain Government enterprises.
»Estimate.
< Preliminary.
NOTE.—Certain interfund transactions are excluded from budget receipts and expenditures beginning
fiscal year 1932. For years prior to 1932, the amounts of such transactions are not significant.
Sources: Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget.




274

TABLE G-57.—Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function,fiscalyears 7946-65
[Millions of dollars]
Budget expenditures by function

Budget receipts by source

IndiTotal vidual
income
taxes

Veter- Agriculans'
Na- serv- ture
All
CorpoAll
ration Excise other Total tional ices and Inter- other
defense and agri- est expendincome taxes re- 1
ceipts
taxes
itures 2
bene- cultural refits sources

1946-.
1947—
1948.1949._

39,650
39,677
41,375
37,663

16,157
17,835
19,305
15,548

11,833
8,569
9,678
11,195

6,999
7,207
7,356
7,502

4,661
6,066
5,037
3,418

60,326
38,923
32,955
39,474

43,176
14,368
11,771
12,908

4,415
7,381
6,653
6,725

747
1,243
575
2,512

4,816
5,012
5,248
5,445

7,173
10,917
8,708
11,884

-20,676
754
8,419
-1,811

1950-1951_>
1952-1953-.
1954..

36,422
47,480
61,287
64,671
64.420

15,745
21,643
27,913
30,108
29,542

10,448
14,106
21,225
21,238
21,101

7,549
8,648
8,851
9,868
9,945

2,679
3,083
3,298
3,456
3,833

39,544
43,970
65,303
74,120
67,537

13,009
22,444
43,976
50,442
46,986

6,646
5,342
4,863
4,368
4,341

2,783
650
1,045
2,955
2,573

5,817
5,714
5,934
6,578
6,470

11,288
9,819
9,486
9,777
7,167

-3,122
3,510
-4,017
-9,449
-3,117

1955..
1956->
1957-_
1958-.
1959.-

60,209
67,850
70,562
68,550
67,915

28,747
32,188
35,620
34,724
36,719

17,861
20,880
21,167
20,074
17,309

9,131
9,929
9,055
8,612
8,504

4,469
4,854
4,721
5,141
5,384

64,389
66,224
68,966
71,369
80,342

40,695
40,723
43,360
44,234
46,491

4,522
4.810
4,870
5,184
5,287

4,388
4,868
4,546
4,419
6,590

6,438
6,846
7,307
7,689
7,671

8,346
8,977
8,883
9,843
14,303

-4,180
1,626
1,596
-2,819
-12,427

1960-.
1961..
1962 3.
1963 3.
1964 3 4

77,763
77,659
81,409
86,376
88,400

40,715
41,338
45,571
47,588

21,494
20,954
20,523
21,579

9,137
9,063
9,585
9,915

6,418
6,304
5,731
7,294

76,539
81,515
87,787
92,642
98,405

45,691
47,494
51,103
52,755

5,266
5,414
5,403
5,186

4,882
5,173
5,895
6,948

9,266
9,050
9,198
9,980

11,434
14,384
16,186
17,773

1,224
-3,856
-6,378
-6,266
-10,005

Fiscal
year

19653 4 93,000

97,900

Budget
surplus
or deficit (-)

—4,900

* Includes employment taxes, estate and gift taxes, customs revenues, and miscellaneous receipts. See
also Note below.
* Includes expenditures for international affairs and finance; space research and technology; natural
resources; commerce and transportation; housing and community development; health, labor, and welfare;
education; and general government. Annual expenditures (millions of dollars) for space research and
technology, 1954-1964 are, respectively: 90, 74, 71, 76, 89,145, 401, 744,1,257, 2,400, and 4,200. Also includes
adjustment to daily Treasury statement (for actuals) and allowance for contingencies (for estimates). See
also Note below.
« Receipts reflect new depreciation guidelines and investment tax credit.
< Estimate.
NOTE.—Total budget receipts and total budget expenditures and the "all other" categories exclude certain interfund transactions.
Sources: Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget.




275

TABLE C-58.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public, 7946-65
[Billions of dollars]

Total

Fiscal or calendar year

Federal
Excess
of receipts
or of
payments

Cash
receipts

Cash
payments

1946
1947
1948
1949

54.2
55.6
59.6
57.6

70.2
47.6
50.2
56.3

-16.0
8.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

58.2
72.5
88.7
93.9
95.6

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964 *

State and local >
Excess
of receipts
or of
payments

Cash
receipts

Cash
payments

61.7
36.9
36.5
40.6

-18.2
6.6

1.3

43.5
43.5
45.4
41.6

61.5
65.2
88.9
99.1
96.1

-3.3
7.3
-.2
-5.2
-.4

40.9
53.4
68.0
71.5
71.6

93.5
105.8
113.5
115.0
117.0

97.5
101.5
111.8
118.3
132.3

-4.0
4.2
1.7
-3.3
-15.3

134.5
139.4
148.0
159.3

132.9
141.7
153.5
162.7

1.6
-2.3
-5.5
-3.3

Excess
of receipts
or of
payments

9.4

1965 5

Calendar year:
1946

Cash
payments

8.5
10.6
13.7
15.7

2.2
1 5

1.0

10.7
12.1
14.2
16.0

43.1
45.8
68.0
76.8
71.9

—2.2
7.6
(*)
—5.3
-.2

17.3
19.1
20.7
22.4
24.0

18.4
19.4
20.9
22.3
24.2

—1.1

67.8
77.1
82.1
81.9
81.7

70.5
72.5
80.0
83.5
94.8

-2.7
4.5
2.1
—1.6
-13.1

25.7
28.7
31.4
33.1
35.3

27.0
29.0
31.8
34.8
37.5

—1.3
__ q
-.4
—1.7
-2.2

95.1
97.2
101.9
109.7
114.4

94.3
99.5
107.7
113.8
122.7

.8
-2.3
-5.8
-4.0
-8.3

39.4
42.2
46.1
49.6

38.6
42.2
45.8
48.9

.8

119.7

Fiscal year:

Cash
receipts

122.7

-2.9
9.5

1.9

8.9

.5
3

-.2
.1
-.2

g
.7

1947
1948
1949

52.9
57.4*
60.0
57.9

50.9
50.7
51.8
59.8

6.7
8.2
-1.8

41.4
44.3
44.9
41.3

41.4
38.6
36.9
42.6

.1
5.7
8.0
-1.3

11.4
13.1
15.1
16.6

12.1
14.9
17.1

1.0
.2
-.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

60.4
79.1
93.0
93.5
93.3

61.1
78.3
93.6
100.4
95.3

-.6
.9
-.6
-6.9
-2.0

42.4
59.3
71.3
70.2
68.6

42.0
58.0
72.0
77.4
69.7

.5
1.2
-.6
-7.2
—1.1

18.0
19.9
21.7
23.2
24.7

19.1
20 2
21.6
23.0
25.6

-1.1
—.4
.1
3

98.4
110.2
116.8
115.9
124.6

100.2
105.2
116.6
125.2
133.1

-1.8
5.0
.2
-9.3
-8.5

71.4
80.3
84.5
81.7
87.6

72.2
74.8
83.3
89.0
95.6

-.7
5.5
1.2
—7 3
-8.0

26.9
29.9
32.3
34 1
37.1

28.0
30.4
33.3
36 2
37.5

-1.1
-.5
-1.0
—2 1
-.5

139.3
141 8
154.0

135.4
148.8
159.3

3.9
—7.0
-5.3

98.3
97.8
106.2

94.7
104.6
111.9

3.6
—6 8
-5.7

41.1
44 0
47.8

40.7
44.2
47.5

.3
—.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
I960
1961
1962

•._

2.0

—.9

.4

* For derivation of Federal cash receipts and payments, see Budget of the United States Government for the
Fiscal Year ending June SO, 1965, and Table C-61.

2 Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from receipts and expenditures in the national income
accounts. Cash receipts consist of personal tax and nontax receipts, indirect business tax and nontax
accruals, and corporate tax accruals adjusted to a collection basis. Cash payments are total expenditures
less Federal grants-in-aid and less contributions for social insurance. (Federal grants-in-aid are therefore
excluded from State and local receipts and payments and included only in Federal payments.) See
Table C-59.
a Surplus of $49 million.
* Less than $50 million.
»Estimate.
Sources: Treasury Department, Bureau of the Budget, Department of Commerce, and Council of Economic Advisers.




276

TABLE C-59.—Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts, 7929-63
[Billions of dollars]
Total government

Calendar year or quarter
Receipts

1929

State and local
government

Federal Government *

Surplus or
deficit
Ex(-)on
Rependi- income ceipts
and
tures
product account

Surplus or
deficit
Ex(-)on
Rependi- income ceipts
tures
and
product account

Surplus or
deficit
Ex(-)on
pendi- income
tures
and
product account

11.3

10.2

1.0

3.8

2.6

1.2

7.6

7.7

-0.1

10.8
9.5
8.9
9.3
10.5

11.0
12.3
10.6
10.7
12.8

-.3
-18
—1.7
-1.4
-2.4

3.0
2.0
1.7
2.7
3.5

2.8
4.2
3.2
4.0
6.4

.3
-2.1
-1.5
—1.3
-2.9

7.8
7.7
7.3
7.2
8.6

8.4
8.4
7.6
7.2
8.1

—.2

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

11.4
12.9
15.4
15.0
15.4

13.3
15.9
14.8
16.6
17.5

2.0
-3.0
.6
-1.6
-2.1

4.0
5.0
7.0
6.5
6.7

6.5
8.5
7.2
8.5
9.0

-2.6
-3.5
—.2
-2.0
—2.2

9.1
8.6
9.1
9.3
9.6

8.5
8.1
8.4
8.9
9.6

.6
.5
.7
.4
.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

17.7
25.0
32.6
49.2
51.2

18.5
28.8
64.0
93.4
103.1

-.7
-3.8
31.4
-44.2
-51.9

8.6
15.4
22.9
39.3
41.0

10.1
20.5
56.1
86.0
95.6

-1.4
-5.1
-33.2
-46.7
—54.6

10.0
10.4
10.6
10.9
11.1

9.2
9.0
8.8
8.4
8.4

.7
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.7

53.2
51.1
57.1
59.2
56.4

92.9
47.0
43.8
51.0
59.5

-39.7
4.1
13.3
8.2
3.1

42.5
39.2
43.3
43.4
39.1

84.8
37.0
31.1
35.4
41.6

-42.3
2.2
12.2
8.0
-2.5

11.6
13.0
15.5
17.8
19.6

9.0
11.1
14.4
17.6
20.2

2.6
1.9
1.1
.3
—.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

69.3
85.5
90.6
94.9
90.0

61.1
79.4
94.4
102.0
96.7

8.2
6.1
-3.9
-7.1
-6.7

50.2
64.5
67.7
70.3
63.8

41.0
58.0
71.6
77.7
69.6

9.2
6.4,
—3.9
-7.4
—5.8

21.4
23.5
25.5
27.4
29.1

22.4
23.8
25.4
27.1
30.1

-1.0
-.3
.1
.3
—.9

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

101.4
109.5
116.3
115.1
130.2

98.6
104.3
115.3
126.6
131.6

2.9
5.2
1.0
-11.4
-1.5

72.8
77.5
81.7
78.5
90.3

68.9
71.8
79.7
87.9
91.4

3.8
5.7
2.0
-9.4
-1.1

31.7
35.2
38.6
42.0
46.6

32.7
35.7
39.6
44.1
47.0

-1.0
-.5
-1.0
—2.1
-.3

1960

140.6
145.5
156.8
168.8

136.7
150.2
160.7
170.5

3.9
—4.7
-3.9
-1.7

96.6
98.2
105.4
113.3

93.1
102.8
109.8
116.1

3.5
—4.5
-4.3
-2.8

50.4
54.3
59.0
64.3

50.0
54.4
58.7
63.2

—. 1
.4
1.1

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

,

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

—

1961 .
1962
1963 3

—.6
(8)

.5

.4

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
145 1
149.4
150.6
155.4

—6.4
-5.4
-4.0
-2.8

93.0
97.3
98.9
103.7

99.0
102.7
102.9
106.2

-6.0
-5.4
-4.0
-2.5

52.6
53.6
54.7
56.1

53.0
53.6
54.7
56.4

-0.4
(8)

153.5
156.7
157.3
159.7

159.0
158.6
160.2
165.1

—5.4
-1.9
—3.0
-5.4

103.4
105.6
105.6
107.1

109.0
108.6
109.1
112.4

—5.6
—3.0
—3.6
5.3

57.6
58.7
59.2
60.7

57.4
57.6
58.6
60.8

.2
1.1
.6
-.1

164.0
167.2
170.1
(*)

168.2
168.5
170.7
174.5

-4.2
-1.3
-.6

110.0
112.3
114.3
(*)

114.5
115.3
116.1
118.4

—4.6
-3.0
-1.8

62.2
63.4
65.0
(*)

61.8
61.7
63.8
65.5

.4
1.7
1.2

1961- I

138.7
144.0
146.6
152.6

1962: I
II
Ill
IV-.-

II
Ill
IV

-

1963: I
II . —
III.
IV >- -

0)

0)

(5)

-.3

0)

i See Note, Table C-£0.
a Deficit of $35 million.
3
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
• Not available.
* Less than $50 million.
NOTE.—Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and
State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted
to eliminate this duplication.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




277

T A B L E C-60.—Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts.
194&-G5
[Billions of dollars]
Receipts

Expenditures
Transfer
payments

IndiPersonal
tax
and
Year or quarter Total nontax
receipts

Fiscal year:
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
I960
1961
1962
1963
1964 a
1965 3

Calendar year:
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952 _.
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 3

Corporate
profit
tax
accruals

37.3
42.9
43.7
40.1
42.0
61.7
65.5
69.9
65.9
67.0
76.3
80.9
77.8
85.9
94.5
95.2
103.6
109.3
113.6
118.8

16.9
7.2
18.8 10.7
20.0 11.2
16.3 10.9
16.5 11.7
23.5 21.8
29.0 19.3
31.5 19.8
30.4 17.1
29.9 18.4
33.5 21.0
36.7 20.4
36.3 17.3
38.7 21.1
42.3 21.7
44.0 19.5
47.6 21.3
50.1 21.6
50.1 23.3
52.3 24.9

39.2
43.3
43.4
39.1
50.2
64.5
67.7
70.3
63.8
72.8
77.5
81.7
78.5
90.3
96.6
98.2
105.4
113.3

17.2
19.6
19.0
16.2
18.2
26.3
31.2
32.4
29.2
31.5
35.2
37.3
36.6
40.4
44.0
45.1
49.0
50.8

8.6
10.7
11.8
9.8

17.1
21.6
18.6
19.4
16.5
20.9
20.2
19.9
17.7
22.0
21.0
20.7
20.8
23.0

business
tax
and
nontax
accruals

7.4
7.9
8.0
8.1
8.3
9 6
9.9

11.0
10.7
lu. 4
11.2
12.1
12.0
12.3
13.9
13.6
14.9
15.6
16.5
17.3

ConPurGrantstribu
chases
in-aid
tions
of
to State
for Total goods To Forand
socia
and
per- eign local
insur
serv- sons (net) governments
ance
ices

5.8
5.5
4.6
4.8
5.5
6.6
7.3
7.6
7.7
8.3

10.5
11.7
12.3
13.8
16.7
18.0
19.7
21.9
23.7
24.2

7.9

5.5

7.9
8.1
8.2

5.1
4.5
4.9

9.0
9.5

5.9
7.1

7.4
10.5
7.4
11.2
10.1
8.1
9.3
11.0
11.6 10.6
12.2 12.2
11.9 12.4
13.0 14.9
14.0 17.6
14.2 18.2
15.2 20.4
16.2 23.4

ft

56.6
31.7
32.3
40.0
42.2
45.3
66.6
76.2
74.5
68.1
69.5
76.5
82.8
90.3
92.1
97.8
106.4
112.6
119.1
121.5

41.4
0)
16.9
0.2
16.6
.6
8.7
21.8
8.1
2.9
20.0 11.3
3.1
8.2
26.5
2.3
47.7
8.7
1.8
9.4
56.8
1.7
53.9 10.6
1.3
45.0 12.2
1.6
45.2 12.9
1.3
48.3 14.6
1.5
50.5 18.1
1.3
53.9 20.4
1.4
53.0 21.3
1.6
54.9 24.3
1.6
60.1 26.2
1.6
64.4 27.7
1.6
67.8
30.5
31.8
69.1

37.0
31.1
35.4
41.6
41.0
58.0
71.6
77.7
69.6
68.9
71.8
79.7
87.9
91.4
93.1
102.8
109.8
116.1

9.2
20.6
8.9
15.6
19.3
7.7
8.8
22.2
19.3 10.9
38.8
8.7
8.9
52.9
9.7
58.0
47.5 11.6
45.3 12.5
45.7 13.5
49.7 16.0
52.6 20.0
53.6 20.6
53.1 22.2
57.4 25.9
62.4 26.7
66.4 28.4

.3
.1
1.6
3.2
2.8
2.1
1.5
1.6
1.4
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.3
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.6
1.7

Net
interest
paid

0.9
1.5
1.8
2.1
2.4
2 4
2.5
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.1
3.6
4.5
6.0
6.7

4.8
49

6.6
7.3
7.9

7.0
7.0
7.6

9.4
9.7

8.0
8.5

1.1

4.2

1.7
2.0
2.2

4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.7
4.8
5.0
4.9
5.2
5.7
5.6
6.4
7.1
6.9
7.2
7.5

2.3
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.3
4.1
5.4
6.7
6.3
7.0
7.7
8.8

3.9
4.2
4.2
4.3
4.4
4 6
4.8

4.9

5.0
55
5.6

5.8
6.9

Surplus
Subsi- or
dies deficit
cur- (-)
rent
on
sur- inplus come
of
and
gov- prodern- uct
ment acenter- count
prises
2.3 - 1 9 . 3
11.2
.7
.4
11.4
.2
.8
-.2
1.0
16.3
1.3
1.1 —1.1
.9 - 6 . 3
1.0 - 8 . 6
1.4 —1.1
1.9
6.8
4 4
3.1
-4.9
2.7
2.7 - 4 . 4
2.4
2.7
3.4 - 2 . 7
4.2
-2.7
3.5 - 3 . 3
3.5 - 5 . 5
2.5 - 2 . 8
1.6
.6
.6
.7
1.2
1.3
1.0
.8
1.2
1.6
2.7
2.8
3.0
2.5
2.8
4.1
4.2

3.3

2.2
12.2
8.0
-2.5
9.2
6.4
-3.9
—7.4
-5.8
3.8
5.7
2.0

-9.4
— 1.1
3.5

-4.5
—4.3
-2.8

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
Calendar quarter:
1961: I
II
III
IV
1962: I
II
Ill
IV
1963: I
II
III
IV»

93.0
97.3
98.9
103.7
103.4
105.6
105.6
107.1
110.0
112.3
114.3
0)

43.7
44.8
45.1
47.0
47.7
49.3
49.4
49.7
50.0
50.4
51.1
51.8

18.2
20.5
20.9
23.1
20.4
20.7
20.5
21.5

13.3
13.9
14.5
15.0
15.1
15.2
15.2
15.4

17.8
18.1
18.4
18.6
20.1
20.4
20.5
20.5

99.0
102.7
102.9
106.2
109.0
108.6
109.1
112.4

21.5
22.6
23.2
0)

15.7 22.8
16.0 23.3
16.4 23.6
16.5 23.9

114.5
115.3
116.1
118.4

55.4
57.1
57.1
59.8
61.8
61.9
62.4
63.6
65.5
66.5
66.4
67.0

25.0
25.8
26.2
26.2
26.4
26.3
26.6
27.6
28.6
28.0
28.1
28.8

L.5
.5

7.0
6.8
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.7
7.5
8.1

,5
.8
1.7
2.0

8.2
8.5
9.2
9.4

1.6
1.5
1.5
1.6
1 .8
]L.5

]

7.0
6.9
6.8
6.9

7.0
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.6

3.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.6
4.2
3.9
4.2
3.4
3.0
3.2
3.6

—6.0
-5.4
--4.0
—2.5
—5.6
—3.0
—3.6
—5.3
—4.6
—3.0
—1.8
0)

2
i Not available.
Estimate.
•Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—These accounts, like the cash budget, include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike
both the conventional budget and the cash statement, they exclude certain capital and lending transactions.
In general, they do not use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead, corporate profits taxes
are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans financed b y
banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made, not when CCC redeems them.
Data forJAlaska and Hawaii included beginning 1960.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget (except as noted).




T A B L E G-61.—Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional
budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income
accounts, fiscal years 1961-65
[Billions of dollarsl
Fiscal years
Receipts or expenditures
1961

Budget receipts..
Less:
Plus:

RECEIPTS

1962

1963

1964 1

1965

77.7

Intragovernmental transactions
..
Receipts from exercise of monetary authority
Trust fund receipts

Equals: Federal receipts from the public (consolidated cash
receipts)
.Adjustments for agency coverage:
Less:
District of Columbia revenues
Adjustments for netting and consolidation:
Less:
Interest, dividends, and other earnings
Plus:
Contributions to Federal employees' retirement
funds, etc
Adjustments for timing:
Plus:
Excess of corporate tax accruals over collections;
personal taxes, social insurance contributions,
etc
Adjustments for capital transactions: *
Less:
Realization upon loans and investments, sale of
Government property, etc

81.4

86.4

88.4

93.0

3.9

4.3

.1
23.6

3.8
.1
24.3

8.T

4.1
.1
30.2

4.1
.1
30.9

97.2

101.9

109.7

114.4

119.7

.2

.2

.3

.4

.4

1.1

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.7

1.8

1.9

1.9

1.9

-1.0

2.0

-.1

-.2

1.5

.9

1.5

1.1

1.0

Equals: Receipts—National income accounts.

95.2

103.6

109.3

113.6

118.8

EXPENDITURES
Budget expenditures.

81.5

87.8

92.6

98.4

97.9

3.8

4.3

4.1

4.1

1.5

1.1

.9

.5

26.5

29.3

29.4

113.8

122.7

122.7

.3

.4

.4

.6

.6

.9

1.9

1.9

1.9

Less:

Intragovernmental transactions..
Accrued interest and other non-cash expenditures
(net)
Trust fund expenditures (including Governmentsponsored enterprise expenditures net)

23.0

Equals: Federal payments to the public (consolidated cash
expenditures)

99.5

Plus:

Adjustments for agency coverage:
Less:
D istrict of Columbia expenditures
Adjustments for netting and consolidation:
Less:
Interest received and proceeds of Government sales.
Plus:
Contributions to Federal employees' retirement
funds, etc.—
Adjustments for timing:
Plus:
Excess of interest accruals over payments on
savings bonds and Treasury bills. _
Excess of deliveries over expenditures and miscellaneous items *
_
Less:
Commodity Credit Corporation foreign currency
exchanges
3
Adjustments for capital transactions:
Less:
Loans—Federal National Mortgage Association
secondary market mortgage purchases, redemption of International Monetary Fund notes,
etc
_
Trust and deposit fund items
Purchase of land and existing assets
Other*
Equals: Expenditures—National income accounts..

.3
.6
1.7

25.2
107.7
.3
.8
1.8

.9

.2

.7

.1

2.1

1.0

1.1

.3

.3

-.2
.6
.1
1.3

2.7
.8
.1

.7
1.9
.1

1.1
3.4
.1

.2
2.6
.1

97.8

106.4

112.6

119.1

121.5

(2)

.8
-.4

» Data for 1964 and 1965 are estimates.
Less than $50 million.
Consist of transactions in financial assets and liabilities, land and secondhand assets. Acquisition of
newly produced tangible assets are included in expenditures for goods and services as defined in the national
income and product accounts.
* Includes net change in Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed non-recourse loans and Increase in
clearing account.
« Commodity Credit Corporation inventory valuation adjustment.
Sources: Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce.
8
8




279

TABLE G-62.—State and local government revenues and expenditures, selectedfiscalyears, 7927-62
[Millions of dollars]
Revenues by source 2

Fiscal year*
Total

Expenditures by function 2

ReveSales
nue
Indi- Corpo- from
and
All
Prop- gross vidual ration Fed- other
erty
net
revere- income income eral
taxes ceipts taxes
Gov- n u e 3
taxes erntaxes
ment

EduTotal cation

High- Public All
wel- other *
ways
fare

1927.

7,271

4,730

470

70

92

116

1,793

7,210

2,235

1,8

151

3,015

1932.
1934.
1936.
1938.

7,267
7,678
8,395
9,228

4,487
1, 076
t, 093
[,440

752
1,008
1,484
1,794

74
80
153
218

79
49
113
165

232
1,016
948
800

1,643
1,449
1,604
1,811

7,765
7,181
7,644
8,757

2,311
1,831
2,177
2,491

1,741
1,509
1,425
1,650

444
889
827
1,069

3,269
2,952
3,215
3,547

1940.
1942.
1944
1946.
1948.

10,418
10,908
12,356
17,250

1,430
t, 537
[,604
[,986
6,126

1,982
2,351
2,289
2,986
4,442

224
276
342
422
543

156
272
451
447
592

945
858
954
855
1,861

1,872 9,229
2,123 9,190
2,269 8,863
2,661 11,028
3,685 17,684

2,638
2,586
2,793
3,356
5,379

1,573
1,490
1,200
1,672
3,036

1,156
1,225
1,133
1,409
2,099

3,862
3,889
3,737
4,591
7,170

1950.
1952.
1953.
1954.

20,911
25,181
27,307
29,012

7,349
8,652
9,375
9,967

5,154
6,357
6,927
7,276

788
998
1,065
1,127

593
846
817
778

2,486
2,566
2,870
2,966

4,541
5,763
6,252
6,897

22,787 7,177
26,098 8,318
27,910 9,390
30,701 10,557

3,803
4,650
4,987
5,527

2,940 8,867
2,788 10,342
2,914 10,619
3,060 11,557

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

31,073
34,667
38,164
41,219
45,306

10,735 7,643
11,749 8,691
12,864 9,467
14,047
14,983 10,437

1,237
1,538
1,754
1,759
1,994

744
890
984
1,018
1,001

3,131 7,584
3,335 8,465
3,843 9,250
4,865 9,699
6,377 10, 516

33,724
36, 711
40,375
44,851
48,887

6,452
6,953
7,816
8,567
9,592

3,168
3,139
3,485
3,818
4,136

1960.
1961.
1962.

50,505 16,405 11,849
54,037 18,002 12,463
58,214 19,056 13,510

2,463
2,613

1,180
1,266
1T~~

6,974 11, 634 51, 876 18, 719 9,428
9,844
7,131 12,563 56,201 20,574
7.857 13,447 59, 714 21,921 10,341

11,907
13,220
14,134
15,919
17,283

12,197
13,399
14,940
16,547
17,876

4,404 19,324
4,720 21,061
5,097 22,355

'Fiscal years not the same for all governments.
* Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores, and of insurance-trust
activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between governments in these categories are also
excluded.
'Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues.
* Includes expenditures for health, hospitals, police, local fire protection, natural resources, sanitation,
housing and community redevelopment, local recreation, general control, interest on general debt, and
other and unallocable expenditures.
NOTE.—Data are not available for intervening years.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning 1959 and 1960, respectively.
See Table C-52 for net debt of State and local governments.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census).




280

CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE
TABLE C-63.—Profits before and after taxes, all private corporations, 1929-63
[Billions of dollars]

Corporate profits (before taxes) and
inventory valuation adjustment
Year or quarter

Manufacturing
All
industries

Dura- Nonble durable

Total goods goods

indus- industries
tries

Corporate profits
after taxes

Corpo- CorpoTransporrate
rate
tation,
profits tax
All
Divi- Undiscommu- other before liabilnication, indus- taxes i t y ! Total dend tributed
payand
tries
ments profits
public
utilities

1929

10.1

5.1

2.6

2.5

2.0

3.0

9.6

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

6.6
1.6
-2.0
-2.0
1.1

3.9
1.3
-.6
-.5
.9

1.5
-1.1

2.4
1.3
.4

'.2

.7

1.2
1.5
.6 - . 2
.2 - 1 . 5
.1 - 1 . 5
.4 - . 2

2.9
5.0
6.2
4.3
5.7

2.0
3.1
3.6
2.2
3.2

.9
1.7
1.7
.7
1.6

1.1
1.4
2.0
1.4
1.5

.5
.7
.8
.6
1.0

.5
1.2
1.8
1.5
1.5

3.1
5.7
6.2
3.3
6.4

9.1
14.5
19.7
23.8
23.0

5.4
9.3
11.7
13.7
13.0

3.0
6.3
7.1
8.0
7.3

2.3
3.0
4.5
5.6
5.7

1.3
2.0
3.5
4.4
3.9

2.4
3.2
4.5
5.7
6.1

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

18.4
17.3
23.6
30.8
28.2

9.5
8.4
12.8
16.8
15.3

4.5
2.1
5.3
7.4
7.9

5.0
6.3
7.4
9.4
7.4

2.8
1.8
2.1
2.9
2.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

35.7
41.0
37.7
37.3
33.7

20.4
24.4
21.1
21.4
18.4

12.0
13.5
11.8
12.1
10.1

8.4
10.9
9.3
9.3
8.3

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959 _.

43.1
42.0
41.7
37.2
47.2

25.0
23.5
22.9
18.3
25.4

14.2
12.6
13.1
9.0
13.4

I960
1961
1962 3

44.5
43.8
47.0
51.3

23.0
22.0
24.5
26.4

11.6
11.1
13.2
14.5

1.4

3.3
-.8
-3.0
.2
1.7

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

- -

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

1963

_

_

348

8.3

5.8

2.4

.8
2.5
.5 - 1 . 3
.4 - 3 . 4
.5 - . 4
.7
1.0

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

-3.0
-5.4
-6.0
-2.4
-1.6

1.0
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.4

2.2
4.3
4.7
2.3
5.0

2.9
4.5
4.7
3.2
3.8

-.7
-.2

9.3
17.0
20.9
24.6
23.3

2.8
7.6
11.4
14.1
12.9

6.5
9.4
9.5
10.5
10.4

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

2.4
4.9
5.2
6.0
5.7

6.1
7.1
8.7
11.2
10.1

19.0
22.6
29.5
33.0
26.4

10.7
9.1
11.3
12.5
10.4

8.3
13.4
18.2
20.5
16.0

4.7
5.8
6.5
7.2
7.5

3.6
7.7
11.7
13.3
8.5

4.0
4.5
4.8
4.9
4.4

11.3
12.0
11.8
11.0
11.0

40.6
42.2
36.7
38.3
34.1

17.9
22.4
19.5
20.2
17.2

22.8
19.7
17.2
18.1
16.8

9.2
9.0
9.0
9.2
9.8

13.6
10.7
8.3
8.9
7.0

10.8
10.9
9.8
9.3
11.9

5.4
5.6
5.5
5.6
6.7

12.8
12.9
13.3
13.3
15.1

44.9
44.7
43.2
37.4
47.7

21.8
21.2
20.9
18.6
23.2

23.0
23.5
22.3
18.8
24.5

11.2
12.1
12.6
12.4
13.7

11.8
11.3
9.7
6.4
10.8

11.4
10.9
11.3
11.9

7.0
7.2
7.6
8.3

14.4
14.6
14.9
16.6

44.3
43.8
46.8
51.7

22.3
22.0
22.2
24.5

22.0
21.8
24.6
27.2

14.5
15.3
16.6
17.8

7.5
6.5
8.1
9.4

Q

1.2

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
38.8
43.6
44.0
48.6

18.6
21.5
22.4
25.3

8.4
10.6
11.4
14.0

10.2
10.9
11.0
11.3

6.7
7.1
7.2
7.8

13.5
15.0
14.4
15.6

38.5
43.4
44.3
48.9

19.4
21.8
22.3
24.6

19.2
21.6
22.0
24.3

15.0
15.1
15.2
15.8

4.2
6.5
6.8
8.5

1962: I
II

46.1
46.5
46.1
49.3

24.0
24.1
24.7
25.2

13.0
12.7
13.5
13.7

11.0
11.3
11.3
11.6

7.4
7.5
7.6
7.9

14.7
15.0
13.8
16.2

45.9
46.7
46.2
48.4

21.7
22.1
21.9
22.9

24.2
24.6
24.3
25.5

16.2
16.4
16.5
17.1

8.0
8.2
7.8
8.4

1963- I

48.8
50.1
52.2

24.2
26.0
27.6

13.2
14.5
15.0

11.0
11.5
12.6

8.1
7.9
8.3
(*)

16.4
16.2
16.4

48.3
51.0
52.2

22.9
24.2
24.7

25.4
26.8
27.5

17.1
17.6
17.6
18.8

8.3
9.2
9.8

1961: I

II

III
IV

III
IV ___
II
IV«

1

Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes.
» Less than $50 million.
a The new figures for 1962 and 1963 reflect the new depreciation guidelines issued by the Treasury Department July 11,1962, and the investment tax credit provided in the Revenue Act of 1962.
* Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
5
Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole; data for fourth quarter are not
available. All other data incorporating or derived from thesefiguresare correspondingly approximate.
»Not available.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




281

TABLE C-64.—Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders* equity and to sales, private manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1959—63
Durable goods industries
All
priLumvate
ber
manand Furufacwood niture
tur- Total proding durand
cor- able ucts fix(exporacept tures
tions
furniture)

Quarter

Stone,
clay,
and
glass
products

Primary
iron
and
steel
industries

Primary
nonferrous
metal
industries

ElecMa- trical
Fab- chin- ma- Motor
riery chincated (ex- ery, vehicles
equip- and
metal cept
prod- elec- ment, equipucts trical) and ment
supplies

Aircraft
and
parts

MiscellaIn- neous
stru- manments ufacand turing
related (inprod- cluducts ing
ordnance)

Batio of profits after Federal taxes {annual rate) to stockholders' equity—percent
BASED ON 1957 SIC

10.0
12.4

10.2
14.0

9.8
9.9
8.7
8.4

10.0
10.1

6.8
9.2
8.8

5.2
8.9
7.8

-

10.5

10.4

9.0

8.9

-

10.3

10.8

10.5

10.2

8.6

8.2

11.0
10.0

11.7

1959: I

II
III
IV

9.6
9.6

1960: I
II
III
IV
1961: I II.-.
Ill
IV
1962: I
II
III
IV
1963: I
II
III

9.3

8.3
9.0

7.1
7.0

8.5

9.3

6.1

11.3
12.9

6.2
9.1

11.7

7.0

8.3

3.3
6.2
4.6
.3

5.5
5.8
8.2
6.5

- . 6 -1.1
6.2
4.0
7.0
6.8
9.6
3.7
1.4
7.6
8.4
4.9

4.6
7.2

10.6
9.1

3.7
9.1

3.5
7.9

12.6

1^.0

8.0 11.7
17.4 16.7
15.7 - 2 . 7

8.2

10.3

5.9
9.7

10.7
12.7
12.1
14.3

19.1
20.5

8.1
9.7
6.9
5.6

10.4
10.0

18.5
16.1

7.3
8.2
8.1

12.0

18.1

7.1

6.7
6.7

10.9

12.5
10.7

5.3
6.9
7.2
3.0

8.8
9.0
6.8
8.0

10.8
12.0
14.5
14.8

7.2
7.1
12.4
10.2

7.2
7.3
6.4
8.5

11.6
12.1
11.9
10.8

5.7
7.9
11.5
11.6

8.0

7.2

13.2

10.2
10.9
10.8

7.1
9.9

11.6
13.5

5.9
7.2
12.6
13.7

12.3
12.7
11.8
13.9

12.6
12.0
13.5

8.0

9.8

6.3

6.7

12.1

13.1
11.9

8.0
4.0
4.6

8.0
8.2
6.8
5.5

2.9

3.2
7.0
6.4
8.0

6.1
8.0
6.1
8.1

2.5
7.3
7.7
6.2

5.7
9.1
7.8
8.5

7.6
5.8
3.4
5.0

8.2
8.8
5.8
7.3

6.3
9.8
8.6
6.9

8.1

9.2

10.8

10.4

16.8
18.3

11.0

20.6

5.1
9.6
5.5

6.9
8.1
6.9

5.9
8.9

7.9

9.2

11.1

10.2

17.3
19.6

10.0

9.7

9.4

10.3
12.9
11.5

11.5
12.8

4.6
8.6
11.0

7.8

10.9
11.7
9.7

3.7

11.8
11.9
8.0

1.5

12.9
11.8

5.6

8.5

9.2
8.2

9.1
8.6

9.2

9.6

10.8

6.1

13.2

6.3

9.3

9.8

8.8

6.8
7.1
12.1
11.3

Profits after taxes per dollar of sales—cents
BASED ON 19^7 SIC

1959: I — .
II—
IIIIV..

4.7
5.5
4.6
4.5

4.8
5.9
4.1
4.2

3.0
4.7
5.4
3.2

2.0
2.8
3.4
2.4

7.1
5.7
8.1
9.8
9.1 - 3 . 1
4.8
6.4

6.0
7.0
5.1
5.0

2.6
3.8
4.1
2.3

3.8
5.8
5.3
4.3

4.0
4.5
4.4
4.8

7.4
7.8
4.2
5.0

1.8
1.7
1.3
1.5

5.7
6.0
7.3
6.8

2.9
2.6
4.6
3.7

1960:

II—
IIIIV..

4.7
4.6
4.3
4.0

4.6
4.6
3.6
3.4

1.7
2.7
2.1
.1

1.9
1.9
2.6
2.1

5.0
8.2
7.4
5.4

7.0
5.3
3.2
3.9

5.9
6.0
5.2
4.3

2.4
2.9
3.0
1.3

4.1
4.5
3.6
3.0

3.9
3.6
3.5
3.2

6.9
6.6
3.5
5.8

1.4
1.4
1.3
1.6

6.0
6.2
6.2
5.3

2.4
3.1
4.1
4.1

1961: I—.
II—
IIIIV-.

3.5
4.4
4.3
4.8

2.7
4.2
3.8
4.7

-.3
2.9
3.0
1.7

-.4
1.3
2.1
2.9

2.4
6.8
7.0
6.2

2.7
5.0
4.6
5.7

4.8
5.9
4.8
5.8

1.2
3.0
3.1
2.4

3.2
4.6
4.2
4.4

2.9
3.2
3.3
4.3

4.1
5.8
3.8
7.5

1.4
1.9
2.0
2.0

4.0
5.3
6.0
6.2

2.5
2.8
4.2
4.7

1962: I
II.-—". III
IV
1963: I..,.
II—
III-

4.3
4.7
4.4
4.8

4.2
4.8
4.0
4.5

.7
3.2
3.4
2.1

1.5
2.1
3.1
2.6

2.8
6.9
6.8
4.9

4.9
4.0
2.6
3.8

5.8
6.2
4.5
5.4

2.7
3.8
3.3
2.7

4.3
5.1
4.6
4.1

3.5
3.8
3.6
4.0

7.1
7.4
4.9
7.8

2.3
2.3
2.2
2.6

5.1
6.1
6.0
6.3

2.7
2.8
4.3
3.8

4.2
5.0
4.6

3.9
5.0
4.3

1.7
3.5
4.6

1.1
2.3
3.3

1.2
7.2
6.5

3.7
5.8
4.0

5.0
5.6
5.0

2.5
3.4
3.7

4.1
5.1
4.8

3.5
3.8
3.7

7.0
7.6
4.9

2.1
2.6
2.3

4.6
5.8
6.5

1.9
3.3
4.1

See footnotes at end of table.




282

TABLE C-64.—Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales, private manufacturing corporations, By industry group, 1959-63—Continued
Nondurable goods industries

Quarter

Total
nondurable

Printing
Ruband
ber
ApTex- parel Paper pub- Chemand
icals Petro- mis- Leather
tile
lishand
and
and allied
and leum cella- leather
mill
ing
prod- related prod- (ex- allied refin- neous proding plastic ucts
ucts prod- ucts
cept products
news- ucts
prodpaucts
pers)

Food
Toand
kin- bacco
dred manufacprod- tures
ucts

Ratio of profits after Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders' equity—percent
BASED O 1957 SIC 1
N
1959: I
II
III
IV

9.8
11.0
10.9
10.1

7.8
9.5
10.4
9.4

12.0
14.2
14.4
12.8

5.9
8.1
7.6
8.6

8.6
7.5
10.1
8.1

8.5
10.2
9.6
9.6

9.8
12.0
14.9
8.8

13.0
15.6
14.1
11.9

10.1
9.4
9.7
10.1

10.0
13.1
11.1
9.9

6.9
8.9
8.7
9.2

I960: I
II
III
IV

9.6
9.8
10.2
9.8

7.6
8.8
9.8
8.7

12.0
13.6
13.7
14.2

6.6
6.1
5.7
5.0

5.2
6.9
11.9
6.8

8.5
9.3
8.2
8.1

11.3
10.2
11.8
9.0

12.5
13.6
12.1
10.6

9.8
8.8
10.3
11.5

9.8
10.5
8.2
7.9

10.4
6.2
3.6
5.0

1961: I
II
III
IV

8.5
9.6
9.9
10.6

7.2
9.2
10.0
9.1

12.0
14.1
14.3
14.2

2.6
4.3
6.0
7.1

2.1
2.6
11.2
12.3

6.6
8.3
7.3
9.1

7.5
6.8
11.2
8.4

9.8
13.2
11.8
12.2

10.6
9.6
9.6
11.3

6.7
10.6
9.2
10.7

3.3
2.6
4.7
6.9

1962: I
II
III
IV

9.1
9.8
10.0
10.8

7.1
8.9
10.2
9.1

11.7
12.9
13.7
14.0

5.3
6.3
6.0
7.3

6.7
7.9
11.3
11.4

7.4
8.7
8.0
8.3

7.7
11.1
11.6
10.6

11.5
13.5
12.2
12.5

10.0
8.8
9.7
11.8

9.1
10.9
8.5
9.8

6.3
5.2
6.4
9.6

9.1
10.4
10.7

7.1
8.9
10.2

11.1
13.6
14.4

4.4
6.2
6.6

6.4
6.7
8.7

6.3
8.4
7.9

6.3
9.9
12.7

11.1
14.3
12.7

11.0
10.3
11.0

8.2
10.2
8.8

5.8
4.4
8.0

1963: I
II
III

.

-

j

Profits after taxes per dollar of sales—cents

BASED O 1957 SIC i
N
1959: I
II
Ill
IV

4.7
5.1
5.1
4.8

2.1
2.5
2.7
2.5

5.2
5.5
5.6
5.2

2.5
3.2
3.0
3.3

1.6
1.4
1.8
1.4

5.0
5.5
5.2
5.2

3.6
4.2
5.1
2.9

7.7
8.5
8.1
7.2

9.3
9.4
9.5
9.9

3.9
4.4
4.1
3.7

1.9
2.4
2.2
2.4

1960: I
II
Ill
IV

4.7
4.7
4.9
4.7

2.1
2.4
2.6
2.2

5.2
5.4
5.5
5.8

2.8
2.5
2.5
2.1

1.0
1.3
2.0
1.1

4.9
5.4
4.8
4.8

4.0
3.6
3.9
2.9

7.6
7.8
7.4
6.9

9.4
8.9
10.2
11.0

3.8
3.9
3.3
3.2

2.7
1.6
.9
1.4

1961: I
II
III
IV

4.2
4.6
4.8
5.0

1.9
2.4
2.6
2.3

5.3
5.7
5.9
5.9

1.2
1.8
2.5
2.7

.4
.5
1.8
2.1

4.1
4.8
4.3
5.2

2.6
2.3
3.7
2.7

6.5
7.8
7.4
7.6

10.4
9.9
9.8
11.1

2.9
4.2
3.8
4.2

.9
.7
1.2
1.6

1962: I
II
Ill
IV

4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0

1.9
2.3
2.7
2.3

5.4
5.5
5.8
6.1

2.2
2.5
2.4
2.8

1.3
1.4
1.9
1.9

4.4
4.9
4.5
4.5

2.6
3.6
3.9
3.4

7.2
7.6
7.3
7.5

9.5
8.8
9.5
11.0

3.7
4.1
3.4
3.7

1.6
1.4
1.6
2.4

1963: I
II
III

4.4
4.9
5.0

1.9
2.3
2.7

5.3
5.8
6.1

1.8
2.4
2.5

1.2
1.2
1.5

3.7
4.7
4.4

2.2
3.4
4.5

6.8
8.0
7.4

10.2
10.0
10.6

3.4
3.9
3.5

1.5
1.2
2.1

i Standard Industrial Classification.
NOTE.—Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see Quarterly Financial Reports for U. 8. Manufacturing Corporations,
Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.

283
715-113




TABLE C-65.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales,
private manufacturing corporations, by asset size class, 1959-63
Asset size class (millions of dollars)
Quarter

All asset
sizes

l t c) 10

Under 1

10 to 100

100 to 1,000

1,000 and
over

Ratio of profits (annual rate) to stockholders1equity—percent
Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After
taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes
BASED ON 1957 SIC t

III
IV
I960: I

_

II

18.7
23.1
17.1
16.8

10.0
12.4

18.4
18.0

1959: I
II

9.8
9.9

9.6

9.6

15.4 8.7
III . _ 14.8 8.4
IV
1961: I
- .. 12.6 6.8
16.8 9.2
II
15.8 8.8
Ill
18.5 10.5
IV
16.7 9.0
1962- I
18.9 10.3
II
16.6 9.3
Ill
18.1 10.5
IV
1963- I
16.0 8.6
19.9 11.0
II
17.8 10.0
III

12.5
20.4
21.1
8.8

11.7
12.4
3.3

15.1
20.2
19.8
14.6

10.1

11.7
15.2
16.7

5.0
8.0

14.1
16.4
14.6

6.3
7.6

5.0

5.7

9.0
.5

9.2

6.9
9.9

7.0

6.9
3.6

6.3

.9

8.3

2.6

13.7
15.8
12.5

6.8
8.4

14.7
16.8
16.1

6.9
8.2
7.7
5.9
8.8
8.8

6.3

10.6
19.8
19.4
10.6

11.7
11.3
5.4

14.0
18.1
18.1
15.1

8.2
20.0
19.9

2.5
11.9
11.5

12.2
17.7
18.3

4.6

17.5
22.4
20.7
19.0
17.1
17.9
16.3
14.5
11.8
16.3
16.3
17.3

8.7

11.4
10.5
10.0
8.4
9.0
8.2
7.4
5.6

8.3
8.1
8.9
7.1
9.0
8.6

7.4

14.6
17.8
17.1
17.0

5.1
8.6
9.0

13.7
18.0
17.8

19.2
23.8
17.6
18.4
18.5
18.3
16.9
16.2
13.9
17.1
17.1
18.3

10.1
12.5
9.4

10.4
9.8
10.1
9.1
9.2
7.5

9.1
9.2

10.3
8.6
9.7
8.7

8.9

16.3
18.1
16.4
17.5

6.6
9.1
9.0

15.6
19.1
18.1

21.7
24.5
12.1
15.9

12.9
14.3
8.6

10.7

21.9
19.0
13.3
17.4

11.4

14.4
18.0
13.6
21.4

11.2
9.2
13.5

13.0
11.5
9.1
9.5

9.9

20.1
20.2
15.6
21.5

13.8

8.3
10.3
9.8

20.0
22.4
17.0

12.1
13.3
10.8

12.1
11.8
9.9

Profits per dollar of sales—cents
Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After
taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes
BASED ON 1957 SIC '

8.9
10.2

4.7
5.5

2.8
4.2

1.3
2.4

5.4
6.6

2.5
3.3

8.4
9.9

4.2
5.0

9.6
10.9

5.0
5.7

8.2
7.9

4.6
4.5

4.3
1.8

2.5
.7

6.7
4.9

3.4
2.4

9.5
8.7

4.8
4.5

8.8
9.1

4.7
5.1

15.2
16.4
10.2
12.2

7.3
8.2

8.7
8.4
7.6
7.1

4.7
4.6
4.3
4.0

2.6
3.2
3.5
1.1

1.1
1.6
1.9
.1

5.0
5.6
5.1
3.2

2.2
2.6
2.4
1.3

8.1
8.2
7.7
6.9

4.0
4.1
3.9
3.5

9.3
9.0
8.7
8.3

4.9
5.0
4.7
4.7

14.5
13.2
10.6
12.7

8.6
8.0
7.3
8.3

IV

6.5
8.0
7.7
8.5

3.5
4.4
4.3
4.8

1.4
2.9
3.4
2.6

.2
1.5
1.8
1.3

3.0
4.8
5.5
5.1

.9
2.3
2.7
2.5

6.0
7.6
7.7
7.9

2.8
3.9
3.8
4.1

7.4
8.4
8.5
8.9

4.0
4.5
4.6
5.0

11.6
13.6
11.4
15.2

7.7
8.5
7.7
9.5

1962: I
II
Ill
IV

8.0
8.6
7.9
8.2

4.3
4.7
4.4
4.8

2.3
4.1
4.1
2.2

1.0
2.4
2.4
1.1

4.7
5.6
5.7
4.7

2.0
2.7
2.8
2.3

7.0
8.0
7.8
7.6

3.4
4.0
3.9
4.0

8.0
8.6
8.1
8.3

4.3
4.6
4.3
4.7

14.2
14.0
12.0
14.4

8.5
8.2
7.6
9.2

1963: I
II _
III

7.7
9.0

4.2
5.0

1.8
4.0

1.7
2.7
2.8

6.5
8.0
8.0

7.8
9.0
8.6

14.0
14.8
12.7

8.5
8.8

4.0

4.0
5.5
5.7

4.2
4.8

4.6

.6
2.4
2.3

3.1
4.1

8.3

1959: I
II

.

IV
I960: I

II .
III
IV

1961: I
II

III

4.0

4.6

9.0
9.6

8.1

i Standard Industrial Classification.
NOTE.—Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see Quarterly Financial Reports for U.S. Manufacturing Corporations, Federal
Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.
Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




284

T A B L E C-66.—Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1952-63 *
[Billions of dollars]

Source or use of funds

Total uses.
Plant and equipment outlays
Inventories (book value)
Customer net receivables *
Cash and U.S. Government securities
Other assets
Total sources .
Internal sources..
Retained profits and depletion allowances
Depreciation and amortization allowances
External sources

1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 19632

27.3 28.2 24.0 45.1 39.5 37.9 31.5 46.8 39.3 42.3 48.1 51.1
22.4 23.9 22.4 24.2 29.9 32.7 26.4 27.7 30.8 29.6 32.0 33.5
1.3 1.8 -1.6 6.7 7.6 2.1 -2.4 6.6 2.5 1.8 3.8 4.0
3.1 .7 2.4 6.4 3.3 2.1 2.9 5.6 4.2 3.5 5.8 5.2
.1
.4

1.8 « .

W

5.0 -4.3 -.3 2.7 2.9 1 7 2.5 1.2 1.8
2.8 3.0 1.3 1.9 4.1 3.5 4.9 5.3 6.6

28.1 30.0 22.4 44.8 42.4 40.1 35.7 51.9 41.7 43.6 52.3 54.4
17.8 19.7 19.8 26.6 27.8 28.0 26.0 31.1 29.1 29.6 34.9 37.6
7.4 7.9

6.3 10.9 10.5

8.9

.
5 7 9.5 6.2 5.6 7 0 8.2
.

10.4 11.8 13.5 15.7 17.3 19.1 20.3 21.6 22.9 24.0 27.8 29.4
10.3 10.3

2.6 18.2 14.6 12.1 9.7 20.8 12.6 13.9 17.4 16.8

.6 .9
Federal income tax liability.. -3.1
.6 -3.1 3.8 -1.7 -2.2 -2.5 2.1 -1.6
2.4 2.2 .4 2.1 3.0 2.1 1.7 3.7 3.2 1.8 3.2
Other liabilities
Bank loans and mortgage
.4 -.6 5.4 5.4 1.7 1.0 7.1 3.0 2.0 6.1
3.1
loans
7.9 7.1 5.9 6.9 7.9 10.5 9.5 7.8 8.0 9.6 7.1
Net new issues
Discrepancy (uses less sources)

-.8 -1.8

1.6

1.5
2.6
6.4
6.3

.3 -2.9 -2.2 -4.2 -5.0 -2.4 -1.3 -4.1 - 3 . 3

i Excludes banks and insurance companies.
* Preliminary estimates.
> Receivables are net of payables, which are therefore not shown separately.
< Less than $50 million.
Source: Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial
data.




285

TABLE C-67.—Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations, 1939-63 l
[Billions of dollars]
Current liabilities

Current assets

End of year or
quarter

h

I!

m
|!J

all

IS I ip

54.5

10.8

2.2

22.1

18.0

1.4

30.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

60.3
72.9
83.6
93.8
97.2

13.1
13.9
17.6
21.6
21.6

2.0
4.0
10.1
16.4
20.9

0.1
.6
4.0
5.0
4.7

23.9
27.4
23.3
21.9
21.8

19.8
25.6
27.3
27.6
26.8

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.4

32.8
40.7
47.3
51.6
51.7

1945
1946

97.4
108.1

21.7
22.8

21.1
15.3

2.7
.7

23.2
30.0

26.3
37.6

2.4
1.7

45.8
51.9

1947
1948
1949

123.6
133.0
133.1

25.0
25.3
26.5

14.1
14.8
16.8

44.6
48.9
45.3

1.6
1.6
1.4

61.5
64.4
60.7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

161.5
179.1
186.2
190.6
194.6

28.1
30.0
30.8
31.1
33.4

19.7
20.7
19.9
21.5
19.2

1.1
2.7
2.8
2.6
2.4

55.7
58.8
64.6
65.9
71.2

55.1
64.9
65.8
67.2
65.3

1.7
2.1
2.4
2.4
3.1

79.8
92.6
96.1
98.9
99.7

.4
1.3
2.3
2.2
2.4

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

224.0
237.9
244.7
255.3
277.3

34.6
34.8
34.9
37.4
36.3

23.5
19.1
18.6
18.8
22.8

2.3
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.9

86.6
95.1
99.4
106.9
117.7

72.8
80.4
82.2
81.9
88.4

4.2
5.9
6.7
7.5
9.1

121.0
130.5
133.1
136.6
153.1

2.3
2.4
2.3
1.7
1.7

1960
1961
1962

289.0
306.0
325.9

37.2
40.3
41.0

20.1
19.7
20.1

126.1 91.8
135.5 95.2
146.5 100.9

1961: I_.
II.
Ill
IV.

293.2
298.0
306.0

35.1
36.4
37.2
40.3

19.9
20.0
18.8
19.7

3.1
3.4
3.6
3.2
3.1
3.2
3.4

125.2
128.9
132.5
135.5

1962: I . .
II.
III.
IV.

313.3
320.5
325.9

36.9
37.2
37.5
41.0

20.4
19.6
19.0
20.1

3.4
3.3
3.4
3.6

1963: I._
II.
III.

327.7
334.7
341.6

38.0
38.5

20.7
20.2
19.6

3.5 148.7 102.7
3.3 153.1 104.0
3.4 157.8 105.8

Net
working
capital

83
P^5

21.9

1.2

6.9

24.5

22.6
25.6
24.0
24.1
25.0

2.5
7.1
12.6
16.6
15.5

7.1
7.2
8.7
8.7
9.4

27.5
32.3
36.3
42.1
45.6

24.8
31.5

10.4
8.5

9.7
11.8

51.6
56.2

10.7
11.5
9.3

13.2
13.5
14.0

62.1
68.6
72.4

47.9
53.6
57.0
57.3
59.3

16.7
21.3
18.1
18.7
15,5

14.9
16.5
18.7
20.7
22.5

81.6
86.5
90.1
91.8
94.9

73.8
81.5
84.3
88.7
99.3

19.3
17.6
15.4
12.9
15.0

25.7
29.0
31.1
33.3
37.0

103.0
107.4
111.6
118.7
124.2

10.6 160.4
12.0 169.3
13.7 181.9

1.8 105.0
1.8 111.6
2.0 119.8

13.5
14.0
14.9

40.1
41.9
45.1

128.6
136.8
144.0

93.4
92.7
93.6
95.2

11.5
12.2
12.7
12.0

157.6
158.9
162.5
169.3

1.8
1.7
1.8
1.8

103.3
104.8
106.5
111.6

11.7
11.3
12.3
14.0

40.8
41.1
41.8
41.9

130.7
134.3
135.5
136.8

137.0 97.8
141.0 98.7
146.4 100.5
146.5 100.9

13.1
13.5
13.7
13.7

170.2
172.9
179.2
181.9

1.8
1.8
1.9
2.0

111.4
113.4
117.7
119.8

13.5
13.6
14.6
14.9

43.5
44.1
45.0
45.1

138.4
140.4
141.3
144.0

2.3 120.2
2.5 123.8
2.5 126.6

14.1
14.2
15.1

46.2
47.1
47.7

144.9
147.1
149.7

38.3
42.4
43.0

15.2 182.8
16.0 187.6
16.6 192.0

0.6
.8
2.0
2.2
1.8

37.6
39.3
37.5

i All United States corporations, excluding banks, savings and loan associations, and insurance companies.
Year^end data through 1960 are based on Statistics of Income (Treasury Department), covering virtually all
corporations in the United States. Statistics of Income data may not be strictly comparable from year to
year because of changes in the tax laws, basis for filing returns, and processing of data for compilation purposes. All otherfiguresshown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources, including
data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. As more complete information becomes available, estimates are revised.
8
Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other
on the corporation's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to
the U.S. Government. Wherever possible, adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government
advances offset against inventories on the corporation's "books.
3
Includes marketable securities other than U.S. Government.
Source: Securities and Exchange Commission.




286

TABLE G-68.—State and municipal and corporate securities offered, 1934-63l
[Millions of dollars]
Corporate securities offered for cash *

State
and
Proposed uses of net proceeds 4
Qross proceeds *
municipal seYear or quarter curities
New money
offered
for cash
Retire- Other
Pre(prin- Total Com- ferred Bonds Total
mon
and
Plant Work- ment purcipal
of sestock stock notes
and
ing
amounts)
Total equip- capi- curities poses
ment

tal

939

397

19

371

384

57

1935
1936
1937.
1938
1939

1,232
1,121
908
1,108
1,128

2,332
4,572
2,310
2,155
2,164

22
272
285
25
87

86
271
406
86
98

2,224
4,028
1,618
2,044
1,980

2,266
4,431
2,239
2,110
2,115

208
858
991
681
325

111
380
574
504
170

478
417
177
155

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

1,238
956
524
435
661

2,677
2,667
1,062
1,170
3,202

108
110
34
56
163

183
167
112
124

2,386
2,390
917
990
2,670

2,615
2,623
1,043
1,147
3,142

474
308
657

424
661
287
141
252

1945
1946
1947
1948.
1949

795
1,157
2,324
2,690
2,907

6,011
6,900
6,577
7,078
6,052

397
758
891 1,127
779
762
614 492
736
425

4,855
4,882
5,036
5,973
4,890

5,902
6,757
6,466
6,959
5,959

1,080
3,279
4,591
5,929
4,606

1950.
1951
1952
1953
1954

3,532
3,189
4,401
5,558
6,969

6,361
7,741
9,534
8,898
9,516

811
1,212
1,369
1,326
1,213

631
838
564
489
816

4,920
5,691
7,601
7,083
7,488

6,261
7,607
9,380
8,755
9,365

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

5,977
5,446
6,958
7,449
7,681

10,240
10,939
12,884
11,558
9,748

2,185
2,301
2,516
1,334
2,027

635
636
411
571
531

7,420
8,002
9,957
9,653
7,190

1960
1961
1962
19631

7,230
8,360
8,558
10,055

10,154
13,147
10,770
12,221

1,664
3,273
1,318
1,025

409
449
436
334

1961: I

2,122
2,370
1,766
2,101

1,992
354
5,352 1,582
2,566
571
3,237
765

192
82
80

2,610
2,534
1,627
1,788

2,378
3,251
2,184
2,957

490
460
200
168

2,798
2,889
1,967
2,401

2,700
3,634
2,466
3,421

344
208
251

1934

,...

III...
IV.__
1962: I
II
III...
IV.__
1963: I
II
III—

231

95

1,865
3,368
,100
,206

193
204
148
222
95

145
207
187
167
405

,854
,583
396
739
2,389

192
172
173
100
96

638
2,115
3,409
4,221
3,724

442
1,164
1,182
1,708

4,555
2,868
1,352
307
401

267
610
524
722
952

4,006
6,531
8,180
7,960
6,780

2,966
5,110
6,312
5,647
5,110

1,041
1,421
1,868
2,313
1,670

1,271
486
664
260
1,875

984
589
537
535
709

10,049 7,957
10,749 9,663
12,661 11,784
11,372 9,907
9,527 8,578

5,333
6,709
9,040
7,792
6,084

2,624
2,954
2,744
2,115
2,494

1,227
364
214
549
135

721
663
915
814

8,081 9,924 8,758
9,425 12,874 10,829
9,016 10,572 8,323
10,862 12,047 8,987

5,662
7,539
5,701
5,319

3,097
3,290
2,622
3,668

271
895
757
1,537

895
1,150
1,491
1,524

1,543
3,578
1,913
2,392

1,951
5,261
2,501
3,161

1,648
4,272
2,120
2,790

952
3,373
1,396
1,818

723
972

142
566
63
123

161
423
318
248

16
180
107
132

1,871
2,611
1,877
2,657

2,320
3,184
2,146
2,921

2,009
2,607
1,565
2,143

,426
,901
,026
,347

582
705
539
796

62
179
236
280

250
399
345
498

65
81
79
109

2,414
3,209
2,179
3,060

2,665
3,587
2,434
3,361

2,067
2,425
1,914
2,581

,453
,538
,016
,312

614
887
897
1,270

314
740
295
188

285
422
225
592

96

1
These data cover substantially all new issues of State, municipal, and corporate securities offered for
cash sale in the United States in amounts over $100,000 and with terms to maturity of more than 1 year.
2
Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks, intercorporate transactions, sales of invest*
ment company issues, and issues to be sold over an extended period, such as offerings under employee purchase plans.
3
Number of units multiplied by offering price.
* Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors
and other costs of flotation.
5
Preliminary.
NOTE.—Data for Alaska and Hawaii ineluded for all periods.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission, The Commercial and Financial Chronicle, and The Bond

Buyer.




287

TABLE C-69.—Common stock prices, earnings, and yields and stock
market credit, 1939-63

Year or month

Common
stock
prices
index,

1957-59=
100
(SEC) i

Standard and Poor's common
stock data
Price index 2

Total

Industrial

Stock market credit

Customer credit (excluding
DiviU.S. Government securities)
dend
Price/
yield 3 earnings
(perNet
Bank
ratio *
cent)
debit
Total
loans
balto
ances 8 "others'^
Millions of dollars

1941-43=10
1939
1940
1941 . .
1942...
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947..-.
1948...._
1949 . .
1950—
1951
1952..
1953
1954
1955—.
1956
1957
1958—_
1959
1960 . . .
1961..
1962
1963

....

.
_...

1962: January
February
March..
April
May
June
___
July
August
September. __
October
November. _.
December
1963: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

26.8
25.3
23.0
20.1
26.6
29.0
35.2
40.1
35.1
35.6
34.3
41.4
49 6
52.3
51 9
61.7
81.8
92 6
89.8
93.2
116.7
113.9
134.2
127.1
142.3
140 4
142.8
142.9
138.0
128.3
114.3
116 0
119.5
117.9
114 3
122.7
128.0
132.6
135 0
133.7
140.7
143.2
142. 5
140 7
144.6
148.2
148 7
147.3
151.1

12.06
11.02
9.82
8.67
11.50
12.47
15.16
17.08
15.17
15.53
15.23
18.40
22.34
24.50
24.73
29.69
40.49
46.62
44.38
46.24
57.38
55.85
66.27
62.38
69.87
69.07
70.22
70.29
68.05
62.99
55.63
56.97
58.52
58.00
56 17
60.04
62.64
65.06
65.92
65.67
68.76
70.14
70.11
69.07
70.98
72.85
73 03
72.62
74.17

11.77
10.69
9.72
8.78
11.49
12.34
14.72
16.48
14.85
15.34
15.00
18.33
22.68
24.78
24.84
30.25
42.40
49.80
47.63
49.36
61.45
59.43
69.99
65.54
73.39
72.99
74.22
74.22
71.64
66.32
58.32
59.61
61.29
60.67
58 66
62.90
65.59
68.00
68.91
68.71
72.17
73.60
73.61
72.45
74.43
76.63
77 09
76.69
78.38

Bank
loans to
brokers
and
dealers7

4.05
5.59
6.82
7.24
4.93
4.86
4.17
3.85
4.93
5.54
6.59
6.57
6.13
5.80
5.80
4.95
4.08
4.09
4.35
3.97
3.23
3.47
2.97
3.37
3.17
2.97
2.95
2.95
3.05
3.32
3.78
3.68
3.57
3.60
3.71
3.50
3.40
3.31
3.27
3.28
3.15
3.13
3.16
3.20
3.13
3.06
3.05
3.14
3.14

13.80
10.24
8.26
8.80
12.84
13.66
16.33
17.69
9.36
6.90
6.64
6.63
9.27
10.47
9.69
11.25
11.50
14.05
12.89
16.64
17.04
17.08
21.18
16.73

19.98
15.63
16.09
15.23
18.18
17.52
18.20

(8)
(8)
(8)

ft

1,374
976

1,032
968

1,249
1,798
1,826
1,980
2,445
3,436
4,030
3,984
3,576
4,537
4,461
4,415
5,602
5,494
7,202
5,464
5,426
5,457
5,491
5,408
4,938
4,876
5,073
5,156
5,165
5,285
5,494
5,595
5,717
5,754
5,978
6,229
6,420
6,511
6,660
6,971
7,180
7,298
7,202

m

ft

a

942
473
517
499
821

1,237
1,253
1,332
1,665
2,388
2,791
2,823
2,482
3,285
3,280
3,222
4,259
4,125
6,475
4,111
4,066
4,083
4,079
4,000
3,605
3,562
3,773
3,887
3,864
3,951
4,125
4,208
4,332
4,331
4,526
4,737
4,898
4,895
5,034
5,316
5,495
5,586
5,475

(8)
(8)
(8)
(8)

353
432
8 503
515
469
428
561
573
8 648
780
1,048
1,239
1,161
1,094
81,252
8 1,181
1,193
81,343
1,369
1,727
1,353
1,360
1,374
1,412
1,408
1,333
1,314
1,300
1,269
1,301
1,334
1,369
1,387
1,385
1,423
1,452
1,492
1,522
1,616
1,626
1,655
1,685
1,712
1,727

715
584
535
850

1,328
2,137
2,782
81,471
784

1,331
1,608
1,742
1,419
8 2,002
2,248
2,688
2,852
2,214
2,190
8 2,569
5 2,584
2,614
3,398
4,352
4,822
2,340
2,985
3,040
3,174
2,610
2,533
2,044
2,224
3,366
3,382
2,738
4,352
3,068
3,856
3,376
3,194
3,364
4,068
3,631
3,331
4,530
3,635
4,050
4,822

1
Includes 300 common stocks: manufacturing, 193; transportation, 18; utilities, 34; trade,finance,and service, 45; and mining, 10; averages of weekly figures.
2
Includes 500 common stocks, 425 are industrials; averages of daily figures.
3 Aggregate cash dividends (based on latest known annual rate) divided by the aggregate monthly market
value of the stocks in the group. Annual yields are averages of monthly data.
* Ratio of quarterly earnings (seasonally adjusted annual rate) to price index for last day in quarter.
Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data.
« As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes
net debit balances of all customers (other than general partners in the reporting firm and memberfirmsof
national exchanges) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U.S. Government
obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period.
6
Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying
securities except U.S. Government obligations. From 1953 through June 1959, loans for purchasing or
carrying U.S. Government securities were reported separately only by New York and Chicago banks.
Accordingly, for that period any loans for purchasing or carrying such securities at other reporting banks
are included. Series also revised beginning July 1946, March 1953, July 1958, and April 1961. Data are for
last Wednesday of period. For details, see Federal Reserve Bulletin, June 1961.
7
Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities, including U.S. Government obligations. Series revised beginning July 1946, January 1952, July 1958, July 1959, and April 1961.
Data are for last Wednesday of period. For details, see Federal Reserve Bulletin, June 1961.
8
Not available.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Standard & Poor's Corporation, Moody's Investors Service, and New York Stock Exchange.




288

TABLE C-70.—Business population and business failures, 1929-63

Year or month

Operating businesses and business
turnover (thousands of firms) *
DisOper- New conating busi- tinbusi- ness- ued
ness- es* businesses a
es'

3,029
2,994
2,916
2,828
2,782
2,884
2,992
3,070
3,136
3,074
3,222
3,319
3,276
3,295
3,030
2,839
2,995
3,242
3,651
3,873
3,984
4,009
4,067
4,118
4,188
4,240
4,287
4,381
4,471
4,533
4,583
4,658
4,713
4,755
4,797
1962: January.... 4,770
February..
March
ADril
4,780
May
June
4,790
July
August
September.
October.
~4~,8M~
November.
December.
1963: January._. 4,815
February..
March
April
May
June
_
July
4,886
August
September.
4~~850
OctoberNovember.
December.
1929..
1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934..
1935.
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.
1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.
1945.
1946.
1947.
1948..
1949..
1950.
1951.
1952..
1953.
1954..
1955.
1956.
1957..
1958..
1959..
I960..
1961.
1962..

Business failures > «
New
business
incorporations
(number)'

<•)

275
290
121
146
331
423
617
461
393
331
348
327
346
352
366
408
431
398
397
422
438
431
430

318
271
386
337
175
176
209 132,916
239 112,638
282 96,101
306 85,491
290 92,925
276 83,649
276 92,819
299 102,545
319 117,164
314 139,651
342 140,775
335 136,697
347 150,280
346 8193,067
384 182,713
389 181,535
387 182,057
•185,739
18,343
14,365
17,196
15,653
16,408
15,234
14,957
14,955
12,777
15,318
12,926
13,925
17,348
14,012
16,259
16,294
16,812
15,016
15,893
15,197
13,753
16,741
12,904
• 15,510

Amount of current
liabilities (millions
of dollars)
Liability size
class
Total
Under $100,000 Total Under $100,000
and
$100,000 over
and
$100,000 over
Number of failures

Business
failure
rate8
103.9
121.6
133.4
154.1
7 100.3
61.1
61.7
47.8
45.9
61.1
r
69.6
63.0
54.5
44.6
16.4
6.5
4.2
5.2
14.3
20.4
34.4
34.3
30.7
28.7
33.2
42.0
41.6
48.0
51.7
55.9
51.8
57.0
64.4
60.8
56.3
62.9
61.1
69.4
65.0
68.7
67.8
68.8
62.6
62.2
66.8
59.4
56.0
55.2
60.7
64-4
64.2
66.4
67.8
67.1
64.5
69.4
59.6
66.1
51.2

Liability size
class

22,909
26,355
28,285
31,822
719,859
12,091
12,244
9,607
9,490
12,836
14,768
13,619
11,848
9,405
3,221
1,222
809
1,129
3,474
5,250
9,246
9,162
8,058
7,611
8,862
11,086
10,969
12,686
13,739
14,964
14,053
15,445
17,075
15,782
14,374

22,165
25,408
27,230
30,197
718,880
11,421
11,691
9,285
9,203
12,553
714,541
13,400
11,685
9,282
3,155
1,176
759
1,002
3,103
4,853
8,708
8,746
7,626
7,081
8,075
10,226

1,447
1,353
1,490
1,504
1,378
1,281
1,165
1,319
1,118
1,410
1,216
1,101

198
148
169
158
183
171
123
210
148
203
157
142

1,258
1,304
1,296
1,287
1,303
1,211

1,249
1,205
1,321
1,346
1,195
1,110
1,042
1,109
970
1,207
1,059
959
1,001
1,109
1,107
1,116
1,062
1,042

1,155
1,135
1,051
1,262
1,115
998

984
982
905
1,056
970
858

171
153
146
206
145
140

10,113
11,615
12,547
13,499
12,707
13,650
15,006
13,772
12,192

744

483.3

261.5

221.8
364.8
382.2
495.7
7 242.0
195.4
175.1
100.4
81.4
106.4
7 132.9 7 49.7
119.9
46.8
100.7
35.4
80.3
20.5
30.2
15.1
14.5
17.1
11.4
18.8
15.7
51.6
63.7
140.9
93.9
140.7
161.4
146.7
97.1
151.2
128.0
131.6
151.4
131.9
226.6
167.5
251.2
211.4
206.4
243.0
239.8
322.9
267.1
348.2
297.6
430.7
278.9
413.9
611.4
327.2
720.0
370.1
867.1
346.5
321.0 1,031.6
30.1
76.5
30.4
60.1
32.5
48.3
31.0
90.8
29.9
61.6
27.7
60.8
64.4
27.1
118.9
27.9
69.3
26.9
88.8
30.3
27.5
71.3
25.3
56.0
135.4
25.5
65.2
29.6
28.8
71.7
29.5
71.3
28.0
90.3
27.6
58.5
94.7
25.8
38.3
26.9
62.0
23.9
64.3
27.5
237.5
24.6
45.3
23.1

947 668.3
303.5
1,055 736.3
354.2
1,625 928.3
432.6
7 979 7 457.5 7 215.5
334.0
138.5
670
553 310.6
135.5
322 203.2
102.8
287 183.3
101.9
283 246.5
140.1

7182.5
166.7
136.1
100.8
45.3
31.7
30.2
67.3
204.6
234.6
308.1
248.3
259.5
283.3
394.2
462.6
449.4
562.7
615.3
728.3
692.8
1,795
938.6
2,069 1,090.1
2, OK) 1,213.6
7 227
219
163
123
66
46
50
127
371
397
538
416
432
530
787
860
856
1,071
1,192
1,465
1,346

2,182

257
195
189
171
241

106.6
90.5
80.9
121.8
91.5
88.5
91.6
146.8
96.2
119.1
98.8
81.3
161.0
94.7
100.5
100.8
118.3
86.2
120.5
65.2
85.9
91.8
262.1
68.4

1
Excludes firms in the fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person
only if he has either an established place of business or at least one paid employee.
8
Data through 1939 are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June 30. Beginning 1940, data
are for beginning of period. Quarterly data shown here are seasonally adjusted.
* Total for period.
* Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and, beginning 1933,
of real estate, insurance, holding, and financial companies, steamship lines, travel agencies, etc.
* Failure rate per 10,000 listed enterprises. Monthly data are seasonally adjusted.
«Not available.
7
Series revised; not strictly comparable with earlier data.
8
Includes data for Hawaii beginning 1959 and Alaska beginning 1960. (Data for 1958 comparable to 1959
are 150,781; data for 1960 comparable to 1959 are 182,374.)
9
Preliminary.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet, Inc.




289

AGRICULTURE
TABLE C-71.—Income from agriculture, 1929-63
Income received from farming

Personal income
received by total
farm population
Year or
quarter

Net to farm
operators

Realized gross

ProducFrom
Cash tion exnonFrom From
receipts penses
farm 1 Total 2 from
farm
all
marketsources sources sources
ings

Exclud- Including net ing net
inven- inventory
tory
change change3

Billions of dollars

Net income per
farm, including
net inventory
change *
Current
prices

1963
prices«

Dollars

1929

13.9

11.3

7.6

6.3

6.1

943

1,813

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

11.4
8.4

9.1
6.4

6.9
5.5

4.5
2.9

650
506
305
382
434

1,354
1,234
847
1,032
1,059

5.4

3.2

2.2

7.1
8.5

5.3
6.4

4.3
4.7

2.8
3.9

4.3
3.3
2.0
2.6
2.9

7.7
7.2
9.0
7.2
7.4

5.4
4.6
6.3
4.7
4.8

2.3
2.6
2.7
2.4
2.6

9.7
10.7
11.3
10.1
10.6

7.1
8.4
8.9
7.7
7.9

5.1
5.6
6.1
5.8
6.2

4.6
5.1
5.2
4.3
4.4

5.3
4.3
6.0
4.4
4.5

778
643
911
675
697

1,898
1,568
2,119
1,646
1,742

1940
1941.
1942
1943
1944

7.6
10.1
14.0
16.3
16.5

4.9
6.9
10.2
12.2
12.3

2.7
3.2
3.8
4.1
4.2

11.0
13.8
18.8
23.4
24.4

8.4
11.1
15.6
19.6
20.5

6.7
7.7
9.9
11.5
12.2

4.3
6.2
8.8
11.9
12.2

4.6
6.6
9.9
11.8
11.8

720
1,044
1,600
1,942
1,967

1,800
2,428
3,200
3,468
3,334

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949.

17.1
20.1
21.0
23.5
19.0

12.9
15.7
16.0
18.1
13.5

4.2
4.4
5.0
5.4
5.6

25.8
29.7
34.4
34.9
31.8

21.7
24.8
29.6
30.2
27.8

12.9
14.5
17.0
18.9
18.0

12.8
15.2
17.3
16.1
13.8

12.4
15.3
15.5
17.8
12.9

2,080
2,574
2,648
3,065
2,259

3,355
3,785
3,310
3,606
2,755

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

20.4
22.8
22.3
20 0
19.0

14.3
16.5
15.7
13 8
13.2

6.0
6.3
6.6
6.3
5.8

32.5
37.3
37.0
35.3
33.9

28.5
33.0
32.6
31.1
30.0

19.3
22.2
22.6
21.4
21.7

13.2
15.2
14.4
13.9
12.2

14.0
16.3
15.3
13.3
12.7

2,479
3,009
2,951
2,664
2,645

2,987
3,343
3,243
2,960
2,939

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

18.3
18.6
18.8
20.5
19.0

12.2
12.0
12.2
13.8
11.8

6.1
6.6
6.6
6.7
7.1

33.3
34.6
34.4
37.9
37.5

29.6
30.6
29.8
33.4
33.5

21.9
22.6
23.4
25.3
26.2

11.5
12.0
11.0
12.6
11.3

11.8
11.6
11.8
13.5
11.4

2,529
2,574
2,695
3,201
2,775

2,810
2,798
2,837
3,334
2,861

1960
1961
1962
1963 «

19.6
20.1
20.5
19.8

12.3
13.0
13.4
13.0

7.2
7.0
7.1
6.8

37.9
39.6
40.8
41.1

34.0
34.9
35.9
36.2

26.2
27.1
28.2
28.8

11.7
12.5
12.6
12.3

12.0
12.8
13.3
12.8

3,044
3,359
3,602
3,575

3 138
3,428
3,638
3,575

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

.

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1962: I
II
III ____
IV

41.0
40.5
40.7
41.0

36.1
35.6
35.8
36.2

28.0
28.1
28.3
28.4

13.0
12.4
12.4
12.6

13.5
13.1
13.2
13.4

3,660
3,550
3,580
3,630

3,700
3 580
3,610
3,670

1963: 16
II«
III 6
IV« . . . .

41.3
40.6
41.1
41.4

36.4
35.6
36.1
36.7

28.6
28.6
28.9
29.1

12.7
12.0
12.2
12.3

13.5
12.6
12.7
12.6

3,770
3,520
3,550
3,520

3,770
3 520
3,550
3,520

i Includes all income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from
nonfarm employment, nonfarm business and professional income, rents from nonfarm real estate, dividends,
interest, royalties, unemployment compensation and social security payments.
3
Cash receipts from marketings, Government payments, and nonmoney income furnished by farms.
* Includes net change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at the average price for the year. Data
prior to 1946 differ from farm proprietors' income shown in Tables C-ll and C-14 because of revisions by
the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department
of Commerce.
< Estimates of number of farms revised from 1951 according to new 1959 Census of Agriculture definition.
* Income in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a
1963 base.
* Preliminary.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




290

TABLE C-72.—Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, and parity ratio, 7929-63
{1957-59=100]
Prices received by farmers
Crops
Year or month

All
farm
prodAll Food
ucts 1 crops grains

Feed grains
and hay
Feed
Total grains

Livestock and products

OilCot- To- bearton bacco ing
crops

All
liveDairy Poulstock Meat prod try
aniand
and
prod- mals ucts eggs
ucts 1

1929

61

61

55

74

77

57

35

62

62

50

65

102

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

52
36
27
29
37

52
34
26
32
44

44
27
21
31
43

67
46
31
36
60

68
44
28
36
60

40
24
19
26
39

29
20
18
22
32

48
32
19
25
45

52
38
28
27
32

43
30
20
19
22

55
43
33
34
40

81
62
51
47
56

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

45
47
51
40
39

46
49
53
36
37

46
51
57
35
34

68
65
79
45
46

70
68
84
45
44

38
38
36
27
28

35
33
41
36
31

55
52
56
42
42

44
46
49
43
41

38
38
42
37
36

45
49
51
45
43

74
73
70
69
61

42
51
66
080
• 82

41
48
65
84
89

40
46
57
70
78

54
58
72
96
108

54
58
73
97
109

32
43
60
64
66

28
32
51
66
72

45
60
80
88
97

42
53
66
77
76

35
46
60
66
62

47
55
63
677
•86

62
77
96
121
112

6

86
•98
114
119
103

91
102
118
114
100

81
95
128
118
103

106
127
161
162
112

104
131
171
170
109

69
91
105
104
94

74
78
77
78
82

100
114
158
153
106

82
94
111
122
106

«67 •89
• 81 •104
107 106
117 117
101
98

126
127
141
153
140

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

107
125
119
105
102

104
119
120
108
108

106
115
116
111
110

122
143
147
130
128

123
147
150
132
130

108
129
119
102
105

83
90
89
89
91

120
148
129
122
133

108
130
119
104
97

110
133
115
94
92

97
112
118
104
96

118
144
130
140
113

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

96
95
97
104
99

104
105
101
100
99

107
106*
106
98
96

116
115
105
97
98

116
116
105
97
98

104
103
101
97
102

90
93
96
100
104

109
111
106
98
96

90
88
94
106
100

80
76
89
109
102

96
99
101
99
100

121
112
102
108
90

I960
1961
1962
1963 7

98
99
101
100

99
102
103
107

96

95
95
97
103

93
94
95
101

97

103

100
104
103

109
109
102

93
112
109
113

98
98
99
95

96
97
101
94

11
0

101

99
107
106

101
98
98

92
92
92

1962: January ..
February...
March
April
May .
_
June

101
101
101
100
100
99

101
102
106
105
107
105

103
104
105
106
109
109

96
96
96
98
100
99

93
93
94
95
98
98

99
95
99
104
109
108

111
112
112
112
112
112

109
111
110
111
111
111

100
100
99
96
94
94

99
99
99
99
99
99

104
103
100
94
91
90

96
99
93
89
82
81

July
August
September. _
October
November. .
December

99
101
103
101
101
101

103
102
104
102
100
100

107
107
107
107
109
109

98
95
97
96
93
96

98
94
96
94
90
94

108
105
107
105
103
100

111
105
108
107
105
104

110
107
104
104
107
108

97
100
103
102
101
100

101
104
106
102
101
100

93
97
101
103
104
102

85
91
97
96
96
97

1963: January
February...
March
April
May
June
July
August
September. _
October
November..
December

101
100
99
100
99
100

103
104
107
109
110
109

109
110
110
113
110
102

99
101
101
101
102
106

96
98
98
99
101
106

97
96
103
106
105
106

101
103
103
103
103
103

110
113
113
111
113
113

100
97
94
93
91
93

100
95
91
94
93
95

101
100
97
94
91
90

96
99
98
91
85
84

101
100
100
100
100
98

107
105
104
105
108
108

97
97
101
105
106
107

106
106
108
102
100
103

107
104
106
99
96
99

103
104
106
106
105
101

103
102
103
102
100
101

112
111
111
115
118
116

97
97
97
96
94
91

100
98
95
93
88
84

93
97
101
104
106
104

87
89
94
92
95
91

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

- , .
_

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

—

.

See footnotes at end of table.




291

TABLE C-72.—Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, and parity ratio, 7929-63—

Continued
[1957-59=100]
Prices paid b y farmers

Year or month

All
Commodities and services
items
inProduction items
terest,
taxes,
FamAll
and
ily
All
Motor Farm Ferwage items living producmatirates
items tion Feed vehicles chin- lizer
1
(parity
ery
items
index)

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
. .
1943
1944
1945
1946 . .
1947....
1948
1949 .. . .
1950
1951
1952
1953 . .
1954...
1955
1956... .
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 7
1962: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
Auffust
September..
October
November..
December. _
1963: January
February
March.
April

May

SS2S

June
July
August
September..
October
November..
December

55
52
44
38
37
41
42
42
45
42
42
42
45
52
58
62
65
71
82
89
86
88
97
98
95
95
94
95
98
101
102
102
103
105
106
104
104
105
105
105
105
104
104
105
105
105
106
106
106
106
106
106
106
107
infi

55
51
44
38
38
43
45
45
48
45
44
45
48
55
61
64
66
72
85
92
88
90
100
100
96
96
95
96
98
101
101
101
101
103
104
102
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104*
104
104
104
104

54
50
43
37
38
43
43
43
45
43
42
42
45
52
58
61
64
71
83
88
85
86
94
95
94
94
94
96
99
100
101
101
102
103
104
102
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
104
104
104
104
104
104
105
104
104
104
104
104

56
52
43
38
38
44
46
46
60
47
46
47
50
57
63
66
67
73
85
95
91
94
104
104
97
97
96
95
98
101
101
101
101
103
103
102
102
103
103
103
102
102
102
103
103
103
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
103
103

68
61
43
32
37
52
53
55
62
47
47
50
54
66
78
87
86
100
118
125
103
105
118
126
114
113
106
103
101
99
100
97
98
100
104
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
99
100
100
100
102
103
104
104
103
102
103
104
104
105
104
103
105

36
35
35
34
34
36
37
38
39
42
40
40
42
45
47
51
53
55
63
71
78
78
83
87
86
86
87
89
96
100
104
102
101
106
108
105

43
43
42
40
39
40
41
42
43
44
43
43
43
46
48
49
49
51
58
67
76
78
83
86
87
87
87
91
96
100
104
107
110
111
114

106

110

105
106
105

85
83
75
66
61
69
68
64
67
67
66
64
64
71
76
77
79
79
88
96
98
94
100
102
103
102
102
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

111

100

105
105
108
108
109

112

100

112

109

113

109
109

114

100

114

100

108
108
108

~ Too

Interest*

120
116
111
104
92
83
76
70
66
62
60
57
55
53
47
44
42
42
43
44
46
50
55
61
66
71
76
84
92
99
109
120
130
145
161
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
155
155
155
155
155
155
155
170
170
170
170
170

Parity
W a g e ratio*
Taxes 3rates *

58
59
58
53
46
39
37
38
38
39
39
40
39
40
39
39
40
45
50
58
62
67
70
73
77
80
83
89
94
100
106
114
123
131
137
131
131
131
131
131
131
131
131
131
131
131
131
137
137
137
137
137
137
137
138
138
138
138
138

32
30
24
18
15
17
18
20
22
22
22
22
26
34
45
54
62
66
72
76
74
73
81
87
88
88
89
92
96
99
105
109
110
114
116
US
US
112
115
115
115
114
114
114
US
US
US
114
114
114
117
117
117
117
117
117
117
117
117

* Includes items not shown separately.
* Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt.
» Farm real estate taxes payable per acre flevied in preceding year).
* Monthly data are seasonally adjusted.
* Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index, on a 1910-14=100 base.
* Includes wartime subsidy payments.
* Preliminary.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




292

92
83
67
58
64
75
88
92
93
78
77
81
93
105
113
108
109
113
115
110
100
101
107
100
92
89
84
83
82
85
81
80
80
79
78
80
80
80
79
79
78
79
80
81
80
79
79
79
78
77
78
77
77
79
78
77
77
77
76

TABLE C-73.--Farm production indexes, 1929-63
[1957-59=100]
Crops
Year

Livestock and products

Farm
out-

Meat Dairy Poulput* Total 2 Feed H a y Food Vege- Fruits Cot- ToOil
and
and
anigrains forage grains tables nuts ton bacco crops Total' mals prod- and
ucts eggs

1929...

62

73

62

79

68

73

1930...
1931...
1932...
1933...
1934...

61
66
64
59
51

69
77
73
65
54

56
63
73
56
33

66
72
74
69
64

74
79
63
47
45

74
75
76
73
80

1935...
1936...
1937...
1938...
1939...

61
55
69
67
68

70
59
81
76
75

60
38
67
65
65

82
66
75
81
75

55
54
74
77
63

81
75
82
81
81

1940...
1941...
1942...
1943...
1944...

70
73
82
80
83

78
79
89
83
88

66
71
81
74
78

86
86
93
91
90

69
79
83
72
88

1945...
1946...
1947...
1948...
1949...

81
84
81
88
87

85
89
85
97
92

75
82
63
91
80

93
87
84
84
83

1950...
1951...
1952...
1953...
1954...

86
89
92
93
93

89
91
95
94
93

81
75
79
77
81

1955...
1956...
1957...
1958...
1959...

96
97
95
102
103

96
95
93
104
103

1960...
1961...
1962...
1963*..

106
107
108
112

108
107
107
112

75
73

120

88

13

63

62

75

44

71

113
138
105
105
78

95
89
58
80
63

14
14
13
11
13

64
65
66
67
61

63
66
67
70
59

76
78
79
79
78

45
44
44
44
41

90
70
93
84
96

86
101
154
97
96

76
68
91
80
110

21
16
18
22
29

59
63
62
65
70

53
60
58
63
71

78
79
79
81
82

41
44
44
45
48

83
84
89
97
92

93
99
98
84
98

102
88
105
93
100

84
73
81
81.
113

34
37
56
60
50

71
75
84
91
86

72
76
87
97
88

84
89
92
91
92

49
54
62
71
71

92
95
111
107
92

94
105
91
97
94

89
106
101
92
98

74
71
97
122
131

114
134
122
115
114

54
52
55
67
61

86
83
82
80
85

84
82
81
79
83

95
94
93
90
93

74
69
68
67
74

89
92
90
92
92

86
85
109
100
88

96
89
90
95
93

98
100
97
98
99

82
124
124
134
111

117
135
130
119
130

71
65
63
63
71

88
92
92
93
96

89
95
95
94
98

93
92
92
97
98

78
81
82
84
87

86
85
93
101
106

98
94
101
102
97

83
87
82
121
97

96
102
98
102
100

99
103
94
102
104

120
108
89
93
118

127
126
96
100
104

78
92
91
111
98

99
99
97
99
104

103
100
96
98
106

99
101
101
100
99

86
94
95
101
104

109
99
101
110

103
102
107
105

115
106
98
102

103
110
109
109

98
109
98
101

116
116
120
126

112
119
134
131

105
122
122
129

102
106
107
109

103
106
108
111

101
103
104
103

104
112
111
114

92
75
76

i Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through
sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules.
^'Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately.
> Includes certain items not shown separately.
* Preliminary.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




293

TABLE C—74.—Selected measures offarm resources and inputs, 1929—63
Crops
harvested
(millions
of acres)1
Year

Exclusive of
use for
Total feed for
horses
and
mules

Index numbers of inputs (1957-59=100)
Livestock
breeding
units
(195759=
100)2

Manhours
of
farm
work
(bilUons)

Total

Farm
labor

MeFeed,
chani- Ferti- seed,
Farm
cal
and
real
power Uzer
live- Misceland
stock laneous
estate' and
Ume
mapurchinery
chases4

1929

365

298

92

23.2

98

218

92

38

21

27

76

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

369
365
371
340
304

304
303
311
281
247

92
93
95
98
98

22.9
23.4
22.6
22.6
20.2

97
96
93
91
86

216
220
213
190

91
89
86
87
86

40
38
35
32
32

21
16
11
12
14

26
23
24
24
24

76
78
79
76
69

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

_

345
323
347
349
331

289
269
295
301
286

86
90
87
87
93

21.1
20.4
22.1
20.6
20.7

88
89
94
91
94

198
192
208
193
194

88
89
90
91
92

33
35
38
40
40

17
20
24
23
24

23
31
29
30
37

66
68
68
70
72

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

_
_
_.

341
344
348
357
362

298
304
309
320
326

95
94
104
117
114

20.5
20.0
20.6
20.3
20.2

97
97
100
101
101

192
188
194
191
190

92
92
91
89
88

42
44
48
50
51

28
30
34
38
43

45
46
57
63
64

73
74
75
76
76

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

354
352
355
356
360

322
323
329
332
338

109
107
104
98
99

18.8
18.1
17.2
16.8
16.2

99
99
99
100
101

177
170
162
158
152

88
91
92
95
95

54
58
64
72
80

45
53
56
57
61

72
69
73
72
69

76
77
78
74
82

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

345
344
349
348
346

326
326
334
335
335

102
103
103
100
104

15.1
15.2
14.5
14.0
13.3

101
104
103
103
102

142
143
136
131
125

97
98
99
99
100

86
92
96
97
98

68
73
80
83
88

72
80
81
80
82

85
88
88
91
91

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

340
324
324
324
324

330
315
316
317
318

106
104
101
99
100

12.8
12.0
11.1
10.5
10.3

102
101
99
99
102

120
113
104
99
97

100
99
100
100
100

99
99
100
99
101

90
91
94
97
109

86
91
93
101
106

94
98
95
100
105

324
304
295
300

319
300
291
296

97
98
99
101

9.8
9.5
9.1
8.9

101
101
101
102

92
89
85
83

100
100
100
101

100
99
96
99

110
114
123
132

109
116
120
124

106
109
111
115

1960
19611962 »
1963 8

-

1 Acreage harvested (excluding duplication) plus acreages in fruits, tree nuts, and farm gardens.
2 Animal units of breeding livestock, excluding horses and mules.
3 Includes buildings and improvements on land.
* Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers' purchases.
* Preliminary.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




294

TABLE G-75.—Farm population, employment, and productivity, 1929-63
Farm population
(April 1) 1

Year

Farm employment
(thousands)»

Farm output

LiveCrop stock
proproduc- duction
As perPer
tion
per
Per man-hour
Num- cent of
per
breedber
Family Hired unit
total
acre 4
ing
Total workers workers of
(thou- popuLivetotal
unit
sands) lation 3
input Total Crops stock
Index, 1957-59=100

1929.

30,580

25.1

12,763

9,360

3,403

63

28

28

48

69

68

1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934.

30,529
30,845
31,388
32,393
32,305

24.8
24.8
25.1
25.8
25.6

12,497
12,745
12,816
12,739
12,627

9,307
9,642
9,922
9,874
9,765

3,190
3,103
2,894
2,865
2.. 862

63
69
69
65
59

28
30
30
28
27

27
30
30
27
27

47
47
47
46
43

64
72
68
61
51

70
70
62

1935.
1936..
1937..
1938.
1939.

32,161
31,737
31,266
30,980
30,840

25.3
24.8
24.3
23.9
23.6

12,733
12,331
11.978
11,622
11,338

9,855
9,350
9,054
8,815
8,611

2,878
2,981
2,924
2,807
2,727

69
62
73
74
72

31
29
33
35
35

31
28
33
35
34

44
46
46
48
50

66
56
76
73
74

70
71
75
75

1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..

30,547
30,118
28,914
26,186
24,815

23.1
22.6
21.4
19.2
17.9

10.979
10,669
10,504
10,446
10,219

8,300
8,017
7,949
8,010
7,988

2,679
2,652
2,555
2,436
2,231

72
75
82
79
82

36
39
42
42
44

37
39
43
41
44

50
51
56
58
56

76
77
86
78
83

75
80
81
78
75

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..

24,420
25,403
25,829
24,383
24,194

17.5
18.0
17.9
16.6
16.2

10,000
10,295
10,382
10,363

7,881
8,106
8,115
8,026
7,712

2,119
2,189
2,267
2,337
2,252

82
85
82
88
86

46
49
50
56
57

46
50
50
57
57

58
59
61
62
66

82
86
82
92
85

79
78
79
82

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..

23,048
21,890
21,748
19,874
19,019

15.2
14.2
13.8
12.4
11.7

9,926
9,546
9,149
8,864
8,651

7,597
7,310
7,005
6,775
6,570

2,329
2,236
2,144
2,089
2,081

85
86
89
90
91

61
62
68
71
74

63
61
67
69
73

68
72
74
76
80

84
85
90
89
88

92

1955...
1956...
1957...
1958...
1959...

19,078
18,712
17,656
17,128
16,592

11.5
11.1
10.3
9.8
9.4

8,381
7,852
7,600
7,503
7,342

6,345
5,900
5,660
5,521
5,390

2,036
1,952
1,940
1,982
1,952

94
96
96
103
101

80
86
91
103
106

77
83
90
105
105

85
89
92
100
108

91
92
93
105
102

93
95
96
100
104

I960..
196L-.
1962 5.
1963 «_.

15,635
14,803
14,313
13,400

8.7
8.1
7.7
7.1

7,057
6,919
6.700

5,172
5,029
4,873
4,809

1,885
1,890
1,827
1,871

105
106
107
110

115
120
127
135

114
119
124
132

113
120
127
133

109
113
116
119

105
108
108
108

1
Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce, i.e., civilian
population living on farms, regardless of occupation.
3
Total population of United States as of July 1 includes armed forces abroad and Alaska and Hawaii
after they achieved statehood.
3
Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data, published by the Department of Agriculture, Statistical Reporting Service, differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department
of Labor (see Table C-19) because of differences in the method of approach, in concepts of employment,
and in time of month for which the data are collected. For further explanation, see monthly report on
Farm Labor, September 10, 1958.
* Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year.
»Preliminary.
Sources: Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce.

295
715-113 O-64-20




TABLE C-76.—Comparative balance sheet of agriculture, 1929-64
[Billions of dollars]
Claims

Assets
Other physical assets
Beginning
of year

HouseMahold
Real
chinfurTotal estate
ery
Live- and Crops nishings
stock motor
and
vehiequipcles
ment *

Financial assets
ProReal
DeposInvest- Total estate Other prietors'
its
U.S.
ment
debt debt equiand savings in coties
cur- bonds operatives
rency

1929..

CO

48.0

6.6

3.2

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

68.5

47.9
43.7
37.2
30.8
32.2

6.5
4.9
3.6
3.0
3.2

3.4
3.3
3.0
2.5
2.2

33.3
34.3
35.2
35.2
34.1

3.5
5.2
5.1
5.0
5.1

2.2
2.4
2.6
3.0
3.2

7.6
7.4
7.2
7.0
6.8

33.6
34.4
37.5
41.6
48.2

5.1
5.3
7.1
9.6
9.7

3.1
3.3
4.0
4.9
5.3

6.6
6.5
6.4
6.0
5.4

6.3
5.2
5.1
7.0
9.4

94.0
103.3
116.2
127.5
134.2

4.9
4.8
4.9
5.1
5.3
5.6
6.1
6.7
7.2
7.7

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939..

9.8
0.6

68.5

9.6
9.4
9.1
8.5
7.7

1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..

53.0
55.0
62.9
73.7
84.5

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..

94.0
103.3
116.2
127.5
134.2

53.9 9.0
61.0 9.7
68.5 11.9
73.7 13.3
76.6 14.4

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..

131.6
150.4
165.5
162.5
159.1

75.3
86.6
95.1
96.5
95.0

12.9
17.1
19.5
14.8
11.7

11.3
13.0
15.2
15.6
16.3

131.6
150.4
165.5
162.5
159.1

1955..
1956..
1957..
1958..
1959..

162.7
166.8
174.7
182.5
198.7

98.2
102.9
110.4
115.4
124.4

11.2
10.6
11.0
13.9
17.7

16.2
16.5
17.1
17.0
18.5

162.7 8.2
166.8 9.0
174.7 9.8
182.5 10.4
198.7 11.1

I960..
1961..
1962..
19631964*.

199.5
199.6
208.0
216.5
226.2

129.9
131.4
137.4
143.6
152.0

15.6
15.5
16.4
17.2

18.6
18.2
18.6
19.3
(»)

199.5
199.6
208.0
216.5
226.2

3.4

12.1
12.8
13.9
15.2
16.7

i Includes all crops held on farms for whatever purpose and crops held off forms as security for Commodity
Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January 1,1963, totaled $1,129 million.
* Revised to reflect farm population estimates based on definition of a farm in 1959 Census of Agriculture.
For further details of revision, see Agricultural Information Bulletin No. 270.
3 Not available.
* Preliminary.
Source : Department of Agriculture.




296

INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS
TABLE C-77.—United States balance of payments, 1947-63
[Millions of dollars]
Exports of goods and service

ear or quarter

Imports of goods and services

Income on
investments

Total
Merchandise i

Military
sales

S7
()
(7)
8
192

1947..
1948..
1949..

19,737
16,789
15,770

16,015
13,193
12,149

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..

13,807
18,744
17,992
16,947
17,759

10,117
14,123
13,319
12,281
12,799

1955..
1956..
1957..
1958..
1959..

19,804
23,595
26,481
23,067
23,476

14,280
17,379
19,390
16, 264
16,282

I960..
1961..
1962..
1963«.

26,974
28,311
29,790
31,106

19,459
19,913
20,479
21,357

Pri- Governvate ment

Balance
on
goods
.iMiiiand
MerOther
tary
servchanservices
dise i expend- ices
itures
TV/TiH

Other
services

Total

1,036
1,238
1,297

66
102
98

2,620
2,256
2,226

8,208
10,349
9,621

5,979
7,563
6,879

455
799
621

1,774
1,987
2,121

11,529
6,440
6,149

182

1,484
1,684
1,624
1,658
1,955

109
198
204
252
272

2,097
2,739
2,845
2,564
2,551

12.028
15,073
15,766
16,561
15,931

9,108
11,202
10,838
10,990
10,354

576
1,270
2,054
2,615
2,642

2,344
2,601
2,874
2,956
2,935

1,779
3,671
2,226
386
1,828

200
161
375
300
302

2,170
2,468
2,612
2,538
2,694

274
194
205
307
349

2,880
3,393
3,899
3,658
3,849

17,795
19,628
20,752
20,861
23,342

11,527
12,804
13,291
12,952
15,310

2,901
2,949
3,216
3,435
3,107

3,367
3,875
4,245
4,474
4,925

2,009
3,967
5,729
2,206
134

335
402
660
747

2,873
3,464
3,850
4,040

349
380
472
499

3,958
4,152
4,329
4,463

23,205
22,867
24,964
25,831

14,723
14,497
16,145
16,768

3,048
2,934
3,028
2,907

5,434
5,436
5,791
6,156

3,769
5,444
4,826
5,275

Seasonally adjusted annual ratPS
1961: I
II-..
III...
IV...

28,352
27,372
28,428
29,092

20,200
19,020
19,948
20,484

352
448
408
400

3,432
3,324
3,616
3,484

380
480
280
380

3,988
4,100
4,176
4,344

21,908
22,024
23,484
24,052

13,544
13,616
15,304
15,524

3,092
3,056
2,720
2,868

5,272
5,352
5,460
5,660

6,444
5,348
4,944
5,040

1962:1
II....
III...
IV...

28,824
30,440
30,200
29,696

20,088
21,048
21,080
19,700

452
760
564
864

3,616
3,760
3,784
4,240

436
576
420
456

4,232
4,296
4,352
4,436

24,476
24,888
25,128
25,364

15,768
16,120
16,508
16,184

3,016
2,992
2,928
3,176

5,692
6,776
5,692
6,004

4,348
5,552
5,072
4,332

1963: I . . . .
II....
I l l io.

29,788
31,564
31,964

19,992
21,924
22,156

724
812
704

4,252
3,856
4,012

496
500
500

4,324
4,472
4,592

25,028
25,740
26,724

16,008
16,680
17,616

2,992
2,900
2,828

6,028
6,160
6,280

4,760
5,824
5,240

See footnotes at end of table.




29 7

TABLE C-77.—United States balance of payments,

7947-63^Continucd

[Millions of dollars]
Government
grants and
capital

Over-all balance (surplus or
deficit ( - ) )

U.S. private capital,
net

RemitFor- Unreeign corded
Year or tances Grants Recapi- transpayLongand
quarter and
pen- capi- ments Direct term Short- t a ] ' actions Total* Total
on invest- port- term
tal
sions
out- U.S. ments folio
flow loans

1947
1948
1949

-715 -6,415
-617 -5,361
-630 -5,854

294
443
205

-749
-721
-660

-49
-69
-80

-189
-116
187

-75
-173
83

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

-523
-457
-545
-617
-615

-3,935
-3,496
-2,809
-2,542
-2,061

295
305
429
487
507

-621
-508
-852
-735
-667

-495
-437
-214
185
-320

-149
-103
-94
167
-635

90
243
212
178
240

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

-585
-665
-702
-722
-791

-2,627
-2,841
-3,233
-3,131
-3,040

416 -823 -241
479 -1,951 -603
659 -2,442 -859
544 -1,181 -1,444
1,054 -1,372 -926

-191
-517
-276
-311
-77

394
653
487
22
863

1960
1961
1962
1963 8...

-672
-705
-736
-819

-3,405
-4,056
-4,281
-4,503

636 -1,694 -850 -1,348
1,274 -1,598 -1,011 -1,541
1,283 -1,557 -1,209 -507
1,048 -1,687 -1,889 -677

2,850
1,530
164

1, 717
-525
11

-3,580 -1,743
-305
53
-1,046
379
-2,152 -1,161
-1,550 -298

- 1 , 837
—358
-1,425
-991
-1,252

-41
503 -1,145 -1,145
543 -935 -935
306
1,157
520
520
798
488 -3,529 -3,529 -2,275
412 -3,743 -3,743 -731

- 1 , 104
-1,241
-278
- 1 . 254
- 3 ; 012

936
1,179
775

4,567
1,005
175

- 2 1 -3,580
477 -305
601 -1,046
339 -2,152
173 -1,550

366 -683
728 -905
1,020 -1,025
524 -419

II
III
IV..1962:
II
III
IV....
1963:
II

iri«.I

4,567
1,005
175

-3,881 -3,881 -1,702 -1,890 -289
-2,370 -2,370 -741 -546 -1,083
-2,186 -2,186 -907 -1,079 -200
-3,147
(9)
00
09
C
O
Quarterly totals, unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1961:

Liquidliabilities*
Gold
and
conTo
vert- mone- To
ible
tary other
cur- author- forities
eign
rencies and in- holdstitu- ers*
tions'

-748
-684
-692
-696

-3,940
-3,424
-4,116
-4,744

512 -1,832 -376 -1,888
3,404 -1,376 -876 -1,756
396 -1,596 -936 -844
784 -1,588 -1,856 -1,676

-331
848 -908 -1,888
73
1,048 -1,560
124
-912
164
60 -2,620
852 -1,212 -5,096 -1,200

-346
331
-270
-456

-69
307
-417
-367

84
-565
-225
-377

-764
-728
-704
-748

-4,300
-4,312
-4,180
-4,332

620 -796 -1,428 -1,220
948 -2,024 -1,316
4
2,404 -1,436 -752 -656
1,160 -1,972 -1,340 -156

1,308 -108
216 -148
704 -1,876
1,852 -1,968

-472
-323
-693
-698

-189
207
-550
-375

416
-506
-601
-388

-699
-24
458
65

-848 -4,232
-836 -5,368
-772 -3,908

704 -2,004 -2,048
348
760 -1,952 -2,464 -2,492
1,680 -1,104 -1,156
112

348 -488 -3,460 -689
1,004
568 -4,956 -1,173
220 -1,336 -1,024 -593

-78
-122
-167

-217
-909
-382

-394
-142
-44

1
3

-2,340
-1,808
-1,424
-3,172

Adjusted from customs data for differences in timing and coverage.
Other than liquid funds.
* Equals changes in U.S. gold and convertible currencies and liquid liabilities to foreigners.
* Minus indicates increase in liabilities.
« To International Monetary Fund (IMF) and foreign central banks and governments.
• To foreign commercial banks and other international and regional institutions not listed in footnote 6
and to other foreigners.
7
Not reported separately.
8
Average of the first three quarters based on seasonally adjusted annual rates.
• Not available.
10
Preliminary.
NOTE.—Data exclude military aid and U.S. subscriptions to IMF.
Source: Department of Commerce.




TABLE

G-78.

Major

U.S. Government foreign assistance, by type and by area, total postwar
period and fiscal years 7959-63
[Fiscal years, billions of dollars]

Fiscal year

Total, net
Total postwar *
1959
I960
1961
1962
1963

Total

94.7
6.0
4.2
4.0
5.2
4.9

Western
Europe
(excluding
Greece
and
Turkey)

Near East
(including
Greece
and
Turkey)
and South
Asia

39.6
.7
.4
-.1
.4
-.1

Investment in five international financial institutions *
Total postwar 1
1959
I960
1961
1962
1963

89.5
4.7
4.1
3.9
5.1
4.8

39.6
.7
.4
-.1
.4

Net grants of military supplies
and services
Total postwar * _ _
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963

32.1
22
2.0
1.7
1 6
1.7

Other aid, net
Total postwar *
1959
I960
1961
1962
1963

16.3
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
2.1

1.5
.1
.2
.2
.4
.3

International orFar East American ganizaand
Repub- tions and
Pacific
lics
unspecified areas

23.0
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

9.1
1.6
.3
.4
.4
.4

5.1
.6
.3
.4
1.0
.7

5.2
1.4
.1
.1
.2
.1

Under assistance programs, net
Total postwar *
1959
I960
1961
1962
1963

Other
Africa

5.2
1.4
.1
.1
.2
.1
16.3
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.6
2.1

1.5
.1
.2
.2
.4
.3

23.0
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5

S.I
.6
.3
.4
1.0
.7

15.5
7
.8
.6
3
.5

5.2
.5
.4
.3
.3
.4

.1

10.1
g
.7
.7
.8
.7

.8
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1

57.4
2.4
2.1
2.2
3.4
3.0

24.1

11.1
.9
1.1
1.3
1.3
1.6

1.4
.1
.2
.2
.3
.3

12.9
.7
.7
.8
.7
.8

4.3
.6
.2
.3
.9
.6

3.6
.2
.2
.3
.2
.3

Net grants (less conversions)
Total postwar *
1959
1960
1961
1962...
1963 _ _

39.1
1.6
1.6
1 8
1.9
1.4

17.2
.1
.2
1

6.1
.5
.4
.6
.7
.6

.9
.1
.1
2
.3
.3

11.0
.7
.7
.7
.6
.1

1.2
.1
.1
.1
.1
.2

2.7
.1
.1
.2
.2
.2

Net credits (including conversions)
Total postwar *
1959...
1960
1961.
1962
1963

15.0
.7
.1

.4

1.6
.1
.1
.1
.6

2.8
.5
.1
.2
.6
.4

.4

.3

Other assistance (through net
accumulation of foreign currency claims) *
Total postwar *
_.
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963

1.4
1.4

3.3
.2
.4
.4
.2
.2

_

•%

—!6

(3)
6.4
—.1
— 4
—.7
—.1
-.7

3.4
.2
.3
.4
.6
1.0

.5

1.6
.2
.3
.3

—.1

1

(3)
.1
.1

.1
3)
3
(3)
)
(3)
(3)
(3)

.1
.1

.1
.1

3.9
.2
.2
.3
.2
.3
.4
(3)
3

( )
(3)
(3)

.4
3
(3)
(3)
()

.1

.4
.1
.1
.1
.1

1
Fiscal years 1946-63.
2
Inter-American Development Bank, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Development Association, International Finance Corporation, and International Monetary
Fund.
* Less than $50 million.
* Other assistance (net) represents the transfer of United States farm products in exchange for foreign
currencies, less the U.S. Government's disbursements of the currencies as grants, credits, or for purchases.
Also includes the foreign currency claims acquired by the Government as principal and interest collections;
since enactment of Public Law 87-128, they are available for the same purpose as farm sales proceeds.
Source: Department of Commerce.




299

TABLE C-79.—United States merchandise exports and imports, by economic category,
1949 and 1958-63
[Millions of dollars]

Category

1949

1958

1959

1960

1961

1962

January-June
1962
Domestic exports: Total».

1963

11,789

16,202

16,211

19,401

19,907

20,632

10,560

10,707

Agricultural
NonagriculturaL

3,578
8,211

3,854
12,348

3,955
12,256

4,831
14,570

5,024
14,883

5,031
15,601

2,572
7,988

8,084

Food and beverages
Agricultural foodstuffs
Nonagricultural foodstuffs..

2,302
2,254
48

2,549
2,511

2,796
2,751
45

3,103
3,060
43

3,346
3,308

3,692
3,652
40

1,921
1,903

1,973
1,951
22

Industrial supplies and materials
Cotton, tobacco, and other agricultural
Nonagricultural industrial materials
....

4,870

6,404

6,110

7,802

7,572

7,000

Materials used in fanning.
Capital equipment
Machinery and related items
Commercial transportation
equipment
Special category equipment 9
Consumer goods, nonfood

18
3,473

1,273

1,262

1,088

1,654

1,593

1,198

3,597

5,142

5,022

6,148

5,979

5,802

167

263

300

331

346

447

3,378
2,296
918
164

5,328
3,667

3,706

6,392
4,141

6,716
4,530

7,405
4,921

234
3,829
2,519

3,797
2,581

1,423
238

1,369
288

1,792
459

1,539
647

1,571
913

854
456

787
429

913

1,271

1,274

1,327

1,357

1,380

710

723

Government military sales and unclassified

387

588
2,885

554
3,039
235

368

446

570

708

General imports: Total *.

6,638

13,255

15,627

15,017

14,713

16,396

8,105

8,248

Industrial supplies and materials»
Petroleum and products
Newsprint and paper base stocks.
Materials associated with nondurable goods output
Selected building materials (excluding metals)
All other industrial supplies and
materials • (associated mainly
with durable goods output)

3,743
485
670

7,007
1,610

8,441
1,536
1,089

7,956
1,548
1,098

7,681
1,682
1,093

8,456
1,814
1,144

4,284
913
563

4,246
942
533

1,556

1,489

1,451

1,613

857

867

603

541

617

299

1,454

2,813

3,657

3,280

2,917

3,268

1,652

1,598

Food and beverages

2,004

3,354

3,364

3,209

3,253

3,520

1,685

1,708

Materials used in farming.

286

366

366

353

395

418

228

267

Consumer goods, nonfood.

410

1,710

2,424

2,459

2,200

2,707

1,243

1,322

Capital equipment (including agricultural machinery)

107

481

618

602

720

843

443

458

88

370

414

438

464

452

222

247

All other and unclassified..

991
143

988
1,161
435

i Excludes military aid shipments of supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program,
1957-63; hi 1949, excludes military shipments under the Greek-Turkey and the China military aid programs.
Also excludes uranium exports prior to 1961 (about $10 million a year).
3
Excludes Government military cash sales.
3
Adjusted to include imports of uranium ores and concentrates.
« Total adjusted to exclude $33 million of the value reported by economic category.
Source: Department of Commerce.




3OO

TABLE C-80.—United States merchandise exports and imports, by area, 1949 and 1958-63l
[Millions of dollars]
January-October
Area

1949

1958

1959

1960

1961

1962
1962

Exports (including reexports):
Total K
Canada
Other Western HemisphereWestern Europe
Soviet bloc *
Other Europe
Asia
_._
Australia and Oceania
Africa
General imports: Total
Canada
_
Other Western HemisphereWestern Europe
Soviet bloc'
Other Europe
Asia
Australia and Oceania
Africa
Unidentified countries 5

1963

11,560

15,925

15,925

18,892

19,143

19,474

16,061

17,088

1,928
2,820
3,980
62
3
1,997
175
594

3,439
4,334
4,514
113
5
2,658
245
618

3,748
3,777
4,535
89
7
2,756
323

3,709
3,770

6,318
194
13
3,646
475
766

3,643
3,720
6,287
133
15
4,111
403
831

3,830
3,560
6,371
125
16
4,124

3,206
2,939
5,243
114
14
3,351
391

3,398
2,896
5,593
121
9
3,854
415
801

15,017

14,713

16,396

13,578

14,211

3,153
3,964
4,185
81
2
2,721
266
627
19

3,270
3,725
4,058
81
2
2,582
320
672
4

3,657
3,926
4,542
79
2
2,965
440
758
25

3,022
3,269
3,745
68
2
2,466
353
631
22

3,166
3,351
3,867
69
2
2,679
427
644
5

6,638 * 13,255 15,627
1,558
2,444
909
67
4
1,184
125
338

2,965

4,049
3,297
63
5
1,997
209
668
34

3,352
4,029
4,523
81
4
2,603
338
679
20

1 Data for all periods have been adjusted to include imports of uranium ore and exports of uranium and
other nuclear materials. Imports from Canada and the Republic of South Africa have been adjusted for
all periods for such imports. Data on imports of uranium ore from other countries are not available prior
to 21961.
Excludes special category items.
3
U.S.S.R., Poland, Bulgaria, Rumania, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Albania, Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania.
4
Total adjusted to exclude $33 million of the value reported by area.
6
Consists of certain low-valued shipments and uranium and thorium imports, not identifiable by country.
Source: Department of Commerce.




3oi

TABLE C-81.—Gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international organizations.
1949, 1953, and 1958-63
[Millions of dollars; end of period]
1963
Area and country

1953

1958

1959

26,935

36,601

42,245

46,297 249,528

52,508

54,795

6,098
92
818
733
149
570
370

9,920
249
915
1,204
1,224
821
981

17,244
612
1,391
1,294
4,407
2,209
1,399

19,248
630
1,279
1,980
4,640
3,119
1,634

21,059
539
X,314
2,165
6,450
3,080
1,783

23,797
561
1,582
3,114
6,509
3,459
1,800

25,058
783
1,539
3,747
6,412
3,627
1,830

26,247
905
1,667
4,500
6,637
3,541
1,911

394

710
169
2,174

1,121
96
2,853
1,862

1,113
157
2,991

942
328
2,957
1,501

1,193
470
3,518

1,256
624
3,658

1,326
752
3,409

1949

Total..
Continental Western Europe
Austria
Belgium
France
Germany
Italy
Netherlands
Scandinavian countries
(Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and Finland)
Spain
Switzerland
Other
United KingdomCanada
Latin AmericaArgentina-.
Brazil
Chile
ColombiaCuba
Mexico
Peru
Uruguay.. Venezuela..
Other
Asia..
Japan.
OtherAll other countries
International and regional..

132
2,067
773

1,473

2,027

3,241

1,516
3,072
412
510
101
138
463
270
82
236
517
343

2,509
3,679
504
425
122
236
570
345
104
333
597
438

2,008
356

2,865
953

1,652

1,912

679

1,105

3,875
3,438

1,705
3,827

1960

4,887
3,770

4,123
210
464
140
241
452
565
96
262
1,215
478

3,610
4,014
393
479
228
288
296
587
111
242
932
458

3,251
1,095
2,156

4,008
1,566
2,442

4,446
2,169
2,277

1,199

1,313

1,251

3,371

6,225

7,351

3,533
420
483
180
237
79
541
114
232
800
447

1961

1962

1,591

1,582

1,599

4,930

4,561

4,565

4,163
3,556
426
514
153
236
44
612
132
238
820
381

4,446
3,411
272
430
178
206
16
630
152
282
807
438

4,578
3,876
454
361
176
217
14
764
198
264
934
494

* 4,385
3 1,979

5,005
2,502
2,503

5,355
2,692
2,663

2,406
1,436

1,764

1,919

8,263

8,255

3,616
3,268
7,261
Preliminary.
* Total dollar holdings include $82 million reported by banks initially included as of December 31, 1961, of
which $81 million reported for Japan.
NOTE.—Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries (with the exception of gold
reserves of U.S.S.R., other Eastern European countries, and Communist China), and of international
and regional organizations (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Monetary Fund, Inter-American Development Bank, European Investment Bank and others). Holdings of
the Bank for International Settlements and the European Payments Union/European Fund and the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold are included under "other" Continental Western
Europe.
1

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System;




302

TABLE G—82.— United States gold stock and holdings of convertible foreign currencies by U.S.
monetary authorities, 1949-63
[Millions of dollars]

End of year or month

Gold stock i
Total
Total 2

Treasury

Foreign
currency
holdings

1949

24,563

24,563

24,427

1950
1951
1952._.
1953
_.
1954

22,820
22,873
23,252
22,091
21,793

22,820
22,873
23,252
22,091
21,793

22,706
22,695
23,187
22,030
21,713

21,753
22,058
22,857
20,582
19,507

21,753
22,058
22,857
20,582
19,507

21,690
21,949
22,781
20,534
19,456

___.

17,804
17,063
16,156
15,808

17,804
16,947
16,057
15,596

17,767
16,889
15,978
15,513

116
99
212

1962: January
February...
March
April..
May
June

16,963
16,948
16,873
16,762
16,718
17,081

16,847
16,795
16,643
16,519
16,458
16,527

16,815
16,790
16,608
16,495
16,434
16,435

116
153
230
243
260
554

July
August
September.
October
November..
December..

16,678
16,562
16, 531
16,364
16,216
16,156

16,182
16,139
16,081
16,026
16,014
16,057

496
423
450
338
202
99

1963: January
February. __
March
April
May
June
_.

16,102
16, 023
16,078
16,046
16,009
15,956

15,974
15,891
15,946
15,914
15, 854
15,830

16,147
16,098
16, 067
15,978
15.977
15.978
15,928
15,878
15,878
15,877
15, 797
15,733

July
August
September.
October
NovemberDecember 3.

15,764
15, 725
15, 788
15,910
15, 780
15,808

15, 677
15.633
15.634
15,640
15,609
15,596

15,633
15, 582
15, 582
15, 583
15, 582
15, 513

87
92
154
270
171
212

_._.

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963 3

_...

128
132
132
132
155
126

1 Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund with the right of repurchase which amounted to $800 million on December 31,1963.
2
Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund.
3
Preliminary.
Sources: Treasury Department and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




303

TABLE C-83.—Price changes in international trade, 1955-63
[1958=100]
1963
1956

1957

1958

1959

1960

1961

1962

Developed areas:
Exports
Terms of trade *..

100
97

103
96

100
100

102

100
103

101
104

101
105

101
105

United States:
Exports
Terms of trade *

97

101
96

100
100

101
102

101
101

104
105

104
108

103
106

97

98
95

95
98

Area or commodity class

1955

Third
quarter

Area:

Undeveloped areas:
Exports
Terms of trade i . .

105
108

104
104

104
100

100
100

Latin America:
Exports
Terms of trade»

111
115

111
111

107
105

100
100

116
120

115
116

111
109

100
100

94
133

138

101
111

100
100

111

Latin America excluding petroleum:
Exports
Terms of trade »

2 93
*97

93

91

95

2 92
2 96

103
109

102
110

95

Commodity class:»
Manufactured goods
Nonferrous base metals.

101
114

102
110
95

Primary commodities: Total

104

105

106

100

97

97

Foodstuffs
Coffee, tea, cocoaCereals

102
109
105

101
106
102

103
103
100

100
100
100

97

91
77
96

Other agricultural commodities.
Fats, oils, oilseeds
Textiles
Wool

115
101
125
125

114
109
123
129

113
105
126
144

100
100
100
100

105
100
98
106

107
94
104
108

103
97
105
107

95

99
105

103
107

100
100

94
97

93

92
100

Minerals
Metal ores..

94

99

90
70
103

102
72
101

101
106

101
95
112
126

1
2

92
95

Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports.
Data are for second quarter.
1 Commodity price indexes relate to exports.
Nora.—-Data shown for area groups and for manufactured goods are unit value indexes. All others
are price indexes.
/
Data exclude trade of Soviet area and Communist China.
Source: United Nations.

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C., 20402 - Price $1.25




304

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1964













