


Economic Report
of the President

Transmitted to the Congress
January 1980
TOGETHER WITH

THE ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 1980

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C. 20402




Stock Number 040-000-00407-6.




CONTENTS
Page

ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT

3

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC
ADVISERS*.

17

CHAPTER 1. THE ECONOMY IN 1979

25

CHAPTER 2. THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

66

CHAPTER

3.

LONGER-TERM

POLICIES

FOR

STABILITY

AND

GROWTH
.,...,....
„.
CHAPTER 4. THE WORLD ECONOMY—TESTING RESILIENCE

156

APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF
THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING 1979

185

APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME, EMPLOYMENT, AND PRODUCTION

197

*For a detailed table of contents of the Council's Report, see page




(Ill)

21.

98







ECONOMIC REPORT
OF THE PRESIDENT




ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
To the Congress of the United States:

Last year world oil prices more than doubled. This increase will
add some $200 billion to the bill for imported oil paid by consuming
nations. Higher oil prices were the major reason for the worldwide
speedup in inflation during 1979 and the dimming of growth prospects for 1980.
The United States was severely affected, as were other oil-importing countries. Our share of the additional oil bill will come to almost
$45 billion this year. Partly, but not solely, because of higher oil
prices, inflation accelerated sharply. The consumer price index rose
by over 13 percent. The Nation's output of goods and services, which
had been predicted in last year's Economic Report to grow by 2V4 percent over the 4 quarters of 1979, rose by less than 1 percent.
Although growth slowed, our economy offered strong resistance to
the forces of recession. Despite virtually universal forecasts of imminent recession, output continued to rise throughout the second half
of last year. Housing sales and construction held up better than expected until late in the year. By reducing their savings, consumers
maintained spending in the face of the multibillion dollar drain of
purchasing power from higher oil prices. Because business inventories have been kept remarkably lean, declines in sales did not lead
to major inventory corrections. More generally, the economic recovery of recent years has been free of the distortions which, in the past,
made the economy sensitive to recessionary forces.
Employment growth held up even better than output, and unemployment remained under 6 percent all year. Unfortunately, the
strength of employment gains reflected a sharp decline in productivity—2 percent over the year. This fall in productivity added to costs,
and thus bore a share of the responsibility for higher inflation.
While inflation worsened in 1979, a large part of the acceleration
was concentrated in a few areas—energy; homeownership and finance; and, early in the year, farm and food products. Elsewhere consumer price inflation was more moderate, as prices rose by 7.5 percent over the year. Wage gains were no higher than in 1978, despite
the speedup of inflation. The government's voluntary wage and price
standards were widely observed and limited sharply the extent to




which inflation spread from oil and a few other troubled sectors to
the rest of the economy.
The Importance of Reducing Inflation

It is my strong conviction that inflation remains the Nation's number one economic problem. Energy and housing prices are still moving up rapidly, adding directly to inflation and continuing to threaten
a new price-wage spiral in the rest of the economy. Even apart from
these special problem sectors, inflation is now running at an 8 to 9
percent rate, compared to 6 or 6V2 percent several years ago, in part
because of a disappointing productivity performance.
Our immediate objective for 1980 must be to prevent the spread of
double-digit price increases from oil and other problem sectors to
the rest of the economy. My budget and economic policies have that
as their primary goal. We share that same urgent goal with virtually
every other oil-importing country. Halting the spread of inflation is
not enough, however. We must take steps to reduce it.
Each new round of inflation since the 1960s has left our country
with a higher underlying inflation rate. Without long-term policies to
pull down the current 8 to 9 percent rate, our Nation will remain vulnerable to still further increases. Another sharp rise in oil prices or a
worldwide crop shortage could provide the next turn of the ratchet.
Failure to lower inflation after the latest episode would strengthen
long-run inflationary expectations and erode resistance to even larger
wage and price increases. Over the longer term, we will either bring
inflation down or it will assuredly get worse.
A Strategy for Dealing with Inflation

To fight inflation I propose that we act along four lines. The first
and most immediate of these is fiscal and monetary restraint:
• Under the economic conditions that now confront us we must
concentrate on reducing the budget deficit by holding down
Federal spending and forgoing tax reductions. We cannot afford
a permissive economic environment in which the oil-led inflation
of 1979 gives rise to a widespread acceleration of wage and price
increases in 1980 and 1981.
• To reduce inflation in subsequent years, the budget will have to
stay tight. That does not mean that it should fail to respond to
changing economic circumstances or that taxes can never be reduced. But compared to an earlier less inflationary era the room
for budgetary maneuver has appreciably narrowed.
• Monetary policy will have to continue firmly in support of the
same anti-inflationary goals.




The second line of action is restraint by the private sector in its
wage and price decisions. Aided by the deliberations of the Pay and
Price Advisory Committees appointed last year, we have been updating and improving the voluntary wage and price standards.
As a third line of action we must pursue measures to encourage
productivity growth, adapt our economy rapidly to the fact of scarcer
oil supplies, and improve our competitive standing in the world
economy. By dealing with these fundamental aspects of economic
performance, we seek to ensure that the long-term monetary and fiscal restraints needed to curb inflation go hand-in-hand with a healthy
growth in output, employment and living standards. These measures
will also help us reduce inflationary pressures from the cost side.
Recent history has driven home the lesson that events outside our
country—such as worldwide crop shortages or sudden increases in
OPEC oil prices—can have major inflationary effects on the domestic
economy. The fourth line of action, therefore, must be the use of
measures relating to energy and food that reduce our vulnerability to
outside inflationary shocks.
The Short-Term Economic Outlook

We face a difficult economic transition in the next year or two. According to my economic advisers, our economy is likely to undergo a
mild recession early this year. Most private forecasters share this
view. Consumer purchasing power is being drained away by rising
energy prices; moreover, construction of new homes may decline
somewhat further because of limited supplies of mortgage credit and
high mortgage interest rates.
Since economic growth in recent years has been well balanced,
there are no serious distortions in our economy to intensify the
forces of recession. An economic downturn, if it occurs, should
therefore be brief and mild. By year-end our economy should be
growing again, and the pace of expansion is likely to increase in
1981.
Unemployment will probably rise moderately this year. Next year a
stronger pace of economic expansion will create more new jobs, and
unemployment will begin to come down again.
Inflation has been building in our country for a decade and a half,
and it will take many years of persistent effort to bring it back down.
This year energy prices will still go up faster than other prices, but
less so than in 1979. Some of the other special factors that contributed to inflation last year should do so to a smaller degree, or not at
all, in 1980. Enactment of the budget that I have recommended, and
continued exercise of reasonable restraint by business and labor in
their wage and price decisions should make it possible to lower the




rate of inflation from 13 percent in 1979 to close to 10 percent in
1980, and to a range of 8 to 9 percent in 1981. But that accomplishment will still leave inflation running at an entirely unacceptable
pace. We cannot, and will not, rest until reasonable price stability has
been achieved.
Budget Policies

My budget proposals will reduce the Federal deficit by more than
half to $16 billion in fiscal 1981. Accomplishing this reduction, despite the effect of slower economic growth on Federal tax revenues,
has required severe restraint on Federal spending. Outlays will increase from $564 billion this year to $616 billion in fiscal 1981. Although real defense spending will rise, total Federal outlays, adjusted
for inflation, will remain virtually constant. I propose to reduce inflation-adjusted spending outside of defense.
My 1981 budget is based squarely on the premise that bringing an
end to inflation must remain the top priority of economic policy. Not
only are budget expenditures held to the minimum level consistent
with urgent national needs, but tax reductions are forgone. This austere budget policy, accompanied by supportive policies of monetary
restraint, is a necessary condition for controlling inflation.
Citizens all across our country are facing rising tax burdens because of increased social security taxes and because inflation pushes
individuals into higher income tax brackets. They want, and deserve,
tax reductions when cuts can be granted within the framework of a
prudent budgetary policy. Businesses need greater incentives to invest in the new and modern plant and equipment that is essential to
growth in our productive capacity and to long-run improvement in
economic efficiency. If we continue to keep the growth of Federal expenditures under tight rein, tax reductions will be forthcoming. But I
could not and did not recommend tax relief this year.
I am aware that a mild recession is widely forecast. Indeed the estimates of revenues and expenditures in my budget assume its occurrence. But forecasts are necessarily uncertain. Our economy has
shown remarkable resilience to date, and there is no evidence that a
recession has begun. Under those circumstances, to have recommended a tax reduction and a much larger budget deficit would have
been a signal that we were not serious in our fight against inflation.
It would have increased inflationary expectations, weakened the value
of the dollar in exchange markets, and risked the translation of last
year's oil-led inflation into a new and higher wage-price spiral in
1980. In recognition of these realities, my budget proposals concentrate on reducing the deficit.




In this uncertain period, of course, economic policy cannot be
fixed in place and then forgotten. If economic conditions and prospects should significantly worsen, I will be prepared to recommend
to the Congress additional fiscal measures to support output and employment in ways and under circumstances that are consistent with a
continued fight against inflation.
Restraint in the 1981 budget has been accomplished while still
moving forward with Federal programs and expenditures that address our Nation's critical needs.
• Outlays for defense will increase by over 3 percent in real terms.
Both strategic and conventional forces will be strengthened. Our
commitment to our NATO allies will be met, and our ability to
deploy forces rapidly anywhere in the world will be improved.
Recent events in Southwest Asia have underlined the necessity
for these actions.
• Expenditures will be raised to expand domestic energy supplies,
increase energy conservation, and provide assistance to lowincome families least able to pay higher energy prices.
• Support for basic research, enlarged in the past three fiscal years,
will be further expanded to a total of $5.1 billion in 1981. Sustained commitment to basic research will assure continued
American scientific and technical preeminence.
•A major new initiative, for which $1.2 billion in new budget authority is requested, addresses the serious problem of unemployment among disadvantaged youth.
These programs were made possible within the framework of a
tight budget by pruning less essential programs, increasing administrative efficiencies, and reducing fraud and abuse. Legislative proposals to reduce Federal spending will save $5Vb billion in fiscal 1981
and even more in subsequent years.
Pay and Price Standards

A little more than a year ago, I asked business and labor to join
with me in the fight against inflation by complying with voluntary
standards for pay and prices. Cooperation with my request was extensive. Last year's acceleration of inflation did not represent a
breakdown of the pay and price standards. Skyrocketing energy
prices, and rising costs of home purchase and finance lay behind the
substantial worsening of inflation. Declining productivity also added
to business costs and prices.
The pay and price standards, in fact, have served the Nation well.
Although the price standards had only limited applicability to food,
energy, and housing prices, in the remaining sectors of the economy,




for which the standards were designed, prices accelerated little during the first year of the program. Wage increases were no larger than
in 1978, even though the cost of living rose faster. Increases in energy prices did not spill over into wages and the broad range of industrial and service prices.
On September 28, 1979, my Administration and leaders of the
labor movement reached a National Accord. We agreed that our antiinflation policies must be both effective and equitable, and that in
fighting inflation we will not abandon our effort to pursue the goals
of full employment and balanced growth.
As an outgrowth of that Accord, I appointed a Pay Advisory Committee to work together with my Administration to review and make
recommendations on the pay standards and how they are being carried out. A Price Advisory Committee was established to make recommendations with respect to the price standards.
The most immediate problem in 1980 is to ensure that last year's
sharp increase in energy prices does not result in a new spiral of
price and wage increases that would worsen the underlying inflation
rate for many years to come. Understandably, workers, business managers, and other groups want to make up for last year's loss of real
income, and they may seek to do so by asking for larger increases in
wage rates, salaries and other forms of income. Such efforts would
not restore real incomes that have been reduced by rising world oil
prices and declining productivity, but they would intensify inflation.
Improvements in our living standards can only be achieved by making our economy more efficient and less dependent on imported oil.
Voluntary standards for wages and prices, together with disciplined
fiscal and monetary policies, are the key ingredients in a strategy for
reducing inflation. During the years immediately ahead, monetary and
fiscal policies will seek a gradual but steady lowering of inflation. By
itself, restraint on borrowing and spending would mean relatively slow
economic growth and somewhat higher unemployment and idle capacity. Effective standards for moderating wage and price increases will
lead to greater progress in lowering inflation and thereby reduce the
burden on monetary and fiscal policies and provide scope for faster
economic growth and increased jobs.
Long-Term Economic Goals

Just before my Administration took office the overall unemployment rate was still close to 8 percent. For blacks and other minorities, the rate was over 13 percent and had shown little improvement
since the recovery began in early 1975.




Since then increases in employment have been extraordinarily
large, averaging nearly 3V2 percent per year. The gains for women
were twice as large as for men. For blacks and other minority groups
the percentage rise in employment was half again as large as for
whites. Aided by a strongly expanded Federal jobs program for
youth, employment among black and other minority teenagers grew
by over 15 percent. Employment among Hispanic Americans rose by
over 20 percent.
Unemployment rates have come down substantially for most demographic groups. Unemployment among black teenagers, however, has
not fallen significantly and remains distressingly high.
To address the very serious problem of unemployment among disadvantaged youth, my Administration has substantially expanded
funds for youth employment and training programs over the past 3
years. My 1981 budget includes an important new initiative to increase the skills, earning power, and employability of disadvantaged
young people.
In 1978 the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act was passed with the active support of my Administration.
The general objectives of the act—and those of my Administration—
are to achieve full employment and reasonable price stability.
When I signed that act a little over a year ago, it was my hope that
we could achieve by 1983 the interim goals it set forth: to reduce the
overall unemployment rate to 4 percent and to achieve a 3 percent
inflation rate.
Since the end of 1978, however, huge OPEC oil price increases
have made the outlook for economic growth much worse, and at the
same time have sharply increased inflation. The economic policies I
have recommended for the next 2 years will help the economy adjust
to the impact of higher OPEC oil prices. But no policies can change
the realities which those higher prices impose.
I have therefore been forced to conclude that reaching the goals of
a 4 percent unemployment rate and 3 percent inflation by 1983 is no
longer practicable. Reduction of the unemployment rate to 4 percent
by 1983, starting from the level now expected in 1981, would require
an extraordinarily high economic growth rate. Efforts to stimulate the
economy to achieve so high a growth rate would be counterproductive. The immediate result would be extremely strong upward pressure on wage rates, costs, and prices. This would undercut the basis
for sustained economic expansion and postpone still further the date
at which we could reasonably expect a return to a 4 percent unemployment rate.
Reducing inflation from the 10 percent expected in 1980 to 3 percent by 1983 would be an equally unrealistic expectation. Recent ex-




perience indicates that the momentum of inflation built up over the
past 15 years is extremely strong. A practical goal for reducing inflation must take this fact into account.
Because of these economic realities, I have used the authority provided to me in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act to extend the timetable
for achieving a 4 percent unemployment rate and 3 percent inflation.
The target year for achieving 4 percent unemployment is now 1985,
a 2-year deferment. The target year for lowering inflation to 3 percent has been postponed until 3 years after that.
MEASURES TO IMPROVE ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
Achieving satisfactory economic growth, reducing unemployment,
and at the same time making steady progress in curbing inflation
constitutes an enormous challenge to economic policy.
To lower inflation, we will have to persist in the painful steps
needed to restrain demand. But demand restraint alone is not
enough. We must work to improve the supply side of our economy—
speed its adjustment to an era of scarcer energy, increase its efficiency, improve the workings of its labor markets, and expand its capital
stock. We must take measures to reduce our vulnerability to inflationary events that occur outside our own economy. Only an approach that deals with both demand and supply can enable the Nation to combine healthy economic growth with price stability.
Long-Run Energy Policies

Over the past 3 years I have devoted a large part of my own efforts
and those of my Administration toward putting in place a long-term
energy policy for this Nation. With the cooperation of the Congress
much has already been accomplished or stands on the threshold of
final enactment.
The phased decontrol of natural gas and domestic crude oil prices
will provide strong, unambiguous signals encouraging energy conservation and stimulating the development of domestic energy supplies.
But decontrol of oil, in the face of very high OPEC prices, inevitably
generates substantial windfall profits. The windfall profits tax I have
proposed will capture a significant portion of these windfalls for public use.
The increased Federal revenues from this tax will make it possible
to cushion the poor from the effects of higher oil prices, to increase
our investment in mass transit, and to support programs of accelerated replacement of oil-fired electricity generation facilities and increased residential and commercial energy conservation. I have also
proposed incentives for the development of energy from solar and
biomass sources, and have asked the Congress for authority to create




10

an Energy Security Corporation to provide incentives and assistance
on a business-like basis for the accelerated development of synthetic
fuels. Other legislation that I have proposed, which is also now before a Conference Committee of the Congress, would create an Energy Mobilization Board to cut the red tape and speed the development of essential energy projects. I urge the Congress to take the
final steps to enact the enabling legislation for my energy initiatives.
These policies will sharply increase the efficiency with which our
Nation uses energy and widen the range of economically feasible energy sources. In so doing, they will help make our economy less inflation-prone. They will also drastically cut our reliance on imported
oil, and by making our Nation less vulnerable to sudden increases in
world oil prices, reduce the probability of sudden inflationary surges.
By the end of this decade, we will be well on the way to completing the transition toward the new world of scarcer oil supplies. In the
interim, however, our country still remains dangerously exposed to
the vagaries of the world oil market.
I am pursuing measures to deal with this transitional problem. Together with other major oil-consuming countries in the International
Energy Agency we are working to devise improved means of matching any future cuts in oil supplies with joint action to reduce oil demand. By avoiding a competitive scramble for scarce oil, we can reduce the chances of further large price increases.
Last year I pledged that our country would never again import
more oil than we did in 1977—8.5 million barrels a day. This year I
am establishing a lower import target of 8.2 million barrels a day. I
am prepared to reduce that target in the event that discussions within
the International Energy Agency produce a fair and equitable agreement that requires still lower imports. I will impose a fee on purchases of foreign oil if they threaten to exceed the limit that I set.
While international cooperation is essential, so are measures we
can take on our own. In accordance with legislation enacted last year
the Administration has developed a standby motor fuel rationing
plan to deal with major supply interruptions, defined to be a shortfall
in supply of 20 percent or more. This plan will be submitted to the
Congress in February. But even smaller supply interruptions can
cause severe economic problems. We are therefore considering proposals for standby measures to be applied if lesser, but still significant, disruptions occur. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) can
cushion the impact of an abrupt cutoff in supplies. My budget provides funds for resuming SPR purchases this year if conditions permit.




11

Improving Labor Markets

The persistence of high unemployment among some groups of
workers while jobs go begging and unemployment is low elsewhere is
not only a major social problem but a waste of national resources.
The lack of skills, the imperfections of the labor market, and in some
cases, the discrimination that gives rise to this situation, reduce national productivity and contribute to inflation.
Although our labor market currently works quite well for most
people, it does not work well for disadvantaged and minority youth.
In recognition of this fact, I have recently sent to the Congress proposals designed to deal with teenage unemployment.
The goals of my proposals are:
• to teach basic skills in the secondary schools to those youths who
did not master them in elementary school and who need special
help;
• to provide part-time employment and training to dropouts if they
participate in long-term training to develop skills that will improve their prospects; and
• to provide intensive long-term training aimed at helping older
youths out of school find jobs in the private sector.
The funds will go largely to poor rural areas and central cities,
where youth unemployment is particularly high because of inadequate education, and where local resources are insufficient to rectify
the problem.
Another segment of the labor force needing special assistance is
the working poor. The welfare reforms which I have sent to the Congress will provide training, help in seeking jobs, and work opportunities for poor but employable persons.
Reforming Regulation

Regulation has joined taxation, defense, and the provision of social
services as one of the principal activities of the government. Unneeded regulations, or necessary regulations that impose undue burdens,
lower efficiency and raise costs.
For the past 3 years I have vigorously promoted a basic approach
to regulatory reform: unnecessary regulation, however rooted in tradition, should be dismantled and the role of competition expanded;
necessary regulation should promote its social objectives at minimum
cost.
Working with the Congress we have deregulated the airline industry. We are now cooperating with congressional committees to complete work on fair and effective legislation that eliminates costly ele-




12

ments of regulation in the trucking, railroad, communications, and financial industries.
Within the executive branch, we are improving the quality and lowering the cost of regulations. The Regulatory Council, which I established a year ago, is helping us comprehend the full scope of Federal
regulatory activities and how these activities, taken together, affect individual industries and sectors. A number of regulatory agencies are
experimenting with new regulatory techniques that promise to
achieve regulatory goals at substantially lower costs.
Increasing Investment and Encouraging Research and Development

We do not know all of the causes of the slowdown in productivity
growth that has characterized our economy in recent years. But we
do know that investment and research and development will have to
play an important role in reversing the trend.
To meet the Nation's sharply increased requirement for investment
in energy production and conservation, to fulfill its commitment to
cleaner air and water and improved health and safety in the workplace, and at the same time to provide more and better tools for a
growing American work force, our Nation in the coming decade will
have to increase the share of its resources devoted to capital investment.
We took one step in this direction in the Revenue Act of 1978,
which provided a larger than normal share of tax reduction for investment incentives. Passage of my pending energy legislation will
make available major new incentives and financial assistance for investment in the production and conservation of energy. When economic conditions become appropriate for further tax reduction, I believe we must direct an important part of any tax cut to the provision
of further incentives for capital investment generally.
One of the most important factors in assuring strong productivity
growth is a continuing flow of new ideas from industry. This flow depends in the first instance on a strong base of scientific knowledge.
The most important source of such knowledge is basic research, the
bulk of which is federally funded.
Between 1968 and 1975 Federal spending for basic research, measured in constant dollars, actually fell. But since that latter year, and
especially during the years of my Administration, Federal support for
basic research has increased sharply. In spite of the generally tight
economic situation, the 1981 budget I am submitting to the Congress
calls for yet another substantial increase in real Federal support for
basic research. Even during a period of economic difficulties, we cannot afford to cut back on the basis for our future prosperity.

13
294-289

0 - 8 0 - 2




Agriculture

Because the worldwide demand for food has grown substantially,
overproduction is no longer the primary problem in agriculture. Government policies now seek to encourage full production, while cushioning the American economy and the American farmer from the
sharp swings in prices and incomes to which the farm sector is often
subject. Over the past several years my Administration has created a
system of farmer-owned grain reserves to supplement tjie loan and
target-price approach to farm income stabilization. In periods of low
prices and plentiful supplies, incentives are provided to place grain in
the reserves, thereby helping to support farm income. The incentives
also work to hold the grain in reserve until prices rise significantly, at
which time the grain begins to move out into the market, helping to
avoid or to moderate the inflationary consequences of a poor crop.
Over this last year, the reserve has been tested twice. When fears
of poor world harvests threatened to drive grain prices to extraordinarily high levels last spring and summer, farmers sold grain from
the reserve, limting the price rise. Since I suspended grain shipments
to the Soviet Union this month in response to that country's brutal
invasion of Afghanistan, increased incentives to place grain in reserve
have been serving as one of our main defenses to protect farmers
from precipitous declines in prices.
The International Economy

Other countries besides our own suffered important setbacks in
1979 from the dramatic increase in oil prices. Growth prospects
worsened, inflation increased, and balance of payments deficits rose.
In such difficult times economic cooperation between nations is especially important. Joint action among oil-consuming countries is needed to reduce the pressure of demand on supply and to restore order
in world petroleum markets. Cooperation is necessary to protect international financial markets against potential disruptions arising
from the need to finance massively increased payments for oil. And
cooperation is also necessary to prevent a destructive round of protectionism.
Because the dollar is the major international store of value and
medium of exchange, the stability of international financial markets is
closely linked to the dollar's strength. The actions taken in November 1978 by the United States and our allies to strengthen and stabilize the dollar worked well during the past year. That the dollar did
well despite accelerating domestic inflation is due in part to a significant improvement in our current account balance during 1979. U.S.
exports grew rapidly and thus helped to offset rising payments for
oil. During the autumn of 1979, however, the dollar came under




14

downward pressure. The October actions of the Federal Reserve
Board to change the techniques of monetary policy helped moderate
inflationary expectations which had been partly responsible for the
pressure on the dollar. As a Nation we must recognize the importance of a stable dollar, not just to the United States but to the world
economy as a whole, and accept our responsibility to pursue policies
that contribute to this stability.
The Multilateral Trade Negotiations of the Tokyo Round were successfully completed and became law in the United States during
1979. These trade agreements are a major achievement for the international economy. By lowering tariff barriers both in the United
States and abroad, they will help increase our exports and provide
Americans with access to foreign goods at lower prices. Perhaps
more important, these agreements will limit restrictive and unfair
trade practices and provide clearer remedies where there is abuse.
They cannot, by themselves, assure smooth resolution of all trade issues. Indeed, the real test will come as we begin to carry them out.
Nevertheless the agreements reached last year do represent a clear
commitment to the preservation and enhancement of an open system
of world trade.
Conclusion

The 1970s were a decade of economic turmoil. World oil prices
rose more than tenfold, helping to set off two major bouts of inflation and the worst recession in 40 years. The international monetary
system had to make a difficult transition from fixed to floating exchange rates. In agriculture a chronic situation of oversupply
changed to one which alternates between periods of short and ample
supplies.
It was an inflationary decade. It brought increased uncertainty into
business and consumer plans for the future.
We are now making the adjustment to the realities of the economic
world that the 1970s brought into being. It is in many ways a more
difficult world than the one that preceded it. Yet the problems it
poses are not insuperable.
There are no economic miracles waiting to be performed. But with
patience and self-discipline, combined with some ingenuity and care,
we can deal successfully with the new world. The 1980s can be a decade of lessened inflation and healthy growth.

January 30, 1980.




15







THE ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

17




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,

Washington, B.C., January 26, 1980.
MR. PRESIDENT:

The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its 1980 Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment
Act of 1946 as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act of 1978.
Cordially,




Charles L. Schultze
CHAIRMAN

Lyle E. Gramley

c
George C. Eads

19




CONTENTS
Page

CHAPTER 1. THE ECONOMY IN 1979

25

An Overview of the Year
The Voluntary Standards
The Operation of the Standards
Prices of Food, Raw Materials, and Energy
Productivity and Wages
The Major Sectors of Aggregate Demand in 1979
Personal Consumption Expenditures
Housing
Business Fixed Investment
Inventory Accumulation
The Foreign Sector
Government Purchases of Goods and Services
Labor Market Developments
Economic Policy in 1979
Fiscal Policy
Monetary Policy and Financial Markets
Credit Flows
Summing Up
Supplement I: Improvements in the Method for Estimating the High-Employment Budget
Supplement II: Measuring the Restraint from Oil Price Increases

25
32
32
33
35
42
43
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
49
51
58
61
61
64

CHAPTER 2. THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

66

The Economy in 1980 and 1981
Fiscal Policy
Monetary Policy
World Oil Markets
The Economic Forecast
Uncertainties in the Outlook
Controlling Inflation
The Price and Pay Standards
The Second Program Year
The Outlook for Inflation
The Productivity Problem
Potential GNP
Goals of Economic Policy
Conclusion

67
68
68
69
69
74
75
79
80
82
84
88
90
96




21

CHAPTER 3.
GROWTH

AND

Page

The Need to Reduce Inflation
Controlling Aggregate Demand
Improving the Structural Performance of the Economy
Meeting the Energy Challenge
Reducing Vulnerability in the Short Run
Longer-Term Improvements
Implications for the Economy
<
Conclusion
Striking the Proper Balance in Regulation
Regulatory Policy and Productivity
Removing Obsolete Regulatory Structures
Balancing Costs and Benefits in Individual Regulations
Coordinating Regulatory Programs
Setting Priorities
New Approaches to Regulation
Conclusion
Promoting Flexibility in the Labor Market
Labor Market Developments in the 1980s
How Well Can the Labor Market Adjust?
Policies to Aid Labor Markets
Increasing the Rate of Capital Formation (Investment
Policy Report)
The Adequacy of Recent Investment
Special Investment Needs
Saving-Investment Relationship
Demand for Nonresidential Fixed Capital
The Sources of Saving
Capital Markets and the Availability of Credit
Some Likely Patterns of National Saving in the 1980s .
The Prospective Policy Mix
Adjusting to Equilibrium in Agriculture
Policy Issues
The Administration's Agricultural Policies
Future Policy Problems

98
100
104
105
105
107
114
116
116
117
118

LONGER-TERM

POLICIES

FOR

STABILITY

98

CHAPTER 4. THE WORLD ECONOMY—TESTING RESILIENCE

Developments in Major Industrial Economies
Growth in 1979
Inflation in 1979
The Response of Economic Policy to Rising Oil Prices
The Outlook for 1980
Reducing World Oil Demand




22

121
124
124
126
127
127
128
131
133
136
136
139
140
141
142
144
145
146
147
147
150
154
156

159
160
162
163
165
166

CHAPTER

4. T H E WORLD ECONOMY—TESTING RESILIENCE—Con.

The Global Pattern of Payments
The Recycling Problem
Foreign Exchange Markets in 1979
The Dollar in the International Monetary System
World Trade: Patterns and Issues
The Multilateral Trade Negotiations
Sources of Rising Protectionism
Needed Responses

Page

168
170
174
177
180
180
181
183

APPENDIXES:

A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council
of Economic Advisers during 1979
B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income, Employment, and
Production

185
197

List of Tables and Charts
Tables

1. Changes in Consumer Prices and in Producer Prices of
Finished Goods, 1976-79
2. Changes in Farm and Food Prices, September 1978 to
September 1979
3. Measures of Changes in Compensation and Employment
Costs, 1977-79
4. Wage Increases Under Major Collective Bargaining Contracts
5. Alternative Deflators for Earnings and Compensation,
1978-79
6. Shares of National Income, 1976-79
7. Shares of Gross Product Originating in Nonfinancial Corporate Business Excluding Petroleum and Coal Companies, 1976-79
8. Growth in Major Components of Real Gross National
Product, 1978-79
9. Changes in Real Business Fixed Investment, 1975-79
10. Labor Market Developments, 1976-79
11. Actual and High-Employment Federal Receipts and Expenditures, National Income and Product Accounts, Calendar Years 1973-79
12. Fiscal and Oil Price Restraint on the Economy, Fourth
Quarter 1978 to Fourth Quarter 1980
13. Economic Outlook for 1980
14. Changes in Compensation per Hour, Productivity, Unit
Labor Costs, and Prices, 1959-79
15. Annual Growth in GNP per Employed Worker in Major Industrial Countries, 1963-79




23

27
34
37
38
39
41
41
42
45
48
50
70
71
78
85

List of Tables and Charts—Continued
Tables

Page

16. Labor Productivity Growth, 1948-79
17. Potential Gross National Product and Benchmark Unemployment Rate, 1973-79
18. Changes in Employment and Unemployment by Demographic Group, Fourth Quarter 1976 to Fourth Quarter
1979
19. Economic Goals, 1980-85
20. Gasoline Consumption and Energy Use, 1966-78
21. Share of Selected Demographic Groups in the Civilian
Labor Force, 1970-85
22. School Attainment of 25- to 29-Year-Olds, 1940, 1960,
and 1978
23. Gross Saving and Investment as Percent of GNP, 1965-79..
24. Determinants of Business Fixed Investment, 1955-79
25. Actual and Illustrative Saving-Investment Balances
26. Growth in Real GNP in Major Industrial Countries, 197880
27. Inflation in Major Industrial Countries, 1978-80
28. Changes in Consumer Prices, With and Without Energy,
and Import Unit Values, Major Industrial Countries,
1978-79
29. Changes in Wages in Major Industrial Countries, 1978-79 .
30. Current Account Balances, 1975-80
31. Impact of Oil Price Increase on Terms of Trade

85
90
91
94
109
130
130
141
141
145
160
160
162
163
169
175

Charts

1.
2.
3.
4.

Personal Saving Rate
Real Inventory/Sales Ratio, Nonfarm Business
Selected Interest Rates and Bond Yields
Fixed-Weight Price Index for Personal Consumption Expenditures
5. Productivity Adjusted for Cyclical Variation
6. Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment as Percent of Real
GNP




24

30
46
52
76
86
137

CHAPTER 1

The Economy in 1979
THE ECONOMY OF THE UNITED STATES was dealt a heavy
blow by rising OPEC oil prices in 1979. Inflation increased sharply;
real earnings of American workers declined and economic growth
slowed. Employment continued to rise, however, while productivity
fell, and the unemployment rate remained relatively stable at between 5.7 and 5.9 percent. Most major demographic groups shared
in the rise in employment; the gains for blacks and adult women
were particularly notable.
The economy's resilience in the face of the dramatic increase in oil
prices and the attendant worsening of inflation was one of the more
surprising features of economic developments in 1979. Forecasts of
impending recession were becoming frequent by late 1978, long before the magnitude of the 1979 increase in oil prices by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) was perceived. By
the middle of 1979 such predictions were common. Growth did slow
markedly, but the characteristics of cumulating recession were still
not in evidence at the close of the year.
Developments on the inflation front were the most significant disappointment in the 1979 economic performance. At the beginning of
the year it was widely expected that inflation would moderate. Those
hopes were destroyed, however, by skyrocketing energy prices.
The inflation and energy problems plaguing our economy seriously
threaten our ability to achieve the economic goals to which the
Carter Administration is firmly committed: maintaining healthy economic growth, providing job opportunities for an expanding labor
force, and reducing the unacceptably high unemployment among
minorities. It is urgent that we increase our energy independence
and reduce the rate of inflation as soon as possible. These are the
central objectives of the Carter Administration's economic policies
for the period immediately ahead.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE YEAR
It was evident at the beginning of 1979 that economic growth
would slow from the 5 percent average annual rate of the preceding




25

3 years. Most of the resources idled by the deep recession of 197475 had been brought back into productive use, and monetary and fiscal policies had been shifted toward restraint in an effort to slow inflation.
The 0.8 percent growth of real gross national product (GNP) actually recorded over the 4 quarters of last year was well below the 2.2
percent forecast by the Administration at the beginning of 1979. The
impact of huge energy price increases on consumers' real incomes
was largely responsible.
Personal consumption expenditures for goods declined slightly in
real terms, but higher outlays for services kept total personal consumption rising. Residential construction also fell last year, but about
in line with expectations at the beginning of the year. The expansion
of business fixed investment slowed substantially, to less than 2 percent, in 1979. Businesses continued to pursue cautious inventory
policies, as they had earlier in the recovery, and the rate of inventory
accumulation in the fourth quarter was well below its level a year earlier.
Net exports of goods and services increased substantially in real
terms last year, and by the fourth quarter they reached the highest
level since 1975. The volume of exports rose, while the volume of
imports leveled off. The slowing of U.S, economic expansion, increased growth abroad, and the decline of the dollar during 1978 all
contributed to these developments.
The pace of economic expansion in the United States was uneven
during 1979. Real GNP declined in the second quarter, when personal consumption expenditures fell sharply in response to long gas
lines, but it rebounded in the summer with the resumption of normal
shopping patterns. Growth in the fourth quarter was at a more moderate rate; the rise in final sales slowed and inventory accumulation
declined. Output in the industrial sector did not closely follow the
quarterly pattern of GNP growth, but over the 4 quarters of 1979 industrial production rose 0.9 percent, about the same as the increase
in real GNP.
Both total employment and the civilian labor force grew by about 2
million in 1979. Adult women accounted for about 70 percent of the
total increase in employment. The proportion of the working-age
population employed rose to 59.3 percent, a slight gain.
Very large advances in energy prices and in the costs of home purchase and finance were dominant factors in the 13 percent rise in the
consumer price index (CPI) during 1979. Wholesale prices of finished goods sold by producers rose by 12.5 percent over the 4 quarters of 1979, compared with 8.7 percent in the previous year. Energy
prices were primarily responsible for the larger increase last year.




26

Sharp movements in prices for food, energy, and houses and in
mortgage interest costs can have a large influence on the overall rate
of inflation recorded in a given year. It is therefore useful to trace
the movements of other prices as one means of ascertaining
longer-term trends in prices—that is, in the underlying inflation rate.
Consumer prices excluding energy, home purchase and finance,
and the farm value of food rose by 8.1 percent last year, less than 1
percentage point above the 1978 pace (Table 1). The rate of increase
in producers' prices for finished goods excluding food and energy
rose somewhat more, from 7.9 percent in 1978 to 9.0 percent in
1979. By these measures the underlying inflation rate has moved up
by about 2 to 3 percentage points since 1976.
TABLE 1.—Changes in consumer prices and in producer prices of finished goods, 1976-79
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
1977

1976

Item

1979

1978

5.0

Food
Energy

All other

12.7

20.1
7.5
13.4
7.3

5.8
36.5
19.8
8.1

2.7

Producer prices of finished goods, total..

9.0

6.8
8.2
8.9
5.9
6.9

8.7

12.5

-4.4
5.0
5.6

Farm value of food
Energy*
Home purchase and finance 2 3 .
All other 3 .

6.6

-13.3
6.2
3.8
6.4

Consumer prices, total

7.4
9.2
6.4

11.6
6.4
7.9

7.7
62.0
9.0

1

Includes only prices for direct consumer purchases of energy for the home and for motor vehicles.
2
In both the table and the text, "home purchase and finance" consists of home purchase and financing, taxes, and insurance
on owner-occupied homes.
3
Estimates.
Sources: Department of Agriculture, Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), and Council of Economic Advisers.

Another measure of the underlying inflation rate is found in the
rise of unit labor costs adjusted for cyclical variations in productivity
growth. Businesses tend to calculate costs on the basis of longer-term
trends in productivity and to set their prices accordingly. When
nominal wage increases exceed estimated long-term productivity
gains, businesses will pass the resulting cost increases through to
higher prices if market conditions permit.
The rate of increase in compensation per hour for all employees in
the private nonfarm business sector declined in 1977, then rose
again. The 1979 increase of 8.8 percent was only slightly more than
the 8.5 percent recorded in 1976. Increases in actual productivity
have slackened considerably, from 2.2 percent in 1976 to minus 2.2
percent in 1979, but this is partly attributable to cyclical developments. In 1976 the economy was emerging from a deep recession
and was growing strongly. In 1979 the recovery was in its fifth year
and economic growth slowed.




27

It is not clear what rate of productivity growth is now being incorporated in business estimates of longer-term trends in costs. Studies
by the Council of Economic Advisers suggest that the current trend
rate of increase in productivity is only about 1 to 1V2 percent; productivity growth in 1979, even allowing for a cyclical slowdown, was
much less than this. With compensation per hour in the private nonfarm business sector rising at about 9 percent, the long-term rate of
increase in unit labor costs—and thus in this measure of the underlying rate of inflation—appears to be around TV2 to 8 percent, compared to about 6 percent in 1976. If heavier weight is given to the
especially poor productivity experience of 1979, the underlying rate
may now be in the 8 to 9 percent range.
Wage restraint played an important role in limiting the increase in
the underlying rate of inflation during 1979. Aggregate measures of
wage performance indicate that growth in nominal wages did not increase last year.
Real disposable income rose temporarily in the first quarter, when
the personal income tax cut provided by the Revenue Act of 1978
took effect, but it fell in the spring. Over the final 3 quarters of 1979
real disposable income remained at about the level reached in the
fourth quarter of 1978. Higher oil prices were the main cause of this
stagnation in real income. Inflation, by moving individuals into higher tax brackets, added further to the drag on disposable incomes, as
did overwithholding of personal income taxes. Despite the leveling
off of real income, personal consumption expenditure rose by
about 1V2 percent over the 4 quarters of 1979, as the personal saving
rate fell.
The distribution of national income among major classes of income recipients changed little in 1979. The shares accruing to corporations as profits and to nonfarm proprietors declined somewhat, as
one would expect in a year of weak economic growth and declining
productivity. The share of rental income in the total continued its
long-term descent. Compensatioin of employees rose slightly as a
share of the total, as did the income of farm proprietors. The net interest component of business costs also increased as a proportion of
total national income, reflecting both rising interest rates and the
rapid pace of business borrowing.
The greater share of farm income in the total was due primarily to
the rapid increase in cattle prices early in the year and a late spring
strengthening in grain prices. Cattle price increases were a consequence of reduced marketings and higher consumer demand for
beef; grain prices increased as the extent of a crop shortfall in the
Soviet Union became known. Through the first half, the income of
farm proprietors was 23 percent higher than in 1978. Livestock




28

prices declined during the summer and autumn as a result of large
supplies of pork and poultry and seasonal increases in beef slaughter.
Grain prices also dropped from their early summer peaks, while farm
production costs continued to increase at about the rate of inflation.
Farm proprietors' income in the fourth quarter was 6 percent below
that recorded a year earlier. For the year as a whole, farm income
equalled the 1973 record.
Why the Economy Was So Resilient

The fact that the economy did not tip into recession in 1979 has
received widespread comment and attention. Periods of economic expansion since World War II have typically come to an end when inflation accelerated and monetary and fiscal policies shifted toward restraint. In 1979, despite rising inflation, restraint on aggregate demand from monetary and fiscal policies, and a huge "oil tax" levied
by OPEC, the economy continued to move forward.
Fiscal policy began to shift toward restraint in 1978, but the degree
of restraint was lessened somewhat in early 1979 by the tax cut provided in the Revenue Act of 1978. Thereafter the Federal budget became moderately more restrictive. The high-employment budget (discussed later in the chapter) shifted from a $7 billion deficit in the
second half of 1978 to a $13 billion surplus in the second half of
1979.
Added to the restraint from the budget was the enormous drain on
consumer purchasing power resulting from the 1979 rise in oil
prices. The oil drag at year's end was reducing consumer spending
power by almost $55 billion at an annual rate, or about 3 percent of
personal after-tax income. Fiscal and oil price restraint together were
thus draining large amounts from consumer incomes by the fourth
quarter of last year. The magnitude of this restraint has no parallel in
any postwar year—including 1974, when the first big OPEC price increase rocked the economy.
Monetary policy also moved toward restraint over the course of
last year. Growth of the major monetary aggregates slowed slightly.
Growth of Mi moderated to 5.5 percent in 1979 from 7.2 percent in
1978; however, shifts to ATS and New York NOW accounts (see
below) are estimated to have reduced Mi growth by 1V2 percentage
points in 1979. The rise in M2 dropped back to 8.3 percent from 8.7
percent in the preceding year. Interest rates shot upward in the second half. Short-term market interest rates at year-end were approximately 3 percentage points higher than a year earlier, while longterm rates were up about 1 V2 percentage points.
The reasons why the economy was able to absorb these shocks
without going into a steep decline may not be fully understood for

29
294-289

0 - 8 0 - 3




some time. Three factors, however, clearly played a role. First, individuals as consumers and home buyers appear to be more strongly
affected by inflationary expectations now than in the past. Surveys of
consumers' attitudes indicate that until fairly recently most people
expected that an increase in inflation would be temporary. When actual inflation rates were rising, expected rates of inflation lagged well
behind. After two episodes of double-digit inflation, a different response is now elicited. When inflation increases, expected inflation
rates move up at the same time. As a result, consumers are now
more likely to accelerate purchases when inflation increases. When
inflation accelerated markedly in 1973, for example, the personal saving rate rose sharply, even after allowance is made for a large increase in the share of total income accruing to farm proprietors. In
1979, however, consumers responded to the squeeze on real incomes
resulting from inflation by continuing to borrow heavily and by reducing their saving as a fraction of disposable income (Chart 1). Although the ratio of household borrowing to disposable income declined over the course of last year, it remained well above 1973 levels.
Chart 1

Personal Saving Rate
PERCENT

15

SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I

1969

70

71

72

73

74

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




30

75

76

77

78

79

Expected price increases probably exert more influence on decisions to buy houses than on purchases of other durable goods. Prices
of new and existing homes have risen considerably faster than prices
of other consumer goods and services over the past decade, and that
fact has not been lost on most individuals. With demographic factors
also supporting demand, sales of new and existing homes remained
very strong until late last year, despite a rise of mortgage interest
rates to unprecedented heights.
Second, monetary restraint no longer produces the abrupt changes
in availability of credit that used to be instrumental in bringing an
end to economic expansion. Changes in financial markets over the
past 20 years have removed or reduced constraints which used to
limit the availability of credit to certain borrowers during periods of
monetary tightness. For example, the legal and constitutional barriers
that once prevented States and their political subdivisions from paying market rates of interest have been raised or eliminated. Usury
ceilings have also been liberalized. Commercial banks and thrift institutions have been given more freedom to bid for funds and are
hence better able to provide credit to borrowers willing to pay going
rates of interest for loans. In particular, the 6-month money market
certificates (MMCs) issued by banks and thrift institutions, on which
rates are tied to market yields on Treasury bills, have been a major
factor sustaining mortgage credit flows since mid-1978.
Changes such as these have altered the way in which restrictive
monetary policies influence aggregate demand. Monetary restraint
now works more through changes in interest rates that influence a
borrower's willingness to incur debt, and less through changes in a
borrower's ability to obtain credit. For this reason, monetary restraint
now tends to affect aggregate demand less abruptly and with a less
uneven impact across major economic sectors. As events in financial
markets late in the year attest, however, significant changes in monetary policy may still lead to constraints on the availability of credit,
particularly for housing.
Third, the resilience of the economy last year reflects the relative
absence of cyclical imbalances characteristic of earlier periods of economic expansion. Most notable in this regard is the comparatively
balanced relationship of inventories to sales after nearly 5 years of
economic expansion. Better inventory controls and very cautious inventory policies prevented a buildup of inventories relative to sales
during the expansion. In fact the aggregate ratio of real nonfarm inventories to sales was lower in late 1978 and early 1979 than it was
throughout most of the preceding 10 years (see Chart 2 on page 45).
When consumer spending weakened in the second quarter of last
year, therefore, businesses did not find themselves seriously over-




31

stocked. To be sure, auto inventories, particularly for large cars, increased substantially, and major auto producers are still trying to redress the balance between stocks and sales. In other industries, however, production cutbacks to reduce excess stocks have been modest.
As Chapter 2 indicates, the economy may head into a recession in
early 1980. The factors that sustained growth in 1979 should help to
make the recession moderate in depth and duration. But it is unlikely
that they will cushion the economy's response to shocks to the same
extent that they did in 1979. This fact increases the uncertainty surrounding forecasts of economic performance this year.

THE VOLUNTARY STANDARDS
On October 24, 1978, the President announced a comprehensive
anti-inflation program that included actions by the Federal Government to reduce the relative size of the Federal budget, rationalize
and improve the regulatory process, and work together with State
and local governments to reduce the inflationary impact of government actions on the economy. Business and labor were asked to adhere to voluntary wage and price standards designed to reduce the
rate of price increase over the following 12 months.
The President announced that the Administration would consider
noncompliance with the standards to be a sign of inflationary pressure in the markets concerned and would reconsider Federal Government programs and policies affecting those markets. The Federal
Government would avoid purchasing from noncompliant firms where
feasible. The President also proposed a program of real wage insurance to help protect workers who complied with the program from
suffering losses of real income. This innovative proposal was not
adopted by the Congress.
THE OPERATION OF THE STANDARDS

The anti-inflation standards administered by the Council on Wage
and Price Stability were designed to minimize administrative burdens
and provide maximum flexibility to the private sector. Firms were
asked to group their employees into "compliance units": for example, employees covered by collective bargaining agreements, other
nonmanagerial personnel, and business managers. The rate of pay
increase for each group was to be limited to 7 percent during the
first program year, October 1978 through September 1979. The
composition of that increase between wages and fringe benefits was
left to private decisions, as was the distribution of increases among
employees within each subgroup. An assumed 6 percent rate of infla-




32

tion was used to evaluate cost-of-living adjustment clauses in labor
contracts.
Each firm was asked to restrain its average price increase to onehalf of 1 percentage point below its average annual rate of increase
during 1976-77 (the "price-deceleration" standard). Firms were left
free to allocate the allowed price increase among their various product lines, so that they could respond to market conditions for particular products while adhering to the overall anti-inflation goal. Exempted were prices determined in auction markets, such as prices of agricultural commodities and industrial raw materials; those set by regulation, such as prices of crude oil and natural gas; and most imports.
New product lines were also exempt.
For some industries with special characteristics, specific alternative
standards were constructed. For example, since the volatility of agricultural prices would make it difficult to apply the price-deceleration
standard to food manufacturers and processors, they could instead
choose to follow a gross-margin standard, limiting the total markup
over raw food prices.
Firms unable to meet the price-deceleration standard, or the special alternative industry standards, because of uncontrollable cost increases were allowed to achieve compliance by meeting a test based
upon a limitation of profit margins.
Compliance with the standards was widespread during 1979. Nevertheless the circumstances in which the program operated made it
impossible to prevent overall inflation from increasing. Energy prices
rose very sharply, and prices of both farm products and internationally traded raw materials increased substantially in late 1978 and
early 1979. The jump in U.S. prices of internationally traded commodities stemmed partly from the earlier depreciation of the dollar.
These price increases led many firms to shift from the primary pricedeceleration standard to the profit-margin limit, so that price increases in primary commodities were passed through to prices of
final products. Declining productivity also added substantially to
business costs.
PRICES OF FOOD, RAW MATERIALS, AND ENERGY

Food. Pressures on food prices were greatest during the first half of
the program year. Declining supplies of beef and strong consumer
demand pushed cattle prices up. Higher prices encouraged farmers
and ranchers to begin rebuilding their herds, thus reducing current
marketings further and putting even more pressure on prices. Prices
of pork and poultry, which are competitive with beef, joined in the
upward move. In addition, harsh winter weather and a strike in the
West were chiefly responsible for shortages of fruit and vegetables




33

that resulted in rapid price increases for these commodities in early
1979.
Consumer food prices rose less rapidly during the second half of
the program year, when farm prices of food declined. Meat supplies
increased, particularly for pork and poultry, and vegetable supplies
were also more ample.
Increased marketing costs contributed to rising consumer food
prices in 1979, as did gains in the net earnings of food distributors.
Marketing spreads for food—the difference between retail costs and
farm value—ordinarily narrow when farm commodity prices increase
rapidly. Early last year, however, these marketing spreads widened
while farm prices were rising sharply (Table 2).
TABLE 2.—Changes in farm and food prices, September 1978 to September 1979
[Percent change x]
Marketing spread

Farm value
Sept.
1978 to
Mar.
1979

Item

iiern

Market b a s k e i 2

1

Sept.
1978 to
Mar.
1979

Mar.
1979 to
Sept.
1979

Retail cost
Sept.
1978 to
Mar.
1979

Mar.
1979 to
Sept.
1979

13.0

-6.0

5.2

6.5

8.2

1.4

21.2

Meat products
Dairy products
Poultry
Fresh vegetables
Processed fruits and vegetables
Cereal and bakery products

2

Mar.
1979 to
Sept.
1979

-12.4

5.9
6.1
8.8

13.4

14.8

-2.5

12.5

-5.4

18.2

-8.0
-14.6

6.0
4.4

4.0
3.8

5.4
4.8

3.5
5.7

7.3
5.2

6.2

31.1

-18.6
-32.9

3.1
7.1

16.8

1.4

3.4
6.5

6.7
6.7

4.9

Not seasonally adjusted, and not at an annual rate.
Includes items not shown separately.

Source: Department of Agriculture.

When farm prices for foods began to decline in April, the marketing spread widened still more. The President met with representatives of the food industry in August and asked them to translate
changes in farm prices more quickly into price changes at the retail
level.
Increases in retail food prices during the fourth quarter were
somewhat below the rate of inflation elsewhere in the economy. At
year-end, retail food prices were about 10 percent above their level a
year earlier.
Raw materials. Pressures on prices of internationally traded raw materials were also greatest during the first half of the program year.
During this period the industrial sector of the U.S. economy was operating at high rates of capacity utilization, and growth abroad was
strengthening. Demand pressures in markets for basic materials
therefore intensified. For example, wholesale prices of crude commodities other than agricultural products and energy rose 24 percent
from September 1978 to March 1979. Pressures in these markets
eased in the spring, when growth of the U.S. economy began to be




34

adversely affected by energy developments. Prices of some internationally traded goods began to climb steeply in the early autumn,
when speculation in gold threatened to spill over into other commodities. Those pressures were short lived and confined largely to
metals, but international political tensions led to a renewed surge in
gold and silver prices in December.
Energy. It was the runup in world oil prices that most seriously aggravated inflation during 1979. Early in the year cutbacks in Iranian
production and efforts here and abroad to rebuild oil inventories created a tight balance between world supply and demand for oil. These
developments led in the second quarter to rapidly rising spot market
prices of crude petroleum and refined products and contributed to
local shortages of gasoline in the United States. Premium prices were
imposed by many oil-exporting countries, and supplies moved from
long-term contracts to the spot market, where much higher prices
prevailed. The Saudi benchmark price of crude oil was raised three
times: in April, July, and December. By early January 1980 the world
price of oil reached about $28 per barrel, more than double the level
a year earlier.
Phased decontrol of domestic oil prices, which was announced in
April and began to take effect on June 1, added only marginally to
average crude oil prices in the second half of last year, though decontrol will have larger effects in 1980. Wider refining and marketing
margins were a relatively important factor in the increase in prices of
gasoline and home heating fuel.
Gasoline prices at the pump rose 35 cents per gallon over the 4
quarters of 1979, compared to an increase of 5 cents that would have
been needed to keep up with the general rate of inflation. Approximately 14 cents of this increase stemmed from higher prices for imported crude oil and products, and 11 cents came from widening
gross margins of refiners, retailers, and distributors. About 10 cents
resulted from higher domestic crude oil prices, only a part of which
was due to decontrol.
Rising energy prices added directly about 2*A percentage points to
the overall rate of consumer price inflation in 1979, considerably
more than they added in 1974.
PRODUCTIVITY AND WAGES
Declining productivity added substantially to business costs during
the first program year, compounding the difficulties businesses encountered in complying with the basic price-deceleration standard.
For all private nonfarm businesses, productivity decreased 2.2 percent from the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979.




35

As a consequence the rise in unit labor costs jumped to 11.3 percent
over the same 4 quarters, compared with 7.8 percent during 1978.
Slower growth of real GNP in 1979 contributed to last year's poor
productivity, but the decline was too large to be explained by cyclical
factors alone. Generally businesses would try to pass cost increases
resulting from lower productivity through to higher prices if they
considered the decline to be permanent. Last year, however, prices in
the broad industrial and service sectors rose significantly less than
unit labor costs. Businesses may have absorbed part of the increased
costs because they believed the productivity decline to be temporary;
on the other hand, either market resistance or the standards may
have prevented businesses from raising prices further.
Under the circumstances that prevailed in 1979, it is hardly surprising that the overall inflation rate increased despite fairly widespread
compliance with the standards. What is surprising is the modest acceleration of inflation that occurred in the broad range of industrial
and service prices. As noted earlier, the increase in consumer
prices—excluding energy, home purchase and finance, and the farm
value of food—was less than 1 percentage point higher in 1979 than in
the previous year. The standards played an important role in preventing greater acceleration of prices.
Continued restraint in private wage and price decisions will be important this year. In September 1979 the Administration and the
leaders of the American labor movement reached a National Accord
recognizing the need to continue an effective and equitable anti-inflation program. (The National Accord and the pay and price standards
for the second program year are discussed in Chapter 2.)
Measures of Wage Performance

The long-term trend of prices of goods and services produced in
the private nonfarm sector of the economy closely follows the rise of
business costs. Wages, salaries, and fringe benefits account for
roughly two-thirds of the total costs of production. If last year's
sharp increases in energy prices and the cost of homeownership had
led to an accelerated rise of wages and fringe benefits, the long-term
outlook for inflation would have greatly worsened. Operation of the
pay standard during the first program year helped to prevent that
outcome.
The 7 percent pay standard provided a guideline to be used in establishing pay policies for nonunion employees and in collective bargaining. By and large, businesses followed those guidelines and
American workers cooperated by complying with the program.




36

Aggregate measures of wage performance indicate that wage and
salary increases did not accelerate during 1979 (Table 3). For example, the rate of increase in the adjusted average hourly earnings
index fell from 8.4 percent in 1978 to 8.0 percent in 1979, and the
growth of compensation per hour in private nonfarm business declined slightly from 9.0 percent to 8.8 percent.
TABLE 3.—Measures of changes in compensation and employment costs, 1977-79
[Percent change]

//

Measure

1978

1979 *

Fourth quarter to fourth quarter:
Adjusted hourly earnings index

7.5

8.4

8.0

Compensation per hour 2
Contribution of:
Private wages, salaries, and fringes
Employer contributions for social insurance..

7.5

9.0

8.8

6.9
.6

8.3
.7

8.0
.8

72
77
69
8.6

8.0
7.9
8.0
7.9

7.7
8.4
7.3
8.3

3.5
3.3
17

2.1
3.5
2.2

2.4
3.0
2.6

Third quarter to third quarter:
Employment cost index3
Union.
Nonunion.
Union wage changes (total effective adjustment)
Adjustment resulting from:
Current settlement.
Prior settlement.
Escalator provision.
1
2
3
4

4

....

Preliminary.
Data relate to private nonfarm business sector, all employees.
Changes are measured from September to September.
Agreements covering 1,000 workers or more.

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), and Council
of Economic Advisers.

Some deceleration in wage increases occurred last year in the nonunion sector. However, both the employment cost index for union
workers and the effective wage change in collective bargaining units
covering 1,000 workers or more showed a greater increase in the 4
quarters through September 1979 than in the preceding 4 quarters.
New collective bargaining agreements were concluded in five major
industries in 1979: petroleum, trucking, rubber, electrical machinery,
and autos. Increases in wages over the life of the contract are shown
in Table 4, with cost-of-living adjustment clauses evaluated at three
different rates of inflation.
Without the pay standard, the increases in wages granted in all of
these contracts might well have been larger. When evaluated at an 8
percent inflation rate (the average prevailing over the previous contract period) all of the major contracts concluded last year provided
for smaller increases in wages than those in the previous contracts.




37

T A B L E 4.—Wage increases under major collective bargaining contracts
[Percent increase]
1979 contract assuming
Prior
contract 1

Industry

6 percent
inflation

8 percent
inflation

10 percent
inflation

Petroleum: 2

8.9

8.2

8.2

8.2

Three-year increase
Annual rate
Rubber:

30.5
9.3

24.0
7.4

27.4

30.9
9.4

Three-year increase
Annual rate
Electrical:

45.5
13.3

27.6
8.5

33.4
10.1

39.4
11.7

Three-year increase
Annual rate
Autos:

32.9
9.9

20.0
6.3

24.5
7.6

28.8
8.8

Three-year increase
Annual rate

29.4
9.0

24.1
7.5

27.9
8.5

32.0
9.7

First year of two-year term
Trucking:

1
2

The previous petroleum contract was signed in 1977; all others were signed in 1976.
The petroleum contract is a two-year agreement but it was reopened in the second year.

Source: Council on Wage and Price Stability.

Studies by the Council of Economic Advisers reinforce the view
that the President's program aided in keeping wage rates from accelerating. Estimates from models of wage and price determination,
those developed at the Council as well as others, suggest that wage
increases during the first program year were about 1 to 1V2 percentage points lower than would be expected, given the basic determinants
of wages. To be sure, many influences could account for the shortfall, the effect of the pay standard being but one. For example, a shift
in the composition of the work force toward less experienced and
lower-paid workers occurred during the year. However, this demographic shift could not have accounted for more than a small part of
the difference between actual and expected wage increases, since
available evidence indicates that percentage wage increases for lowerpaid workers were larger than those for higher-paid workers.
Real Wages

Increases in wage rates during the first program year were below
the rise in consumer prices and hence workers' real incomes declined. The rise in prices relative to wages did not result from a general increase in business profit margins, however, but from other
sources. The rise in energy prices, stemming in large measure from
increased world oil prices, was the major cause.
The magnitude of the decline in real wages last year is itself difficult to estimate. Conclusions differ according to the measure of price
change to which the rise in wages is compared. The average hourly
earnings index for the private nonfarm sector rose by 8.0 percent
over the 4 quarters of last year. Since the consumer price index for




38

urban consumers climbed 12.7 percent, the average hourly earnings
index deflated by the CPI declined by 4.2 percent, compared to the
decline of 0.6 percent in 1978 indicated in Table 5.
TABLE 5.—Alternative deflators for earnings and compensation, 1978-79
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
1978

1979»

Average hourly earnings index
Deflated by:
Consumer price index (CPI)....
CPI with rent substituted for homeownership
CPI with rent substitution and excluding energy

-4.2
-2.4
.1

Fixed-weight deflator for personal consumption expenditures (PCE)..
Fixed-weight deflator for PCE excluding energy

-2.5

Compensation per hour 3
Deflated by:
Consumer price index (CPI)
CPI with rent substituted for homeownership.
CPI with rent substitution and excluding energy.
Fixed-weight deflator for PCE
Fixed-weight deflator for PCE excluding energy.
1
2
3

-3.5
-1.6
.9
-1.8

Preliminary.
Less than 0.05 percent.
Data relate to private nonfarm business, all employees.

Note.—Consumer price index for all urban consumers used.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).

The appropriateness of using the CPI as a measure of the inflation
confronting the average consumer has been called into question in
recent years because of the way this index treats the purchase of
homes and the associated costs of home financing. The CPI is a price
index of goods and services that consumers buy; it is not a cost-ofliving index. A home is an investment as well as a good purchased by
consumers for current consumption. An increase in home prices is
thus as much a return on savings to the homeowner in his role as an
investor as it is a rise in the cost of living to the individual in his role
as a consumer. Furthermore relatively few individuals purchase
homes in any given year and pay the associated current mortgage interest rates; for others the rise in the home purchase and finance
components of the CPI does not represent an increase in current living costs. Conversely this year's increase in the costs of home purchase and finance, unless reversed, would affect future buyers even if
this component of the CPI showed no subsequent rise.
During recent years the Bureau of Labor Statistics has reviewed intensively the treatment of homeownership in the CPI. Several approaches were developed, but none dealt with the complexities in a
manner satisfactory to the major users of the CPI. One alternative is
to use a rent index to represent the costs of using the services of a
house. This may give a better measure of changes in the cost of living to the average consumer, particularly during periods when the




39

costs of homes and home finance move very sharply. When average
hourly earnings are deflated by the CPI with the rent index substituted for homeownership, real earnings still show a drop in 1979, as
Table 5 indicates, but it is more moderate.
Another measure which uses the CPI rent index to represent housing costs is the fixed-weight price index for personal consumption
expenditures in the national income and product accounts. Average
hourly earnings show a decline of about the same size when deflated by
this index.
In either case, the source of the decline was the sharp increase in
energy prices. Without this rise in energy prices, real average hourly
earnings would have been approximately unchanged in 1979, compared with a small increase in the previous year.
The lower part of the table shows compensation per hour deflated
by each of these measures of consumer price change. Compensation
per hour includes wages, fringe benefits, and employers' contributions to social insurance, and it has generally increased faster than
wage rates. The broad pattern of change that emerges when this
measure is deflated by the various price indexes is similar to that for
average hourly earnings.
There is no doubt that real earnings of American workers declined
in 1979. Sharp increases in energy prices made that decline inevitable. The decline in real wages would have been larger if businesses
had fully passed through to higher prices the rise in unit labor costs
resulting from declining productivity. Larger increases in nominal
wages would at best have improved real wages only temporarily. By
increasing business costs, they would eventually have led to a still
more rapid rise in prices.
The Distribution of National Income

Another way of appraising the impact of the standards is to consider the changes that occurred during the program year in the distribution of total national income among major income groups.
In the third quarter of 1978, the last quarter before the standards
went into effect, employee compensation excluding employer contributions to social insurance accounted for 69.9 percent of total national income (see Table 6). One year later the ratio had risen slightly to 70.2 percent. Over the same year the corporate profit share fell
from 10.0 percent to 9.3 percent. Such changes in the share of national income going into employee compensation and profits are
typical of a period in which economic growth slows. Since productivity declined and the increased costs were not passed through fully to
prices, corporate profit margins fell. The share of employee compen-




40

sation in national income was larger than it would have been had the
higher costs been passed through fully to higher prices.
TABLE 6.—Shares of national income, 1976-79
[Percent of total]
Third quarter

1977

1976

1978

1979 *

1978

1979

76.3

75.8

75.7

75.8

75.4

75.8

5.2
71.1

5.3
70.5

5.5
70.2

5.7
70.2

5.4
69.9

5.7
70.2

6.6

6.6

6.8

6.8

6.7

6.7

5.2
1.3

5.3
1.3

5.2
1.6

5.1
1.7

5.2
1.5

5.1
1.6

1.6

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.5

1.4

Corporate profits ..

9.3

9.8

9.7

9.3

10.0

9.3

Net interest

6.2

6.2

6.4

6.7

6.4

6.8

Compensation of employees
Employer contributions for social insuranceWages, salaries, fringe benefits, and other....
Proprietors' income
Nonfarm
Farm 2
Rental income

2

2

3

2

1
2
3

Preliminary.
With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments.
Rental income of persons, with capital consumption adjustment.

Note.—Quarterly figures based on seasonally adjusted data.
Detail may not add to 100 percent because of rounding.
Source.- Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

The decline in the corporate profit share occurred despite significant increases in the profit margins of oil companies. For other nonfinancial businesses, the squeeze on profit margins stemming from
the decline in productivity growth was larger than the overall numbers indicate.
Table 7 shows employee compensation and corporate profits as a
share of gross product originating in nonfinancial businesses, excluding petroleum and coal companies. From the third quarter of 1978 to
the third quarter of 1979 the profit share declined by 1 V percentage
2
points, while the share of employee compensation rose by almost
that much.
TABLE 7.—Shares of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporate business excluding
petroleum and coal companies, 1976-79
[Percent of total]

Item

1978
1976

1977

Compensation of employees

68.2

68.5

Corporate profits 1

10.9

10.9

1978

1979

1

II

III

I
V

1

II

III

69.1

69.8

68.9

68.9

68.8

69.8

70.1

70.2

10.7

9.4

10.8

11.0

11.2

10.3

9.8

9.5

1

Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment but without capital consumption adjustment, which cannot be
distributed by industry.
Note.—Figures in this table cannot be compared directly to those in Table 6.
Source.- Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Council of Economic Advisers.




41

THE MAJOR SECTORS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND IN 1979
Demand in nearly all major sectors of the economy was weaker in
1979 than in the previous year (Table 8). In real terms domestic final
sales declined during the first half, largely because of the pronounced drop in consumers' purchases of goods in the second quarter, when long gas lines discouraged shopping. Declining residential
construction also contributed to the reduction in final sales. The fall
in real GNP in the first half was cushioned by a sizable rise of inventory investment, primarily traceable to involuntary accumulation in
the second quarter.
TABLE 8.—Growth in major components of real gross national product, 1978-79
[Seasonally adjusted annual rate]
1977 IV
to
1978 IV

Component

1978 IV
to
1979 II

1979 II
to
1979 IV l

Percent change:
Real gross national product

4.8

4.5
1.5
-5.9
2.9

-2.4
-2.6

4.7
1.8

4.3

Real domestic final sales 2

2.3

-.1.1
1.9
-10.7
-2.6

-2.5
4.0

Federal
State and local

-0.6

4.5
10.5
-.2
1.7

Personal consumption expenditures.
Business fixed investment
Residential fixed investment.
Government purchases of goods and services.

-1.5

3.4

Change as a percent of real GNP:

-2.1
1.0

Inventory accumulation
Net exports of goods and services..
1
2
3

Preliminary.
GNP excluding change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services.
Less than 0.05 percent.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Final sales strengthened in the second half of the year, when consumer spending picked up noticeably, and government purchases
also increased. However, continued cautious inventory policies and
efforts to reduce swollen stocks of new cars led to a large decline in
inventory accumulation.
Purchases by State and local governments declined slightly in 1979
after a large increase in 1978 that came partly from the effects of the
stimulus package introduced by President Carter in 1977.
Net exports were a source of strength in 1979, particularly in the
second half. In volume terms, exports of goods and services increased by 9 percent, while imports of goods and services rose only 2
percent.




42

PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES

Growth of real personal consumption expenditures over the 4
quarters of 1979 was the smallest since 1974, when a decline in real
consumer buying occurred. The 1979 increase would have been still
smaller if consumers had not been willing to reduce their current
saving as a proportion of after-tax income and to increase their
indebtedness. The personal saving rate, already low at 4.7 percent of
disposable income in the fourth quarter of 1978, declined further to
a very low level of 3.3 percent by the fourth quarter of last year.
The pattern of consumer spending over the year was uneven. The
steep second-quarter drop was followed in the summer by a marked
pickup that carried into the fourth quarter. While sales of new cars
weakened in the fourth quarter, purchases of other goods and services remained relatively strong despite the continued squeeze on consumer purchasing power.
Purchases of durable goods fell 4 percent in real terms; unit auto
sales in the fourth quarter were 11 percent below their level a year
earlier. The mix of new car sales changed as consumers became increasingly concerned about the cost and availability of gasoline. Purchases of medium-size and larger cars plummeted in the second
quarter. Some strengthening occurred in the third quarter in response to very heavy price discounts, but sales fell again later in the
year. Sales of recreational vehicles, vans, and light trucks were also
hit hard. In contrast, more imported models, chiefly fuel-efficient vehicles, were purchased in 1979 than in 1978; by the end of last year
imports had captured one-fourth of the domestic market. Although
sales of the new small American models were limited severely by
availability, domestically produced compact and subcompact cars accounted for one-third of total auto sales late last year.
Sales of nondurable goods increased by only 1 percent in real
terms during 1979. Declines occurred for energy commodities—gasoline, fuel oil, and coal—as a result of rising energy prices since 1973
and the improved fuel efficiency of automobiles. In 1972, before the
first large OPEC price rise, consumers' outlays for energy amounted
to 6.8 percent of total personal consumption expenditures. Adjusted
for price changes, the ratio in the fourth quarter of 1979 was a full
percentage point lower.
HOUSING

The decline in residential construction in 1979 was about in line
with expectations at the beginning of the year, although interest rates
increased much more than had been anticipated. For the year as a
whole, real residential construction was 6 percent below the high
1978 level, and new housing starts fell to about 1.74 million units




43

from 2 million in the previous year. A decline in single-family starts
to below 1.2 million units accounted for most of the overall reduction. Multifamily starts were only slightly below 1978 levels.
A severe winter led to a drop of more than 20 percent in housing
starts in the first quarter. Making up the resulting shortfall helped to
sustain construction activity over the next 2 quarters, when housing
starts exceeded an annual rate of 1.8 million. During the fourth quarter, housing starts dropped sharply to a rate of about 1.6 million in
response to a marked increase in mortgage interest rates and reduced availability of mortgage credit.
The rising cost of mortgage and construction financing depressed
housing sales and starts only moderately until late in the year. Interest rates on mortgage loans rose a full percentage point—to about 11
percent—from late 1978 to September 1979. Nevertheless sales of
both new and existing homes continued at a fairly high rate. While
this strength was partly attributable to demographic trends, the perception of housing as a good hedge against inflation was a major factor sustaining demand. The average price of new homes, adjusted for
changes in quality, increased by about 15 percent last year.
Following Federal Reserve action in early October to tighten monetary policy, mortgage interest rates rose sharply, reaching levels well
above usury limits in many States. In some cases these usury limits
resulted in severe disruptions in local housing markets. In other
States potential home buyers found mortgage credit less readily
available as mortgage lenders raised down payments, made loans
only to established depositors, and took other steps to reduce their
lending. Housing starts fell by 14 percent in November to a 1.5-million annual rate and remained at that level in December.
BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT

Real business fixed investment in the current expansion began to
rise strongly in early 1976, led by increased outlays for producers'
durable equipment, especially vehicles (Table 9). Investment in industrial plant and other structures lagged behind, but it too turned
upward in the middle of 1977. From then until the end of 1978 rising business investment provided strong support for new jobs, higher
incomes, and increased total real output. From the end of 1975 to
the fourth quarter of 1978 the share of real GNP devoted to business
capital formation rose from 9.1 to 10.2 percent, although it remained
below the high level attained in late 1973 and early 1974.




44

TABLE 9.—Changes in real businessfixedinvestment, 1975-79
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
1975

Component

1976

1977

1978

1979

1

Nonresidential fixed investment

-9.9

9.6

7.5

10.5

1.7

Structures
Producers' durable equipment

-7.2
-11.2

3.2
12.7

4.4
8.8

16.0
8.1

6.0
-.2

Autos, trucks, and buses
Other

2.9
-14.8

22.6
9.7

20.3
4.8

8.0
8.1

-23.0
8.9

1

Preliminary.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Over the 4 quarters of last year, growth of real business fixed investment fell to 1.7 percent, compared with 10.5 percent in the previous 4 quarters. Last year's slowdown in the rise of business fixed
investment was partly caused by the gradual increase in excess capacity and the squeeze on profit margins that accompanied the reduced
pace of economic expansion. Purchases of cars and trucks declined
sharply. Excluding the vehicle component, the growth of business investment in equipment during the past 4 quarters was 8.9 percent,
compared with 8.1 percent in 1978.
Investment in structures was curtailed in the first quarter because
of adverse weather, but it recovered in the second quarter and increased somewhat further in the second half. Growth during 1979
was 6 percent in real terms, well below the increase in 1978.
INVENTORY ACCUMULATION

Inventory investment in 1972 dollars was just under 1 percent of
real GNP in the first quarter of 1979, about the same ratio as in the
preceding 2 years. In the second quarter the drop in auto sales led to
marked increases in stocks of large cars, trucks, and recreational vehicles; inventories of small cars declined, however. Involuntary accumulation occurred in other industries also, but in moderate amounts.
The ratio of real inventories to final sales rose in the first half of the
year but declined in the second half. Auto stocks were reduced in the
late summer, and other industries adjusted production to avoid undesired increases in inventories.
Because cautious inventory policies continued in 1979, the cyclical
imbalances that often occur during economic expansion have been
avoided (Chart 2). As a consequence the slower pace of final sales
did not lead to the magnified reduction in output that would have
occurred if inventory liquidation had been extensive.

45
294-289

0 - 8 0 - 4




Chart 2

Real Inventory/Sales Ratio, Nonfarm Business
RATIO
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

r Y n i i i 1 i i i I i i i I i i I 1 i i i 1 11 11 i i i I i 11 1 i i 11 i 11 i i i 11 i 11 1 i i i 1 i i i I i 11 I i 11 I i i 11 i i I 11 i i I i 11 n

1960

62

64

66

68

70

72

74

76

78

NOTE: RATIO OF REAL INVENTORIES AT END OF QUARTER TO ANNUAL RATE OF REAL FINAL
SALES FOR QUARTER.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.

THE FOREIGN SECTOR

The volume of U.S. merchandise exports began to grow rapidly in
the first half of 1978 after several years of near stagnation, and this
rapid growth continued through 1979. Over the 4 quarters of last
year the volume of merchandise exports is estimated to have risen by
about 12 percent.
Although more rapid economic growth abroad helped boost U.S.
exports, the most important factor accounting for this surge in foreign sales was the depreciation of the dollar during late 1977 and
1978. Depreciation of the dollar makes U.S. goods more competitive
abroad by lowering their prices in foreign currency. Since trade flows
respond to changes in relative prices only after a considerable lag,
export volumes continued to be affected throughout 1979 by the depreciation that had occurred earlier.
Growth in agricultural exports to a record level also contributed to
the rising volume of merchandise exported during 1979, particularly
in the second half. A crop shortfall in the Soviet Union resulted in a
significant increase in grain exports and higher domestic grain prices.
The price rise was moderated, however, by farmer-held reserves and
excellent domestic crops of corn, wheat, cotton, and soybeans. In
January 1980 the President announced a suspension of agricultural
exports to the Soviet Union. At the same time the President took



46

steps to channel the 17 million metric tons of grain exports which
had been interrupted by this action into the Nation's grain reserves.
The volume of merchandise imports, which had grown strongly
during 1978, is estimated to have increased by less than 3 percent
last year. Earlier depreciation of the dollar, weak growth of domestic
demand, and reduced energy consumption in the United States were
all contributing factors.
The deficit on merchandise trade narrowed during 1978 from a
$48-billion annual rate in the first quarter to about $24 billion in the
fourth. This improving trend did not continue in 1979 because of the
rise in oil prices. In the fourth quarter of 1979 payments for
imported oil were about $30 billion higher (at an annual rate) than a
year earlier, even though the volume of oil imports was lower. Net
gains in other components of merchandise trade were strong, but
they did not quite offset this rise in oil payments.
The current account position of the United States, after posting
deficits for 7 consecutive quarters, improved sharply to show a small
surplus in the fourth quarter of 1978. For the year 1979 the current
account may have been in near balance, compared with a deficit of
$13.5 billion in 1978. This improvement was greater than the yearover-year decline in the merchandise trade deficit because the surplus on service transactions, particularly net investment earnings,
rose substantially. Overseas earnings were an estimated $9 billion
larger in 1979 than in 1978. Revival of growth abroad, exceptionally
strong earnings by U.S. oil companies on their foreign operations,
and the increase in the dollar value of foreign currency earnings due
to the depreciation of the dollar all contributed to this rise.
Net exports, as measured in the national income and product accounts, rose about $8 billion in 1972 dollars over the 4 quarters of
1979.
GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES

Federal purchases of goods and services, measured in constant dollars, rose by slightly more than 1 percent over the 4 quarters of
1979. In real terms Federal purchases declined in 1978, and their
level at the end of 1979 was still somewhat below the figure posted 2
years earlier. Most of the 1979 increase reflected purchases for defense. In current dollars, defense purchases increased by 13 percent
over the 4 quarters of 1979.
The real value of State and local purchases fell in the first quarter
of last year because public construction was curtailed by harsh winter
weather in the Midwest and along the Atlantic Coast. These purchases recovered somewhat in the second and third quarters of 1979;
but over the 4 quarters of the year they declined slightly compared




47

with a 4-percent rise in 1978. This turnaround partly reflects the
ending of the 1977-78 step-up of Federal assistance. Grants-in-aid
from the Federal Government rose moderately during 1979, after a
large increase in 1978. The aggregate operating account of all State
and local governments swung from a small surplus at the end of
1978 to a small deficit by the close of 1979. Receipts grew more
slowly than expenditures, partly because the slowdown in economic
expansion limited the rise of taxable incomes.
LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS
Employment growth remained strong in 1979, although well below
the substantial gains of recent years. Despite a continued fairly rapid
expansion of the labor force, amounting to 2.2 percent during the 4
quarters of 1979, the overall unemployment rate remained within a
fairly narrow range of 5.7 to 5.9 percent. The unemployment rates
for most major population groups were also relatively stable throughout 1979 (Table 10). The proportion of the working-age population
that was employed rose slightly last year.
Women contributed most to the growth of the labor force. The
participation rate of adult women rose to a new high of 51.0 percent,
TABLE 10.—Labor market developments, 1976-79
Component

1976 IV

1977 IV

1978 IV

1979 IV

Percent change from year earlier 1

3.4

4.4

3.6

2.1

Males 20 years and over
Females 20 years and over
Both sexes 16-19 years

2.6
4.6
3.0

3.3
5.2
8.0

2.5
5.4
2.6

1.3
3.9
-.9

White
Black and other

3.3
4.2

4.3
4.7

3.2
7.0

2.0
2.9

Increase in civilian employment, total..

Percent2
Unemployment rate, t o t a l 3

7.7

6.6

5.8

5.9

Males 20 years and over.
Females 20 years and over.
Both sexes 16-19 years.

6.0
7.4
19.0

4.7
6.7
16.5

4.0
5.7
16.2

4.2
5.7
16.1

White
Black and other.

7.0
13.2

5.7
13.2

5.0
11.5

5.1
11.2

Participation rate, t o t a l 4

61.8

62.6

63.5

63.8

Males 20 years and over
Females 20 years and over
Both sexes 16-19 years

79.9
47.3
54.4

79.9
48.6
56.9

79.8
50.1
58.5

79.6
51.0
58.2

White
Black and other

62.1
59.6

62.9
60.7

63.7
61.9

64.1
61.8

1
Changes for 1978 IV adjusted for the increase of about 250,000 in employment and labor force in January 1978 resulting
from changes in the sample and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey.
2
Seasonally adjusted.
3
Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force.
4
Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population.

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




48

up almost a full percentage point over 1978 and about 4 percentage
points over 1976. The participation rates of teenagers and adult men
declined slightly last year.
The increase in employment among adult women accounted for
about 70 percent of the rise in total civilian employment; the percentage increase was about three times that of adult males. Blacks
and members of other racial minorities accounted for over 15 percent of the employment increase. Employment for these groups grew
one and a half times faster than that for whites.
Nonfarm payroll employment increased 2.4 million from the fourth
quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979, a smaller gain than the
4-million rise in 1978. This increase was concentrated in nonmanufacturing industries; in particular, mining, construction, and services
showed large gains. In the manufacturing sector, most nondurable
goods industries continued to show little or no growth in employment. Employment declined in the apparel, leather products, and tobacco industries. Some producers of durable goods, notably manufacturers of electrical and electronic machinery, showed strong gains
in employment.
After a fairly steady drop since mid-1975, the number of persons
reporting layoffs as the reason for their unemployment leveled off in
the first half of last year and rose in the second. The number of unemployed persons who were new entrants or reentrants into the
labor force fell for the second consecutive year after having risen
quite rapidly through 1977.
ECONOMIC POLICY IN 1979
The principal objective of economic policy in 1979 was to stem accelerating inflation. Restraining aggregate demand with fiscal and
monetary policies was a key element of the government's anti-inflation program. It was recognized, however, that monetary and fiscal
restraint could not do the job alone. As discussed earlier, the voluntary standards for prices and wages helped to hold down the rise of
prices in the broad industrial and service sectors of the economy and
to maintain wage restraint.
FISCAL POLICY
Federal outlays for fiscal 1979 were $494 billion, an increase of 9.5
percent over fiscal 1978 but well below the 12.1 percent average annual rate of increase from fiscal 1973 through 1978.
The Revenue Act of 1978 provided for tax relief amounting to
$18.9 billion in calendar 1979, with a $14.1-billion reduction in personal taxes, a $6.5-billion cut in business taxes, and a $0.7-billion in-




49

crease in outlays for the earned income tax credit. An employment
tax credit of $2.5 billion was allowed to expire. The tax package offset the increase in individual income tax rates caused by inflation,
and it also encouraged investment in the new and modern plant and
equipment needed to improve productivity.
These tax and spending programs yielded a unified budget deficit
of $28 billion in fiscal 1979, $21 billion less than the fiscal 1978
level. The deficit was $10 billion less than had been originally forecast. Outlays were close to original projections, while receipts were
$10 billion greater than expected. The excess of actual over projected receipts reflected not only the impact of inflation, but also
substantial unanticipated overwithholding.
The High-Employment Budget

Changes in Federal expenditures, receipts, and the deficit are often
misleading indicators of fiscal policy because they reflect cyclical
changes in economic activity as well as changes in fiscal policy. This
problem does not arise with the high-employment budget. The adjustments made to obtain the high-employment budget remove from
TABLE 11.—Actual and high-employment Federal receipts and expenditures, national income and
product accounts, calendar years, 1973-79
[Amounts in billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rate]
Actual
Calendar year or quarter
Receipts

Expenditures

High-employment
Surplus
or deficit ( —)
Receipts

Amount

Percent
of GNP

Expenditures

Surplus
or deficit ( —)
Amount

Percent
of GNP !

1973
1974

258.3
288.6

265.0
299.3

-6.7
-10.7

-0.5
-.8

255.1
307.0

264.9
297.7

-9.8
9.3

-0.8
.6

1975
1976 .
1977
1978 2 3
1979

286.2
331.4
375.4
432.1
498.3

356.8
385.0
421.7
459.8
508.0

-70.6
-53.6
-46.3
-27.7
-9.7

-4.6
-3.1
-2.4
-1.3
-.4

327.7
361.5
395.0
444.2
515.0

345.9
374.9
413.6
455.7
505.2

-18.2
-13.4
-18.6
-11.6
9.8

-1.1
-.7
-1.0
-.5
.4

1977:
III
IV

375.8
388.2

429.4
441.8

,-53.6
-53.6

-2.8
-2.7

391.6
404.9

422.1
434.9

-30.5
-30.0

-1.5
-1.5

1978:
1
II
Ill
IV

397.8
424.8
442.1
463.5

447.3
449.4
462.6
479.7

-49.4
-24.6
-20.4
-16.3

-2.5
-1.2
-.9
-.7

417.2
437.1
452.1
470.2

442.1
445.2
458.9
476.8

-24.9
-8.0
-6.8
-6.6

-1.2
-.4
-.3
-.3

475.5
486.3
505.3

486.8
492.9
516.1

-11.3
-6.6
-10.8

-.5
-.3
-.5

483.8
504.5
524.8
546.9

484.1
490.3
513.3
533.1

-.4
14.3
11.5
13.8

(4)
.6
.5
.5

1979:
|2

II 2
|||2

IV 2
1
2

High-employment surplus or deficit as percent of high-employment gross national product.
Includes proposed tax increases involving foreign tax credits which are retroactive to 1979 and not included in data
published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
3
Preliminary.
4
Less than 0.05 percent.
Note.—Detail may not add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of the Treasury, Office of Management and
Budget, and Council of Economic Advisers.




50

actual receipts and expenditures the effects of cyclical fluctuations in
the economy. Consequently this budget shows the surplus or deficit
as it would be if the economy were moving smoothly along its potential growth path. It is therefore a better, although still imperfect,
measure of discretionary fiscal policy.
Estimates of high-employment budget expenditures and receipts,
as measured in the national income and product accounts, indicate a
substantial shift of fiscal policy toward restraint over the past year—
from a deficit of $7 billion, annual rate, in the second half of 1978 to
a surplus of about $13 billion in the second half of 1979 (Table 11).
The procedure for estimating the high-employment budget is discussed in Supplement I to this chapter.
Fiscal and Oil Price Restraint
T h e shift of the high-employment budget into surplus was less important in restraining aggregate demand in 1979 than were the rising
prices of oil and refined petroleum products. T o help assess the effects on aggregate demand of these two factors taken together, the
Council of Economic Advisers has calculated the combined restraint
from fiscal policy and price developments in the oil sector. These estimates are at best an approximate measure, but they indicate the unexpectedly severe restraint placed on aggregate demand in 1979.
Over the 4 quarters of the year, fiscal and oil price restraint increased by about $60 billion, or about 2Vz percent of GNP. (A more
detailed discussion of the procedures used by the Council to measure
the restraint from higher oil prices is provided in Supplement II to
this chapter.)
MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS
T h e principal objective of monetary policy in 1979 was to help
check accelerating inflation by limiting the growth of money and
credit. In an environment of sharply expanding demand for money
and credit, implementation of that policy required a pronounced rise
in interest rates. T h e pattern of increases was uneven: rates fell
slightly on balance in the first half but advanced rapidly thereafter
(Chart 3).
In submitting to the Congress the annual monetary policy report
required under the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of
1978, the Federal Reserve set forth its objectives with regard to increases in the monetary and credit aggregates during 1979. For the
period from the fourth quarter of 1978 to the fourth quarter of 1979
the Federal Reserve established a target range of 1 V2 to 4V2 percent
for Mi (demand deposits and currency). T h e range for M2 (Mi plus
time and savings deposits other than negotiable certificates of depos-




51

Chart 3

Selected Interest Rates and
Bond Yields
PERCENT PER ANNUM

16

SHORT-TERM

14
FEDERAL FUNDS

A
12

i

A
tA

10

8

6

r \
I \I

J
I

H
•

h
H

1 1

•v /

J

\ ^

\\
\

• # *

r

PRIME

—

J
LJ

/ I

/
•

A
\\
\\

t

y

/ I
i
* _

r

r

/

TREASURY BILLS
6-MONTH
NEW ISSUES)

4

ni I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I

1973
12

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

LONG-TERM

NEW-HOME
MORTGAGES!/

10

•'" .?

*^ /
, '

CORPORATE Aaa BONDS

4 V l i 11 i 11 i i i i i I i | 1 1 i 1 i i i i t I i i i i i 1 i i i i i I i i i i i | i i i i i 1 i i i | i | i i i i i | 11 i i i | i i i i i I i i i i i 1 i i i i i I

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

UEFFECTIVE RATE ON CONVENTIONAL MORTGAGES IN THE PRIMARY MARKET.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE SYSTEM, FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD, AND MOODY'S INVESTORS SERVICE.




52

1979

it at large commercial banks) was set at 5 to 8 percent. For M3 (M2
plus time and savings deposits at savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks, and credit unions) a range of 6 to 9 percent was
established. Commercial bank credit was projected to increase between 7V2 percent and 10V2 percent during the year. In setting the
initial Mi range, the Federal Reserve staff estimated that the introduction of automatic transfer services (ATS) and negotiable order of
withdrawal (NOW) accounts in New York State (discussed below)
would reduce growth in Mi by about 3 percentage points over the
course of 1979. In October the target for Mi was revised upward to a
range of 3 to 6 percent because ATS and NOW accounts had grown
much more slowly than anticipated.
In the first quarter of 1979, Mi actually declined, while M2 rose at
an annual rate of about 2 percent. This leveling off in the monetary
aggregates reflected both slower economic growth and shifts of funds
from bank deposits to other financial assets because of the higher interest rates established late in 1978. Balances in money market mutual funds jumped from $11 billion in December to $18 billion in
March, and households substantially stepped up their purchases of
government securities. The contraction in Mi was also due to the
rapid growth in ATS and NOW accounts during the first quarter.
The decline in real GNP in the second quarter, combined with uncertainties about the energy situation, led to a widespread belief that
an economic downturn had begun. In this environment the Federal
Reserve kept monetary policy approximately unchanged. The 9V2
percent discount rate established in November 1978 was maintained
until July; the Federal funds rate was raised 25 basis points to 10V4
percent in May and then held at that level until July.
Growth of the monetary aggregates surged in the second quarter
despite the decline in real GNP. From March to June both Mi and M2
increased at an annual rate of almost 12 percent. This pickup in
money growth was partly attributable to special factors. Large increases in demand balances occurred just before the April and June
tax dates. In addition, after mid-March thrift institutions were no
longer permitted to pay a higher interest rate than banks on the popular 6-month money market certificates. As a result commercial banks
captured half of the net increase in MMCs in the second quarter,
compared to one-third in the first quarter, and this raised the growth
rate of M2.
In July monetary growth continued at a rapid pace, and market interest rates began to move up. At first the Federal Reserve kept
its target for the Federal funds rate unchanged, but it soon became apparent that maintenance of the funds rate was resulting in
a rapid expansion in bank reserves and the monetary aggregates. Al-




53

though the expansion of the monetary aggregates slowed considerably in August, rapid growth of money and credit resumed in September, when economic statistics were indicating a rebound of activity in the third quarter and the continuation of a very high rate of
inflation.
During the third quarter the Federal Reserve took steps that led to
higher interest rates. The discount rate was moved up in several
stages to 11 percent in mid-September, and the Federal funds rate
was raised to 11 V2 percent. From the end of June to mid-September
most short-term rates had climbed by almost 200 basis points. Nevertheless both Mi and M2 were growing rapidly, and it was clear that
the Federal Reserve's 1979 target ranges would be breached if such
high growth rates continued.
During the first 9 months of last year, growth in bank credit was
well above earlier projections and consistently outstripped the expansion in bank deposits. To satisfy expanding demands for credit,
banks substantially increased their reliance on nondeposit sources of
funds, which rose from $85 billion in December 1978 to about $130
billion in September.
It was—and still is—difficult to assess the degree of restraint exerted by monetary policy in the first 3 quarters of 1979. The spread of
active liability management among banks, the advances in cash management techniques used by firms, and the growing financial sophistication of households have produced a marked shift in the normal
relationships between economic activity and the monetary aggregates. The new7 MMCs have played a particularly important role in
cushioning the effects of monetary restraint on housing. Moreover
the effects of interest rates on aggregate demand may also have
changed because of heightened inflationary expectations. In any
event, by September the growth of money and credit, developments
in the real economy, and signs in commodity markets of an apparent
worsening of inflationary expectations were giving unambiguous signals that more monetary restraint was needed. Pressures on the dollar reinforced those signals.
Monetary Policy in the Fourth Quarter of 1979

On October 6 the Federal Reserve announced a major shift in its
technique for implementing monetary policy. Previously it had attempted to control the expansion of the monetary aggregates by
adopting a target for the Federal funds rate. Under the new approach
the object of open market operations would be to supply the volume
of bank reserves consistent with desired rates of monetary growth.
Much greater variation in the Federal funds rate was to be permitted.




54

The Federal Reserve also raised the discount rate to 12 percent and
established a marginal reserve requirement of 8 percent on increases
in the total of managed liabilities of member banks, Edge Act corporations, and U.S. agencies and branches of foreign banks. Managed
liabilities subject to this requirement include large-denomination
time deposits with maturities of less than a year, Eurodollar borrowings, repurchase agreements, and borrowings of Federal funds from
lenders not subject to the requirement. This added reserve requirement raised the effective cost to banks of obtaining funds through
these sources.
Interest rates climbed to record levels in the first few weeks after
October 6 but then declined through late November. In December
rates rose again but remained below October peaks. On average,
short-term rates during the final month of 1979 were about 1% percentage points above September levels, while long-term rates had
risen about 1 percentage point. With the prime bank loan rate at
15V4 percent at the end of December, businesses faced short-term
borrowing costs that greatly exceeded the rate of inflation in the industrial sector, about 9 percent for producer prices of finished goods
other than food and energy.
Money and credit growth decreased markedly in the wake of the
Federal Reserve's action. During the final quarter of last year Mi rose
at an annual rate of only 3.1 percent, while growth of M2 dropped to
a 7.1 percent rate. Consequently, growth of Mi and M3 fell within the
target ranges established for 1979, while jthe increase in M2 was just
above the upper end of its range.
Thrift Institution Deposits and Mortgage Credit

Although short-term interest rates nearly doubled from December
1977 to December 1979, both thrift institution deposits and the flow
of mortgage credit proved more resilient than in earlier periods of
high rates.
During past periods of high interest rates, depositors had shifted
their funds from accounts at banks and thrift institutions, where deposit ceilings were fixed by regulation, to market instruments giving
a higher rate of return. The introduction in June 1978 of 6-month
money market certificates enabled both thrift institutions and banks
to compete more effectively for funds. Commercial banks are permitted to pay an interest rate on these certificates, which require a
$10,000 minimum deposit, equal to the discount rate on 6-month
Treasury bills. Initially thrift institutions were able to pay one-fourth
of 1 percent more, but in March 1979 that differential was eliminated
whenever the 6-month bill rate was 9 percent or higher.




55

Thrift institutions captured 70 percent of the net increase in MMC
balances from June 1978 to March 1979, and 50 percent of the
growth in MMCs over the last 3 quarters of 1979. By the end of 1979
MMCs accounted for about one-fourth of all deposits at thrift institutions.
Certificates of deposit sold in amounts of $100,000 or more, which
are not subject to rate ceilings, were also important in maintaining
thrift flows during 1979. Those large-denomination certificates accounted for about one-third of the increase in deposits with savings
and loan associations last year, compared to only 12 percent in 1978.
Regulations were issued in December authorizing federally chartered
savings and loan associations to tap the Euromarkets by issuing
large-denomination certificates to foreign investors.
In July 1979 a floating ceiling was established for deposits with a
maturity of 4 years or more. Thrift institutions were permitted to pay
an interest rate 1 percentage point below the yield on 4-year Treasury issues, and the ceiling for commercial banks was set 25 basis
points below that for thrift institutions. The 4-year certificates did
not play an important role during 1979; short-term rates remained
well above medium-term Treasury yields throughout the latter part
of the year, and the 4-year certificates were less attractive to depositors than MMCs and money market mutual funds. Minimum deposit
requirements were also eliminated in July for all deposit categories
except MMCs, and penalties for early withdrawal were reduced.
On January 1, 1980, the floating ceiling was extended to cover deposits with a maturity of 2% years or more. Under these new regulations thrift institutions can pay an interest rate on such accounts that
is one-half of a percentage point less than the 2V2-year Treasury
yield, while the ceiling for banks is 25 basis points less than that for
thrift institutions. (Floating ceilings apply only when they exceed the
previously established fixed ceilings for a given class of deposits.)
Secondary mortgage markets, which have expanded rapidly in recent years, also helped sustain the flow of mortgage credit during
1979. The Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA)
guarantees mortgage-backed securities issued against pools of FHA
and VA mortgages. Only $5 billion of such securities were issued
during 1974, when the GNMA market was just developing. By 1979
more than two-thirds of all FHA and VA mortgages were being packaged in pools guaranteed by GNMA, and new issues of these securities rose to almost $25 billion. The secondary market for conventional mortgages has also expanded in recent years. By making mortgages attractive to a wider group of investors, the development of
secondary markets has further reduced the degree to which the availability of mortgage credit depends on the flow of deposits to thrift
institutions.




56

Despite these developments the October 6 actions of the Federal
Reserve caused a severe shock in the mortgage credit markets. Thrift
institutions were confronted with greater uncertainty regarding their
ability to attract funds. They also faced the prospect of sharp reductions in earnings because the cost of attracting funds had risen so
much relative to revenues from their loan portfolios, which consist
largely of loans made at lower rates of interest prevailing in earlier
years. In the light of these uncertainties substantial numbers of thrift
institutions stopped making new mortgage loan commitments altogether, and many others tightened their lending policies by raising
required down payments or by lending only to long-standing depositors. Mortgage interest rates increased sharply in all States where
usury ceilings were not binding. Where such ceilings prevented mortgage rates from rising, many mortgage lenders withdrew from the
market.
Potential home buyers in late 1979 were therefore confronted with
sharply higher costs of home financing and tighter nonprice terms.
Some were unwilling to pay the higher rates, others could not make
the higher down payment required, and still others found it difficult
to qualify for loans because of the higher monthly payments. With
both higher costs and reduced availability of credit driving buyers out
of the market, housing starts declined substantially in October and in
November before leveling off in December.
What the developments in late 1979 imply for the mortgage market in 1980 cannot yet be fully evaluated. Initially the market may
have overreacted to uncertainties prevailing in October and November. Since late October, interest rates on market securities have declined, as have rates on new mortgage loan commitments in some regions of the country. Late last year legislation was enacted that permanently exempted FHA and VA loans from State usury limits and
temporarily exempted other residential mortgage lending from these
ceilings. This should bolster home sales and construction in States
where usury limits had been binding. Nevertheless the outlook for
housing construction in early 1980 has been dimmed by conditions
prevailing in mortgage markets late in 1979. This weakness in housing makes it more likely that the economy will slide into recession
this year.
ATS and NOW Accounts

Two regulatory changes introduced late in 1978 had an important
bearing on the financial services offered to individuals by banks in
1979. On November 1, 1978, commercial banks were authorized to
offer customers automatic transfer services whereby funds are shifted
automatically from savings to demand deposit accounts to cover




57

checks. With ATS the customer need not keep money in his checking
account, and his funds can earn interest at the passbook rate in his
savings account. In the same month, banks and thrift institutions in
New York State were authorized to offer NOW accounts. Negotiable
orders of withdrawal may be used like checks to make current payments, but they are drawn against an interest-bearing savings account. NOW accounts have been available in all six New England
States for several years.
Both ATS and NOW accounts, as well as credit union share drafts,
provide checking privileges on a deposit that earns interest. Since all
of these accounts are classified as savings deposits, shifts from regular demand deposits to these accounts reduce the growth of Mi.
In the 5 months through March 1979 the increase in ATS accounts
and in NOW accounts at New York banks totaled more than $6 billion. In mid-April, however, a U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that ATS
and similar accounts, such as credit union share drafts, were illegal
and could not be maintained after January 1, 1980, unless the Congress enacted appropriate legislation. After this ruling the spread of
ATS was curtailed sharply.
In December the Congress enacted legislation extending authority
for credit union share drafts and bank ATS systems through March
31, 1980. The Senate bill had also included provisions to phase out
regulatory interest ceilings on bank and thrift institution deposits over
a period of 10 years and to give federally chartered savings and loan
associations and credit unions greater consumer and commercial
lending authority. Decision on these steps was deferred until 1980.
In May the President had sent a message to the Congress strongly
supporting such measures, which would enable small savers to earn a
market rate of return on their deposits and give thrift institutions the
flexibility they need to pay market interest rates and yet maintain
adequate earnings. The Administration also proposed granting thrift
institutions authority to offer variable rate mortgages. Regulations
were issued in July by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board permitting all federally chartered savings and loan associations to issue variable rate mortgages. Federally chartered associations in California
and some State-chartered associations were already offering such
mortgages before July.
CREDIT FLOWS

Borrowing by the private nonfinancial sector of the economy (including State and local governments) continued to expand during the
first 3 quarters of 1979, although somewhat less rapidly than private
GNP. The increase in private credit flows was about offset by a reduction in Federal borrowing that reflected the decline in the Federal




58

budget deficit. The aggregate flow of credit to all nonfinancial borrowers thus remained close to its 1978 pace.
The increase in private borrowing stemmed from the business sector. The annual rate of borrowing by nonfinancial businesses during
the first 3 quarters of 1979 was one-fourth larger than in 1978. Although the increase cut across most types of borrowing by business,
commercial bank loans accounted for most of the acceleration. The
strength of business credit demands reflected the slow growth of internal funds relative to capital spending. For nonfinancial corporations the ratio of external funds raised to expenditures for fixed capital and inventories increased from 48 percent in 1978 to 55 percent
during 1979 but remained well below the peak rate of 61 percent recorded in 1974.
Borrowing by households over the first 3 quarters of 1979 as a
whole remained close to the 1978 pace, but the rate of borrowing
tended to decline as the year went on. Growth in consumer installment credit subsided, and so did the volume of mortgage borrowing.
The moderation of growth in installment credit derived primarily
from the slower pace of auto sales after the first quarter. The slower
expansion of household mortgage debt may have stemmed from
higher mortgage interest rates and the somewhat more limited availability of mortgage credit. During 1978 the increase in household
mortgage debt amounted to 113 percent of household expenditures
for new residential construction. By the third quarter of 1979 the
ratio was down to 107 percent.
In earlier periods of economic expansion, rising interest rates generally led to sharp changes in the sources of credit supplied to borrowers. Constraints on the ability of depository institutions to attract
and hold deposits resulted in a marked decline in the share of credit
supplied through financial intermediaries. Correspondingly a higher
share was supplied directly to credit markets by households, businesses, and State and local governments. As a result of the innovations in financial markets discussed earlier, this shift in sources of
credit did not occur in the first 3 quarters of 1979, when the proportion of funds advanced through private financial intermediaries was
actually somewhat higher than in 1978. During the first half of the
year, the proportion advanced directly by the public also increased
while supplies from foreign sources declined, reflecting substantial
intervention sales of dollars by foreign central banks as the U.S. currency strengthened in exchange markets.
The Consumer Debt Burden

The ratio of consumer debt repayments to disposable income has
risen steadily in recent years, reaching a record peak of 18 percent in
the third quarter of 1979. The increase in this ratio has created con-




59

cern that consumers are becoming overextended and has also raised
fears that a high repayment burden might act as a strong constraint
on consumer spending during an economic downturn. Repayments
were equal to 17 percent of disposable income at the top of the last
cycle in 1972-73.
The increase in the debt repayment burden from the last cyclical
peak to the present is completely accounted for, however, by an increase in monthly payments on revolving credit lines. The revolving
credit figures cover all charges and repayments on credit cards issued
by banks, gasoline companies, and retail stores, including transactions of consumers who use credit cards only as a convenience and
pay their outstanding balances in full each month. Bank credit cards
accounted for most of the increase in revolving credit charges and
repayments relative to income. While revolving credit repayments
have risen rapidly relative to income in the past 6 years, the ratio of
debt outstanding on revolving credit lines to income has risen only
slightly. Most of the recorded increase in the debt repayment burden
for this category of consumer credit can thus be attributed to a
greater use of credit cards, particularly bank cards, for convenience
only.
The monthly repayment burden on fixed-term consumer loans has
not risen over this period. On the contrary, during the last half of
1979 such repayments, which include those on auto loans, were actually somewhat lower in relation to income than they were in 1972-73.
Debt outstanding on these loans, however, has increased substantially
as a proportion of after-tax income. Consumers were able to increase
their debt without raising required repayments as a share of income,
because average maturities have lengthened considerably. The average repayment period on new car loans, for example, has increased
from almost 3 years in 1974 to about 3 years and 9 months in the
third quarter of 1979. Maturities on other fixed-term installment
loans have also lengthened, reflecting the easier terms provided by
most categories of lenders.
Consumer indebtedness from auto loans and other fixed-term installment credit declined substantially relative to disposable personal
income during 1974 and 1975 and then increased rapidly in the upturn. Outstanding balances on revolving credit lines, however, have
been a fairly constant proportion of after-tax income throughout the
past decade. Last year net borrowing on revolving lines rose at about
the same pace as disposable income, while net fixed-term borrowing
dropped from about 2V2 percent of disposable income in the fourth
quarter of 1978 to less than IV2 percent in the final quarter of 1979.




60

Consumers are indeed more indebted today than they were at the
peak of the past cycle, but their fixed-term repayments are actually
somewhat lower compared to their disposable income than was the
case in 1972-73. While the burden of repayments can be expected to
restrain consumer spending as the economy heads into recession, the
impact will probably be no greater than during the last downturn and
might well be less.
SUMMING UP
Huge oil price increases dominated economic developments in
1979. Economic growth slowed much more than expected. The decline in inflation anticipated at the beginning of the year did not materialize; on the contrary, inflation increased sharply. The fact that
the increase in inflation was confined largely to energy (and as measured in the CPI, to housing) was a distinct positive element in the
economic record, but there is still a danger that last year's sharp rise
of energy and housing prices may spill over into this year's wages
and costs and thus become built into the underlying inflation rate.
Fighting inflation must therefore remain the top priority of economic
policy.
SUPPLEMENT I

Improvements in the Method for Estimating the
High-Employment Budget
Beginning with the publication of the 1978 Report, the Council's approach
in calculating the high-employment budget changed. In the method used earlier, high-employment receipts were determined as the product of real potential GNP, the price level, and estimates of income shares and effective tax
rates at high employment. Comparisons of actual receipts—those collected at
actual employment levels—with high-employment receipts often yielded an
implausible elasticity of receipts with respect to the change in income between actual and potential GNP.
The source of the problem is that estimates of high-employment income
shares and effective tax rates made with this approach do not reflect all of
the structural characteristics of the tax system or the economy that are embodied in the short-term behavior of actual income shares and effective tax
rates. These estimates are unlikely to incorporate such features because they
rely completely on trends of income shares and effective tax rates. Hence estimates of actual and high-employment budgets can be inconsistent.

61
294-289

0 - 8 0 - 5




The revised approach ensures consistency by basing the high-employment
estimates on actual receipts and adding to these receipts the extra revenues
that would be collected if the gap between actual and high-employment GNP
were closed. Estimates of these additional revenues are based on the average
historical behavior of income shares and marginal tax rates or tax elasticities
over the business cycle. In this way the implied elasticity of receipts with respect to the change in income between actual and potential GNP is more
consistent with past experience.
During 1979 the Council worked with other Federal agencies to improve
the estimates of income shares, marginal tax rates, and tax elasticities used in
this approach, integrating as fully as possible the Council's work on potential
GNP. Cyclical adjustments of expenditures were made for the first time for
several additional Federal expenditure programs, and separate cyclical adjustments were made for regular and extended unemployment insurance
benefits.
Income Shares

The principal improvement last year to estimates of cyclically adjusted income shares was the joint estimation of equations explaining the shares of all
major components of national income and the difference between national
income and GNP. Because the equations were estimated jointly, the sum of
the gaps between actual and high-employment values for income components equals the gap between actual GNP and its high-employment level.
To facilitate the calculation of the difference between actual and highemployment tax bases for different revenue aggregates, national income was
disaggregated into six components: wages and salaries, other forms of compensation, nonfarm proprietors' income, farm proprietors' income, corporate
profits, and rent plus net interest.
Tax Elasticities

Efforts were made on several fronts in 1979 to improve estimates of the
personal income tax elasticity. Time series analyses related personal tax receipts adjusted for changes in tax law to adjusted personal income (defined
as wages and salaries, proprietors' income, rental income, dividends, and
personal interest income). Cross-sectional analyses using a model from the
Department of the Treasury's Office of Tax Analysis were also performed for
several years in the 1970s. Inputs to this model included estimates of
changes in the components of adjusted personal income that would occur in
closing the gap between actual and potential GNP. The estimated number
and type of additional income tax returns filed by the extra persons employed in closing the gap were also used by the model. These studies suggest that estimates of the personal tax elasticity obtained in moving between
actual and potential GNP are particularly sensitive to assumptions about productivity, the income distribution, and the filing status of the extra employed
persons. For the calculation shown in this Report, an elasticity of 1V3 was
used. It is recognized that this estimate is subject to a substantial margin of




62

The study of the marginal corporate tax rate used a time series analysis of
the relationship of corporate profits tax receipts to the product of the statutory tax rate and a tax base adjusted for Federal Reserve profits, profits from
foreign operations, and State and local taxes. The investment tax credit was
also an explanatory factor in the analysis. While it is difficult to control accurately for the effects that changes in these factors exert on corporate tax revenues, most specifications suggested a marginal corporate tax rate near 40
percent in recent years.
During 1979, estimates of the additional contributions for social insurance
brought about by closing the gap between actual and high employment were
refined in several ways. Social insurance revenues were disaggregated into
four subcategories: social security taxes, excluding those paid by the selfemployed, and railroad retirement taxes; social security contributions by the
self-employed; unemployment insurance taxes; and other taxes (including
Federal employee retirement contributions, supplemental medical insurance
premiums, veterans' life insurance payments, and workmen's compensation).
This disaggregation was particularly important because the relative weight of
social security taxes in the total has increased materially since the 1950s.
Estimates were made of the cyclical sensitivity of tax bases for each category of social insurance receipts (except the tax base of other contributions,
which was assumed to be insensitive to cyclical influences). Separate tax elasticities were then applied to each of these bases. The tax elasticities were calculated as a weighted average of an employment elasticity (assumed to be
1.0) and an average wage elasticity. For example, the average wage elasticity
for social security taxes (except those paid by the self-employed) and railroad
retirement taxes has increased during the 1970s from an estimated 0.57 in
1971 to 0.78 in 1979 because of the increase in the taxable earnings base
relative to average earnings. The weights are based on the proportion of the
difference between actual and high-employment wages and salaries attributable to the change in employment, and the proportion attributable to the
change in average wages per worker, in moving from actual to potential
GNP.
Estimates of the elasticity of indirect business taxes with respect to changes
in real GNP were revised last year on the basis of studies that analyzed the
behavior of indirect business taxes since the 1950s, after allowing for
changes in tax law. According to these studies the elasticity of total indirect
business taxes with respect to real GNP is less than 1, since most of the taxes
are on products for which demand is inelastic in relation to income. This
elasticity has declined from a peak of 0.9 in the mid-1960s to nearly 0.6 in
recent years as a consequence of the repeal of several cyclically sensitive excise taxes, particularly the automobile excise tax.
Expenditure Adjustments

Separate estimates were made of the cyclical sensitivity of regular and extended unemployment insurance benefits. The estimates suggest that ex-




63

penditures for regular unemployment insurance benefits currently rise about
$2.5 billion for each 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate.
The cost of extended benefits is estimated to rise smoothly as a percentage
of the cost of regular benefits when the actual unemployment rate rises to
about 7V2 percent from the benchmark unemployment rate of 5.1 percent.
This rise occurs as extended benefits payments are triggered in an increasing
number of States. Near an unemployment rate of IV2 percent, the cost of
extended benefits jumps sharply, because these benefits are triggered for the
Nation as a whole.
During 1979, cyclical adjustments were made for six additional Federal expenditure programs: food stamps, aid to families with dependent children,
old age and survivors' insurance, disability insurance, medicaid, and veterans'
readjustment benefits (the GI bill). These adjustments were based on a survey of research on these programs, most of it conducted within the Federal
Government during the last decade. The increase in expenditures for a 1
percentage point rise in the unemployment rate is about 1 percent of total
expenditures on these programs, or $1.4 billion at 1979 expenditure levels.
The total cyclical adjustment for these programs was $0.9 billion in 1979.
Further improvements are planned in the estimates of income shares and
tax elasticities used in calculating the high-employment budget. During 1980
these refinements and historical estimates of the high-employment budget
will be reported in the Survey of Current Business; and the Bureau of Economic
Analysis of the Department of Commerce will then regularly publish updates
and revisions of these historical estimates.

SUPPLEMENT II

Measuring the Restraint from Oil Price Increases
In analyzing the economic consequences of higher oil prices the Council
has found it useful to estimate the magnitude of the "oil price drag," which
has effects on real output and employment that are analogous to those of
fiscal drag.
Oil price increases affect the broad performance of the economy in two
principal ways. First, the overall price level is raised because of the higher
prices of petroleum products and the higher costs of products incorporating
petroleum. Second, income is transferred from users of petroleum to foreign
and domestic producers and also to the government through increased tax
collections.
The effect of higher oil prices on users of petroleum is similar to the impact of a higher excise tax. Both raise prices directly, reduce real purchasing
power, and thus depress aggregate demand. But when oil prices rise, oil pro-




64

ducers receive higher net revenues and expand their demands for goods and
services.
The calculations of oil price drag are based on average prices for imported
and domestically produced oil and on estimated changes in refining and marketing margins. The gross impact of a price increase for imported or domestic crude oil used in the United States is calculated by multiplying changes in
average oil prices by the quantities of oil from each source, after allowing for
the reduction in oil consumption induced by higher prices. To estimate the
effect of higher margins, price increases at each stage in the processing and
distribution of refined products are taken into account, along with the quantity of each product used. Where crude oil or refined products are used as
inputs in producing other goods, the increased costs are assumed to be
passed through to prices on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
In calculating the drag attributable to higher crude oil prices and increased
refining and marketing margins, only the increase that exceeds the general
rate of inflation is taken into account. Estimates for 1980 assume no further
rise in real prices of imported oil above the level prevailing in early 1980 and
no further widening of real margins.
Gross oil price drag is defined simply as the gross value of changes in the
cost that users of oil and refined products must pay. To calculate a net oil
price drag, estimates of respending on American products from the increased
revenues of OPEC countries and those of domestic oil producers are subtracted. Increased exports of American products resulting from higher world
oil prices are estimated to equal 20 percent of the increase in the U.S. oil bill
after 1 year and 50 percent after 2 years. It is assumed that 30 percent of the
incremental after-tax revenue of domestic sellers of oil is respent for goods
and services after 1 year and 75 percent after 2 years.
According to the Council's estimates, gross oil drag increased over the 4
quarters of 1979 by $59 billion and is expected to rise by an additional $41
billion over the 4 quarters of this year. Over the same two 4-quarter periods
the net oil drag is expected to increase by just under $53 and $24 billion
respectively. By the end of 1980 the net drag will have increased by an
amount approximately equal to 3 percent of GNP.




65

CHAPTER 2

The Economic Outlook
ECONOMIC FORECASTS LAST YEAR tended to underestimate
the strength of private spending and, consequently, the economy's
ability to withstand the effects of energy price shocks, fiscal restraint,
and rising interest rates.
As indicated in Chapter 1, the resilience of the economy last year
reflected forces that may continue to sustain economic activity in
1980. Nevertheless there are a number of reasons for expecting a
mild recession in the first half of this year. Rising oil prices, coupled
with increases in effective tax rates caused by inflation, will continue
to dampen consumers' purchasing power in 1980, and the personal
saving rate is likely to rise from its exceptionally low level at the end
of last year. Consequently the growth in consumer spending will
slow. Businesses are likely to react to the slowdown in consumer
buying by trimming their capital investment plans. Housing starts
turned down sharply late last year and may decline further in response to reduced availability of mortgage credit and extraordinarily
high mortgage interest rates. And inventory accumulation is also likely to decline further as final sales weaken.
In most past periods of economic recession both fiscal and monetary policy have been eased significantly. At the present time, however, recession is still only a forecast; it has not yet appeared in overall
measures of economic performance. Moreover the economy has recently withstood recessionary pressures far better than most analysts
expected. These facts, together with the seriousness of our inflation
problem, argue against an easing of policy at this time. Such a move
would heighten expectations of inflation and reduce our prospects of
making progress toward price stability. An easing of monetary and
fiscal policy, in advance of any actual economic deterioration, would
also put strong downward pressures on the dollar in foreign exchange markets. Creating an environment conducive to reduced pressures on prices and costs requires restraint in fiscal and monetary
policies and great caution in making changes.
Fiscal policies cannot, of course, be set to run an unswerving
course regardless of how actual economic events unfold. The Administration will monitor economic developments closely in 1980 and is




66

prepared to recommend additional policy measures if worsening economic conditions warrant such action.
THE ECONOMY IN 1980 AND 1981
The expected recession is likely to be mild and brief. Declines in
real gross national product (GNP) should not extend much past midyear, and economic growth will resume later this year, albeit slowly at
first. Over the 4 quarters of 1980 real GNP is forecast to decline by 1
percent.
Employment should remain almost unchanged despite the fall in
real GNP, as productivity declines and the average length of the
workweek is reduced. However, because job opportunities will not
grow as fast as the labor force, the unemployment rate is likely to
rise from 5.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 1979 to 7% percent in
the fourth quarter of this year.
In 1980 a major task of economic policy is to prevent the large energy shocks of 1979 from spilling over into wages and industrial
prices. Greater slack in the economy will help to hold down inflation
by discouraging large wage increases and creating resistance to price
increases. The rate of increase in home financing costs should slow
this year. Energy prices will continue to rise substantially, although
most probably at a slower pace than in 1979. Over the 12 months of
this year consumer prices are forecast to increase 10.4 percent, compared with 13.3 percent in the year just ended. Late in 1980 the annual rate of inflation should be between 9 and 9V2 percent.
While several factors will be working to reduce inflation, dramatic
progress cannot be expected because the momentum of past inflation
is substantial and expectations of inflation are deeply entrenched.
The pay and price standards will continue to help restrain the growth
of wages and nonenergy prices, but they cannot be expected to yield
a large reduction in inflation. Indeed, to the extent that workers seek
and achieve larger nominal wage gains, some increase in the underlying rate of inflation—that is, the rate determined by the long-term
trend in industrial costs—could occur this year. The degree of spillover of last year's price increases into this year's wages will be limited, however, not only by greater economic slack, but also by continuation of the voluntary pay and price standards.
Real growth is forecast to increase to a rate of 2% percent over the
4 quarters of 1981. Employment growth is also expected to strengthen, and consequently the unemployment rate is forecast to be slightly
lower by year's end. Inflation should decline somewhat further, to
about 8V2 percent over the 12 months of 1981, as a result of some




67

improvement in productivity growth and continued slack in labor and
product markets.
FISCAL POLICY

Fiscal policy must continue to follow a course consistent with reducing inflation. This principle is particularly important in light of
the large rise in oil prices in 1979 and the possibility of spillover
from higher oil prices into wages and nonenergy costs.
In fiscal 1980 Federal outlays are projected to be $563.6 billion, an
increase of about 14 percent from the previous year. In fiscal 1981
the budget projects outlays of $615.8 billion, a rise of 9 percent.
Most of the increase in Federal outlays over the 2 years arises from
the effects of inflation on the Federal budget. Adjusted for inflation,
Federal spending will increase only about 2V2 percent over the 2
years. Outlays for defense, in real terms, will rise somewhat more
than 5 percent between fiscal 1979 and fiscal 1981. Inflation-adjusted
outlays for all other Federal programs will be less in fiscal 1981 than
they were in fiscal 1980.
Fighting inflation continues to be the top priority of economic policy, and hence the President has not recommended any legislated
changes in tax rates in the 1981 budget. Since individuals will be
moving into higher tax brackets as their incomes increase, the share
of personal income taken by Federal income taxes will rise. Social security tax liabilities are scheduled to increase in January 1981 by $18
billion. The resulting rise in effective tax rates, combined with limited growth of Federal outlays, will cause the Federal budget to move
significantly toward restraint in the next fiscal year.
MONETARY POLICY

The actions taken by the Federal Reserve on October 6 to restrain
the growth of money and credit were followed by a sharp rise in interest rates to record postwar levels in the last quarter of 1979.
Short-term market interest rates reached a peak in the third week of
October but eased somewhat thereafter.
The changed approach to monetary control, with more emphasis
on controlling the growth of bank reserves and greater willingness to
permit fluctuations in interest rates, will help the Federal Reserve to
hit its target ranges for the growth of the monetary aggregates.
Short-term shifts in the demand for money and credit now show up
in movements of short-term interest rates more than in the growth of
the monetary aggregates.
While the new strategy will lead to more variation in the course of
interest rates over the short run, it need not alter their central tendency. This will continue to be determined by longer-term trends in




68

inflation and the demands for credit and money relative to the available supplies, which are influenced by the objectives of the Federal
Reserve. As the year progresses, slowing economic activity and declining inflation should make the Federal Reserve's objectives for
monetary restraint consistent with lower interest rates. The decline in
interest rates that develops, however, is likely to be moderate compared to past periods of recession because of the persistence of a
high rate of inflation.
WORLD OIL MARKETS

World oil markets are expected to be in a delicate balance in 1980.
Although consumer demand for petroleum products has fallen and
can be expected to decline further, continued high levels of stockbuilding, combined with supply cutbacks by some foreign producers,
may offset whatever tendency might exist for the creation of slack in
the international oil market.
The outlook presented here takes into account the most recent
price increases announced by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). In Caracas, the OPEC members did not agree
on an integrated cartel pricing structure, though some member countries made an effort to narrow existing price differentials within the
cartel. Since then some of the countries with the highest prices have
posted additional increases. In early January the world price of oil
was near $28 per barrel, more than twice its level a year earlier. The
forecast makes allowance for the possibility that further increases in
world oil prices may somewhat exceed the inflation rate during 1981.
THE ECONOMIC FORECAST

At this time the economy appears likely to head into a mild recession. Housing starts began to turn down in the fourth quarter of last
year. New car sales also fell, and auto companies have curtailed their
production schedules for the first quarter of this year to reduce abnormally large inventories, especially of large models.
The downward pressure on consumers' real incomes, resulting
from rising oil prices and increasing fiscal restraint, is continuing. In
the 2 years beginning with the final quarter of 1978, the high-employment budget will swing to surplus by $34 billion. Increases in
crude oil prices, and in domestic oil refiners' and distributors' gross
margins, in excess of the general rate of inflation will increase the
revenues of domestic and foreign producers by $100 billion during
these years. Some of these receipts will be respent within this time,
but a large part will be retained. Allowing for such respending, and
adjusting for double-counting, the combination of oil and fiscal restraint is estimated to rise by almost $80 billion over the 2 years end-




69

ing in the fourth quarter of 1980, about 3 percent of GNP (see Table
12).
TABLE 12.—Fiscal and oil price restraint on the economy, fourth quarter 1978 to fourth quarter
1980
[Billions of dollars, annual rate]
1978 IV
to
1979 IV

Item

Fiscal restraint x
Oil price restraint 2 less adjustment for double-counting

1979 IV
to
1980 IV

1978 IV
to
1980 IV

20
42

Total

14
3

34
45

62

3

17

79

1

Change in the high-employment budget.
2
Increase in foreign and domestic producer revenues due to real increases in crude oil prices and refiners' and distributors'
gross margins, less the estimated respending by oil sellers of their additional revenues. The 1980 estimates assume no further
rise in real imported oil prices from levels prevailing early in 1980.
3
Higher windfall profits taxes and corporate profits taxes due to real increases in crude oil prices and refiners' and
distributors' gross margins, which are included in both the measure of fiscal restraint and the measure of oil price restraint,
have been deleted from the latter.
Source: Council of Economic Advisers.

Around the middle of 1980, forces of recovery from recession are
expected to be evident. Reduced restraint in financial markets will
permit housing starts to turn up in response to strong underlying demand. As inflation abates, some of the drain on consumer purchasing
power will be relieved. Continuation of fiscal restraint, together with
maintenance of cautious inventory policies by businesses, will result
in a slower pace of recovery than has been typical after earlier
postwar recessions. The rate of economic growth is expected to
strengthen during 1981, however, as businesses step up their capital
spending plans. Table 13 reports the forecast for this year.
Consumer Expenditures

Consumer spending in 1980 will be restrained by the drain on consumers' purchasing power imposed by rising energy prices and the
increases in effective tax rates caused by inflation. The rise in energy
prices is expected to be smaller than in 1979, and there is likely to be
some step-up in the rise of wage rates during 1980. But since employment is projected to change little this year, after-tax income in
real terms will show only a small gain. An increase in tax refunds because of overwithholding of individual income taxes in 1979 will help
to sustain the rise of after-tax incomes.
Last year the personal saving rate declined considerably and ended
the year below 3 M percent. Some increase from this exceptionally
s
low level seems very likely this year, but it should be small as people
try to maintain their living standards in the face of slow growth of
income. The expected rise in the saving rate, together with sluggish
income growth, is expected to result in a decline in real consumer
purchases of goods and services of between one-half and 1 percent
over the 4 quarters of 1980. This would be the first reduction since
1974.




70

TABLE 13.—Economic outlook for 1980
1979 *

Item

Forecast range
1980

Growth, fourth quarter to fourth quarter (percent):
0.8

Federal purchases
State and local purchases

3 to 3V2
-PAto-PA

9.0

9y 4

9y 2 to
-y4to

10
-%

5.9
1.6

2

8% to

8.9
-2.0

GNP implicit price deflator
Compensation per hour
Output per hour 2

-V2to
-1
OtO - V 2
- 1 1 to - 1 2

1.1
-.4

Personal consumption expenditures
Nonresidential fixed investment
Residential investment...

- % to -1V*

1.6
1.7
-8.3

Real gross national product...

7y 4 to
iy2to

7%
i%

Level, fourth quarter: 3
Unemployment rate (percent)
Housing starts (millions of units) 4
1

Preliminary.
Private business sector, all employees.
Seasonally adjusted.
4
Annual rate.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), and
Council of Economic Advisers.
2
3

Expenditures for consumer durable goods will be most affected.
Automobile sales for the year will be below 1979 average levels but
should improve in the second half. Purchases of other household
durables may also decline, given the downturn forecast for housing
starts.
Expenditures by consumers on nondurable goods are also expected to decline in real terms in 1980; purchases of energy-related items
are likely to be cut considerably. Consumption of services will probably continue to rise but at a slower pace than in 1979.
Growth in real consumer spending should resume late this year
and strengthen in 1981, when employment is expected to rise more
strongly while inflation moderates. The increase in social security
taxes scheduled for January 1, 1981, however, will limit the rise in
real disposable income. In part for this reason, real consumption expenditures are likely to grow less rapidly than real GNP next year.
Business Fixed Investment

Current indicators suggest that business fixed capital spending in
real terms should turn down moderately in 1980. New orders for
nondefense capital goods, adjusted for inflation, have fallen from
their peaks of last spring. Capital appropriations of manufacturing
firms, adjusted for inflation, have also declined since the first quarter
of last year. The most recent Department of Commerce survey of
capital spending plans by business suggests that companies are planning to increase their real outlays by only about 1 to 2 percent on a
year-over-year basis in 1980.
Business spending plans tend to be revised down when the economy weakens. With a mild recession early this year, capacity utilization




71

will be falling, profits will be squeezed, corporate cash flow will diminish, and business spending will slow further. Recovery from the
recession will lead to a strengthening of business investment plans
early in 1981, and increased activity in this key sector will provide
increasing support to economic growth next year.
Housing

The outlook for housing is more uncertain in 1980 than in the past
several years. Late in the fourth quarter the severe strains evident in
the mortgage market soon after the October 6 tightening of monetary policy were eased somewhat. Mortgage lenders appeared to be
relaxing their lending terms a little; in some sections of the country
mortgage loan rates were lowered from the extreme highs of a few
weeks earlier. Interest rates on short-term market securities were
down from their October peaks, and depository institutions gained
additional power to attract funds for lending when the regulatory authorities, effective January 1, instituted a floating interest rate ceiling
on deposits with a maturity of 2Vfe years or more.
These developments should help to improve the flow of mortgage
credit early next year. Moreover the preemption of State usury ceilings by Federal law through March 31, which applies to new residential mortgage commitments made during the period as well as to residential loans closed, could lead to a substantial increase in credit
available to potential home buyers in almost 20 States.
Very high mortgage interest rates will continue to discourage some
individuals, however, and make it difficult for others to qualify for
loans. It may also take time for builders to reassess the prospects for
housing sales. A sample survey in mid-November conducted by the
Bureau of the Census indicated sharp cutbacks in builders' construction plans for early this year.
Housing starts may therefore fall somewhat further to a trough before midyear. Single-family housing starts will bear the brunt of the
decline. Unlike the 1974-75 experience, starts of multiple-family
dwellings are expected to decline relatively little; vacancy rates are
low, and demand is strong in this segment of the housing market.
Later this year housing construction should recover as demand responds to lower mortgage interest rates and continuing strong demographic factors. The favorable after-tax rate of return on housing
compared with other physical and financial assets will also reinforce
housing demand.
Some slowing in the rise of housing prices may occur in 1980, particularly in the first half, when sales will be depressed by the high
cost of mortgage credit. This slowdown of inflation in the housing
sector may be temporary, however, since the forces underlying the
demand for housing are strong.




72

In 1981 housing starts should continue to increase toward levels
consistent with their long-term determinants. By the end of next year
housing starts may be close to a 2-million annual rate.
Inventories

As final demand weakens in the first half of this year, the rate of
inventory accumulation is expected to fall. Since the cautious inventory policies followed by businesses during the recovery have prevented a large buildup of undesired stocks, no significant decumulation is expected. By around midyear, adjustments of stocks to lower
levels of demand should be largely complete. Resumption of growth
of final demand, together with lower rates of interest, will encourage
an upturn in the rate of inventory accumulation in 1981.
Government Purchases

Real Federal purchases are projected to increase by about 3 percent over the 4 quarters of 1980, led by growth in defense outlays,
and will continue to rise moderately during calendar 1981.
State and local government purchases in real terms are expected to
continue falling in 1980. Concern over the impact of the recession on
tax revenues, combined with taxpayers' resistance to expenditures for
new programs, will operate to hold down spending. In 1981, as economic growth resumes and tax revenues increase, State and local
purchases should increase in real terms, though much more slowly
than real GNP.
Employment and Unemployment

Employment is likely to be almost unchanged in 1980 despite the
weakness of overall economic activity. Declining real GNP during the
first half is expected to lead to a further reduction in output per hour
worked and to a somewhat more rapid reduction in the average
workweek than occurred in 1979. In 1981 employment growth
should be stronger as growth in real output increases.
Growth in the labor force is expected to average about 13A percent
a year over the next 2 years. Weak growth of job opportunities will
keep the labor force from growing at the rates of recent years. Nevertheless the increase in the number of job seekers will be larger than
the rise in employment during 1980, and the unemployment rate is
forecast to rise to 7% percent by the fourth quarter of 1980. A small
decline in the unemployment rate, to about 7Vi percent, is expected
by the end of 1981.
Foreign Sector

Economic growth abroad is likely to slow from 4 percent in 1979
to an average annual rate of about 2 percent in 1980 and 1981. For




73

the 2 years taken together, growth abroad is expected to be stronger
than in the United States. These developments will add moderately
to real net exports of goods and services.
The contribution of net exports to real GNP growth this year and
next, however, will be significantly less than during the previous 2
years. Imports are projected to decline in volume during the course
of 1980 and to recover only moderately in 1981—reflecting the pattern of mild recession and recovery foreseen for the U.S. economy.
But the growth of exports is not expected to continue at the strong
pace that marked the last 2 years, not only because growth abroad is
likely to slow but also because the boost to exports from the past depreciation of the dollar will largely have run its course.
The deficit on merchandise trade, which was about $28 billion in
1979, is expected to increase somewhat over the coming 2 years because the generally favorable developments in non-oil trade will not
fully offset the large increase in the oil import bill from 1979 to
1981. Agricultural exports, which reached record levels in the second
half of 1979, should remain on a high plateau in 1980. This estimate
makes allowance for the recent decision to limit grain sales to the Soviet Union. A small decline in the volume of agricultural exports over
the 4 quarters of 1980 will be nearly offset by a slight increase in
export prices of farm commodities.
The widening deficit on merchandise trade should result in a small
current account deficit in 1980 and again in 1981, even though moderate increases in net receipts on invisibles transactions are likely.
These developments are not expected to affect the value of the dollar
adversely in foreign exchange markets, since the U.S. current account
position should be stronger than that of other major industrial
countries.
UNCERTAINTIES IN THE OUTLOOK

As in 1979, a major threat to the outlook is that OPEC decisions
about prices and production may lead to increases in world oil prices
that go well beyond those announced recently. Such a development
would, in the short run, add to the restraint on the economy exerted
by oil prices, exacerbate inflation, and lead to lower economic
growth and higher unemployment. As Chapter 4 indicates, the probability of large price increases for oil will be diminished if the major
consuming countries join to reduce demand in world oil markets.
Discussions toward this end are now proceeding in the International
Energy Agency.
The new orientation of monetary policy poses additional uncertainties. If inflation does not decelerate as expected, interest rates may
be under more upward pressure than is now foreseen. On the other
hand, if the Federal Reserve's monetary targets are attained easily be-




74

cause money demand weakens more than expected, the Federal Reserve's strategy will permit market forces to lower interest rates considerably. The central bank's scope for maneuver will be determined
in part by developments in monetary policy abroad and by a variety
of forces influencing the value of the dollar in exchange markets.
The potential behavior of the personal saving rate further complicates the assessment of the course of the economy. The saving rate is
forecast to rise moderately from its exceptionally low level at the end
of 1979. Should it increase further, economic growth would be
weaker than expected. As Chapter 1 indicates, past experience provides only limited guidance on how individuals may choose to allocate their disposable income between current consumption and saving under present circumstances.
Perhaps the most serious risk for the longer-term performance of
the economy is the possibility of a large spillover of energy price increases into wages and then into industrial goods prices generally. If
temporary bursts in energy prices became a relatively permanent feature of the underlying cost structure, the outlook for inflation during
the years immediately ahead would worsen; and, as Chapter 3 points
out, the costs of bringing inflation back down again would be increased. Maintenance of effective pay and price standards is essential
to minimize this spillover.
CONTROLLING INFLATION
Even during the very sharp 1975 recession the underlying rate of
inflation never fell below the neighborhood of 6 percent. In 1976
and 1977 inflation remained at about this level. But early in 1978 inflation began to accelerate, initially on account of a dramatic increase
in food prices that resulted from limited supplies of meat and the effects of cold weather on fruit and vegetable production. In 1978 and
1979 adverse productivity developments acted to push up unit labor
costs. And around the close of 1978, as the economy was operating
near the limit of its capacity, excess demand added briefly to upward
pressure on prices. But a dominant factor in the most recent worsening of inflation was the explosion of energy prices in 1979. In the
consumer price index (CPI) energy prices in 1978 had risen by 8 percent, somewhat less than the overall rise for other consumer goods
and services. During the 12 months of 1979, however, energy prices
to consumers increased by 37.4 percent, directly adding about 2XA
percentage points to overall inflation.
Temporary excess demand or sharply rising food and energy prices
would not affect inflation for more than a limited period if they did
not become built into longer-term trend rates of increase in wages
and other costs. However, as outside shocks drive up materials
prices, businesses may seek to maintain profit margins by raising
prices. The higher prices of finished goods may induce workers to try




75

to protect their real incomes by demanding larger nominal wages.
Moreover businesses are less resistant to increases in the cost of materials and labor when demand is relatively strong and these increases can be readily passed through to prices of finished products.
Temporary shocks that aggravate inflation can thus become embedded in underlying inflation.
To the extent that a rise in prices relative to wages reflected a
surge of business profits to abnormal levels, wages could rise to recover the lost ground. The increase in costs could then be absorbed
by businesses without further price rises, and any longer-term increase in inflation could be avoided. However, as Table 6 in Chapter
1 indicates, in 1979 the rise in prices relative to wages did not stem
from a general increase in the profit share of national income. Instead it was the result mainly of rising oil prices. Attempts to recapture the lost ground are not likely to lead to a readjustment of income shares; the danger is that they may trigger another round of
price increases.
Trends in the broad range of prices for final industrial goods and
services in the U.S. economy are fairly evident in the fixed-weight
price index for personal consumption expenditures, excluding food
and energy, in the national income and product accounts. Chart 4 inChart4

Fixed-Weight Price Index
for Personal Consumption Expenditures
PERCENT CHANGE*

14
12
10

8
6
4
2

1960

62

64

66

68

70

•CHANGE FROM FOURTH QUARTER TO FOURTH QUARTER.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




76

72

74

76

78

dicates a rise in that index from a 1 percent rate of increase in 1964
to near 8 percent in 1979.
There have been few years in which this measure of price rise has
shown any significant moderation over the past two decades. In 1971
and 1972, when mandatory price controls were in effect, inflation
shown by this measure declined by more than IV2 percentage points,
from 4V2 percent in 1970 to just under 3 percent in 1972. By the end
of 1973, however, when a less stringent set of mandatory controls
was in place, inflation in the industrial and service sectors was up
again to 4% percent. Removal of the controls in early 1974 was followed by an explosion of wages and prices. By the fourth quarter of
1974, prices paid by consumers for goods and services, excluding
food and energy, had risen lOVi percent above the level a year earlier. Once this temporary burst of prices following controls ended, underlying inflation settled back to around 6 percent—higher than the
level before the controls were instituted.
Periods of economic recession over these two decades produced
little permanent progress in unwinding inflation. In the very mild recession of 1970, prices of goods and services other than food and energy rose nearly as fast as they had in 1969 when the economy was
overheated. Moreover in 1970, when the unemployment rate averaged almost 5 percent, the rise of hourly wages and fringe benefits
was almost as large as the rise in 1969, when the unemployment rate
was 3V2 percent. In 1975 the rate of increase of prices (excluding
food and energy) declined significantly, as did the rise of compensation per hour worked. That moderation of inflation, however, came
about largely because of the termination of the special factors pushing up prices and wages in 1974. During the latter half of 1975 the
rates of increase in compensation per hour and in prices, excluding
food and energy, were still higher than they had been in 1973.
The trend of inflation created by these developments is disturbing.
Shocks from excess demand and from higher prices of food and energy have at least partly fed back into wages, costs, and prices for
goods other than food and energy. Since the early 1960s the start of
each period of economic expansion has been marked by higher inflation than the start of the previous upswing, and inflation has been
higher at the end of each expansion than at the beginning.
Developments in productivity have been another important source
of the upward trend of cost and price increases. In the early 1960s
increments to productivity averaged about 3 percent per year, as
Table 14 shows. Rates of advance have dwindled, however, since the
middle years of the 1960s. Adjusted for cyclical developments, productivity growth in the 2 years ending with the fourth quarter of
1978 was only one-half of 1 percent. During 1979 cyclically adjusted
productivity declined sharply. The longer-term reduction in produc-

77
294-289

0 - 8 0 - 6




tivity growth would not have influenced the trend of inflation if wage
increases had been correspondingly scaled down.
Table 14.—Changes in compensation per hour, productivity, unit labor costs, and prices, 1959-79
[Percent change per y e a r x ]
Private nonfarm business sector, all
employees
Period

1959
1964
1969
1972
1974
1977
1
2

to
to
to
to
to
to

1964
1969
1972
1974
1977
1979

Compensation per
hour

4.0
5.9
6.5
9.5
8.2
8.9

2

Output per
hour

2.9
1.3
2.8
-2.0
2.7
-.5

Unit labor
costs

1.0
4.5
3.6
11.8
5.3
9.5

Fixed-weight
deflator for
personal
consumption
expenditures
excluding
food and
energy
1.1
3.2
3.8
7.5
6.0
7.3

Changes are measured from fourth quarter to fourth quarter.
Preliminary.

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).

As noted earlier, rising inflation over a long period has influenced
the way prices and wages are set, and these and other structural
changes may have reduced the response of wages and prices to a
moderate degree of slack in the economy. Formal escalator clauses in
labor contracts have become more common. In 1970 only one-fourth
of the workers covered by major collective bargaining contracts had
such clauses; in 1979 the contracts of nearly 60 percent of such workers had these clauses. Nonunion wages have also become more sensitive to price increases, perhaps because informal agreements to provide cost-of-living protection for workers have become more common. Econometric studies of the determinants of wage changes indicate a larger response to price inflation in more recent periods, and
some studies suggest a smaller response to labor market slack. The
incomes of other groups have been adjusted for inflation as well.
Since 1975 social security benefits have been indexed to increases in
the consumer price index.
Widespread belief that inflation will continue, if not worsen, leads
businesses to accede to cost increases in the expectation of being
able to pass the added costs forward into higher prices. These higher
prices then become the basis for additional rounds of wage increases.
Expectations of inflation can also lead individuals and businesses to
accelerate their spending and thus add to the pressure of aggregate
demand on available supplies of goods and services.
Repeated shocks to prices from the energy and food sectors aggravate the problem. As shocks become more frequent, the probability
grows that a given shock will have a greater effect on expectations of
inflation.
In the present environment we cannot realistically expect that price
and wage increases will respond quickly and strongly to a moderate
increase in the degree of slack in the economy. Nor can it be expect-




78

ed that a sharp but relatively short recession would have a lasting effect on inflation. Expectations of inflation have become much too
deeply entrenched for that to happen.
Aggregate demand restraint is nonetheless critical to the creation
of an environment that helps to prevent an acceleration of underlying inflation in 1980 and to lower it in the years beyond. Fiscal and
monetary policies must be conducted in ways that convince the public—workers, businesses, consumers, and investors—that our government will not permit inflation to proceed unchecked. It is particularly
critical at this time to avoid circumstances in which the energy-led
price increases of 1979 could easily carry over into a general wageprice spiral at double-digit rates of increase. Maintenance of restrictive fiscal and monetary policies in the face of the forces now weakening the economy will unfortunately mean less output and employment in the immediate future than anyone would like. But persistence in restraint now is the only way to produce the conditions for
sustainable expansion later.
The Administration's fiscal policy exhibits the restraint needed at
this time. As Table 11 in Chapter 1 indicates, the high-employment
Federal budget began to move from stimulus toward restraint early
in 1978. At that time the high-employment deficit amounted to about
1 Vi percent of actual GNP. The budget moved into surplus in early
1979 and will move further into surplus throughout 1980 and 1981.
By late 1981 the surplus in the high-employment budget will amount
to 2V4 percent of GNP; the swing from deficit to surplus over the 4
years ending in the fourth quarter of 1981 will be about 4 percent of
GNP. This fiscal policy, and the impact on the economy of higher oil
prices, imply a strong degree of restraint on aggregate demand.
The monetary policy being pursued by the Federal Reserve is consistent with an overall aggregate demand policy aimed at slowing inflation and breaking the grip that expectations of inflation have on
decisions affecting wages, prices, and spending. Because the new
methods of implementing monetary policy should make the monetary
authority better able to achieve its target ranges for growth of the
monetary aggregates, they provide greater assurance that monetary
policy will not inadvertently add to pressures on costs and prices by
permitting excessive increases in supplies of money and credit. At the
same time the new approach will tend to lead fairly promptly to
lower interest rates as inflation comes down and economic activity
weakens.
THE PRICK AND PAY STANDARDS

The price and pay standards announced in October 1978 recognized that our current inflation problem cannot be solved through
aggregate demand policy alone. The costs in forgone output and em-




79

ployment would be unacceptably high. Used in conjunction with prudent monetary and fiscal policies, voluntary standards for prices and
wages can help limit increases in prices that widen profit margins,
lessen the need for catchup wage increases, and minimize the transmission of temporary price pressures into wages and other costs.
During their first 15 months the pay and price standards did help
hold down inflation, as indicated in Chapter 1. The first year's experience revealed two major problems, both caused in large measure by
sharp price increases in sectors where standards cannot effectively
limit price increases: energy, other raw materials, and food.
Many firms faced with uncontrollable cost increases applied to
switch from the price-deceleration standard to the profit-margin limitation. While this limitation restricted both the profit margin and the
rise in dollar profits that could be secured through higher prices,
firms that qualified for the exception were still able to pass through
large uncontrollable cost increases to prices of final products. Moreover the constraint on the growth of dollar profits had an upward
bias. Firms with low base-year profits were able to increase prices
and raise their profit margins to the average of the best 2 out of 3
prior fiscal years, while those with high base-period profits were not
compelled to make a comparable downward adjustment.
On the pay side, a problem of equity was created by the way costof-living adjustment (COLA) clauses were treated. Calculations of
whether a wage contract adhered to the standard assumed a 6 percent inflation rate in assessing the cost of a COLA clause. This appeared to be a reasonable assumption at the time that the standard
was designed, especially for multiyear contracts. Because of the large
price increases in the several sectors noted above, however, inflation
during the first program year was far in excess of 6 percent. As a result, many workers with COLAs were in compliance with the pay
standard while receiving greater wage increases than the complying
workers without such clauses—and greater increases than were consistent with the desired degree of wage restraint.
THE SECOND PROGRAM YEAR

Sharply higher prices led to a substantial reduction in real wages in
the first program year. Because many workers have attributed the
loss of real income to the pay standard rather than to its fundamental
causes, there have been pressures to relax the pay standard in ways
that would aggravate inflation. The American people cannot be wholly recompensed for losses of real income due to higher world oil
prices. Efforts by workers or other groups to restore real income
through larger increases in wages, salaries, or other forms of nominal




80

income will only increase business costs and thus ultimately intensify
inflation. This fact makes the pay and price standards all the more
important in the year ahead.
On November 1, 1979, the Council on Wage and Price Stability
announced the second-year price standard. Companies are expected
to limit their price increases for the 2 years ending September 30,
1980, to the price change for the 2 years from 1976 to 1977. A 2year standard was chosen to avoid penalizing companies that raised
prices less than the standard allowed during the first year. Any company, regardless of its base-period performance, will be in compliance if its prices go up less than 5 percent in the 2 years; any company whose prices rise by more than 19 percent will be out of compliance. Under the profit limitation exception, price increases are permissible if the growth of dollar profits over the 2 years does not exceed 13.5 percent and the profit margin is no higher than the average in the best 2 out of 3 fiscal years preceding the program. The
special adjustment for firms whose base-year profit margin is below
the profit margin in the best 2 of the last 3 years has been cut in half.
To elicit greater public participation in the standards program, a
Price Advisory Committee has been created. This Committee, which
consists of six public members appointed by the President, will from
time to time recommend to the Council on Wage and Price Stability
modifications of the price standards and new or revised interpretations of them.
The problem of catchup for workers without COLA clauses who
complied with the pay standard in 1979 is difficult. Just before the
end of the first program year the Council on Wage and Price Stability allowed a self-administered 1 percent pay increase for complying
workers not covered by COLA clauses; on a case-by-case basis the increases may be more than 1 percent where disparities between wage
increases of workers with COLAs and other workers in similar situations demonstrably require correction.
On September 28, 1979, the Carter Administration and the leadership of the American labor movement reached a National Accord.
This agreement provides for the cooperation and participation of organized labor in formulating and implementing policies aimed at reducing inflation effectively and equitably while furthering our
national goals of full employment and balanced growth.
One immediate result of this accord was the creation of a tripartite
Pay Advisory Committee with 18 members: six from labor, six from
management, and six from the public. Its central task is to recommend modifications to the first-year pay standard. The Committee
has been asked to look at the basic standard, the accompanying infla-




81

tion assumption for those workers who have COLA clauses, the exemption for low-wage workers, equitable catchup adjustments for
workers not covered by COLA clauses, and the treatment of incremental or merit increases.
The Committee has already made a number of recommendations
that the Council on Wage and Price Stability subsequently adopted.
The Committee recommended loosening the exception for tandem
pay relationships allowed in the first year. Pay increases in "follower"
units will be in compliance if they are substantially equal to increases
in "leader" units that are exempt from or in compliance with the pay
standard; employee groups whose pay increases follow formal market
surveys of pay rates will also be in compliance. The Committee further proposed that the tandem exception be self-administered, with
notification to the Council on Wage and Price Stability after the fact.
The Pay Committee recommended a change as well in the lowwage exemption. The exemption will continue to apply to individual
workers making under $4.00 per hour on October 1, 1978. Employee
groups with an average straight-time hourly wage rate of $5.35 or
less during the third quarter of 1979 are exempt from the pay standard in the second program year.
Finally, a recommendation by the Committee clarifies the status of
so-called incremental pay increases. Any promotion or pay raise in
established pay plans that results from completing a qualification requirement or from movement within a preexisting pay structure is
exempt from the pay standard.
As this Report went to press, the Committee had just recommended
a basic pay standard that would establish a range of allowable pay increases, together with a statement of principles for labor and management to use in determining the appropriateness of particular
wage increases.
THE OUTLOOK FOR INFLATION

Restraint on aggregate demand in combination with the pay and
price standards can make an important contribution to the control of
inflation in 1980 and help lay the foundation for later reductions in
inflation. Price developments in specific sectors such as food, energy,
and housing will continue to have a significant impact on inflation.
Over the 4 quarters of 1980 food prices should rise approximately
in line with general inflation. Prices are expected to climb most rapidly during the fall. Both the farm value of food prices and marketers' margins are expected to move up at about the same rate.
Inflation will continue to raise food marketing costs, which account
for about two-thirds of consumer food costs. Price increases in food
marketing operations, including labor, packaging materials, fuels, and




82

transport supplies, are quickly translated into higher retail food
prices.
The pattern of price increases for food during the year will also
depend on the general level of economic activity and the relative
availability of food products, primarily meats. Beef supplies for the
year will be about the same as in 1979, making 1980 the first year
since 1976 that supplies have not declined substantially. However,
seasonally lower cattle marketings could put upward pressure on beef
prices during the spring, and a reduction in the supplies of other
meats is likely to boost meat prices in the fall. While pork and poultry production will continue to increase through the first half of the
year, it might slow later because farm prices for these commodities
may not cover production costs during the first half of 1980. Pork
and poultry prices are consequently expected to remain fairly stable
through midyear but then to increase, particularly in the fourth quarter.
A major uncertainty in the outlook for food prices is consumer demand. While food prices tend to be most heavily influenced by the
availability of food products and marketing costs, the slower growth
of consumer incomes expected in the first half of this year will help
to moderate food price increases. Prices for highly perishable products like meat, fruit, and vegetables are likely to be most affected.
Energy prices to consumers are likely to increase less in 1980 than
in 1979, when they rose 37.4 percent. The outlook for prices of
petroleum products is very uncertain, however, since it is not clear
how much further world oil prices will rise this year. The forecast assumes no further increase in real world oil prices in 1980, after the
most recent round of OPEC price increases. As decontrol of domestic oil prices proceeds, the ratio of domestic to world oil prices will
rise from about two-thirds at the beginning of 1980 to slightly over
four-fifths at year's end. Domestic oil prices will rise substantially over
the 4 quarters of 1980.
The extent to which crude oil price increases are passed on to consumers depends heavily upon the balance of supply and demand in
the oil market. In 1979 the market was tight enough not only to
allow full pass-through of higher crude oil prices, but also to permit
a widening of refiners' and distributors' gross margins. Barring another severe disruption in world oil supplies, the outlook for the balance of supply and demand in the world oil market, at least in the
first half of 1980, is not likely to permit a further widening of inflation-adjusted margins.
The rate of increase in prices of houses may moderate somewhat
early in 1980 as a consequence of reduced demand attributable to
developments in mortgage credit markets late in 1979. The rise in




83

home financing costs should also be moderated later in 1980 by declining mortgage interest rates.
Available evidence noted in Chapter 1 suggests that the pay standard reduced wage inflation by about 1 percentage point in 1979.
The voluntary pay standard will continue this year, although its impact on increases in wage costs during 1980 may be somewhat less
than in 1979, both because the standard has had to be made more
liberal and because of pressures to restore real wage losses suffered
in 1979. Increased slack in the labor market, however, will also help
to hold down the rise of wage rates this year. The increase in average
hourly earnings is expected to range between 8V2 and 9 percent in
1980.
Because of the projected cyclical decline in real GNP, the output
per hour of all employees in the private business sector will probably
decline in 1980, but by less than in 1979. As a consequence the increase in unit labor costs will be above 10 percent for the second
year in a row. Not all of these cost increases will be passed through
to consumers, however, because weak aggregate demand will limit
price increases and cut into profit margins in 1980.
Taking all these factors into account, consumer prices are expected
to rise about 10.4 percent over the 12 months of this year, considerably less than in 1979. Smaller increases in energy prices and in the
costs of purchasing and financing homes are principally responsible
for the moderation. Most of the expected slowing of inflation this
year will occur during the second half, when the direct effects that
OPEC's recent price increases exert on the prices of petroleum products will be largely exhausted. Some further winding down of inflation is expected in 1981, when the increase in the consumer price
index is expected to be about 8 V2 percent.
THE PRODUCTIVITY PROBLEM

The trend rate of productivity growth in the United States, as in
other major industrial countries, has been declining in recent years.
In the United States, however, this decline started earlier and has
lasted longer than in other industrial economies. Table 15, which
compares growth in output per worker for the major OECD countries,
makes it evident that declines have occurred in all countries.
Table 16 shows growth in output per hour in the United States since
the end of World War II. During the first 20 years after the war, output
per hour for all employees in the private nonfarm business sector rose at
an average annual rate of just under 2V2 percent. From 1965 to 1973
the increase was 1V2 percent. Since 1973 the annual growth of productivity has been less than 1 percent. In the most recent period,
years of sharply declining productivity, such as 1974 and 1979, have
been interspersed with years of fairly good gains, such as 1976.




84

TABLE 15.—Annual growth in GNPper employed worker in major industrial countries, 1963-79
[Percent change per year]
1963

1973

to

Country

to

1973

l

1.9
8.7
4.6
4.6
3.0
5.4
2.4

United States
Japan
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy
Canada
1

1979

0.1
3.4
3.2
2.7
.3
1.6
.4

Estimate.

Source: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.

Last year's productivity performance was particularly disappointing. While productivity increased at a rate of 1.1 percent during
1978, in line with the recent trend, it declined over the 4 quarters of
1979 by about 2 percent. Productivity growth is cyclically sensitive
because businesses are generally slow to adjust their work force to
changes in production. This tendency causes sharp increases in productivity when output increases vigorously in the early stages of recovery; later, near cyclical peaks, very weak growth in productivity or
even declines may occur as growth in real output slows. Still, cyclical
considerations cannot account for all of the decline in productivity
last year.
TABLE 16.—Labor productivity growth, 1948-79
[Percent change per year]
Sector

1948
to
1955

Private business sector
Nonfarm
Manufacturing
Nonmanufacturing
1
2

1955
to
1965

1965
to
1973

1978 IV
to
1979 IV 1

1973
to
1978

2.5

2.4

1.6

0.8

-2.0

2.4

2.5

1.6

.9

-2.2

3.2
2.1

2.8
2.2

2.4
1.2

1.5

Preliminary.
Not available.

Note—Data relate to output per hour for all employees.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Chart 5 shows 4-quarter changes in productivity since 1965, adjusted for cyclical fluctuations. The productivity pattern of the last
decade has not been marked by consistently lower growth, but by periods of relatively satisfactory productivity gains interrupted by several intervals of very poor performance. One of the disturbing factors
about the productivity decline of 1979 was that it did not interrupt a
period of high growth but followed 2 years in which productivity
gains had already been quite low.
Last year's Report evaluated the various explanations for the slower
growth of productivity in recent years. The Council has continued to
examine the productivity problem and to monitor closely other analyses of this topic.




85

Chart 5

Productivity Adjusted for Cyclical Variation
PERCENT CHANGE FROM FOUR QUARTERS EARLIER

4

3 -

2 -

-2 -

1965 66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

NOTE: DATA ARE FOR PRIVATE NONFARM BUSINESS SECTOR. ALL PERSONS.
SOURCE: COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

The magnitude of the slowdown and numerical estimates of the
various forces behind it differ according to the period and measure
of productivity examined. Most analysts have, however, identified
breaks in productivity growth in the mid-1960s and again in 1973,
though other sharp reductions in cyclically adjusted productivity appear to have occurred as well. A comparison of estimated productivity growth in the nonfarm economy from 1973 to 1978 with the estimated growth from 1948 to 1973 indicates a slowdown of about 1%
percentage points. Statistical analyses have been able to identify factors responsible for some of the decline, but a significant part remains unexplained.
The slowdown in the growth of the capital-labor ratio may have
contributed about one-fourth of a percentage point to the decline, although some estimates put the figure higher. In earlier years the
entry into the labor force of many young workers had a measurable
impact on the decline, but this factor has not been so important since
1973. Offsetting some of the loss, however, have been the improved
training and health of the labor force.




86

The diversion of resources to comply with government regulation
may have accounted for as much as three-tenths of a percentage
point of the decline, although the impact has not been so large in
recent years. Many of these regulations have of course improved the
quality of our environment and the health and safety of workers and
consumers, benefits that are not measured in business output and
productivity statistics. But regulation has not always proceeded in the
most effective and efficient manner, and there is ample room for improvement. Administration initiatives to modernize the regulatory
structure in some industries have improved productivity. (The case of
the airline industry is discussed in Chapter 3.)
The relevance of research and development spending in explaining
the decline of productivity is controversial. The real volume of resources devoted to research and development fell by 7 percent between 1968 and 1975, but since the latter date it has increased steadily. However, as a percentage of GNP, total research and development spending has declined since the mid-1960s, from 3.0 percent in
1964 to 2.2 percent in 1979. In private industry, where the links between productivity and research and development are more firmly established, real expenditures have increased steadily over the last two
decades and have remained relatively stable as a share of GNP. More
industrial research and development, however, has been aimed at
compliance with regulatory requirements, and this may affect its contribution to measured output, especially in the short term. Moreover,
with the recent slowing of growth of the private capital stock, fewer
technological advances may have been embodied in equipment used
in production. Federal support for research and development rose
steadily during the early and middle years of the 1960s, but in real
terms declined by about one-fourth from fiscal 1967 to fiscal 1975.
Government research and development support is concentrated in
basic research and in military research, however, which affect business output and productivity only after very long lags. Thus this
slowdown in Federal funding may have had little effect on measured
productivity so far. And Federal obligations for research and development have increased by over 14 percent in real terms since 1975.
Finally, some events, such as sudden changes in energy prices or
the impact of inflation on decisions by business and individuals, may
affect productivity in ways not yet understood. For example, rapid increases in energy prices, if sustained, would make the operation of
older energy-intensive equipment less profitable and may make some
of our present knowledge less relevant. To the extent that energy
and capital are complements in production, rising energy prices may
slow the rate of growth of the capital-labor ratio, and labor productivity may fall. While this phenomenon probably played a role, the




87

available evidence does not suggest that it represents a major source
of the decline in productivity since 1973.
Since it is difficult to identify a single cause for a slowdown in productivity growth, the immediate prospects for a dramatic improvement in productivity are not good. Most recommendations for policies to improve productivity have been directed at incentives to increase investment in human and physical capital as well as in research and development. Since the slower growth of physical capital
is responsible for only a part of the decline in productivity growth,
efforts to stimulate business fixed investment will not solve all our
productivity problem. Still, improved investment performance is almost surely a necessary condition for higher productivity growth.
In last year's Report the Council estimated the current trend rate of
advance in productivity at 1 V percent. Since the average rate of in2
crease during the past 6 years has been below that figure, the trend
rate of increase may very well be still lower, perhaps 1 percent. Such
a judgment, however, would give very heavy weight to last year's
sharp decline in productivity, whose causes are not clearly understood. The Council has therefore decided to leave its estimate of the
trend unchanged at 1V2 percent. It is recognized, however, that cyclically adjusted productivity growth in the immediate future may fall
short of that figure.
POTENTIAL GNP

The uncertainties surrounding the causes and extent of the decline
in trend productivity make the assessment of the rate of growth of
the economy's productive potential most difficult. In last year's Report, the Council of Economic Advisers noted that the trend rate of
growth of productivity since 1973 was extremely uncertain, but apparently it was below the 2 percent figure consistent with the 3 V2
percent growth rate of potential GNP previously estimated.
Corollary evidence for this conclusion came from inaccurate predictions of the unemployment rate based on Okun's law, which describes the relation between the unemployment rate and the gap between actual and potential real GNP. If potential GNP growth had
been at 3V2 percent from 1968 onward, the unemployment rate in
1977 and 1978 would have been substantially higher than its actual
level.
As a result of these considerations the Council concluded in the
1979 Report that potential GNP had grown at only a 3 percent average rate in the 5 years since 1973. With this downward revision, the
overpredictions of the unemployment rate by Okun's law were
brought within historical margins of error. Underlying this estimate
of potential GNP growth was an assessment that productivity had
grown on average at about 1 percent per year, perhaps one-half of 1




88

percentage point below its long-term average. The shortfall of actual
productivity growth from its trend was offset by average annual
growth in the labor force about one-half of 1 percent above its longterm average.
The projection made in the 1979 Report of potential GNP growth
over the 1978-83 period was 3 percent, the same as the revised estimate for 1973-78. The estimated trend productivity growth underlying this projection was 1V2 percent, implying that some part, but less
than half, of the 1973-74 drop in productivity represented nonrecurring events and that the remainder derived from a lower trend rate
of increase.
Developments during 1979 raised further questions about the
long-term trend rate of increase in productivity, as noted earlier.
Once again the unemployment rate was substantially less than would
have been indicated by a projection based on a comparison between
the rate of growth of actual GNP and the assumed growth rate of potential GNP. If potential GNP had been rising at 3 percent, actual
economic growth of 0.8 percent in the 4 quarters of 1979 should
have caused the unemployment rate to rise from 5.8 in the fourth
quarter of 1978 to about 6V2 percent in last year's final quarter; in
fact the unemployment rate was unchanged over the period.
One year's experience does not provide sufficient evidence to
change the 1V2 percent estimate of long-term productivity advance
that underlies the Council's projection of a 3 percent annual trend
rate of growth in potential GNP. The 1979 drop in productivity,
however, in the wake of a similar one in 1974, does reduce the confidence with which that estimate can be held. In any event the Council
believes that cyclically adjusted productivity growth in the next 2
years will not recover fully from its 1979 low and reach the 1 V per2
cent trend. For this reason the estimate of the rate of growth of potential GNP has been reduced from 3 to 2 V2 percent during the 3
years beginning with the first quarter of 1979. This temporarily lower
growth of potential can be divided into the following components: an
annual growth in potential employment of near 2 percent, an increase in productivity of about 1 percent per year, and a one-half of
1 percent per year decline in hours per worker.
This estimate puts potential real GNP at $1,461 billion in 1972
dollars in 1979, $30 billion above the actual real GNP of $1,431 billion, as shown in Table 17. By the fourth quarter of 1979 the gap
between actual and potential GNP was $36.3 billion in 1972 dollars.
During the 1982-85 period productivity growth should increase.
Improved growth in investment and a more experienced labor force
should boost cyclically adjusted productivity growth during this period to a range of 1V2 to 2 percent. A projected average annual increase of 1% percent in potential employment, combined with an ex-




89

TABLE 17,—Potential gross national product and benchmark unemployment rate, 1973-79
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted]

Potential
GNP

Year

Actual GNP

GNP gap
(potential
less actual)

Benchmark
unemployment rate
(percent)

[97AZZZZZZZIZZZZZZZZZZZZI1ZZZ

1,227.0
1,264.4

1,235.0
1,217.8

-8.0
46.6

4.9
5.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,302.3
1,341.4
1,381.6
1,422.9
1,461.1

1,202.3
1,273.0
1,340.5
1,399.2
1,431.1

100.0
68.4
41.1
23.7
30.0

5.1
5.1
5.1
5.1
5.1

1

1

Preliminary.

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Council of Economic Advisers.

pected yearly fall in hours of one-half of 1 percent, yields a growth in
potential output over the 1982-85 period that is near 3 percent.
Projections of potential GNP, and in particular of cyclically adjusted productivity, are always subject to wide margins of error. This is
especially true now, when the economy is adjusting to higher energy
prices, changes in comparative advantage in international trade, and
new trends in regulation.
GOALS OF ECONOMIC POLICY
In 1978 the Humphrey-Hawkins Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act, enacted with the support of this Administration, specified procedures for developing and reviewing economic policies within the government and required the President to set 5-year goals for
the U.S. economy. Last year the Economic Report of the President and the
accompanying "Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers"
discussed the act at length. In September 1979 the use of the principles in the act as a framework for making economic policy was reaffirmed in the National Accord reached by the Administration and
American labor leaders.
The Humphrey-Hawkins Act incorporates both general and highly
specific objectives for two of the most important indicators of the
country's economic health: the unemployment rate and the rate of inflation. The general objectives of the act—and those of the Administration—are to achieve full employment and reasonable price stability. The act is quite clear that reasonable price stability means ultimately achieving a zero rate of inflation. Full employment is not defined as any specific unemployment rate. The preamble to the act,
however, indicates that the purpose of the legislation is "to translate
into practical reality the right of all Americans who are able, willing,
and seeking to work to full opportunity for useful paid employment
at fair rates of compensation." The act also establishes a balanced
Federal budget as a high-priority goal of economic policy.




90

The act sets up specific milestones for the reduction of unemployment and inflation as the Nation proceeds toward the ultimate objectives. Interim goals of 4 percent for the overall unemployment rate
(3 percent for adults) and 3 percent for inflation are set for 1983.
The act requires that this year's Economic Report include, along with a
review of the numerical goals and timetables for reducing unemployment and inflation, and the goal of a balanced budget, a report to
the Congress on the degree of progress being made in these areas,
and a discussion of the policies being used to achieve these goals.
In this and subsequent Economic Reports the President may, if he
finds it necessary, recommend modification of the existing timetable
or timetables for achieving the interim goals of 4 percent for the unemployment rate and 3 percent for inflation.
Progress Toward Meeting the Humphrey-Haw kins Goals

At the end of 1976 the overall unemployment rate was still close to
8 percent. For blacks and other minorities the rate was over 13 percent. The average duration of unemployment exceeded 15 weeks,
and 1 million discouraged workers stayed out of the labor force because they believed no jobs were available. A large part of the labor
resources idled by the severe recession of 1974-75, the deepest of
the postwar period, still remained unemployed.
Since the fourth quarter of 1976, increases in employment have
been extraordinarily large, averaging nearly 3V2 percent per year.
Gains in employment have occurred for all major demographic
groups (Table 18).
TABLE 18.—Changes in employment and unemployment by demographic group, fourth quarter 1976
to fourth quarter 1979
[Seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Unemployment rate
(percent)

Employment
Thousands of persons

Group

1976 IV

1979 IV

7.7

5.9

1976 IV

1979 IV

Percent
change 1

By sex:
Male
Female

88,242

97,665

10.4

52,732
35,509

Total....

56,648
41,017

7.3
14.9

By race and origin:
White
Black and other
Hispanic origin 2 ....

7.0
13.2
11.1

5.1
11.2
8.6

78,689
9,577
3,841

86,640
11,048
4,626

9.8
15.2
20.4

By age:
Adults (20 years and over)
Teenagers (16-19 years)
Black and other

6.6
19.0
36.6

4.8
16.1
34.1

80,987
7,255
588

89,686

10.5
9.4
15.7

7,979
671

1
Adjusted for the increase of about 250,000 in employment and labor force in January 1978 resulting from changes in the
sample and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey.
2
Data on persons of Hispanic origin are tabulated separately without regard to race, which means that such persons are also
included in the data for white and black and other workers; at the time of the 1970 Census, approximately 96 percent of their
population was white. Data are not seasonally adjusted.

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




91

For blacks and other minority groups the percentage rise in employment was half again as large as for whites. Gains in employment
among persons of Hispanic origin, in percentage terms, were about
twice as large as for all workers. Aided by strongly expanded Federal
jobs programs for youth, employment among black teenagers grew
by nearly 16 percent. Since the number of black teenagers seeking
work also climbed very sharply, however, their unemployment rate
fell less rapidly, and in December 1979 it was still an exceedingly
high 34.3 percent.
While unemployment rates declined for all major demographic
groups, disparities among the rates for different groups did not
change appreciably. The unemployment rate late last year for blacks
and other minorities was still about twice as high as that for whites;
the teenage unemployment rate was more than three times that for
adults.
The most distressing feature of the unemployment record is the
fact that the unemployment rates of black teenagers failed to decline
significantly. To address this very serious problem the Administration
has substantially increased the funds available during the past 3 years
to support employment and training programs for youth. Indeed despite a tight budget it has gone further. An important new initiative
to improve the basic skills and the ability of disadvantaged youth to
find and keep jobs is proposed in this year's budget.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, inflation has not declined during the past 3 years; in fact, it has increased appreciably since 1976.
A large part of the increase was due to developments in the food and
energy sectors, where aggregate demand policies and the voluntary
pay and price standards have little influence. The underlying, or
longer-term, rate of inflation, however, has also moved up considerably.
Progress in reducing the Federal budget deficit has been significant. The budget deficit has declined from $66 billion (4.1 percent of
GNP) in fiscal 1976 to a projected level of about $40 billion in the
1980 fiscal year (1.6 percent of GNP). The budget for 1981 just submitted to the Congress moves the deficit substantially lower, to $16
billion. Sharp increases in oil prices have worsened the outlook for
economic growth in 1980. If economic growth in 1980 and 1981
were strong enough to keep the unemployment rate from rising, the
expenditure programs and tax rates in the 1981 budget would yield a
surplus.
Achieving the Goals of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act

The next 2 years will be difficult for the U.S. economy. As indicated earlier a mild recession is expected in the first half of this year,




92

and some increase in unemployment is likely. Economic growth is expected to resume later in 1980 and to continue through 1981; and
the unemployment rate should begin to decline, though it is not expected to fall below 7XA percent by the fourth quarter of 1981. Some
progress in slowing inflation from the very high rate that occurred
last year is foreseen; but, given the energy price increases now in
train, the rate of consumer price increases in 1981 is still likely to be
close to 8V2 percent.
After 4 years of relatively rapid growth during the recovery from
the 1974-75 recession, some slowdown in the rate of economic expansion in 1979 and 1980 would have occurred even under the best
of circumstances. But we have not had the best of circumstances.
Huge OPEC oil price increases since the end of 1978 have made the
outlook for economic growth much worse and have at the same time
sharply increased inflation. Attempting to offset the deleterious effects on output and employment from the rise in the cost of oil by
applying a very strong economic stimulus would make inflation worse
and risk pushing it permanently into the double-digit range. The effect that a further worsening of inflation would have on long-term interest rates, the exchange value of the dollar, and investment plans
would in turn frustrate the effort to keep output and employment on
a rising course. Conversely, applying draconian monetary and fiscal
policies in an effort to suppress completely the inflationary results of
the oil price increase and keep the economy on a path toward the
Humphrey-Hawkins goal of 3 percent inflation would produce a deep
and extended recession without reducing inflation to the desired degree. During the next 2 years, appropriate economic policies can
help the economy adjust to the impact of the OPEC price increases.
But no policies can change the realities which those increases impose. The world oil situation has caused a tremendous setback in the
economic progress of all oil-importing nations.
Given this obstacle to economic progress, the goals of a 4 percent
unemployment rate and 3 percent inflation by 1983 are no longer
practicable. Reduction of the unemployment rate to 4 percent by
1983, starting from the level now expected in 1981, would require a
growth of real GNP averaging about 7 percent per year during 1982
and 1983. That would be a rate of growth higher than that in the
first 2 years following the recession of 1974-75, the deepest of the
postwar period. Indeed no 2 consecutive calendar years since the Korean war have produced a real GNP growth averaging over 7 percent
a year. Moreover, efforts to achieve so high a growth rate through
aggregate demand policies would be counterproductive. Their immediate result would be extremely strong upward pressure on wage
rates, costs, and prices. As already noted, this would undercut the

93
294-289




0 - 8 0 - 7

basis for sustained economic expansion and postpone still further the
date at which we could reasonably expect a return to a 4 percent unemployment rate.
Reducing inflation from 8M2 percent in 1981 to 3 percent by 1983
is an equally unrealistic expectation. Recent experience indicates that
the momentum of inflation built up over the past 15 years is extremely strong. A practical goal for reducing inflation must take this
fact into account.
Because of these economic realities, the President has used the authority provided to him in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act to extend the
timetable for achieving a 4 percent unemployment rate and 3 percent
inflation. The target year for achieving 4 percent unemployment is
now 1985, a 2-year deferment. The target year for achieving 3 percent inflation has been postponed until 3 years beyond that. Economic goals through 1985 consistent with this timetable are shown in
Table 19.
TABLE 19.—Economic goals, 1980-85
Item

1980

1981

1982

1984

1983

1985

Level, fourth quarter l
Employment (millions)
Unemployment rate (percent)

97.8

99.7

102.5

105.3

108.0

110.7

7.5

7.3

6.5

5.6

4.8

4.0

Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter
Consumer prices
Real GNP
Real disposable income
Productivity 2

10.7

8.7

7.9

7.2

6.5

5.8

-10

28

50

50

48

46

.5

1.1

4.7

4.7

4.6

4.4

-.3

1.3

2.3

2.5

2.5

2.5

1

Seasonally adjusted.
2
Based on real GNP per hour worked.
Source.- Council of Economic Advisers.

The short-term goals represent a forecast for 1980 and 1981. The
medium-term goals for 1982 through 1985 are not forecasts but projections of the economic performance needed to achieve the unemployment rate and inflation goals within the Administration's timetable. Long-term policies that will improve the prospects of meeting
these targets are discussed in Chapter 3.
These projections through 1985 assume that growth of real potential GNP is 2V2 percent during this year and next and 3 percent
thereafter. Accordingly, given the growth rates forecast for 1980 and
1981, real GNP growth from 1982 through 1985 would need to be
quite rapid to achieve 4 percent unemployment by 1985. The projection shows growth at a 5 percent rate in 1982 and 1983 followed by a
deceleration as the economy approaches 4 percent unemployment.




94

The rate of inflation is projected to slow steadily to just under 6
percent by 1985. Faster deceleration would be desirable but difficult
to attain, particularly in light of the prospect, discussed in Chapter 3,
that energy prices will probably continue to rise faster than other
prices. Progress against inflation along the lines projected would
have an important salutary effect on inflationary expectations, however, and would greatly add to the chances of reducing inflation still
further in subsequent years.
As last year's Economic Report pointed out, reducing unemployment
to 4 percent and at the same time achieving steady progress in curbing inflation constitutes an enormous challenge. The rate of unemployment has continuously exceeded 4 percent since early 1970.
Over the past decade, however, inflation has increased substantially,
stimulated by large increases in oil prices and the slowdown in productivity growth.
The Administration believes that simultaneous progress toward the
unemployment rate and inflation goals cannot be made by relying
solely on aggregate demand policies. The Humphrey-Hawkins Act
also recognizes this fact. To be sure, a reduction of inflation over the
long term will require continued application of restraint in monetary
and fiscal policies. Braking the momentum of inflation will also require the widespread and sustained compliance of business and labor
with the voluntary pay and price standards. If output and employment are to be kept growing satisfactorily while growth of aggregate
demand is restrained, specific policies are needed to improve productivity and reduce the impact from outside inflationary shocks. Chapters 3 and 4 in this Report discuss a number of such measures. First
among these is the Administration's long-term energy program, designed to promote conservation and to help in the development of
alternative energy sources that will make us gradually less vulnerable
to OPEC price increases that add to unemployment and inflation.
Also included among these longer-term measures and discussed in
Chapters 3 and 4 are grain reserve policies designed to prevent
worldwide crop shortages from leading to sharp increases in food
prices; regulatory reform policies to foster competition in currently
regulated industries and ensure cost-effective social regulations; cooperative efforts with other oil-consuming countries to match oil imports with available production and thus avoid a costly scramble for
petroleum supplies; and trade policies designed to secure the advantages of a free flow of imports for American consumers, to give
American businesses access to expanding world markets, and to improve procedures for the protection of American workers and businesses from unfair trade practices.




95

Progress toward the goals of the Humphrey-Hawkins Act will also
require policies that reduce structural unemployment through carefully targeted jobs programs, especially for minorities and youth. The
Administration has launched a number of such programs since 1976.
In 1978 a new structural employment component was added to title
II of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) establishing a category of public service jobs especially for the disadvantaged and the long-term unemployed. The 1978 legislation also
provided new resources for employment and training opportunities
in private industry, and private industry councils have been established in nearly all local CETA jurisdictions. In addition, under
CETA, particularly in the Youth Employment and Demonstration
Projects Act, special employment and training programs have been
established for the young, giving particular attention to the disadvantaged. Outlays for the Department of Labor's youth employment and
training programs have tripled since 1976.
The Revenue Act of 1978 contained a targeted income tax credit
to encourage the employment of disadvantaged persons, particularly
those between the ages of 18 and 24. The Administration has also
worked vigorously for its proposed welfare reform, which would
make benefit levels uniform and expand work and training opportunities for the poor, thus moving the country closer to the President's
goal of providing job opportunities for all Americans. A major demonstration project has been initiated to help in the design of the program.
Further, as mentioned previously, a significant new initiative is included in the budget this year to improve basic educational and job
skills among the Nation's disadvantaged young people. This program
is described further in Chapter 3.
CONCLUSION

Progress toward our goal of a high-employment economy with reasonably stable prices was interrupted last year by the effects of sharply rising oil prices on economic growth and inflation. Achieving both
a 4 percent unemployment rate and 3 percent inflation by 1983 was
an ambitious goal a year ago; developments of this past year indicate
now that it is impossible. A reasonable degree of success in attaining
our objectives will take somewhat longer.
As last year's Economic Report pointed out, the most difficult obstacle to achieving our national economic goals is the tendency of inflationary forces to intensify as the economy approaches full utilization
of its human and capital resources. This obstacle still exists; in fact
increased real prices of energy make it even greater. The challenge
for economic policy in the near term is to prevent last year's higher
energy prices from becoming embedded in the structure of costs and




96

industrial prices, thereby worsening inflation for years to come and
delaying even longer the achievement of our economic goals. The
challenge over the longer run is to strengthen our defenses against
the effects of OPEC price and supply decisions and reduce the inflationary forces that accompany high employment through measures to
increase productivity and to lower structural unemployment. Longterm policies to meet these needs are the subject of Chapter 3.




97

CHAPTER 3

Longer-Term Policies for Stability and
Growth
THE CONTROL AND REDUCTION OF INFLATION is the Nation's highest economic priority, requiring fiscal and monetary policies that restrain demand not only in the immediate future but over
an extended period. We also need policies to improve the structure
and functioning of the economy in order to increase the effectiveness
of demand restraint in lowering inflation and to reduce its depressing
influence on output and employment. Such supply and structural
policies are also important because they address two other tasks facing the American economy: restoring the Nation's productivity
growth and making the necessary adjustments to scarce energy
supplies.
The first part of this chapter outlines the broad framework of aggregate demand restraint consistent with a sustained attack on inflation and touches briefly on the strengths and limitations of this
means of controlling inflation over the long run. The bulk of the
chapter is devoted to a discussion of supply and structural problems.
It examines how productivity and output are affected by the pace of
business investment and by measures to reform regulatory policies,
improve the operation of labor markets, promote energy conservation, and expand energy supplies. It also discusses ways to reduce
the economy's vulnerability to inflationary shocks in the areas of
energy and food.
THE NEED TO REDUCE INFLATION
As Chapter 2 emphasized, the most immediate goal of anti-inflation policy must be to prevent the recent price increases for energy
and housing from spilling over into the rest of the economy. Success
in that endeavor will still leave the country's inflation rate far too
high. On the basis of measures of inflation in sectors other than energy and housing, and taking account of longer-term trends in unit
labor costs, the underlying inflation rate currently appears to be in
the neighborhood of 8 to 9 percent.




98

Each new round of inflation since the mid-1960s has left us with a
higher underlying inflation rate. Without long-term policies to reduce the current underlying rate of 8 to 9 percent, the economy will
remain vulnerable to still further increases. These could come from a
variety of sources. Another sharp increase in oil prices or a worldwide crop shortage could be the impetus for the next turn of the
ratchet. A sudden and unanticipated surge in private spending could
temporarily overheat the economy and spur inflation. Moreover, failure to lower inflation significantly after the latest inflationary episode
would strengthen long-run inflationary expectations and erode resistance to future wage and price increases. Over the longer term, therefore, we must either have policies in place to reduce the underlying
rate of inflation or in all likelihood face worsening inflation.
Successfully unwinding inflation over the coming years will require
policies that address each of its three major long-run determinants:
the rate of growth of nominal wages, profits, and other income; the
pace at which productivity advances; and the occurrence of outside
inflationary events. First, the rise in hourly wages and other income
has to be reduced in order to bring down the rate at which costs are
rising. While the task of economic policy at the moment—after a year
of substantial increase in energy and housing prices—is to prevent
the acceleration of wages and other costs, the longer-run objective of
substantially reducing inflation can only be achieved by decreasing
the rate of growth in nominal incomes. Second, curbing the rise of
unit costs also requires that the rate of productivity growth be improved. For the economy as a whole, short-run changes in the rate of
productivity growth do not seem to affect the growth of money
wages, which depends principally on the state of aggregate demand
and the momentum of past inflation. As a consequence, measures
that improve efficiency and speed up productivity growth not only
raise real living standards but retard the growth of unit labor costs
and thus lower the underlying rate of inflation. The dismal productivity performance of the American economy in recent years calls urgently for improvement. Much of the rise in unit labor costs over the
past several years appears to derive not from an acceleration of wage
increases, but from the fall in productivity growth.
Finally, the Nation must improve its ability to cope with such
shocks as worldwide crop shortages or sudden increases in the world
price of oil. These periodic events, whose effects have been especially
severe in the past decade, do not cause merely temporary spurts in
inflation. They do more permanent damage through the formal indexing and informal mechanisms that many groups in society resort
to in an attempt to raise their money incomes and escape the burden
of the initial price shocks. If widespread, these mechanisms cannot




99

make up for the loss in real income, but they do raise the underlying
rate of inflation.
CONTROLLING AGGREGATE DEMAND

The President's budget for 1981 calls for increased fiscal restraint.
Chapter 2 estimates the degree of restraint and explains the necessity
for using the budget as an anti-inflation tool, even in a period of
weakening economic growth.
The specific fiscal and monetary policies needed to reduce inflation
will necessarily vary from year to year, depending principally upon
the strength or weakness of the private economy and the actual
course of inflation and unemployment. Nevertheless some broad
principles can be laid down to guide fiscal and monetary policy toward a long-term reduction in the underlying rate of inflation.
Reducing the Groivth of Nominal GNP

While monetary and fiscal policies can to some extent directly affect the rate of inflation through their impact on inflationary expectations, their principal influence comes indirectly through their effect
on the growth of total spending, or nominal gross national product
(GNP). If inflation is to be reduced over the long run, the growth of
nominal GNP must decline. At one level this is simply an arithmetic
truism. The growth rate of nominal GNP approximately equals the
rate of growth of real output plus the rate of inflation. If real output
increases by 3 percent and prices rise by 10 percent, nominal GNP
will thus increase by about 13 percent. A long-term reduction in the
rate of inflation in an economy growing at or close to its potential
rate necessarily implies a decline in the growth rate of nominal GNP.
But the proposition is more than a truism. Because there is a momentum to inherited inflation, this year's underlying rate of wage and
price increase is likely to perpetuate itself next year unless other
forces counteract it. In the absence of significant economic slack,
therefore, monetary and fiscal policies which aim at a continuation of
last year's rate of growth in nominal GNP are likely to perpetuate last
year's underlying rate of inflation. Indeed, failure to resist such perpetuation of inflation may arouse inflationary expectations and thereby produce a further increase in inflation—particularly after the
economy has been shocked by soaring energy prices. On the other
hand, if monetary and fiscal policies reduce the growth of nominal
GNP, the persistence of wage and price increases at undiminished
rates would necessarily lessen the growth of output and create more
idle capacity and unemployment. Increased economic slack generates
greater resistance to wage and price increases; and the degree to
which wage and price increases respond determines the division of




100

reduced growth in nominal GNP between a reduction in output and a
decline in the inflation rate.
Unfortunately, as the 1979 Economic Report of the President discussed
at length, the overall rate of wage and price increases in the American economy, while not immune to the effects of idle capacity and
unemployment, is not highly sensitive to moderate changes in economic slack. Using monetary and fiscal policies to produce a very
sharp and immediate reduction in the growth of nominal GNP in the
hope of reducing inflation quickly by a large amount would almost
surely fail. It would produce a large decline in output and employment and only a modest reduction in the underlying rate of inflation.
In such circumstances the political consensus needed to continue
policies of restraint on aggregate demand would be short lived. The
most appropriate course is likely to be monetary and fiscal restraint
that aims for a long-term decline in the growth of nominal GNP and
produces a gradual but steady lowering of inflation. Persistence in
this endeavor, moreover, would improve the expectations about future inflation, and as a result prices and wages might respond more
readily to economic slack than they have in the past.
In the context of such monetary and fiscal policies, standards for
moderation in setting wages and prices become a means not only of
reducing inflation but also of increasing jobs and output. If the pay
and price standards succeed this year in stabilizing the underlying
rate of inflation, they can be directed in later years to the more difficult task of reducing that rate. Over the longer term the challenge is
to develop standards and approaches that are sufficiently specific to
be self-administered by most employers and employee groups, but
flexible enough to avoid rigidity and misallocation of resources. The
National Accord between labor leadership and the Administration
provides a framework for developing such standards.
Similarly, in the context of a long-run aggregate demand policy
dedicated to reducing inflation, the supply and structural policies discussed later in the chapter also take on a new meaning. Many of
these measures are designed to speed up the rate of productivity
growth. To the extent that they succeed, the growth of output is likely to be higher for any given reduction in the growth of nominal
GNP. Moreover an increase in the long-term rate of productivity
growth raises the potential growth rate, and thus output can rise
more rapidly without putting any greater demand pressure on product or labor markets. As a consequence, a lesser degree of monetary
and fiscal restraint is needed to produce a decline in the inflation
rate. Policies that improve supply thus make possible an eventual relaxation of the monetary and fiscal constraints on the growth of aggregate demand without endangering the effort to reduce inflation.




101

Some General Principles

The general principles that must guide economic policies designed
to reduce the inherited underlying rate of inflation over the long run
can be summarized in four propositions: (1) The rate of inflation can
be reduced only if fiscal and monetary policies over the long term
aim at lowering the rate of growth of nominal GNP. (2) Because of
the momentum of underlying inflation, such restraint in fiscal and
monetary policies will operate to retard output and employment
somewhat, compared to what might have been achieved in a noninflationary economy. (3) Greater moderation in wage and price decisions by business and labor will result in correspondingly smaller
losses in output and employment growth as growth in nominal GNP
falls. (4) Measures that successfully increase the Nation's efficiency in
using its human and capital resources not only directly reduce inflation but also improve standards of living and make possible some relaxation of fiscal and monetary restraint, thereby promoting a faster
growth in national output and employment.
The goal of a long-term reduction in the nominal growth of GNP
still leaves room for adapting fiscal and monetary policy to shorterrun changes in economic conditions. In the first place the objective
of a long-term decline in nominal GNP growth has to allow for some
year-to-year variations. In 1980, for example, real output is expected
to decline, while subsequent recovery would raise GNP growth moderately above potential for a time. Anti-inflation policy this year will
be successful if it does no more than stabilize the rate of underlying
inflation after a series of huge oil price increases. Substantial reductions in inflation must come later. Taking all of these factors into account, the maintenance of an overall framework of monetary and fiscal restraint during the next several years is likely to be consistent
with a growth of nominal GNP that declines substantially in 1980 and
then rises in 1981 and 1982.
Furthermore any given growth of nominal GNP might require
more or less restraint from monetary or fiscal policy, depending
upon the strength of private demand. When the growth of private
spending promises to be very strong, aggregate demand should be
further restrained to prevent nominal GNP from growing too rapidly.
When private demand is very weak, the desired growth in nominal
GNP may require more expansive policies. The long-term reduction
of inflation does not mean that fiscal and monetary policy must be
locked into a fixed position. But it does require adjustments around
an average degree of demand restraint that produces declining inflation over the long run and is therefore greater than would be appropriate in less inflationary times.




102

In one respect the necessities of the long-term fight against inflation have a very particular implication for the way in which specific
decisions ought to be made about short-run adjustments of monetary
and fiscal policies. Monetary and fiscal policies exert their effects on
the economy only after some time. Hence they must be based on
economic forecasts, which are often in error; makers of economic
policy must take this fact into account. A world in which the momentum of past inflation is very strong and in which inflationary expectations are easily aroused produces asymmetric risks. If expansive monetary or fiscal actions are undertaken on the basis of an erroneous
forecast that economic activity will weaken, the underlying inflation
rate may well worsen for many years to come. On the other hand, if
expansive actions are forgone because of a mistakenly optimistic
forecast, the resulting unexpected declines in output and employment, while still costly, can be remedied more surely and quickly
than if the error had been in the other direction.
These considerations do not warrant a rigid and unbending policy,
but they do indicate the need for continuing prudence and caution in
monetary and fiscal decisions. To be acceptable, the case for relaxing
monetary and fiscal restraint now and in the near future will have to
be more urgent and much clearer than it was in earlier and less inflationary periods.
As events of the past decade have made painfully clear, monetary
and fiscal policy must be prepared to cope with sudden inflationary
forces arising from events like a worldwide crop shortage or a large
increase in world oil prices. Such supply shocks have two inflationary
effects. First, they directly increase prices of the affected commodities; second, they threaten to induce larger wage increases and efforts to restore profit margins which generate higher prices throughout the economy.
If, before the supply shock, monetary and fiscal policies were set to
produce a decline in the growth of nominal GNP and in the rate of
inflation, how should they now be adjusted? To suppress even the
direct inflationary consequences of an abrupt increase in food or oil
prices, fiscal and monetary policy would have to be sufficiently tightened that the reduction in price and wage inflation outside the affected sector would offset the price shock within the sector. But given
the relative insensitivity of wages and prices to economic slack, such
a policy would lead to unacceptably severe reductions in output and
employment. On the other hand, an effort to avoid any loss in output
and employment from the supply shock would require supporting aggregate demand to the point where no resistance would be offered to
the wage-price spiral triggered by the price shock. Such a policy
would raise the underlying rate of inflation, setting back for many




103

years the long-term goal of reducing inflation. A practical alternative
would be to accommodate the direct inflationary effects of the shock
but, through a combination of monetary and fiscal policies and wageprice guidelines, to seek to stabilize the rate of wage and price increase elsewhere in the economy. Thus monetary and fiscal policy
would recognize the inevitability of a temporary addition to inflation
but would fight vigorously any tendencies to increase the underlying
rate. Such a policy would lead to some temporary loss of output. But
the direct inflationary effects of the supply shock would gradually disappear and the economic slack would itself moderate the indirect effects. At some cost, the economy could absorb the supply shock and
return to its previous path of increasing output and declining inflation.
Finally, one must be clear about measuring restraint in fiscal policy. This Administration has committed itself to reducing the share of
Federal spending in GNP. At the same time, however, in the absence
of tax cuts the progressivity of the tax system generates Federal revenues that grow faster than GNP, producing increasing fiscal restraint. (Table 12 estimates the growth of fiscal drag in 1979 and
1980.) Tax reductions become necessary at times to prevent excessive fiscal restraint and need not in themselves be inconsistent with a
general policy of fiscal restraint. However, the timing and magnitude
of such reductions must be decided on the basis of prevailing and
expected economic conditions. Tax reductions at the appropriate
time could be quite consistent with the maintenance of restraint;
taken prematurely, they could induce an excessive growth in nominal
GNP and thus thwart the achievement of long-run anti-inflation objectives. Proper timing for tax reductions must also take into account
the asymmetry of risks discussed on the previous page. The President's budget for 1981 was drawn up in accordance with these considerations.
IMPROVING THE STRUCTURAL PERFORMANCE OF THE
ECONOMY
While a long-term strategy of restraint on the growth of aggregate
demand is essential in bringing down the underlying rate of inflation,
it cannot accomplish the task by itself without serious costs in the
form of reduced growth in real incomes. Over the longer run there is
simply no alternative to increasing the efficiency with which the economy produces goods and services. "Supply-side" policies to achieve
this end fall into two general categories: those that improve the productivity of human and capital resources and those that help insulate
the economy from the price-increasing effects of supply shocks.




104

Supply-side policies do not produce quick and dramatic results.
They operate slowly and sometimes only after a considerable lag. But
unless we successfully pursue them, we cannot achieve the high rates
of economic growth, stable prices, and full employment set forth as
goals in the Humphrey-Hawkins Act.
MEETING THE ENERGY CHALLENGE
The immediate economic consequences of the sharp rise in world
oil prices in 1979 have focused attention on the short-term effects of
tighter energy supplies. Developments over the last year have a deeper significance, however. They confirm that rising energy prices are
not a transient phenomenon, but something the Nation must adjust
to. This adjustment will place a significant burden on the economy,
but it cannot be avoided. Attempts to do so will damage the Nation's
growth prospects and its competitiveness in the world economy.
Over the long run and with proper policies the United States can
make a successful transition to a world of higher energy prices. With
energy conservation and the timely development of alternative energy supplies, growth in output and improvements in our living standards need be only modestly reduced by the relative scarcity of energy
supplies. The task of energy policy is tw7ofold: to promote over the
long run an efficient and orderly adjustment to a world of scarcer
and more costly energy supplies, and in the interim to reduce the
Nation's vulnerability to the transitional economic costs of sudden increases in oil prices and disruptions in supply.
REDUCING VULNERABILITY IN THE SHORT RUN

Over the longer term the Administration's energy program will accomplish substantial reductions in oil imports. In the short run, however, the Nation's dependence on imported oil is likely to remain uncomfortably high. The President has pledged that the United States
will never again import more oil than it did during 1977: a net of 8.5
million barrels per day. During 1979 both imports and oil consumption fell considerably because of a number of factors, including physical shortages in the spring, conservation induced by the sharp increases in energy prices, and policies to promote conservation and
conversion to non-oil energy sources. A continuing decline in domestic demand for petroleum products is forecast for 1980. However,
uncertainty about further sharp price increases and supply disruptions keep the balance between supply and demand in the world oil
market precarious. Measures to limit the Nation's vulnerability over
the shorter term are therefore necessary.




105

The most effective means of moderating the impact of supply disruptions is to change the conditions which permit large and sudden
price increases. To the extent that world demand for oil can be reduced, the price-raising pressures of demand against supply will be
relieved. Similarly by developing a mechanism for responding to any
cutbacks in oil supply with a coordinated reduction in demand, the
major oil-consuming countries, acting together, can reduce the competitive scramble for oil and thus lessen the bidding up of prices in
the spot market. High spot market prices would encourage further
official price increases by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC). Chapter 4 discusses the efforts now under way by
the United States and other major oil-consuming countries in the International Energy Agency to achieve these very important objectives.
While international cooperation is essential, so are national measures. The Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) is intended to cushion
the impact of any abrupt cutoff in supply. Purchases for the SPR
were halted last year at the onset of the Iranian crisis. In August
1979 the reserve contained 92 million barrels—far short of its target.
If conditions permit during the year ahead, SPR purchases could resume. An adequate Strategic Petroleum Reserve, combined with private stocks, will provide considerable protection for the United States
against supply interruptions. The SPR will also buy time for other responses to disruptions, such as mandatory conservation measures, to
be put in place.
Finally, we also need to have measures in readiness so that if a severe disruption occurs available supplies will be distributed both fairly and efficiently. While the price system is likely to be the most efficient (and in some respects the fairest) way of handling minor interruptions in supply, it should not be relied on as the sole remedy for
interruptions of all magnitudes. In response to recent legislation the
Administration is developing a standby motor fuel rationing plan for
submission to the Congress. Under that legislation the rationing plan
may be put into effect in situations where the shortfall in gasoline,
diesel fuel, and heating oil supplies is expected to exceed 20 percent
for more than 30 days. (Using 1979 figures, this shortfall would
amount to approximately 2 million barrels per day.) A notable feature of the plan is a "white market" for trading unused ration coupons. All motorists would be assured a certain minimum supply of
fuel, but those wishing more would be free to purchase it—at marketclearing prices.
The Nation must also be capable of dealing with smaller supply
disruptions. As we learned this past year, even cutoffs of less than 10
percent of supply can significantly disrupt normal activity, and hence




106

the Administration is preparing proposals for standby measures to be
applied when smaller disruptions occur.
LONGER-TERM IMPROVEMENTS

A key aim in the Administration's energy program is to move as
quickly as feasible to a rational pricing policy for energy. Price controls are being removed from domestic oil and natural gas so that the
market can direct efficient use of energy and encourage the production of additional supplies.
Unfortunately, reliance on the market will not be enough. Habits
of energy consumption learned over decades of falling real energy
prices are difficult to change. Furthermore the benefits to our national and economic security from reducing our dependence on foreign
oil exceed even the high price we must now pay for this oil. For both
of these reasons there is room for measures that mandate additional
energy conservation and encourage investment in new sources of
energy.
Gradual Decontrol of Domestic Natural Gas and Crude Oil Prices

The 1978 enactment of the Administration's proposal for deregulation of natural gas began what is to be a gradual decontrol of gas
prices. The initial steps toward decontrol have already been beneficial. The decline in yearly additions to reserves has been halted, and
natural gas previously confined to intrastate channels can now enter
the interstate market. Price flexibility is also helping to redirect supplies to relatively more valuable uses.
In April 1979 the President announced that he would phase out
price controls on domestically produced oil. Decontrol began on
June 1 with the release of controls on the price of newly discovered
oil (oil discovered since January 1, 1979). At that same time 80 percent of all "marginal" oil (oil produced from wells of various depths
yielding 10 to 35 barrels per day) was allowed to be sold at a substantially higher (but still controlled) price. In August the President
announced the immediate decontrol of "heavy" crude oil, an extremely viscous oil produced mainly in California. In December the
definition of heavy oil was broadened slightly, exempting still more
oil from controls. These initial decontrol steps had little impact on
the economy, however, because they affected a relatively small proportion of the domestically produced oil.
In January 1980 the pace of decontrol accelerated as the price of
most domestically produced oil began to move steadily toward the
world price. Decontrol is scheduled to be completed by October 1,
1981.
Decontrol of domestic crude oil prices will provide strong,
unambiguous signals encouraging conservation and stimulating do-




107

mestic energy supplies. According to recent estimates by the Department of Energy and the Congressional Budget Office, by 1990 decontrol will result in U.S. oil imports being at least 2 million barrels
per day lower than they would be otherwise.
The Effect of Higher Prices on Oil Consumption

Some continue to doubt that higher energy prices significantly reduce energy demand. Because the elasticity of demand for most
petroleum products is somewhat smaller than that for other familiar
commodities, and is less than unity, economists have called the demand for petroleum products inelastic. This fact, combined with a
widespread belief that use of energy in general and gasoline in particular is essential, has led to the erroneous conclusion that price
would have no impact on demand. However, economists who have
studied the question have almost invariably found statistical evidence
that gasoline demand is indeed responsive to price. In the majority of
studies, estimated short-run (1-year) price elasticities of demand for
gasoline range between minus 0.2 and minus 0.4. (Thus a 10 percent
rise in price will lead to a reduction of 2 to 4 percent in consumption.) Longer-run (5-year) elasticities are significantly higher, generally between minus 0.6 and minus 0.8.
Even before the dramatic price rise of last year there were signs
that the price of energy was cutting into demand. Table 20 shows
that after the 1973 oil embargo the growth in per capita gasoline
consumption was much slower than in the years immediately preceding it, even though real per capita income rose at approximately the
same rate during the two periods. While this finding is partly explained by improvements in the fuel efficiency of automobiles, there
was also a sharp reduction in automobile use. By the end of 1978 the
average miles traveled per car was slightly below the 1972 average. If
trends before the embargo had continued, the 1978 figure would
have been 10 percent higher.
Of course, gasoline is not the only energy source whose demand is
influenced by price. The final item in Table 20 shows that increases
in total per capita energy use slowed dramatically after the 1973 embargo. If the trends of the preceding 6 years had continued, total
1978 use would have been 16 percent higher—the equivalent of
nearly 6 million barrels of oil per day.
During 1979 additional evidence accumulated that energy demand
is responsive to price. Preliminary estimates indicate that demand for
all petroleum products (as measured by disappearances from primary
stocks) fell by 4.2 percent between the fourth quarter of 1978 and
the fourth quarter of 1979. Demand for gasoline fell by 9.3 percent.
Preliminary estimates also suggest that miles traveled per car
dropped about 5 percent from 1978 levels. Although waiting in line




108

TABLE 20.—Gasoline consumption and energy use, 1966-78
[Percent change]
1966
to
1972

Item

teal per capita income

1972
to
1978
17

teal gasoline price

15

-12

21

Per capita gasoline consumption

25

11

Per capita total energy use

21

5

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of Energy (Energy Information Administration),
Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), and Council of Economic Advisers.

for gasoline surely contributed to these dramatic reductions, there is
no doubt that sharply higher prices were a primary factor.
Side Effects of Crude Oil Decontrol: Windfall Profits and Impact on LowerIncome Groups

Decontrol has inevitable side effects which public policy must address. Decontrol generates substantial windfall profits and reduces
the real incomes of consumers. Gradual phasing in of decontrol can
mitigate those effects, but it cannot entirely eliminate them. Other
measures are therefore needed.
Decontrol of domestic crude oil will transfer very substantial revenues from users of petroleum products to domestic crude oil producers. While some of these increased revenues will stimulate additional domestic production, a large proportion will represent pure
windfalls—revenues that owners of oil properties receive solely because of actions taken by others. Windfalls do nothing to increase
supplies. The windfall profits tax will divert a significant portion of
these revenues to public uses that will help the economy to adjust to
higher oil prices. Through the combined effect of the corporate income tax and the windfall profits tax, the Federal Government will
collect considerably more than half of the additional net revenues accruing to producers. Certain States will also collect substantial additional revenues through their own tax systems.
Recent sharp increases in energy prices have had a significant impact on low-income households. A portion of the windfall profits tax
will be used to cushion this blow. Public policy must try to offset the
drain on the incomes of poor households from higher energy prices
without blunting the incentive to conserve energy. Policies which directly reduce the perceived price of energy should obviously be
avoided. But even income supplement programs, which might not
appear to influence decisions at the margin, may blunt impulses toward conservation. The weaker the link between the amount of assistance and the family's actual energy consumption, the less interfer-

109
294-289




0 - 8 0 - 8

ence there will be with conservation incentives, but the greater the
likelihood will be that some poor families needing relatively large
amounts of energy may have significant losses of income. The Administration's low-income energy assistance program represents a
reasonable compromise in adjusting assistance to need without blunting conservation incentives.
The program provides two types of assistance to low-income
households. The first is the special energy allowance, which provides
assistance to recipients of supplemental security income and will provide grants to States to be distributed according to the energy-related needs of the low-income population. This program will cost $1.2
billion in 1980, increasing to $2.0 billion in 1981 and later years.
The second is the energy crisis assistance program. It provides payments of $400 million per year that States can use to help low-income households with critical emergencies related to energy: the
need to repair home heating systems, pay overdue heating bills, and
obtain additional clothing or food. In 1980 the program will be completely financed by the Federal Government, but in 1981 it will become a matching-grant program with the States. After 1980, $2.4 billion in windfall profits tax revenues will be used annually for these
programs to assist low-income individuals and families.
The Case for Additional Conservation and Supply Incentives

Although the incentives for increased energy conservation as well
as for increased energy supplies must come principally from market
prices, a strong case can be made for supplementary measures to
push conservation and supply decisions beyond what the market dictates. The most telling argument is that the cost to the Nation of
substantial dependence on imports exceeds the price that U.S. citizens pay for imported oil.
First, the United States is the world's largest importer of oil, accounting for about one-fourth of all world oil imports. Reductions in
U.S. import demand will help ease pressures for higher prices in the
world oil market. Second, the bill for imported oil adds substantially
to the Nation's trade deficit. Reducing this bill will tend to strengthen the dollar, thereby lowering the cost of all imports. Third, an intangible but exceedingly important consideration is the cost to our
security entailed by an excessive reliance on imported oil. The events
of the past year graphically demonstrate these costs.
The conservation incentives in the Administration's energy policy
are targeted to reach nearly every significant use of energy. Illustrations here will focus on two such uses: automobiles and residential
space heating and cooling.




110

Fuel economy standards for autos. Automobiles represent the country's
single largest user of petroleum products. As of 1978, American motorists were burning over 80 billion gallons of gasoline per year, almost 15 percent of total domestic energy use. Between 1950 and
1974 the average number of miles traveled per gallon of fuel consumed by newly produced cars dropped by 20 percent.
Even though this trend was reversed in the 1975 model year, the
Energy Policy and Conservation Act passed in December 1975 required that automobile manufacturers substantially increase their improvements in fuel efficiency. By 1985 the average fuel efficiency of
new cars must reach at least 27.5 miles per gallon (EPA test basis).
While the relation between the Environmental Protection Agency's
(EPA) estimates and actual mileage is uncertain, current estimates indicate that actual mileage for new cars is about 80 percent of the
EPA figures.
Sharply higher gasoline prices in 1979 have caused consumer demand to shift toward smaller and more fuel-efficient cars. Due to the
standards, this demand will be more easily accommodated.
The effect that improving the fuel economy of cars will have on
domestic demand for energy will be substantial. Because of the time
it takes to replace the entire fleet of domestic automobiles, the full
effects of these improvements will not be felt until the mid-1990s.
But by then, even if the annual average number of miles driven per
car does not fall significantly from present levels, and even if the
fleet continues to grow, the total amount of fuel consumed by U.S.
passenger cars will be only about two-thirds of what it was in 1979.
This savings would translate into about 2 million barrels of gasoline
per day. To the extent that higher gasoline prices reduce the miles
traveled per car and that further improvements in automobile fuel
economy occur after 1985, the reduction in total gasoline consumption could be significantly greater.
Residential space heating and cooling. Residential space heating and

cooling account for about 15 percent of all the energy consumed in
the United States. This figure can be significantly cut by several relatively simple and inexpensive steps. Raising thermostat settings during the summer and lowering them during the winter directly reduce
energy use and costs, though they entail some discomfort. Other
measures, such as increased insulation and making structures more
weatherproof, require investment but increase the efficiency with
which any given degree of comfort can be attained. It is difficult to
induce millions of individuals to undertake such changes. The single
most important inducement for residential users to conserve energy
will be the higher prices now confronting them. Indeed higher prices
may be the only way to bring about permanent changes.




Ill

A targeted program of incentives can nevertheless accelerate investments in insulation and weatherproofing. The Administration's
program to encourage energy conservation in residential structures
requires that electric and gas utilities offer to perform "energy audits" of their customers' residences, thus enabling households to pinpoint sources of serious heat losses and learn how to remedy them.
The program also provides financial assistance to households for
installing insulation, caulking, weatherstripping, storm windows, and
fuel-saving heating equipment. Households at all income levels are
helped in various ways. For example, a 15 percent tax credit on the
first $2,000 spent on qualified conservation measures is available to
any household. Households with low or moderate incomes may apply
for a direct interest subsidy of up to 35 percent with a limit of $1,000
per loan. (This limit includes the value of any tax credit taken.) The
Weatherization Grant Program goes even further in assisting families
with low incomes; it supplies grants for qualified energy-saving measures. Supplementing these provisions, the program requires that
utilities offer to help customers finance the energy-saving measures
they may need to take.
Special incentives are available to encourage use of solar energy.
Builders of new structures utilizing passive solar technology may be
eligible for a tax credit up to $2,000 per residence or $10,000 per
commercial building. A tax credit of up to $2,200 is available for new
homes with active solar systems. A proposed Solar Bank would provide interest subsidies of up to 40 percent on loans for equipment to
convert to solar energy.
The improvements that these programs and higher energy prices
could produce are impressive. One private study estimates that by incorporating in existing and new residential structures only those
technological improvements in heating systems and building shells
that are economically justifiable at an energy price equivalent to $30
per barrel for oil, the total U.S. consumption of energy for residential heating could be reduced to about half its 1975 level by the year
2000. This translates into a reduction in energy demand equivalent
to approximately 2 million barrels of oil per day.
Developing Additional Domestic Supplies of Energy

Policies to stimulate savings in energy must be supplemented by
programs to add to domestic supplies of energy. Even after decontrol, the unaided market place may not in all instances generate the
needed investment in new energy supplies. Or it may do so more
slowly than is desirable, especially in the case of investments involving new technology for increasing the supply of energy.




112

The synthetic fuels program. Events of the past few years have demonstrated that future oil prices are hard to estimate. Yet a private investor must predict not only the level but also the path of world oil
prices in deciding whether to undertake a development project for
synthetic fuel.
The difficulty is more than statistical. If world oil prices were market determined, then an investor might reasonably estimate when the
rising world oil price would so far exceed the cost of commercializing
a given synthetic fuel technology that he would be compensated for
the risk of proceeding. But world oil prices are not market determined. The present price reflects both demand considerations (including the demand for increased stocks) and OPEC's desired production levels. The latter incorporate the OPEC countries' assessment of the oil prices they can charge in the future.
The cost of producing synthetic fuels in commercial quantities,
however, can have an important effect on this judgment. As the prospects of substantial supplies of synthetic fuels increase, OPEC countries may be induced to expand their own oil production considerably because of the depressing effect of this development on the value
of their oil reserves. Thus the potential investor faces a risk that the
world price of oil will be less than his break-even point; he has little
chance of making much more than a going rate of return on his capital.
Few private concerns would be willing to invest in synthetic fuels on
the basis of forecasts that world oil prices will rise by a given amount.
They would more likely wait until the world oil price came fairly close
to the estimated cost of synthetic fuel production. This would not
present a problem if a synthetic fuels industry could be developed
quickly, but more than a decade will probably be required before much
capacity can be brought into operation.
A paradox here underlines the need for some governmental role.
The more OPEC countries are convinced that high oil prices will
bring a large synthetic fuels industry into existence, the more their
own decisions are likely to lead to moderate pricing. But the more
potential investors fear this reaction from OPEC, the less likely they
are to make the investments needed for developing a large-scale synthetic fuels industry on their own.
In addition to such price risks, new products like synthetic fuels involve serious technological uncertainties. Several processes may be
able to produce synthetic liquid fuels. The absolute and relative costs
of each are highly uncertain. Given the large capital costs, the risk of
picking the wrong technology could discourage private, commercialscale investment in any one.




113

The preceding argument applies equally to all of the so-called unconventional sources of energy. The development of a significant domestic capacity to produce liquid fuels from biomass, a substantial increase in the use of solar energy, or the development of major new
sources of natural gas would all tend to limit the rise in OPEC prices
to a degree that depends on the cost at which each resource could be
brought to market. The Administration is strongly supporting programs in each of these areas tailored to the specific technological
characteristics and the current state of development.
During the past year, techniques which would tap the Nation's vast
supplies of coal and shale and biomass were singled out for special
attention. These now seem to be at a stage where a focused effort
might hasten their commercial use. The Administration has therefore
proposed the creation of an independent government corporation to
assist in this major undertaking.
The Energy Security Corporation (ESC) will have a number of instruments at its disposal. It will be able to use at its discretion both
loan guarantees and outright loans to assist private enterprises pursuing approved synthetic fuel projects. The Corporation will also be
able to shelter to some extent the developing concerns from the risks
they would otherwise face because of the uncertainty of future oil
prices. Purchasing agreements or price guarantees will be arranged at
firm prices for the project output, but the agreements will require
private enterprise to bear a fair share of the risks. The variety of instruments available to the Energy Security Corporation increase its
ability to assist recipients without removing the normal incentives to
exercise prudent judgment and keep costs to a minimum.
The Energy Security Corporation will also be able to participate in
cooperative or joint ventures with private companies. In an extremely
limited number of cases, it may also construct and operate facilities
for processes that have technical merit but cannot be sufficiently developed by other means.
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ECONOMY

The energy policy initiatives undertaken during this Administration
will sharply alter both the future consumption of energy in this country and the range of energy sources. Most important, the Nation's reliance on oil, especially imported oil, will be cut. By the end of the
decade the economy will be well on its way toward completing this
transition—one of the most important and difficult it has ever faced.
Total U.S. energy use in 1978 amounted to 78 quadrillion Btu
(quads). Estimates for 1990, made soon after the 1973-74 oil price
rise, were as high as 120 quads. More recent forecasts have been re-




114

vised sharply downward and seem to be clustering near 100-110
quads. Given recent rapid increases in oil prices, even lower figures
can be expected.
The composition of expected demand for fuels reflects a relatively
more rapid rise in the price of oil. In 1978 nearly half of the country's primary energy demand was met by petroleum. In most present
forecasts this share falls sharply; some project it to be as low as onethird by 1990. Removal of price controls on domestic crude oil will
ensure that the highest possible share will be met by domestically
produced oil.
In mid-July the Department of Energy estimated that the various
steps already taken or announced would reduce oil imports to approximately 4.5 million barrels per day by 1990—far less than earlier
estimates of imports, which were as high as 13 million barrels per
day. Events since July have reinforced the belief that record levels of
oil imports are already behind us.
Requirements for Higher Investment Levels

Changes in private consumption and production in response to
higher energy prices, the supplemental conservation measures induced by regulation, and the development of new, unconventional
sources of energy in the United States will all require substantial investments by both the private and the public sectors. Estimates vary,
but the following figures (all in 1978 dollars) give some idea of the
possible magnitudes.
The Department of Energy has estimated that the domestic oil and
gas sector will need to invest an average of $25 to $30 billion annually during the 1980s for exploration, development, production, and
refining capacity just to achieve the lower share of energy supply that
has been projected for it. Other private estimates range as high as
$35 billion per year. Comparable expenditures were less than $13
billion in 1972 and approximately $20 billion in 1978. The Department of Energy also estimates that the domestic coal industry will
have to invest between $5 and $6 billion annually during the 1980s if
it is to increase its output as forecast. This compares to actual investments of less than $1 billion in 1972 and $2.4 billion in 1978.
Building a domestic synthetic fuels industry will also be expensive.
The costs of developing the technology and installing operating capacity are still highly uncertain; but to create the capacity to produce
about 1 % million barrels of coal liquids and shale oil per day by the
early 1990s at a capacity cost per barrel of output per day of about
$40,000, investment will probably average more than $6 billion per
year over the next decade. While the ESC will provide various forms
of assistance, most of these funds will come from the private sector.




115

The adjustments in consumption induced by decontrol, with its
consequent higher prices, and the supplementary conservation measures will also be costly. Fuel-saving features installed in old and new
dwellings will add at least an additional $4 billion per year to the
cost of residential construction. Similar conservation measures for
new and old commercial structures will also add to construction
costs. Finally, the replacement or refitting of portions of our industrial plants may have to be accelerated. Facilities that might have been
marginally profitable for a few more years at pre-1974 or even pre1979 energy prices may have become unprofitable at current energy
prices. Any such acceleration in obsolescence will add to required annual investments during the mid-1980s.
CONCLUSION

The developments in the domestic and international energy markets during this past year have profoundly affected the economy. Energy consumers and producers have begun in earnest to adjust to
higher prices. These adjustments—belt-tightening in some cases, or
finding more energy-efficient ways to do things—have been costly
and in some cases painful. But as a result, the economy should
gradually become less dependent on foreign sources of oil and consequently less vulnerable to disruptions in supply. It is imperative
that the Nation persevere in these efforts.
STRIKING THE PROPER BALANCE IN REGULATION
That the pace and scope of the government's regulatory activity
have increased sharply over the last decade is obvious. Whether and
how the government should regulate certain activities have become
familiar questions in policy debates. In the case of traditional economic regulatory activities, especially with regard to transportation,
communications, and finance, there has been a growing recognition
that we need to reduce direct regulation and give greater play to
competitive forces. In these sectors regulatory reform has become
synonymous with deregulation. But for the newer forms of regulation
dealing with social concerns such as the environment, occupational
health and safety, and the safety of consumer products, regulatory reform has come to mean not deregulation but more flexible and more
cost-effective regulation. The government is increasingly seen to
have a legitimate role in helping the private sector to attain socially
desirable ends that cannot be achieved in the market place. People
have also become much more aware that regulation often adversely
affects productivity, at least as it is conventionally measured.




116

Over the last 3 years the Administration has made marked progress
in reforming this country's regulatory institutions and procedures. In
some cases regulatory structures existing for decades are being dismantled, exposing the industries they protected to new forces of
competition. In other areas important procedural reforms have been
put into place to help assure that, subject to legislative mandates,
regulations set reasonable goals and meet those goals in a costeffective manner. The job of reforming the regulatory process is far
from complete, but an important beginning has been made.
REGULATORY POLICY AND PRODUCTIVITY

Government regulation of individual and corporate behavior takes
many forms, including common law rules of liability, antitrust laws,
restrictions on international trade, and regulatory rules of all kinds at
the Federal, State, and local level. The ways in which this activity affects productivity are varied and complex, but several broad generalizations can be made:
First, regulations which divert capital and labor from the production of steel, automobiles, or clothing (where output can be readily
measured) to the production of environmental cleanliness, workers'
safety, or other goods whose values are difficult to measure, entail a
loss in measured productivity. This is not necessarily a matter for
concern, since it stems primarily from the limitations of what can be
captured in the national income statistics.
Second, regulatory procedures which cost more in capital and
labor than they yield in social benefits, or which require more resources than are necessary to meet stipulated social targets, do reduce national productivity, both measured and unmeasured.
Third, many economic regulations directly cut productivity. Before
recent decontrol actions, airline regulations encouraged low load factors on airplanes. Current trucking regulations require needless
empty backhauls and circuitous routing of trucks, both of which reduce productivity. Many local building codes necessitate the use of
excessively costly materials. Perhaps an even more important cause of
lower productivity is the attempt by many of the older economic regulatory bodies to preserve the domain of some established industries.
Such protective measures can suppress the competitive pressures that
force otherwise staid firms to adopt innovative ideas and improve
their productivity.
Some loss in measured productivity is a necessary and unavoidable
consequence of regulation. But there are also avoidable losses stemming from regulatory activities. Regulatory reform that works toward




117

the elimination of outmoded economic regulations and promotes improvements in the balance and cost effectiveness of social regulation
can contribute to growth in productivity.
REMOVING OBSOLETE REGULATORY STRUCTURES

The reasons why industries were originally made subject to detailed economic regulation regarding the prices they charged and the
conditions under which they provided service were many and varied.
One obvious example was the objection to the so-called "natural monopoly" enjoyed by an industry with such large economies of scale
that meaningful competition was impossible. In other instances fear
of "destructive competition" provided the primary rationale for regulation. Extending the scope of service was yet another aim behind
government intervention. In many cases the original justification is
no longer valid; in others it never existed. Legislative and administrative action is helping to remove these obsolete regulatory structures.
In late 1978, with the cooperation of the Congress, the Administration succeeded in opening up the domestic airline industry to meaningful entry and truly competitive pricing for the first time in at least
40 years. This was the culmination of a process of liberalization that
had begun several years earlier. Under regulation, airlines competed
through quality of service; under deregulation consumers benefited
immediately from an expanded volume of flights and lower fares. By
September 1978 the average level of domestic and foreign air fares
for the 11 largest U.S. airlines had fallen 2.8 percent from the year
before and stood only 1.4 percent above their 1976 level. In October
1978 air fares were actually lower than 2 years earlier.
Some critics have interpreted recent increases in airline fares as
evidence that deregulation, though perhaps successful initially, will
be a failure in the long run. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Deregulation of an industry does not render it immune to increases
in prices of factors of production. It does affect the degree to which
such increases are translated into higher unit costs and prices. The
airline industry has recently provided graphic proof of how reduced
regulation can improve productivity and hence price performance.
As of the end of September 1979, average fares for the 11 domestic trunklines were 7.8 percent above their mid-1977 levels. But average weighted input prices for the airlines rose by 35.4 percent over
this same period. These rises in input prices were largely offset by
improved productivity. Load factors—the percentage of seats filled—
rose from 56.1 percent during the first 9 months of 1977 to 65.1 percent during the comparable period in 1979. The airlines increased
the number of seats per aircraft by 8.6 percent for the large DC-lOs
and L-lOlls, and by 4.3 percent for the smaller 727s. Finally, air-




118

lines have used their aircraft fleets more intensively. Airborne hours
per aircraft per day rose by 12 percent between the third quarter of
1977 and the third quarter of 1979. Greater use of the airlines' capital stock has reduced passenger comfort and curtailed some other
amenities, but the lower fares it permits compensates for these reductions in service.
The record under regulation offers an instructive contrast. During
the mid-1970s, airline input prices also rose substantially; in 1977
they averaged 56 percent above their level of 1973. During this period, however, the airlines lacked the strong spur to productivity
brought about by deregulation. Fares rose by 32 percent. Although
airlines' profits have weakened during recent months, orders for new,
fuel-efficient aircraft have continued to be strong. The difficulty of
obtaining long-term credit, which accompanied some industry downturns in the past, as yet shows little sign of occurring.
The experience of the airlines during this past year differs sharply
from that of certain segments of the regulated trucking industry.
Here lack of fuel, large fuel price increases, and sticky Interstate
Commerce Commission rates were significant factors in leading many
of the smaller, independent truckers to go on strike rather than operate their trucks at a loss. The result was a shortage of trucking capacity and a disruption in commerce.
It is both impractical and inequitable to dismantle regulatory institutions overnight. Producers and consumers, as well as suppliers and
others indirectly dependent on the industry, must have time to adjust
to a less regulated market environment, and some may be hurt by
less stringent regulation. Transitions must therefore be planned for
the groups seriously affected by the change. For this reason the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 permits a gradual phase-out of the
Civil Aeronautics Board's regulatory activity and of the Board itself
over a 6-year period. The act also provides continued subsidies for
essential service to communities affected by the easing of abandonment restrictions.
Substantially relaxing detailed economic regulation of an industry
does not mean the end of governmental interest in the industry's
performance. For example, the eventual abolition of the Civil Aeronautics Board will not weaken the powers of the Federal Aviation Administration to regulate airline safety. The Administration is committed to basic reforms in economic regulation and to incorporating in
them the adjustments needed to ease the legitimate problems of
transition. The President has introduced or is supporting legislation
embodying these principles, which would substantially reduce Federal
regulation in trucking, railroads, telecommunications, and finance. As




119

the record of airline deregulation has so graphically illustrated, these
initiatives offer the prospect of large gains in productivity.
The Administration's trucking bill proposes a sharp reduction in
regulatory barriers to competition. Among other things, the bill will
make entry into common-carrier trucking easier and will phase out
the numerous commodity and route restrictions which limit competition between firms in this segment of the industry. It will significantly
broaden the exemption from regulation currently enjoyed by the
transporters of some agricultural commodities and permit the Commission to grant similar exemptions to other classes of commodities,
if this seems in the public interest. The bill permits freight forwarders and contract carriers to hold common-carrier certificates and
ends the artificial limit on the number of shippers that contract carriers may serve. Private carriers will be allowed to apply for authority
to haul noncompany commodities, to provide transportation for corporate subsidiaries, and to "trip-lease" for single trips to carriers
holding certificates. Finally, it will end the exemption granted in
1948 (over President Truman's veto) of rate bureaus' activities from
antitrust litigation. Because of the Administration's belief that truck
safety is currently inadequate, the Administration's bill would substantially increase the government's responsibility for this activity and
the Federal resources channeled into it.
The Administration's efforts are also directed at broadening the
gains achieved by earlier reform legislation affecting railroads. The
intent of this legislation has been blunted by the Interstate Commerce Commission's overly restrictive interpretation of certain of its
key provisions. The Administration is working with the Congress to
see how increased pricing flexibility can be achieved in ways that do
not reduce the protection offered "captive" shippers, and it has also
sought to make abandonment of unprofitable services less difficult.
In his September 1979 message on telecommunications policy the
President supported congressional efforts to amend the Communications Act of 1934. Consumers are already benefiting from Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) actions that have increased competition in the market for telephone sets and for certain sophisticated
data-processing and private-line services. But in spite of extraordinary technological advances that now make it possible to hold meetings, transmit messages, perform research, bank, shop, and receive a
widening variety of information and entertainment through electronics—and that invalidate the assumption that all telecommunications
enterprises are natural monopolies—the basic statutory framework
for regulating telecommunications has remained unchanged. The
President's message encouraged legislation to promote competition
wherever it is workable. (If necessary, some markets, such as local




120

telephone exchanges, may remain regulated monopolies indefinitely.)
He also urged removal of restrictions based on out-of-date market
distinctions, such as that between telecommunications and data processing, and he advocated allowing the FCC to develop more efficient
means of assigning nonbroadcast frequencies. At the same time, the
President reaffirmed the Administration's support for regulations to
make basic telephone service available to all at affordable rates and
for measures to protect the technical quality of the telecommunications network.
In May 1979 the President sent a financial reform message to the
Congress urging that deposit interest rates be permitted to rise to market
levels after a period of orderly transition, and that federally insured
institutions be authorized to offer interest-bearing transactions accounts to individuals. The President also urged the Congress to
grant all federally chartered savings institutions the power to offer
variable rate mortgages and to invest up to 10 percent of their assets
in consumer loans. This package was intended to bring the benefits
of market rates to small savers, promote a steadier flow of credit to
finance housing, and improve the efficiency of financial markets. Although a bill was passed by the Senate which addressed all of the
President's May proposals, the House-passed bill was less comprehensive. Resolution of the broader questions was postponed until
1980, but the Congress did pass more limited legislation extending
through March 31, 1980, authority for credit union share drafts,
automatic transfer services, and savings and loan institutions' remote
service units. These three services effectively enable depositors to
earn interest on deposits that are used for making current transactions.
BALANCING COSTS AND BENEFITS IN INDIVIDUAL REGULATIONS

Eliminating large areas of regulation is not the appropriate route
to reform of regulations aimed at environmental protection, health,
safety, and other social goals. Rather, attention must focus on the
processes and techniques of regulation. One especially important task
is to ensure that the individual regulations consider the balance between gains and social costs and the adoption of cost-effective approaches.
The designing of any regulation involves an implicit weighing of
costs against benefits. How explicit any such balancing should be or
can be is a major question, especially in regulation affecting the environment, health, and safety. Although any explicit effort to determine the "appropriate" level of health and safety meets with opposition, many similar choices are being made implicitly. It is clear, for
example, that traffic fatalities could be reduced by drastically lower-




121

ing maximum speed limits or by providing pedestrian underpasses at
all major traffic intersections. The failure of society to take these actions reflects a tacit judgment that the benefits in safety do not warrant the costs. Society also implicitly recognizes that a risk-free world
is impossible, and that pursuing such a goal would lead to unacceptable reductions in social welfare. Indeed, reducing some risks can generate new risks elsewhere. For example, prohibiting the use of sodium nitrite as a meat preservative may cut the risk of cancer but increase the risk of botulism.
The Administration has sought to encourage balanced and costeffective regulation through the requirement for regulatory analysis
called for in Executive Order 12044, signed by the President on
March 23, 1978, which applies to executive branch agencies and departments but not to the independent regulatory agencies. The order
requires that agencies' policy makers give increased attention to regulatory issues, provide greater opportunity for public participation in
the development of regulation, and conduct "sunset" reviews of existing regulations. In addition, the order requires that agencies prepare a regulatory analysis for each major regulation. The analysis
must examine the costs and other burdens imposed by the proposed
regulatory action and compare them with those of alternative actions
differing in approach, timing, degree of stringency, or scope.
The purpose of regulatory analysis is not to reduce all costs and
benefits to dollar sums that can be mechanically compared. Some
monetary costs cannot be confidently estimated—the costs, for example, of introducing untested changes in technology or production
processes, or of changing the attributes of products or the location of
plants. Even more clearly, many social benefits cannot be easily converted to monetary terms. But costs and burdens can be identified
and in many cases measured. Benefits can be described and often
analyzed at least partially in quantitative terms even if not in dollars.
The fundamental premise of the requirement for regulatory analysis is that the difficulty of measuring costs and benefits justifies neither indiscriminate regulation nor the elimination of all regulation.
The analysis required by the Executive Order is not a cost-benefit
analysis which automatically dictates the decision; it is a procedural
mechanism—a decision-making tool—for examining the costs and
other consequences of achieving regulatory goals.
Regulatory analyses are not easy to prepare, but they play an important role. A formal regulatory analysis forces the rulemaking
agency to consider explicitly the objectives of a major regulation and
the best route to those goals. It requires consideration of process as
well as outcome. This sort of thinking is a prerequisite for good
rulemaking.




122

A draft regulatory analysis is issued when a regulation is first proposed. It can thus play a part in the public debate over the rule.
Members of the public can examine and evaluate the agency's assumptions and objectives. The President has also established an
interagency group to review and comment upon selected regulatory
analyses. The Regulatory Analysis Review Group comprises representatives from the Executive Office of the President and from all executive branch economic and regulatory agencies. This group, which
is chaired by the Council of Economic Advisers, has completed five
comprehensive reviews during each of the past 2 years. In 1979 this
group's reports, submitted for the public record, covered the Environmental Protection Agency's hazardous waste standards and new
source performance standards for electric utility plants; the Department of Energy's proposed and interim final regulations on coal conversion for utilities and industrial boilers; and the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare's proposal for labeling to accompany
prescription drugs. At year's end, reports were being prepared reviewing the Environmental Protection Agency's air carcinogen policy,
its guidelines for water effluents in the leather-tanning industry, and
the Department of Energy's standards for the energy performance of
new buildings.
The number of reviews that the group can undertake in any one
year is quite limited. Furthermore the Executive Order does not
apply to independent regulatory agencies. Comments filed by the
Council on Wage and Price Stability, however, partially fill the gap.
That Council is directed by statute to comment on the economic impact of rules and regulations proposed by both the executive branch
and the independent agencies. In 1979 the Council on Wage and Price
Stability filed 58 comments in rulemaking proceedings.
The Administration's regulatory reform legislation would make the
regulatory analysis called for in Executive Order 12044 a permanent
requirement and extend the order to cover the independent regulatory agencies. Agency heads would be required either to choose the
least burdensome alternative or to explain their proposed course of
action. Selecting the least burdensome alternative would not be mandatory if there were a justification for choosing another approach.
The relevant substantive statute would continue to govern the final
decision.
Several existing statutes have been interpreted as limiting the extent to which regulatory agencies can consider costs (including added
risks). However, even for agencies having little or no discretion to
balance costs against benefits, the regulatory analysis allows consideration of cost effectiveness. If even this degree of flexibility is not
within the terms of the statute, the rationale for precluding cost ef-




123

fectiveness should be continuously re-evaluated in the light of new
knowledge. The Administration supports "sunset" review legislation
that would require just such periodic re-examination of major regulatory mandates.
COORDINATING REGULATORY PROGRAMS

Improving individual regulations is an important part of long-term
economic policy, but more is needed for effective management of the
regulatory process. Many individual regulations overlap, and some
try to serve conflicting objectives. For example, congressionally mandated emission standards for automobiles have sometimes tended to
decrease fuel economy. When they do this, they make it harder for
auto companies to meet the Department of Transportation's standards requiring a steady increase in fuel economy. This is not a case
of confused action but of conflicting goals. In designing an automobile, some balancing may be necessary between cleaner air and
energy conservation.
The President established the Regulatory Council, composed of 36
Federal departments and agencies, to help achieve better coordination among regulatory programs and expand efforts to manage the
regulatory process more effectively. At the President's direction the
Council prepares the semiannual Calendar of Federal Regulations. This
provides in one document a concise summary and analysis of important regulations being developed by each of the executive branch
agencies and by those independent regulatory agencies that choose
to participate. It includes all major rulemakings in progress or expected during the coming year and thus provides a means of identifying potential overlaps or conflicts as well as previewing the impact of
the rules on affected sectors.
The Regulatory Council will assess the cumulative effects of regulations issued by a number of different agencies on particular sectors
or industries. The Council has begun a comprehensive analysis of
how regulation affects the automobile industry, and it is conducting
projects related to coal, hospitals, and nonferrous metals. In addition, the Council has successfully coordinated a joint policy statement
by the five Federal agencies with primary responsibility for regulating carcinogens. The activities of the Council should help reduce two
of the major sources of unnecessary costs of regulation—uncertainty
about regulatory policies and conflict or duplication in regulatory
actions.
SETTING PRIORITIES

Because we do not live in a world of unlimited resources we cannot simultaneously achieve all desirable social goals. Rational social




124

regulation requires priorities in our use of the resources at hand. No
purely technical means can determine what resources should be devoted to social goals in any given year. That must come from the
political system. Although some implicit balancing of goals occurs,
more explicit attention should be devoted to the aggregate and sectoral consequences of regulation and to the problem of priorities.
Until recently efforts by the Federal Government to promote social
goals relied principally on direct expenditures. Since 1921 the Congress has required that these expenditures appear in the Federal
budget. The budget process allows explicit tradeoffs to be made and
the appropriate level of government action to be debated. But as
more goals are pursued through rules and regulations mandating private outlays rather than through direct governmental expenditures,
the Federal budget is an increasingly inadequate measure of the resources directed by government toward social ends.
As a result, proposals have been made that the Federal Government develop a "regulatory budget," similar to the expenditure
budget, as a framework for looking at the total financial burden imposed by regulations, for setting some limits to this burden, and for
making tradeoffs within those limits.
However, a regulatory budget is not without problems. In the case
of particular programs in the expenditure budget, past outlays are
known and most future outlays can be predicted with some accuracy.
Estimates of the past or future costs of regulation, some of which
may be important to the development of a regulatory budget, are
much less certain. It is difficult, for example, to specify all the costs
to a firm when it must locate a new plant according to its third
choice rather than its first. It is equally hard to measure the cost of
banning the manufacture of a product.
A regulatory budget would also have to take into account the basic
difference between the processes through which regulation and expenditures are determined. For Federal expenditures, the President
initially sets priorities in the budget he submits to the Congress,
which has the final word in adjusting those priorities through appropriation and revenue bills. For social regulations the order is generally reversed. The Congress passes regulatory statutes which set forth
objectives with varying specificity. A number of executive branch
agencies and independent regulatory agencies are delegated the
power, subject to judicial review, to implement those objectives
through specific regulations on a case-by-case basis. Regardless of
which branch initiates and which completes the priority-setting, however, it is clear that the regulatory process as yet lacks any mechanism analogous to the expenditure budget for comparing and integrating priorities among different program areas.

 2 9 4 - 2 8 9 0


125
- 8 0 - 9

As the process of regulation develops, more consideration will
need to be given to the impact of regulations on the economy. The
Nation must recognize that regulation to meet social goals competes
for scarce resources with other national objectives. Priorities must be
set to make certain that the first problems addressed are those in
which regulations are likely to bring the greatest social benefits. Admittedly, this is an ideal that can never be perfectly realized, but
tools like the regulatory budget may have to be developed if it is to
be approached.
NEW APPROACHES TO REGULATION

Growing recognition that social regulations have significant and
sometimes unintended indirect effects on the economy is producing
pressure to modify regulatory mechanisms. One modification may
take the form of alternatives to, or variations of, the "command-andcontrol" approach, which uses detailed regulations to specify permissible behavior. This approach often creates inflexibilities that add unnecessarily to the burdens imposed by the regulations. In the past
few years regulatory agencies have begun to experiment with alternatives or supplements to traditional regulation. For example, the Environmental Protection Agency has developed an "offset" policy under
which firms can set up activities that result in pollution in areas not
currently attaining air quality standards only if they can purchase
greater reductions in the pollution from existing sources. The agency
has also recently promulgated a "bubble" policy, to be applied under
carefully controlled conditions, which permits a firm to trade further
reductions in emissions from one source for increases in emissions
from another. Since firms can thereby reduce pollution most where
costs are least, the same overall reduction of pollution can be
achieved at a lower cost (or more improvements realized for the
same cost). A similar approach was taken in permitting corporatefleet averaging in the present standards for automobile fuel economy.
Regulation can be improved in other ways as well. Although there
is some doubt about the ability of consumers to assess and assimilate
certain information, the strategy of informing the public instead of
banning questionable products shows promise in some situations.
During 1979 the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
made data available to potential buyers on how well cars can withstand crashes, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission continued to publish information about hazardous products as an alternative to outright bans or restrictions. Such programs help consumers
become better able to judge competing products.




126

Increasing the information consumers can draw upon sometimes
complements more traditional structural remedies as a means of fostering competition in a market. The Department of Agriculture is
currently trying to replicate in the United States the results of a recent Canadian experiment that achieved price reductions of 3 to 7
percent on a typical market basket of food items by disseminating
comparative price lists for local grocery stores. If successful, this
strategy of fighting high prices by helping consumers take advantage
of price differentials among retailers could have wide application.
CONCLUSION

Regulation has joined taxation, and the provision of defense and
social services as one of the principal activities of government; it has
just as much need for effective management. Careful and responsible
management of the government's regulatory efforts is all the more
vital because many of their effects on the economy are subtle and difficult to discern. Although some regulation can be largely or wholly
eliminated, most of the government's regulatory activities are here to
stay. This country will not give up the protection afforded by these
programs, any more than it will give up education or a sound defense. But it has every right to demand its dollar's worth. The Administration's regulatory reform effort over the past 3 years has been
designed to assure just that.
PROMOTING FLEXIBILITY IN THE LABOR MARKET
How well the labor market functions will be crucial in any successful long-run strategy for reducing inflation. Wages constitute a major
part of production costs, and the supply and productivity of labor
help determine how much of which goods and services will be sold at
any particular price. The more rapidly and smoothly the labor market
adjusts to changes in the supply and demand for labor, the less delay
and cost will be entailed in accommodating such major economic dislocations as the sharp rise in energy prices. Efficient adjustment in
the labor market makes possible a greater growth in employment and
output without hindering the long-term reduction in inflation.
Output and the demand for labor do not grow evenly in all industries and occupations. In a poorly adjusting labor market, unsatisfied
demands for labor in rapidly growing sectors or occupations can generate inflationary pressures while unemployment and economic slack
are still high elsewhere in the economy. In such situations inflation
can be avoided only by more restrained monetary and fiscal policies
and a slower growth of overall employment than would have been
possible in a more efficient labor market.




127

In a modern industrial society, raising the productivity of labor is
less a matter of changing worker motivation than of attracting labor
to the sectors of the economy where it is most productive and then
combining it effectively with other resources. Therefore a labor market in which the demand and supply of labor adjust smoothly raises
the general productivity of the labor force.
The use of labor market policy as part of an anti-inflation strategy
poses three requirements: (1) to identify the sources of potential
labor market pressures; (2) to consider how well the labor market is
likely to cope with these developments; and (3) to ascertain the measures most likely to promote timely and effective labor market adjustments.
LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS IN THE 1980s

On the demand side, two developments that will probably require
continuing adjustments in the labor market during the years ahead
are rising energy prices and the increasing importance of international trade. Governmental policies that help the labor market adjust to
these developments will also help build an energy-efficient economy,
pull labor into more productive uses, and thus work to reduce inflation.
Energy. Technological adaptation to a higher real price of energy
entails two major shifts in employment. First, labor is needed to
build, operate, and maintain the new sources of energy. Second,
workers must adapt to the new productive techniques that become
economically efficient at the higher energy prices.
The amount of labor directly required by the President's energy
program depends on the mix of energy sources, the technology used
to produce energy, and the labor required for constructing, operating, and maintaining these projects. The Administration's initiatives
are expected to increase substantially the demand for labor in the energy sector. Employment in the industries supplying goods and services to the energy sector will also increase. The distribution of these
added jobs will not be uniform either geographically or by skills.
In the remainder of the economy, higher energy prices, once adjusted to, will also lead to changes in employment patterns. Some
studies using data through the early 1970s have suggested that higher fuel prices cause a substitution of labor for energy and capital in
manufacturing industries, although the evidence on this, as noted
earlier, is mixed. Historically, energy and blue-collar workers have
appeared on average to be substitutes in production; energy and
white-collar workers in manufacturing have appeared to be complements. If those relationships continue as energy prices rise, the consequent increases both in gross manufacturing employment and in




128

the ratio of blue-collar to white-collar jobs may partially offset a
trend of the past several decades. Given the uncertainty about the
technology that will prevail in a world of sharply higher energy
prices, however, predictions about the impact of higher energy prices
on employment patterns must remain tentative.
International trade. Over the past two decades U.S. foreign trade has
expanded very considerably. Real exports have increased steadily
from 4.1 percent of real GNP in 1950 to 8.4 percent in 1979. A
growing role for international trade tends to favor industries for
which our Nation has particular efficiencies; it also helps provide an
additional competitive force to the market. On both counts, trade has
a moderating effect on inflation. But it also forces shifts in employment. Jobs become fewer in domestic sectors threatened by imports;
they increase in industries which are more competitive in world markets. Since the comparative advantage of the United States tends to
be in its high-technology, capital-intensive industries, a growth in exports shifts the demand for labor toward more highly skilled workers
with more advanced training.
Other factors. If the adjustments required by international trade and
higher energy prices are encouraged rather than hindered, changes
in the composition of labor demand during the next decade should
favor a faster productivity growth. Reducing race and sex discrimination will also improve productivity because human resources will be
put to more advantageous use. The virtual disappearance of wage
discrimination against young blacks with high levels of education is a
favorable development. Unless the pace of improvement is accelerated, however, it will still be many decades before all wage discrimination against blacks is eliminated.
Supply Side

The dominant force on the supply side of the labor market during
the 1980s will be the aging of the large World War II "baby boom"
generation. As Table 21 shows, young people in the 16-24 age
group have represented one of the fastest growing components of
the labor force during the 1970s. In the coming years their share of
the labor force will decline swiftly. At the same time the proportion
of the work force accounted for by prime-age and the more experienced workers will grow rapidly.
This demographic change should help reduce both inflation and
unemployment. The growth in the relative size of the experienced
work force means that average productivity should rise. The fact that
young people, whose unemployment rates are usually higher than
average, will represent a smaller fraction of the work force, will itself
tend to lower the level of aggregate unemployment at which inflationary pressures begin to emerge. Finally, young members of minor-




129

TABLE 21.—Share of selected demographic groups in the civilian labor force, 1970-85
Annual percent
change in
share *

1970

Group

1985
(projected)

1977

1970
to
1977

1977
to
1985
(projected)

Share (percent) 2
All youth (16-24 years)
Black and other minority youth (16-24 years)..

21.6
2.6

24.3
2.8

21.6
2.7

-1.5
-.7

All prime-age (25-54 years)'
Prime-age women (25-54 years)

60.9
22.0

61.0
24.3

65.7
28.7

.9
2.1

1
2

Percent changes based on unrounded shares.
Percent of civilian labor force.

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

ity groups, whose unemployment rates are now exceedingly high,
should find it easier to secure entry-level jobs in a work force where
there are fewer young people seeking such jobs.
The productivity of the labor force depends not only on the number and experience of workers but also on their education. As Table
22 shows, a general increase occurred during the past four decades
in the years of schooling of all groups in the labor force, with a dramatic rise for blacks. School enrollment rates for whites and nonwhites are now comparable. Unfortunately, trends in the quality of
education have not all been favorable. For elementary school children an improvement in basic skills and a substantial lessening of racial differentials are evident. But there has been no improvement in
the skills achieved in the secondary schools. Blacks and low-income
city youths do especially poorly in tests measuring functional literacy,
and this weakness may contribute to their unemployment problems.
TABLE 22.—School attainment of 25- to 29-year-olds, 1940, 1960, and 1978
Item

All persons

Blacks

Percent with—
Less than 5 years of school:
1940
1960
1978

5.9
28

9

27.7
70

8

4 years of high school or more:
1940
1960
1978

38.1
60.7
85.3

11.6
37.7
77.3

4 years of college or more:
1940
1960
1978

5.9
11.1
23.3

1.6
4.8
11.8

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




130

There is some evidence that the gap between the achievement of
black and white students has been narrowing. Future improvements
in productivity performance would be aided by continuation of this
movement.
HOW WELL CAN THE LABOR MARKET ADJUST?

Policies that will help the labor market allocate resources so as to
raise productivity and reduce the waste of human resources need to
be targeted to areas where the market fails to perform effectively.
The fact is that the labor market worked quite well for most people
during the 1970s; the serious failures were concentrated among special groups. During this period the civilian labor force grew by some
21 million workers, or 25 percent. One-third of that growth was
among young people from 16 to 24 years old, and 39 percent was
among women between the ages of 25 and 44. Although unemployment rates for those groups rose over the decade, the percentage increase in their unemployment rate was less than that of the total unemployment rate. Indeed, the market even works well for most
youths; they find jobs without difficulty when they enter the full-time
labor force.
There is a large flow of workers through the labor market each
year as people change jobs and individual firms hire and lay off
workers. In January 1978 a special study by the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that fewer than 72 percent of those employed had held
the same job they were in a year earlier. Transfers on so large a scale
imply that the labor market is relatively flexible and capable of making major adjustments. Moreover, fewer than 42 percent of those unemployed in 1978 were on indefinite layoffs or had lost their jobs.
Most were re-entering the labor force, had quit their last job, or had
never worked before.
While the market has worked well for most groups, it has not
worked well for all. The greatest problems are concentrated among
disadvantaged young people, especially blacks. Approximately threefourths of the weeks of unemployment reported by youths are accounted for by those who have been unemployed for periods totaling
more than 15 weeks within a year. A disproportionate share of those
young people are black. Over the past 15 years the employmentpopulation ratio for black youths has been falling both absolutely and
relative to the record for white youths. A Department of Labor study
found that among black males aged 16 to 19 the unemployment rate
rose from 23 percent to 42 percent between March 1964 and March
1978. Among black teenage females there was an increase from 35
percent to 44 percent over the same period. Increases were especially
large for central city black teenagers attending school. The message




131

is clear: when major labor market adjustments are required, like the
absorption of the large numbers of young people during the 1970s,
the poor or those with other disadvantages have the least chance of
making that adjustment successfully. Further, when potential workers
have few basic skills and little experience and when the minimum
wage and other institutions create wage floors, the result can be unemployment or part-time employment rather than full-time but
lower-wage employment. The Administration's targeted jobs tax
credit is an employment subsidy designed to deal with these problems.
Unwarranted differences in the experiences of different groups
imply that there has been failure in the labor market, and the Humphrey-Hawkins Act places special emphasis on reducing such differences. While it is not possible to establish detailed employment and
earnings goals for disadvantaged youths, older displaced workers, the
handicapped, women, Hispanics, veterans, and other such subgroups,
the specific goal can be set forth: to reduce unemployment and raise
earnings for all these groups. Equality of unemployment rates among
all demographic groups is not an appropriate objective, of course,
since it would fail to recognize differences in employment needs. For
example, young people searching for better careers and not greatly
attached to any job should not be expected to have the same unemployment rates as older experienced workers. But structural policies
are needed to reduce unjustified disparities among groups, and especially to lower unemployment among those with the most acute problems and those handicapped by childhood poverty. Labor market differences based on factors which do not affect productivity or reflect
variations in tastes for work and type of job search should be eliminated.
Another group for whom labor markets may not work adequately is
older, more experienced workers whose long-time jobs disappear.
Workers with skills specific to the needs of a particular firm often
have to accept lower wages when they must seek another job. In a
dynamic economy where the fortunes of individual firms wax and
wane, these problems are continual. If they are concentrated in a
major industry or in a large firm, they often become issues for government to deal with.
Problems in adjustment will continue in the 1980s as the labor
market responds to changes in energy sources, in patterns of international trade, and in other economic factors. While no general rule
will serve every occasion, the goals of raising productivity and improving living standards are best achieved if governmental policy is
designed to aid the flow of human resources from obsolescent and
lower productivity uses to new and more productive ones.




132

Although there are some general principles for dealing with displaced workers possessing firm-specific skills, applying them to particular cases is not easy. It is difficult to tell in advance which displaced workers will have trouble. For example, a study of workers
who had been laid off and were eligible for aid under the Trade Adjustment Act in 1978 showed that about three-fourths eventually returned to their previous place of employment. In the same period a
sample of unemployed manufacturing workers receiving unemployment insurance showed that 58 percent eventually returned to their
previous jobs.
POLICIES TO AID LABOR MARKETS

The labor market is sufficiently flexible that it can adjust to most
of the pressures of the 1980s without special assistance. Governmental policy still has a role, however, in easing the adjustment for some
workers. This cannot be accomplished through aggregate demand
policy alone, because attempting to do so would merely add to inflation while yielding only minimal benefits for the groups suffering especially from unemployment. Active labor market policies directed at
the structural unemployment of particular groups or at specific rigidities in the market are thus called for.
Nearly 5 percent of the Federal budget goes to education, training,
and employment programs, many of which are aimed directly at increasing employment. These include public service jobs (some
450,000 such jobs will be funded in 1981); a new targeted jobs tax
credit giving subsidies to firms hiring the disadvantaged; antidiscrimination efforts of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance; the new Presidential
directive expanding the hiring of disadvantaged workers in private
sector jobs through Federal economic development programs; and
flexitime experiments and employer technical services of the U.S.
Employment Service that help restructure jobs to fit workers' needs.
Complete evaluations of most of these programs are not yet available. Some of them may prove effective on a small scale but may not
work so well on a larger scale.
Programs to create public sector jobs provide an example of some
of the difficulties faced by structural labor market policies. Such public jobs programs have three consequences which must be considered: First, the existence of such jobs may attract such large numbers
of people into the labor force that the reduction in unemployment is
significantly less than the increase in employment. (To the extent
that new members of the labor force were previously too discouraged
even to seek work, this would of course be beneficial.) Second, the




133

jobs may either displace some public sector workers or end up financing existing public sector jobs rather than providing new ones.
The limits placed on wages payable in public service jobs in the 1978
Administration-supported amendments to the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) and other amendments should
eliminate some of the "substitution" problems. Third, such jobs are
relatively short-term solutions for individual workers and may only
postpone the transition for these workers, without adequately preparing them for unsubsidized employment. To address this problem, the
1978 CETA amendments increased the emphasis on preparing workers for unsubsidized jobs, and the programs were also changed in
other ways that should help workers adjust to labor market needs.
Both the Administration and the Humphrey-Hawkins Act recognize
that the problems of disadvantaged and minority youth make this
group a particularly appropriate subject for structural labor market
policy. The Administration has tripled expenditures on Labor Department programs for youth training and employment. In anticipation of the expiration of authority for some youth activities this year
and in recognition of the persistent needs of disadvantaged youth,
the President's budget contains proposals that will form the basis of
this Administration's policies to alleviate the labor market problems
of young people in the 1980s. These policies recognize that, especially as the proportion of youths in the population declines, there is no
general youth problem; but that employment problems are likely to
be serious for the roughly 10 percent of young people who are poor
and suffering long-term unemployment. Not all of them require government help, but many do. The decline in young people's share of
the labor force should make it more likely that training and job development will help that group.
The President's new policies also recognize that the best time to
confront the employment problems of the young is before they leave
school and experience long stretches of unemployment. Better and
more intensive training in basic skills for junior and senior high
school students before they leave school must have high priority if
we are to improve their opportunities to find employment. The need
to reduce long-term unemployment among labor market entrants is
made more urgent because one of its consequences is lower productivity and earnings in later years. Our economy cannot afford to
waste such human potential. So far, however, the amount of government money spent on compensatory education for secondary students has been relatively small.
The goals of the President's new initiative are: (1) to teach basic
skills in the secondary school to those youths who did not master
them in elementary school and who need special help; (2) to provide




134

part-time employment and training to dropouts willing to undertake
extended training to develop skills that will improve their labor market prospects; and (3) to provide intensive long-term training aimed
at achieving unsubsidized private sector placements for older youths
out of school. Under the proposal the funds will go largely to poor
rural areas and central cities, where a lack of basic skills and high unemployment are most serious.
For principal wage earners in low-income families with children,
the Administration has sent to the Congress a set of major proposals
for welfare reform. One component of these proposals would provide training, help in seeking jobs, and work opportunities for employable persons. The other major component improves the cashassistance provisions of the welfare system. Together the two parts of
the program would provide minimum income for those low-wage
earners in need, along with jobs for those who can work. The program is designed to make employment more attractive than cash aid.
Much remains to be learned about the design of effective policies
aimed at other groups in the labor market. Perhaps most important,
the efficacy of training programs for adult low-income workers is uncertain. The CETA system and other programs provide such workers
with both work experience and training. Although a new authority,
Title II-C of CETA, can be used for retraining and aiding any displaced worker, most of CETA has increasingly been targeted toward
the disadvantaged and long-term unemployed. Evaluations of the
training components of such programs show that they have modest
positive effects, especially for women. These effects seem to diminish
for male participants in the course of time.
Another question in policy design is whether the government or
the unemployed workers themselves are better informed about the
type of training they need and can most benefit from. If the unemployed workers are knowledgeable about themselves and the market,
schemes giving them vouchers for training through either private or
public programs should be considered. Some limited experiments
using this approach for welfare recipients show promise.
A third issue is the success of programs to help workers relocate.
Relocation assistance is a feature of the Trade Adjustment Assistance
Act. The concept of providing relocation assistance is sound, but few
workers now take advantage of such assistance, and many who do return to their home towns within a relatively short time.
As demographic changes begin to reduce some of the problems in
the labor market remaining from the 1970s, significant progress in
helping those groups which suffer the worst unemployment problems
becomes feasible. By improving the employment opportunities of
these groups and by making them more productive, labor market




135

policies can increase our supply of goods and services, improve our
efficiency in using the Nation's human resources, and help people
lead more satisfying lives.
INCREASING THE RATE OF CAPITAL FORMATION
(Investment Policy Report)
To reach a number of our important economic goals, the share of
national output devoted to capital formation will have to increase in
the 1980s. Lifting the growth of productivity from the very low levels
of recent years will require an accelerated rise in the stock of capital.
Environmental and related improvements will also demand large investments. Further, as discussed earlier in this chapter, we will need
to invest very substantial sums in developing alternative sources of
energy and improving the energy efficiency of the economy. A larger
and more efficient capital stock would also help the United States to
compete in world markets, improve the foreign trade balance, and
strengthen the value of the dollar relative to other currencies in exchange markets.
Because of the importance of capital formation in determining the
long-run growth of the economy, the Humphrey-Hawkins Act places
considerable emphasis on the performance of business fixed investment. One of the requirements of the act is that an Investment Policy
Report be included in each Economic Report of the President. The following section touches on the topics specified in the act; relevant matters, such as policies dealing with Federal expenditures, Federal regulation, and international trade, are discussed in more detail elsewhere in this Economic Report.
THE ADEQUACY OF RECENT INVESTMENT

An examination of recent trends in investment raises a number of
questions. The fraction of GNP devoted to investment in 1978-79
has approached the shares realized in the late stages of the last two
expansions, but this proportion was relatively low during the early
stages of the recovery from the 1974-75 recession. Thus the addition
to the stock over the past 4 years has been relatively small, especially
when the depreciation of the stock during this period is taken into
account. At the same time the growth in the labor force was larger
than in earlier periods, and hence the rate of growth in the capital
stock available per worker fell substantially. Furthermore some of the
recent investment has been devoted to meeting increased energy
needs and the requirements of environmental, health, and safety regulations. While such investment is important to national goals, it
does not directly expand industrial capacity or contribute to meas-




136

ured productivity. Finally, the composition of investment has been
more heavily weighted toward shorter-lived assets than it was in periods prior to the 1974-75 recession.
Since 1974 the share of gross business fixed investment has
reached 10 percent of GNP only during the last 2 years (Chart 6).
Moreover the 1979 gain occurred despite reduced growth in real investment expenditures; real GNP grew at a still lower rate.
Chart 6

Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment
as Percent of Real GNP
PERCENT OF GNP

12

-

-

TOTAL

10

8

/

y//'~

\

—

—
PRODUCERS' DURABLE EQUIPMENT
\

6

\

s'

"

4
STRUCTURES

2

0

-

i

i

i i

1

1

1

1

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

1 I

1 1 1

I

I

I

I

i

i

i

i

i

1948 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.

Historically it has not been uncommon for the share of such investment in GNP to rise as growth of the economy begins to slow. Similar behavior occurred in 1960, 1969, and again in 1974. The growth
of investment does not always coincide with the overall growth of the
economy because actual investment expenditures lag the planning
and appropriation stages and because expenditures for ongoing projects are not necessarily curtailed in a downturn.
The composition of recent business fixed investment has been
quite different from historical norms. In 1979 the share of investment in producers' durable goods in real GNP (7.0 percent) was the




137

second highest in the last three decades. Both motor vehicles and
other equipment attained shares of GNP that approached record
peaks for the year as a whole, although purchases of vehicles declined sharply during the course of 1979. In contrast the share of
real GNP accounted for by business investment in structures (3.3
percent) continued to be less than that realized in every year between
1947 and 1974.
A variety of causes could be found for the changing strength of the
major components of business fixed investment. One is Federal tax
legislation, which since 1971 has increased the investment tax credit
for equipment while giving structures only partial coverage. Another
is that the higher level of inflation in recent years has increased the
tax burden on long-lived assets relative to short-lived assets. Uncertainty about future economic conditions and about the outcome of
various regulatory processes has intensified, and such uncertainty
tends especially to penalize investments in assets with long-term
payoffs.
As discussed in Chapter 2, only part of the unsatisfactory productivity of recent years can be blamed on declining rates of capital accumulation. Nevertheless there is little doubt that increased rates of
capital formation will improve productivity in the future. Capital accumulation increases labor productivity directly by giving labor more
to work with, and some technical advances contribute to productivity
growth only when they are embodied in the capital stock.
Investment and Innovation

The last point made in the preceding section takes on special significance in the light of changes in the average age of the capital
stock. From 1948 through 1966 the average age of producers' durable equipment and structures fell about 3 years. The average age fell
by about 1 year from 1966 through 1973. Since 1973 the average age
of business capital has not changed significantly. Because the gap between best-practice and average-practice technology is narrowed
when innovations are put in place, modernization of the capital stock
is one way to diffuse innovation that will add to productivity. Not all
technical progress is embodied in capital, however, and the quality of
some new capital may change little. Thus the fact that the average
age of the capital stock has remained constant may account for only a
small portion of the recent declines in productivity growth.
A Domestic Policy Review, initiated by the President, recently assessed the proper role of the government in fostering industrial innovation. On the basis of this review, the President sent an Industrial
Innovation Message to the Congress in which he detailed a number
of steps that the Administration had taken or would soon be taking.




138

Specifically, the President's 1981 budget proposes programs to encourage the development and transfer of technical information and
to improve the patent system. The budget also contains proposals to
stimulate small businesses devoted to high technology, including direct support to small research and development firms. The President
has directed the Small Business Administration to increase further
the availability of venture capital to these firms. Finally, also to increase the availability of venture capital, Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulations have already been changed to allow
pension funds to invest in small innovative firms.
Federal support for research and development, measured in real
terms, fell substantially between 1969 and 1975. In more recent years
the trend has been reversed. The Nation's effort in basic research depends on the Federal Government for about two-thirds of its support. The budgets of the Administration have increased that support
each year, the increase amounting to 22 percent in real terms between 1976 and 1979. The President's 1981 budget proposal continues that policy.
SPECIAL INVESTMENT NEEDS

Compliance with mandates to improve the environment, health,
and safety requires substantial investment. The results of this investment—cleaner air, purer water, and a safer working environment—
are not included in conventional measures of output, although they
benefit everyone. Investments to meet regulatory requirements are financed from the same sources as investments that directly increase
industrial capacity. Thus any given fraction of GNP devoted to investment will yield less measured gain in productivity than historical
relationships would suggest. Meeting requirements of the Clean Air
and Water Acts alone is estimated by the Environmental Protection
Agency to have absorbed 5.6 percent of business fixed investment, or
0.6 percent of GNP, in 1977. Over the decade of the 1980s the investment required to meet existing environmental regulations alone
is expected to average 0.3 to 0.6 percent of GNP. To the extent that
new regulations are imposed, the share of GNP used may be larger.
The additional private investments directly attributable to increasing and diversifying our domestic energy supplies and improving energy efficiency will also be substantial. The requirements outlined
earlier in this chapter, including those stemming from the national
energy program, will add the equivalent of about 1 percent of GNP
to investment needs. There will be other indirect investment requirements. Since rapidly rising energy costs increase the rate at which the
capital stock becomes obsolete, replacement investment must also
rise if a reduction in the Nation's productive capacity is to be avoided.




139

Even without the special investment needs of energy and the environment, it is difficult to imagine that healthy economic growth could
be maintained by a ratio of business fixed investment to GNP of less
than 10 percent. The direct investment requirements for increased
energy supplies, plus environmental regulations currently on the
books, could raise this to over 11 percent. Finally, depending upon
how much investment will be required by new environmental regulations and by the need to accelerate the replacement of industrial
facilities made obsolete by higher energy costs, the necessary investment ratio may be higher still. Achieving this level of investment will
not be easy; the highest share attained by the economy in the
postwar period was 10.8 percent in 1966.
SAVING-INVESTMENT RELATIONSHIP

The basic saving-investment relationship as measured in the national income and product accounts is presented in Table 23. The
reported values represent the amount of gross saving by the household, business, and government sectors, along with gross investment
by type of expenditure. Household saving equals disposable personal
income less personal outlays, which consist mainly of personal consumption expenditures. Business saving is defined as retained earnings plus depreciation. The government sector's contribution to national saving depends on the budget surpluses or deficits of Federal,
State, and local governments. The government sector adds to national saving when a combined budget surplus is recorded.
Gross investment consists of domestic investment and net foreign
investment. Net foreign investment is conceptually similar to the current account deficit in the balance of payments, with a surplus in the
current account corresponding to positive net foreign investment. As
Table 23 shows, saving and investment as fractions of GNP have increased in the last 2 years, although they remain slightly below the
values of the 1965-69 period.
Whether business investment will grow enough to meet the country's needs in the 1980s will depend on two key questions. Will investment incentives be sufficient to bring the demand for business
capital goods up to the necessary level? And will the share of national saving in GNP expand to permit that investment demand to be
realized without adding to inflationary pressures on the economy?
While the two questions are related—since additional saving tends to
lower long-term interest rates and encourage investment demand—it
is useful to examine each of them separately.




140

TABLE 23.—Gross saving and investment as percent of GNP, 1965-79
[Percent]

1965-69

Item
2 3

1970-74

1975-77

1978-79 »

15.8

15.1

13.8

15.3

4.4
11.6
-.2

5.0
10.5
-.5

4.2
11.9
-2.3

3.2
11.8
.3

Federal
State and local..

-.3

-1.2
.7

-3.3
1.0

1.2

3

15.8

15.3

14.2

15.5

10.5
4.0
1.3
.1

10.2
4.5
.8
-.3

9.8
4.1
.4
-.2

10.6
4.9
.9
-.9

Gross saving

Personal
Business
Government

Gross investment

Nonresidential fixed
Residential fixed
Change in business inventories....
Net foreign
Statistical discrepancy..
1
2
3
4

.2

.2

Preliminary.
Includes net capital grants received by the United States, not shown separately.
Saving and investment may not be equal due to rounding.
Less than 0.05 percent.

Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis).

DEMAND FOR NONRESIDENTIAL FIXED CAPITAL

Future trends in capital formation will reflect both past and future
investment incentives. Last year's Economic Report discussed many of
the factors which appear to influence business decisions to invest.
Table 24 presents data for a number of these factors.
Preliminary data for the year 1979 as a whole do not indicate a
clear pattern. Two of the measures shown—capacity utilization and
the rate of return on stockholders' equity—rose and were above their
average levels for the 1955-69 period. The other three declined and
TABLE 24.—Determinants of business fixed investment, 1955-79
[Percent, except as noted]
Nonfinancial corporations

Period

Cash flow as
percent of
GNP 2

Rate of
return on
depreciable
assets 3

Rate of
return on
stockholders'
equity 4

Ratio of
market value
to
replacement
cost of net
assets 5

9.5
10.0

1955-69 average
1970-77 average
1978
1979-. First 3 quarters

Ratio of real
investment
to real GNP

Capacity
utilization
rate in
manufacturing l

6

84.2
80.9

9.4
8.3

12.9
9.4

6.4
6.4

1.097
.871

10.0
10.4

84.4
86.0

8.8
8.5

9.7
9.2

7.1
7.7

.678
.654

1

Federal Reserve Board index.
Cash flow calculated as after-tax profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment.
Profits before taxes plus capital consumption adjustment and inventory valuation adjustment plus net interest paid divided
by the stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost.
4
After-tax profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth (physical capital component valued at current
replacement cost).
5
Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets.
6
Seasonally adjusted.
2

3

Note.—For annual figures for 1955-77, see Appendix Table B-85.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and
Council of Economic Advisers.

141
294-289 O - 80 - 10




were below their 1955-69 averages. The steady increases in capacity
utilization rates since the 1974-75 recession reflect the strength and
duration of the subsequent recovery as well as the relatively slow accumulation of additional industrial capacity. The rate of return on
stockholders' equity also rose (see Table 24). However, this increase
is not a good measure of the change in the rate of return available
on new equity investments, because it stemmed largely from unanticipated increases in inflation which reduced the real burden of corporate debt. The slowdown in the growth of profits in 1979 contributed
to the declines in the rate of corporate cash flow and the rate of return on depreciable assets. The ratio of market value to replacement
cost of net assets declined even further from its low 1978 level as inflation pushed the replacement cost of physical capital well beyond
the market value reflected in equity and debt prices. All of the investment determinants except the ratio of market value to replacement
cost of net assets and the return to depreciable assets were above
1970-77 averages, but these averages themselves were equal to or
below those of the 1955-69 period.
Federal tax policy has an important influence on business fixed investment. The Revenue Act of 1978 lowered the corporate tax rate
across all income classifications. The investment tax credit was made
permanent and was extended to a broader range of investment expenditures. The tax rate on capital gains was also reduced by allowing a larger proportion of capital gains to be excluded from an individual's taxable income.
While these reductions in tax rates were occurring, the increase in
inflation tended to raise the tax burden on businesses. During periods of rising inflation the real tax burden increases because depreciation allowances are based on historical costs rather than on replacement costs. Partly for this reason, the ratio of Federal corporate income taxes to profits measured on an economic basis was higher in
1979 than in 1978 despite the reduction in the corporate income tax
rate which took effect in 1979. Since long-lived investment goods suffer larger declines in the real value of depreciation allowances over
time, inflation distorts both the amount and composition of investment.
THE SOURCES OF SAVING

In periods of economic slack the production of additional capital
goods does not require a reduction in the output of consumer goods.
In fact the expansion of wage income from the increase in output of
investment goods will lead to a simultaneous rise in the demand for
and the production of consumer goods.




142

In periods of relatively high employment, however, the growth of
national output is limited to the 2V2 to 3 percent rate given by the
growth in potential GNP. Investment can grow more rapidly only if
its share in GNP rises, which in turn requires an increase in the share
of GNP that is saved. In order to increase the share of investment in
GNP during the 1980s, therefore, total saving will have to rise relative to GNP. Saving frees resources for use in the production of capital goods and provides the flow of funds needed to finance investment outlays. The amount of saving by governments, business firms,
and individuals is thus the major determinant of the amount of total
investment that can be undertaken. About one-fourth to one-third of
national saving in the past has been absorbed by residential construction. The bulk of the remainder is available for business capital formation.
Recently, as the Federal Government's deficit has narrowed, Federal Government dissaving has declined. The Federal deficit (as measured in the national income and product accounts) has declined in
every year since 1975 from an average of 3.3 percent of GNP in
1975-77 to 0.8 percent in 1978-79 (see Table 23).
Gross saving in the State and local government sector averaged 1.2
percent of GNP during 1978-79. The bulk of this saving was from
net additions to the surpluses of social insurance and pension funds.
Last year the operating budgets of State and local governments were
approximately in balance. The combined budgets of Federal, State,
and local governments recorded a net surplus in 1979, the first such
surplus since 1973.
In contrast to the recent changes in governmental budgets toward
positive net saving, the personal saving rate has declined substantially
in recent years. For 1979 as a whole, the rate was 4Vfe percent; it was
even lower by year end. A number of contributing factors have been
cited as causes of the recent low saving rate. These include the high
proportion of the work force consisting of younger people, the increased number of two-earner households, and—in 1979—the efforts
of consumers to maintain real consumption in the face of slow
growth in real income. In addition, inflationary expectations in conjunction with low rates of return on financial assets, low real borrowing costs, and the ready availability of credit may have reduced the
personal saving rate by increasing the attractiveness of real assets relative to financial assets. The relative importance of these factors to
the decline in the saving rate is uncertain.
Business saving—retained earnings plus depreciation—grew at a
rate of 9.2 percent in 1979, down moderately from the growth of recent years. Historically the rate of growth of business saving has var-




143

ied substantially; the most recent figure is well within past ranges.
Because business saving is an internal source of funds to finance expenditures on physical capital, policies designed to increase business
saving also tend to have a direct impact on business fixed investment.
The Revenue Act of 1978 strengthened this source of corporate financing by lowering the corporate income tax rate.
CAPITAL MARKETS AND THE AVAILABILITY OF CREDIT

Financial markets and institutions play a major role in linking saving and investment. The business sector finances a significant portion
of its long-term investment expenditures through such financial intermediaries as insurance companies and pension funds. Direct purchases of new equities and corporate bonds by households have recently been only a minor source of financial capital for businesses. In
1978, for example, the nonfinancial corporate business sector raised
$20.1 billion in the corporate bond market, while the household sector reduced its net corporate bond holdings by $1.4 billion. Indirectly, however, workers and other individuals constitute an important
source of business funds through pension funds and other forms of
group saving.
During most of 1979 businesses had little difficulty in obtaining
credit. Total financial capital raised by the nonfinancial business sector rose by an estimated 17 percent in 1979. Short-term debt was an
unusually important source of the business sector's financing. Businesses preferred shorter-term issues because it was thought throughout most of the year that longer-term rates were at or near their cyclical peaks and would decline in the near future. In fact long-term
rates rose sharply during 1979, but this increase had not been widely
anticipated.
To help ensure that financial capital is available to businesses in
the future, the Administration is systematically reviewing Federal
credit activities. In the budget for fiscal 1980 the Administration announced the development of a program to establish a credit-monitoring system which covers direct lending by agencies as well as guaranteed loan programs. The 1981 budget recommends limitations on
annual appropriations for a wide range of activities involving Federal
credit. This new monitoring system includes both on- and off-budget
Federal loan and loan guarantee programs. Although some programs
are exempt, this review will lead to a more efficient allocation of both
credit and real resources.
The availability of financial capital in the future will be maintained
by improving the economic environment in the United States, as outlined in this chapter, and by selective policies designed to meet the




144

needs of small businesses for financing. Through the continuing efforts of the Small Business Administration and the programs included in the President's proposals to foster industrial innovation, more
credit will be available to small businesses. For the economy as a
whole, a reduction in inflation will enable monetary policy to ease,
thereby improving the flow of funds in financial markets.
SOME LIKELY PATTERNS OF NATIONAL SAVING IN THE 1980s

Table 25 illustrates a pattern for national saving that seems possible under a set of reasonable assumptions for the 5-year period
1982-86. The Federal budget is assumed to be balanced on average
over the period. Continued control over spending should make it
possible both to reduce taxes during the period and to have a balanced budget in most of those years. State and local governments are
likely to continue, on average, the surpluses of recent years which
stem from an excess of revenues over expenditures in pension and
related funds for their own employees. Business saving will probably
remain close to historical trends in the absence of future business tax
cuts, and the personal saving rate is assumed to increase to slightly
above its 1975-79 average. In sum, total domestic saving as a proportion of GNP can be expected to rise slightly in the 1982-86 period compared to recent years. But the inflow of investment from
abroad, which is the financial counterpart of the U.S. current account
deficit, should move toward zero as market forces bring receipts and
expenditures in the current account close to balance. The share of
GNP used for housing will increase slightly because of the energy requirements discussed earlier in this chapter. With inventory investment taking about the same share of saving as in the recent past, the
TABLE 25.—Actual and illustrative saving-investment balances
[Percent of GNP]
Actual
1975-79»
-2.2

Federal Government surplus
State and local government surplus
Gross business saving
Personal saving

1.1

Illustrative
1982-86

0
1.0

11.8
3.8.

11.5

Equals: Total saving

14.5

16.5

Less:

-.5
4.5
.6

0
4.8
.7

9.9

11.0

Net foreign investment
Residential fixed investment...
Inventory investment

Equals-. Saving available for business fixed capital formation....
1

Preliminary; detail may not add to total because of rounding.

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Council of Economic Advisers.




145

4.0

amount available for business fixed investment should be about 11
percent of GNP.
It was estimated earlier that to improve productivity, expand capacity, make the adjustment to higher energy costs, and meet environmental needs the ratio of business capital formation to GNP would
have to rise to at least 11 percent and possibly somewhat higher. The
earlier discussion of factors underlying the demand for investment
goods and the analysis of saving ratios in Table 25 suggest that specific measures to increase investment and saving may be needed in
later years.
THE PROSPECTIVE POLICY MIX

Inflation and economic growth tend to increase average effective
tax rates and thus the share of Federal taxes in GNP. Under current
inflationary conditions, and given the uncertainties in the economic
outlook, the highest priority in the use of additional Federal revenues
is to reduce the budget deficit. This is the policy incorporated in the
President's 1981 budget proposals. However, continued control of
Federal spending will make possible tax reductions in future years
that are quite consistent with the maintenance of an appropriate degree of fiscal restraint. Considering the need for additional investment incentives, the design of future tax reductions should give a
high priority to measures which strengthen investment.
Policies will also be needed to increase the amount of available national saving. One way to do so is to have smaller tax reductions and
run a Federal budget surplus. A budget surplus would increase national saving and thereby provide additional sources of funds for investment. Alternatively, some of any potential budget surplus could
be used to reduce taxes in ways which increase the after-tax return to
personal saving. There is considerable uncertainty about the likely
size of the response of personal saving to increased after-tax returns.
It is clear, however, that each dollar of such tax reduction—which
lowers the potential Federal surplus (and hence total national saving)
dollar for dollar—will yield at most a small fraction of a dollar in additional personal saving.
Tax reductions devoted explicitly to business firms in the form of
increased investment incentives, on the other hand, will tend to increase both business saving and investment. While some part of a
business tax reduction will go toward higher dividends, a fairly large
fraction of it is likely to end up as increased retained earnings.
The fact that an increase in the ratio of saving to GNP may be necessary to make possible the desired expansion of investment does not
imply, of course, that increasing the saving share will itself guarantee




146

a rise in investment. A higher saving share will tend to reduce real
interest rates and thus encourage investment. But that alone may not
be sufficient. An overall economic climate with inflation being steadily reduced and output growing at a sustainable pace would be very
conducive to investment. It may be necessary also, as fiscal drag allows statutory tax rates to be reduced, to provide a significant part of
the reduction in forms which both raise the return to investment and
increase business saving.
ADJUSTING T O EQUILIBRIUM IN AGRICULTURE
During the past decade the role of U.S. agriculture in the national
and international economy changed dramatically. This change has
important implications for inflation, agricultural productivity, and the
long-term performance of the farm sector.
Historically agriculture's productive capacity increased so rapidly
relative to demand that national agricultural policy had to concentrate heavily on protecting farm income from the consequences of
overproduction. But rising world population, increased consumption
of animal products, and the improved capability of some developing
nations to purchase food and feed grains—combined in the last decade with dollar devaluations and global crop shortfalls—now require
nearly full use of the land, labor, and capital available to agriculture.
Measured in constant dollars, this sector's total exports have increased more than 60 percent since 1972. U.S. agriculture appears
closer to resource equilibrium than it has been for many decades.
This situation is likely to persist. While year-to-year fluctuations in
weather, world economic performance, or even international affairs
may result in potentially troublesome periods of excess production,
the longer-term outlook strongly suggests that production will more
typically be at or near capacity. Growth in world population and improved economic conditions in both developed and developing countries will increase their need for and improve their capability to purchase food and feed grains.
POLICY ISSUES
The United States is now more vulnerable to agricultural price and
income fluctuations arising from changes in worldwide demand for
U.S. farm products than it was in the past. Sustained full use of farmland, for example, makes it more difficult to increase output in response to successive world crop shortfalls. Then too, as exports are
expanded, U.S. agriculture becomes even more closely linked with




147

world weather and the domestic policies of other nations. Since little
can be done to influence these factors, domestic agricultural policies
must operate to cushion the sector and the Nation from the price
and income shocks that they would otherwise experience. Reducing
this vulnerability while improving the sector's productivity and economic performance is a major objective of the Administration's food
and agricultural policy.
Supply Shocks

The total demand for food is so inelastic that small changes in global food supply can lead to very large changes in price. And because
the supply cannot be increased quickly, year-to-year price changes do
little to alter the quantity offered for sale; rather they increase the
potential for generating oscillations in price and production. Widespread crop shortages can set off a general inflationary surge.
Bumper crops can reduce market prices below what is needed to
cover variable operating expenses. These characteristics, combined
with the fact that food is a basic raw material, leave us exposed to
abrupt price changes in the food sector.
A clear demonstration that small variations in global food supply
can lead to wide variations in producers' incomes and food prices
was furnished by the events of 1972-74. World food production declined only about 2 percent globally in 1972. This modest decline led
to an increase of 54 percent in U.S. crop prices in 1973 and to another 28 percent increase in 1974. Consumer food prices increased
31 percent over these 2 years. Net farm income was a record $33.3
billion in 1973, 78 percent higher than in 1972.
The rise in grain prices touched off the most rapid liquidation of
the domestic cattle herd ever recorded. Cattle prices fell as cattle
marketings increased during 1975 through 1977. Grain prices also
fell during the period, a consequence of increasing world stocks. In
1976 net farm income was about equal to its 1972 level. Beginning in
1978, food prices rose, reflecting strong consumer demand and the
cut in meat supplies that resulted from the earlier slaughter of breeding herds. During 1978 and 1979 retail beef and veal prices increased more than 50 percent.
Price and Income Support

Government programs in the past have increased farm income by
raising commodity prices. These artificially high price supports often
interfered with adjustments in production and agricultural trade
flows; farmers frequently based decisions on government price guarantees rather than on basic forces of demand and supply. Production




148

often exceeded market needs at government-supported prices, and
government stocks began to accumulate. As a result, quotas and acreage allotments were adopted to control output. Agriculture was justifiably cited as an example of the inefficiency created by government
interference in private markets.
The Agriculture and Consumer Protection Act of 1973 (see the
1974 Economic Report for detail) represented a significant change in
the philosophy underlying government support of farm incomes
through commodity programs. For major crops the price support
mechanism was augmented by a system of direct income payments
under which market prices are allowed to fluctuate in response to
supply and demand, thereby promoting a more efficient allocation of
agricultural resources among the crops. By this means consumers
and grain-using producers can benefit from lower prices when harvests are large. When market prices fall below legislatively determined targets, farmers receive direct income payments to make up
for the income lost through the lower prices.
While the 1973 act changed the way incomes were protected, the
primary focus was still on the problem of low incomes. The act made
no provision for cushioning farmers and consumers from the effects
of instability resulting from increased reliance on market prices. It
was generally believed that the rapid price increases of 1973 were
largely an aberration and that sufficient commercial grain stocks
would be available in the future to moderate the price fluctuations
associated with occasional crop failures. Only in the years that followed did the inflationary consequences of a continuing policy of
placing sole emphasis on minimum income protection become clear.
Agricultural Productivity

A sustained and nearly full use of agricultural resources requires
giving more attention to policies that improve the sector's productivity. Crop production per acre increased at an average annual rate of
2.4 percent from 1953 to 1973. Since then the average rate has been
about 1.1 percent per year. Without the excellent growing conditions
in 1978 and 1979, which pushed yields per acre well above the trend,
the rate of increase would have been below 1 percent per year.
The greater use of marginal lands during this decade has undoubtedly contributed to the slower increase in crop production per acre.
After steadily declining for more than 20 years, the number of crop
acres harvested increased significantly in 1973. This number has remained at about the 1973 level, despite the occasional use of acreage
set-asides since then. The rise in agricultural exports has been a significant factor in increased land use. Today one-third of the U.S.




149

crop acres produce for export, 40 percent more than in the 1960s
and 120 percent more than during the 1950s.
Continued intensive use of cropland will lead to a depletion of soil
and water resources unless specific resource management schemes
are employed. These improved farming practices are becoming even
more crucial to productivity improvements because the migration of
labor from the sector has slowed and because prices for fuel and fertilizer are climbing.
THE ADMINISTRATION'S AGRICULTURAL POLICIES

In January 1977 world grain stocks and prices were returning to
pre-1972 levels. The domestic cattle herd was being liquidated at a
rapid rate, and retail meat prices were lower than in 1976. Net farm
income had fallen 44 percent from 1973. Sentiment was growing for
a reinstatement of farm programs designed to support producers' incomes through higher commodity prices. It was uncertain whether
the 1972-75 situation was an aberration or a signal that price and income stability would have to be the major consideration in future
farm policy.
The Administration, believing that conditions had indeed changed,
worked with the Congress in developing the Food and Agriculture
Act of 1977. That legislation and the policy directions it implied became the basis for a broad range of food and agricultural programs
to protect farmers' incomes while supporting the principle of fullcapacity production and increased reliance on market prices.
Grain Reserves

In a major departure from past policies the Administration's programs went beyond minimal income protection for grain farmers and
established a farmer-owned grain reserve. Using existing authority
and the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) loan program, the
Administration announced the implementation of a farmer-owned
wheat and rice reserve in April 1977. CCC loans on the 1976 crops
were extended and farmers received government payments for crop
storage. They were allowed to repay the loans without penalty whenever the market price reached 140 percent of the loan rate on the
crop.
In August 1977 the Administration announced its plan to establish
reserves of 30-35 million metric tons of food grain (wheat and rice)
and feed grain (corn, sorghum, barley, and oats). Most were to be
owned by farmers, but a small government-owned food reserve was
also planned.
Passage of the 1977 Act formally authorized these reserves. It mandated the farmer-owned wheat reserve with essentially the same op-




150

erating rules as those announced earlier by the Administration. The
act also provided broader authority for incentives to use the farmerowned reserve to store crops. It authorized a reserve for feed grains
as well and provided low-interest loans to expand facilities for grain
storage at the farm. By October 1979 more than $1.3 billion in loans
were outstanding to farmers for constructing such facilities.
The Administration achieved its goal for the level of reserve stocks
in less than 2 years. By early 1979 more than 11 million metric tons
of wheat and 20 million metric tons of feed grains had entered the
reserve.
Explicit rules now govern release of the grain from the reserve.
Farmers may not redeem loans or sell the reserve stocks within the
contract period (generally 3 years) without penalty unless market
prices reach a certain percentage of the loan value. If they do, the
reserve is "released"; that is, the government ceases storage payments and farmers are allowed (but not required) to repay the CCC
loan and sell their reserve stocks. If the market price reaches a higher
percentage of the loan rate the loans are "called"; farmers are required to repay the CCC loans or forfeit the grain. This program
thus makes it less likely that grain prices will rise significantly above
the call price, because grain is released from the reserve in stages.
The combination of the call price and the loan rate establishes a
known corridor of market prices. Price movements within that range
allocate resources among crops but the probability of excessive fluctuations which disrupt planning and increase volatility in agricultural
production is much reduced. This arrangement helps to make the
Nation less susceptible to the inflationary effects of crop shortages.
The first test of how well the managed reserve concept could
weather a period of tight supplies occurred in the spring of 1979.
Late plantings in the United States and most of the rest of the Northern Hemisphere increased the likelihood that 1979 would bring a
poor harvest. Reports of a potentially serious production shortfall in
the Soviet Union added to this possibility. The farm-level price of
wheat rose 16 percent between mid-May and mid-June alone. Feed
grain prices also increased rapidly.
Even with the prospect that world carryover stocks might decline
more severely than in 1972, a rapid rise in grain prices was avoided.
The price increases in late spring brought the wheat and the feed
grain reserves into release status. At that point the government
ceased storage payments and farmers were allowed to withdraw grain
from the reserve without penalty. By mid-October 40 percent of the
wheat and sorghum and more than 25 percent of the corn had been
withdrawn. As this grain came into the market the price increase




151

slowed. As a result, producers of hogs, poultry, and dairy products
could continue to expand their output, and cattle producers could
continue to rebuild their breeding herds.
The suspension of sales of agricultural products to the USSR in
early 1980 will provide yet another test of the grain reserve concept.
Normally such an action would have substantially reduced farm
prices. In announcing the trade suspension the President assured the
Nation that the burden of that action would not fall unfairly on the
agricultural sector. Shortly thereafter the Administration stated that
the farmer-owned grain reserve would play an important role in isolating affected commodities from the market. To remove the immediate price-depressing effect of the Soviet grain suspension, the CCC
offered to assume the contractual obligations for the unshipped
grains. Simultaneously the Administration announced that the rules
governing the reserve were being changed to encourage farmers to
place grain in storage. These two actions were expected to reduce
the level of free stocks and counter downward pressure on prices.
Then, as prices firmed, the government-secured grain could be sold
back to the market, thus keeping season-average prices little changed.
The flow of grain into reserve stocks would support prices over the
current crop year and serve as a buffer against future crop shortfalls.
The central role assigned to the use of farmer-owned reserves in this
case underlines their usefulness as a major tool for cushioning supply
shocks in the farm sector.
The reserve can thus be a moderating force on both the upside
and the downside. If corn prices had reached $3.50 per bushel in
early 1979, as some thought possible, the expansion in the cattlebreeding herd would have been delayed. Hog and poultry producers
would have begun slaughtering their animals immediately. Total
meat production in 1981 and beyond would have been lower than is
now expected, and food prices would have been higher. Then too,
the early 1980 suspension of agricultural trade with the Soviet Union,
in the absence of special policy actions, would have resulted in a significant decline in commodity prices and farm income. Use of the
farmer-owned grain reserve coupled with other policy actions will
mitigate these impacts. In both cases food prices and farm income
will have been stabilized—and, importantly, stabilized around longterm market trends.
International

Trade Agreements

The avoidance of excessive price fluctuations in an agricultural sector operating at full capacity with an increased reliance on agricultur-




152

al exports requires improvements in international trade arrangements. The grain reserve helps to cushion the effects of fluctuations
in world trade, of course, but better commodity trade communication
between nations is also essential.
Since 1970 the communication process has been made more formal in a number of ways, perhaps the most important being passage
of reporting requirements on export sales. The Agricultural Act of
1970 requires that all exporters of major agricultural products report
weekly the type of commodity to be exported, the marketing year of
shipment, and the destination, if known. The Secretary of Agriculture
is then required to publish the compiled data each week following
the week of reporting. The law was amended by the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 to allow the Secretary of Agriculture to require
the daily reporting of export sales.
In addition to requiring these regular reports of export trade the
Administration has been successful in several other related areas.
Completion of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, ratified through
subsequent passage of the Trade Agreements Act of 1979, is one example. In addition, the President's Export Council has been revitalized with a strong subcommittee on agricultural exports. Agricultural
trade offices have been opened in several overseas locations, and the
rank of the U.S agricultural attache at important foreign posts has
been upgraded. All these actions help to improve our network for international agricultural trade communications.
The Administration has also moved to moderate the volatility in
domestic sugar prices. Acting in concert, the world's sugar producers
and importers have established a mechanism for balancing world
sugar supplies more nearly in accord with market needs. When the
International Sugar Agreement is fully operational, we should be less
likely to see a repetition of the 450 percent price increase of 1974.
The Meat Import Act of 1979, which provides a new procedure for
determining meat imports, is further evidence that price stability in
the food and agricultural sector is important to the Administration.
Under the predecessor to this legislation allowable meat imports
were tied directly to domestic production, and this served to accentuate cyclical movements in the beef industry. Presidents were often
impelled to take action that would increase the amount of meat available to consumers and would moderate retail price rises in years
when domestic production was low. But even suspension of the
quota could not increase total supplies for domestic consumption by
much, since most cattle-producing nations are generally at the same
phase in the production cycle.




153

The new authority automatically allows imports to increase when
domestic supplies fall. With prior knowledge that the United States
will accept greater quantities of imported meat when domestic production declines, producers around the world can act in ways that
help to stabilize beef production.
Humanitarian aid has long been an important aspect of U.S. agricultural policy. But when crop prices rose sharply in 1973-75, the
food sent to aid the developing nations was substantially reduced,
evidencing the need for a policy that would not leave such nations so
vulnerable to crop shortages and high prices. As a result the Administration has proposed an International Food Security Reserve, which
would isolate about 4 million metric tons of wheat from the market
and make it available to developing nations during emergencies. The
Congress has yet to act on the legislation. Title III of Public Law
480, the Food for Peace Program, is also a major vehicle of the Administration's policy related to international food aid. Under Title
III, qualifying nations are permitted to repay debts for food aid by
investing in projects which improve their countries' long-term economic prospects and thereby reduce the future need for emergency
food assistance.
FUTURE POLICY PROBLEMS

Significant progress has been made in refocusing food and agricultural policies toward making the Nation better able to withstand
shocks in the food sector. Managing full-capacity production with
grain reserves and better arrangements for long-term international
trade and food aid represent a fundamental shift in policy. But much
is still left to be done.
The concept of a farmer-owned grain reserve has been tested, at
least to a point, and has proved capable of moderating volatility in
grain prices. Important questions must still be answered, however,
about its operation and impact on the sector's productivity. There
are misgivings about the appropriate size of the reserve and the
price-trigger rules. There is also a danger that the target price could
eventually be established "too high" and possibly lead to subsequent
upward adjustments in both the release price and the call level. If
that happens, our grain will become less competitive in world markets, and the flexibility of the reserve policy will largely be negated.
More emphasis needs to be placed on increasing the food and agricultural sector's productivity. Past productivity gains in the sector
were aided by the widespread use of relatively inexpensive energy inputs, especially petroleum-based fertilizers, and by the migration of
the rural population to the cities. Today, in the face of the world's




154

growing needs for food, and increased anxiety about inflation, environmental damage, and the energy shortage, other avenues to advanced productivity will probably need to be found. As an example,
the Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 provides targeted, competitive
grants for studying plant growth, a field where research may disclose
many possible ways to improve productivity.
Over the next several years, food prices will continue to command
attention. Although rising commodity prices have been a significant
cause of past increases in retail prices, programs to stabilize commodity prices by buffering annual fluctuations in production cannot,
by themselves, lead to significant reductions in food price inflation.
Marketing costs, of which labor costs and the price of energy inputs
are major components, account for approximately two-thirds of every
dollar spent on food. Long-term progress in lowering the annual rate
of food price increases will therefore depend on reducing the underlying general inflation rate.
While we must expect future problems, the accomplishments of recent years in certain key commodity areas have been encouraging. In
a relatively brief time the agricultural sector has moved from excess
capacity, supported by policies designed to reduce production, to
nearly full utilization of the sector's resources, with sales at world
market prices. This change in the operation of the sector made the
economy more vulnerable to potentially rapid increases in food and
commodity prices, such as those in 1972-74. Administration policies
in agriculture have aimed at reducing this vulnerability, and the
events of the past year are evidence of their promise.




155

CHAPTER 4

The World Economy—Testing
Resilience
ABROAD, JUST AS AT HOME, oil price increases dominated economic developments in 1979. Both the sharply higher price for oil
and the likelihood that oil supplies will continue to be uncertain in
the intermediate future raise difficult questions for economic policy
in all countries. Substantial adaptations within and among the world's
economies are needed to respond to the changing energy situation.
Improvement in economic performance during 1978 had provided
a solid base for further expansion in 1979. Outside the United States,
inflation pressures had eased somewhat. Growth had begun to increase, partly in response to the less restrictive policies that the declining inflation made possible. As a result of previous changes in exchange rates as well as the altered pattern of relative growth among
the United States and the major foreign countries, external imbalances were diminishing rapidly. Actions in November 1978 to
strengthen and stabilize the dollar helped to reduce uncertainties in
financial markets.
Other circumstances also favored continued expansion abroad in
1979. Declining real oil prices during 1978 and the appreciation of
most currencies against the dollar had improved the terms of trade
for many countries. The resulting gain in real incomes began to be
reflected in higher spending in late 1978 and early 1979. With diminishing margins of spare productive capacity, strengthening profit positions, and improving business expectations, investment demand recovered sharply. Trade volumes also grew at a higher rate than had
been generally expected despite a virtual collapse in exports to Iran.
Developments in oil markets, however, began to pose a growing
threat to continued economic progress. In December 1978 the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) announced a
schedule of gradual price increases to raise the average price of
crude oil from about $13 pqr barrel to about $14.50 by the end of
1979. Following the temporary interruption of Iranian supplies, official OPEC selling prices rose sharply and prices in spot markets
soared even further. With continued tightness in oil markets, stemming in part from a large inventory buildup by consuming countries,




156

world oil prices reached an average level of about $28 by early
January 1980.
Thus in the course of 13 months oil prices have more than doubled. The additional payments for oil imports resulting from this
price rise represent just over 2 percent of the combined gross national product (GNP) of the industrial countries. Measured in this way
the oil shock of 1979 is fully as large as that of 1974.
The dimensions of the 1979 price increase raise the question of
whether the 1974-75 pattern of global recession and increased inflation will be repeated. There are a number of similarities in the two
situations.
First, direct transfer of purchasing power from oil consumers to oil
suppliers can be expected to lead consumers to spend less on other
goods and services. As in 1975, this reduced consumer spending will
not be replaced fully in the near term by increased purchases by the
oil-exporting countries. On the contrary, internal conditions in a
number of these countries suggest that the expansion of imports in
response to higher revenues will be less rapid now than in 1974-75.
Second, as discussed in Chapter 2, the policy dilemma that became
apparent in 1974 reappeared in 1979. Large oil price increases depress demand, output, and employment. But by sharply raising consumer prices, they also threaten to set off a new wage-price spiral as
workers and other income recipients seek to prevent a reduction in
real income. Stimulative fiscal and monetary measures designed to
prevent the adverse effects on output and employment increase the
likelihood that the oil price rise will become embodied in wages and
other costs, and thus in underlying inflation. On the other hand, restrictive fiscal and monetary policies aimed at preventing a spillover
of oil price increases into a more general inflationary surge exacerbate the harmful effects of the higher oil prices on output and
employment.
Third, international financial markets will once again need to recycle very large flows of funds from OPEC countries to countries with
current account deficits. While the 1974-75 experience demonstrated
the versatility and flexibility of these markets, serious strains may still
emerge.
There are also major differences between the current situation and
the 1974-75 oil price shock. In one respect the situation is now more
difficult. Following the rise in oil prices in 1974, the oil market began
to ease and from 1975 to 1978 a buyers' market prevailed. An extended easing is less probable in the current situation since moderate
reductions in the demand for oil may be matched by reduced supplies. Sustained price weakness is not likely unless rapid and substantial conservation can be achieved.


29H-289 0 - 80 - 11


157

In other respects, however, the situation is somewhat more hopeful. Perhaps most important, there is now substantially less aggregate
demand pressure on overall capacity and on labor markets than in
the earlier period. All countries had reached cyclical peaks more or
less simultaneously in early 1974, and clear signs of overheating had
emerged. Inventory building in particular had become marked by
speculative excess. In order to counter aggregate demand pressures,
government policies had turned sharply toward restraint. The shock
of rising oil prices reinforced these other tendencies toward weakness, and together they produced a global recession in 1975. The
close synchronization of economic activity across countries in 197475 also intensified the transmission of recession from one country to
another through rapidly declining world trade.
Currently elements of cyclical strength persist in a number of
countries. Signs of a speculative surge in inventory building have not
appeared, and prospects are good that a large inventory cycle can be
avoided. Continued growth in a number of the larger countries—albeit at a much reduced rate—will help to sustain world trade in the
face of weakening activity and imports in the United States; hence the
secondary repercussions on growth from declining trade will be less
pronounced.
Moreover a good deal has been learned since 1974. The major
countries recognize more clearly the nature of the constraints imposed by the rise in oil prices. In at least some countries labor market participants appear to have recognized that higher oil prices cannot be fully compensated through higher nominal wages. A "wage
explosion" like that in many countries during 1974 is therefore less
likely. Government policies, too, seem better prepared to limit the
spillover effects from the oil market, while avoiding the sharp swings
of fiscal and monetary policy that characterized the earlier period. Finally, the mechanisms for gaining international cooperation and policy coordination have been strengthened since 1974, though much
more can be done in this regard.
Although oil price increases and the problems they bring dominate
the current economic scene, they cannot be viewed in isolation from
other developments in the international economy. Appropriate policies in trade, international financial relations, and energy can make it
easier to adjust to the rise in oil prices. Conversely if protectionist
trade actions multiply, if energy policies work at cross-purposes, or if
financial markets become disrupted, then overall economic performance will be that much worse.




158

The remainder of this chapter examines the direct economic aspects and policy implications of the oil price rise and then considers
some broader questions of managing international economic interdependence.
The first section discusses recent and prospective overall economic
performance in the industrial world and explores the challenges for
fiscal, monetary, and energy policies to manage this performance.
The second section discusses recent developments in the international financial and monetary system. Three topics are of particular
importance: the emerging pattern of international payments and the
problem of recycling the OPEC surplus to finance the deficits of developing countries; the evolution of a system of "managed floating"
exchange rates among major currencies; and the longer-run role of
the dollar as the principal international reserve asset and medium of
exchange.
The final section discusses trade and trade policies, focusing on
the process of adjustment to changing patterns of comparative
advantage.
DEVELOPMENTS IN MAJOR INDUSTRIAL ECONOMIES
Despite the sharp rise in energy prices, average GNP growth for
the six major industrial countries other than the United States was
about 4 percent in 1979, roughly unchanged from 1978. The momentum of growth appears to have been surprisingly well maintained
into the second half of the year in most foreign countries. While virtually all forecasts suggest that growth will slow sharply this year,
clear signs of a general weakening have not yet emerged.
Inflation rates in 1979, as measured by the personal consumption
deflator, averaged about 7 percent for this same group of countries,
a moderate increase from 1978. During the course of the year, however, inflation accelerated sharply as higher oil prices began to work
their way through these economies.
The most recent projections by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) are that the average growth of
GNP for these six countries will fall to about 2V2 percent in 1980 and
that inflation will rise to about 9 percent (see Tables 26 and 27). The
further increases in oil prices that have occurred since this projection
suggest that these forecasts understate the extent to which economic
performance is likely to deteriorate.




159

TABLE 26.—Growth in real GNP in major industrial countries, 1978-80
[Percent change]
Country

United States
Japan
Germany
France 3
United Kingdom
Italy 3
Canada

1978

1979 »

1980

4.4
5.6
3.5
3.3
3.3
2.6
3.4
4.1

3

Average excluding United States 4

2.3
6.0
4.3
3.0
.5
4.0
2.8

2

4.1

-0.6

4.8
2.3
2.0
-2.0

2.0
1.5
2.6

1

Preliminary.
2 Forecasts by OECD and Council of Economic Advisers.
3
Data are for real gross domestic product.
4
Based on 1978 GNP/GDP weights and exchange rates.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), and Council of Economic Advisers.

GROWTH IN 1979

The fact that growth abroad remained strong while our own
growth was slowing stems in part from differences in the earlier pace
of recovery. Through mid-1978, economic recovery from the global
recession of 1974-75 was far more complete in the United States
than in most other industrial countries. For that reason economic
policies here and abroad moved in different directions. In the United
States, where unemployment had fallen to a relatively low level and
inflationary pressures were intensifying, a shift toward more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies was made. In a number of other
countries, particularly Germany and Japan, policies to promote faster
growth were set in motion.
TABLE 27.—Inflation in major industrial countries, 1978-80
[Percent change in prices1]
Country

United States
Japan
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy
Canada

1980 3

1979 2

1978

6.8
4.5
2.6
9.3
8.3
12.1
7.3

9.0
7.3
5.0
11.5
15.5
16.5
8.5

6.1

Average excluding United States 4

8.9
3.3
4.5
10.8
12.3
14.8
8.5
7.1

9.2

1

Change in implicit price deflator for private consumption expenditures for United States, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom,
and Canada. Change in consumer prices for France and Italy.
2
Preliminary.
3
Forecasts by OECD and Council of Economic Advisers.
4
Based on 1978 GNP/GDP weights and exchange rates.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD), and Council of Economic Advisers.

Perhaps the most important factor accounting for higher growth
abroad in 1979, however, was the recovery in private investment,




160

which had been unusually weak since 1974. A pent-up demand for
replacement investment and capacity expansion had developed because of low rates of investment over the preceding several years.
Consequently, when business firms perceived a moderate improvement in the prospects for overall demand, investment responded rapidly. The recovery of investment was reinforced by improving profits
and higher cash flows for enterprises. A substantial part of the gains
in the terms of trade experienced by the major foreign industrial
countries during 1978 apparently accrued to businesses in the form
of higher profits, since the relative decline in the prices of imported
goods was only partly passed through to final consumers. The generally moderate rise in wages in both 1978 and early 1979 also worked
to strengthen profits. Profit positions were further improved in
a number of countries by a sharp rise in productivity as output
expanded.
The acceleration of growth in the second half of 1978 and the first
half of 1979 was accompanied by an even sharper acceleration in the
growth of imports. Import volumes, which had increased at an average rate of about 4 percent for the six major foreign industrial countries during the preceding year, grew by more than 11 percent over
the year from mid-1978 to mid-1979. This more rapid increase in imports reflected not only higher final domestic demand but also a rise
in inventory accumulation and, for Japan, the appreciation of the yen
during 1978. The principal beneficiaries of this strengthened demand
for imports were the United States and a number of the smaller
countries of the OECD.
During the second half of last year, imports by the major foreign
countries slowed; and their exports accelerated, primarily because of
the rapid growth of purchases by the oil-exporting countries. The
continuation of relatively rapid growth abroad in the face of the
growing burden of higher oil prices is explained in large part by this
strengthening of net exports. Another factor is that abroad as well as
in the United States consumers apparently reacted to accelerating inflation by reducing personal saving rates, so that consumer demand
slowed less than personal income.
It is difficult to judge whether the growth momentum that had become established abroad would have been sustained in 1980 if oil
prices had not risen. Outside Germany, Japan, and a few smaller
countries, inflation rates were still very high. Because they probably
would have begun to increase, a strong recovery might have been difficult to sustain in any event. The serious structural problems
brought on by rigid labor markets and other resource immobilities
continue to limit the degree to which full capacity utilization can be
approached without serious inflationary repercussions.




161

INFLATION IN 1979

With oil prices rising sharply, inflation increased everywhere. Table
28 shows the rate of consumer price increases during 1978 and 1979
in major countries. An attempt has been made to separate the
changes in prices into energy and other components. For comparison, import unit values are also shown.
TABLE 28.—Changes in consumer prices, with and without energy, and import unit values, major
industrial countries, 1978-79
[Percent change, annual rate >]

Dec. 1977

June 1978

Dec. 1978

to

Country and item

to

to

June 1978 Dec. 1978 June 1979

United States
Consumer prices 2
Energy :i
Other
Import unit value

2
3
4
5
6

11.0
43.6

10.3
23.4

8.1
24.2

36.2

3.8

3.2

4.2

6.7

-11.7

31.6

Latest
month
(1979)

8.5

17.2

7.7
8.5
7.3
5.0

50.2

8.5
7.7
8.7

Japan:
Consumer prices
Energy 4
Other
Import unit value
Germany:
Consumer prices
Energy 4
Other
Import unit value
France
Consumer prices
Energy 4
Other
Import unit value
United Kingdom
Consumer prices
Energy 4
Other
Import unit value
ItalV'
Consumer prices
Energy 4
Other
Import unit value
Canada:
Consumer prices
Energy 4
Other
Import unit value
1

Latest 3
months
over
preceding
3 months

-5.6

4.4
-9.8

1.9
2.1
1.9
-2.2

4.2

2.4
63.2

73.8

November
September

3.9

-12.3

December

2.9
9.4
2.4
-1.6

4.7

7.4

September

23.4

30.2
5.8
18.8

September

10.7
17.3
10.1
18.1

12.6
30.8
10.9
23.8
33.4
82.4
28.4

September

32.8

2.7

9.6

9.7

10.3

14.2

9.5
1.2

9.3
2.7

6.4
.4
7.0
2.9

10.2

6.0

12.5
18.1
11.9
10.1

11.5
11.5
11.5

11.6

6.8

8.1

8.7
7.2
8.9

8.1
10.2

11.0

16.7

5

15.6

8.0
10.4

October

.0

8.1

12.4

16.1
25.2

7.9

9.5
7.1
9.8
6.6

5

September

September

8.9
6

September

18.5
61.0
15.5
35.9

September

7.1

September

September

10.3

6.7
30.6

October

Consumer prices are seasonally adjusted; import unit values are not seasonally adjusted.
Consumer prices with rent substituted for home ownership.
Gas (piped) and electricity; fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; and gasoline, motor oil, coolant, etc.
Fuel and light and gasoline.
Reflects increases in value-added tax rates in these countries.
Fuel and light only.

Note.—All data for breakdown of consumer prices between energy and other are estimates.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Department of Labor, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and Council
of Economic Advisers.

While it is not possible to distinguish precisely between "internally" and "externally" generated inflation, a substantial part of the declining inflation abroad in 1978 can be traced to the relative modera-




162

tion in import prices during 1978. This moderation resulted not only
from the stability of dollar prices of oil and primary commodities but
also from the appreciation of most currencies against the dollar.
Conversely the sharp acceleration in inflation in 1979 predominantly
reflects the turnaround in import prices, a development exacerbated
in Japan by the sharp depreciation of the yen.
The judgment that the domestic component of inflation in most
countries did not accelerate much in 1979 is borne out by the behavior of wages, which have risen at a relatively constant rate in most
countries (see Table 29). One exception is Italy, where widespread
indexation (the scala mobile) leads inevitably to a rapid transmission of
higher prices into wages. In the United Kingdom very sharp wage increases in new contract settlements signed in October may also signal
an acceleration in wages, though the evidence is still scanty. Domestic cost pressures in most countries outside the United States were
also eased by relatively strong productivity growth.
TABLE 29.—Changes in wages in major industrial countries, 1978-79
[Percent change]
Change from same period a year earlier to
Country

United States
Japan
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy...
Canada

1978
1st half

1978
2nd half

1979
1st half

1979
latoct •?

Latest month
(1979)

months

7.9
7.9
5.5

8.3
6.3
5.6

8.0
4.4
4.9

8.0
7.0
4.8

12.6
13.2
17.3

12.7
15.6
15.6

12.7
14.5
17.0

12.2
15.1
20.8

7.4

7.4

9.1

9.3

December
October
October
June
October
September
July

Source: National sources.

THE RESPONSE OF ECONOMIC POLICY TO RISING OIL PRICES

The mechanism through which increases in OPEC oil prices reduce
growth and worsen inflation is well understood and is much the same
in all countries that rely heavily on imported oil.
Higher prices for imported oil raise the prices of petroleum products directly and also increase the costs and prices of goods and services requiring petroleum for their production. Consumers suffer a
real income loss. The result is equivalent to a rise in excise taxes,
hence the term "OPEC tax/' Except temporarily, this tax cannot be
offset by increases in nominal wages; such increases, when they
occur, tend to lead not to a restoration of real incomes but to a rise
in other prices, a sequence that builds the increase in oil prices into
the underlying inflation rate.




163

In the longer run the loss in real income resulting from the OPEC
tax need not result in a weakening of aggregate demand. To the extent that the higher receipts of OPEC countries lead to a commensurate increase in their demand for goods and services, aggregate demand would be unaffected. Lower real spending by consumers of petroleum products would be offset by stronger exports. Jobs lost in
the consumer goods industries would be replaced by new jobs in export industries. Indeed, by 1978 the industrial countries as a group
were exporting sufficient goods and services to the oil-producing
countries to pay in full the tax imposed on them by the 1974 rise in
oil prices.
In the short run, however, OPEC's imports will not increase as rapidly as its receipts. Indeed, as discussed in more detail below, it appears probable that the gap between OPEC receipts and expenditures that has now reappeared will remain very large for a number of
years.
The adverse effects on aggregate demand of the current rise in oil
prices could be offset, at least in the short run, by changes in private
spending. For example, while the "oil tax" caused economic growth
in the United States to decline in 1979 by more than had been expected early last year, the drag on the economy has been softened by
a drop in the personal saving rate. A similar though less marked decline has occurred elsewhere. This decline may not be sustained,
however. Historically, the greater uncertainty associated with higher
inflation, the increased job insecurity resulting from adjustment to
the higher oil prices, and the desire of consumers to restore the real
value of financial wealth that has been eroded by inflation have all
induced more cautious behavior by consumers.
Policy responses of most countries during the past year have not
compensated for the OPEC tax. On the contrary, fiscal and monetary
policies have shifted toward restraint. Germany and the United Kingdom both raised value-added tax rates during the course of 1979,
though in the United Kingdom this was partially offset by reductions
in income taxes. Almost everywhere, government deficits in 1979
were smaller than had been projected at the beginning of the year.
Planned budgets for 1980, furthermore, are generally more restrictive than those of last year, Italy being the principal exception.
Monetary policies were also tightened during 1979 in all major
countries. Short-term interest rates abroad rose by over 500 basis
points on average during the year as monetary authorities attempted
to maintain growth of the monetary aggregates within target ranges
in the face of rising inflation. The fact that these target ranges were
not changed implies in itself greater monetary restraint on real
growth, since price levels are higher now because of the oil price rise




164

than had been expected when the targets were set. A number of
countries have announced lower targets for growth of the monetary
aggregates for 1980.
The major reason for pursuing relatively restrictive economic policies is the overriding need to limit the spillover from higher oil
prices into higher nominal wages. In other countries, as in the United
States, preventing an upward ratcheting of the wage-price spiral is
viewed as the most pressing task of economic policy. Nominal wages
in most countries have not, so far, shown signs of sharp acceleration.
Prospects for limiting wage acceleration seem better in Germany and
Japan than elsewhere. In those countries and some others the process of wage determination is relatively concentrated in wage rounds
that terminate each spring when annual labor contracts for most
workers are negotiated. In such circumstances it is easier to enforce
the perception that an accelerated growth of wage claims cannot effectively raise real incomes. Synchronization of wage bargaining does
not by itself assure a moderate wage outcome—both Germany and
Japan experienced wage explosions in 1974 when the "consensus
mechanisms" broke down. Recognition of this fact perhaps explains
why those two countries, as well as most others,.are currently practicing restrictive demand management as the principal means of limiting the inflationary effects of higher world oil prices.
THE OUTLOOK FOR 1980

Most major countries thus face the prospect that growth in 1980
will be slowed by both the direct effects of higher oil prices and the
shift to more restrictive policies needed to limit the rise in inflation.
However, if real oil prices do not rise substantially beyond the $28
per barrel average that appears to have been established by early
1980, growth will probably remain positive in all major countries except the United States and the United Kingdom. Investment demand
in a number of countries may be relatively well sustained. Japan is
likely to benefit from a stronger growth in the volume of exports
during 1980 as a result of the lower value of the yen (although the
growth induced by yen depreciation will to some extent displace production in other countries). The United Kingdom's fall in output
does not derive principally from the rise in oil prices but from the
very sharp shift toward restrictive monetary and fiscal policies instituted by the new government.
For at least some countries the rise in inflation may be brief if the
increases in oil prices now begin to moderate. To the extent that the
cautious economic policies generally pursued during 1979 succeed in
forestalling wage increases induced by higher oil prices, there may be
more room for policy actions to support economic activity in some




165

countries as 1980 proceeds. Hence the slowdown in economic
growth need not be prolonged.
It is clear, however, that the outlook is precarious. Further substantial increases in the price of oil could induce a widespread recession
as well as higher inflation. If wages accelerate more sharply than is
now assumed and, in response, monetary policies tighten further,
positive real growth will become less likely. Finally, a sharper slowing
of world trade—because of a general move to reduce inventories, increased protectionist barriers, or forced retrenchment by developing
countries unable to finance needed imports—could also lead to
weaker growth than is currently expected.
REDUCING WORLD OIL DEMAND

The rise in petroleum prices reflects very tight conditions in world
markets. If there are no further significant reductions in supply, some
temporary easing in market conditions is likely, at least in 1980, because of price-induced conservation, slower growth in oil-importing
countries, and reductions in the recent rate of stockbuilding demand.
Given the relatively low price elasticity of demand for oil in the short
run, however, the margin between ease and tightness is very narrow.
Increased uncertainty of supply, as well as the erosion of previously
established buyer-supplier relationships in the petroleum markets,
have tended to raise the demand for oil inventories as a hedge
against possible future scarcity. Decisions by a small number of oilexporting countries to reduce production in response to market
weakness could undo some or all of the benefits of reduced demand.
Unless the reductions in demand are substantial, upward pressure on
oil prices could continue, even as consumption declines, and thus
further undermine the prospects for economic performance.
The current situation is marked by strong interdependence among
oil-consuming countries. Increased demand for petroleum in one
country, by putting pressure on world oil prices, affects inflation and
growth prospects in all other oil-importing countries. Conversely the
benefits of lower consumption in one country tend to be shared by
all in the form of reduced price pressure in the world oil market.
Such interdependence creates strong grounds for the coordination of
energy policies among countries.
Considerable progress toward this end was made during 1979. But
the problem is difficult, given both the strong perception of national
interest that colors each country's views regarding adequate supplies
of oil and the attendant pressure on each to secure its own position.
The basis for cooperation among oil-consuming countries since
1974 has been the Emergency Allocation Agreement within the Inter-




166

national Energy Agency, to which the major industrial countries except France belong. This agreement provides a mechanism for sharing available oil supplies among member countries when the supply
shows a substantial shortfall (a 7 percent reduction or more). The
agreement, however, does not provide a mechanism for limiting competition among countries when the shortfall is below this threshold.
Early in 1979 it was agreed within the International Energy Agency, and in parallel within the European Economic Community, that
by the end of the year each country should reduce its consumption
by 5 percent relative to trend. While the United States met this objective, there was significantly less success in doing so among most
other countries.
At the Tokyo Summit meeting last June the leaders of the seven
major industrial countries took several important steps to establish a
framework for cooperation in energy over the medium term. Of central importance was the acknowledgment of interdependence and recognition of the resulting need for each country to commit itself to
import levels that, in sum, would not exceed the volume of oil likely
to be available. Firm targets for 1985 were laid down. It was further
agreed to pursue discussions in the International Energy Agency and
other forums on steps to reach these targets and develop cooperative
approaches to limit demand for imports during the intervening years.
These discussions resulted last December in a new agreement by the
International Energy Agency, setting out individual targets for each
country's oil imports in 1980. It was further agreed to review the targets each quarter and revise them if necessary to match reductions in
supply. The successful carrying out of this approach would do much
to moderate future upward pressure on oil prices, since it provides a
means of averting a competitive scramble for limited oil supplies.
Over the long run, the cut in the availability of oil need not sharply
check the growth of the world economy. Higher relative prices for oil
will encourage conservation and additional production of energy
from other sources. While the increased real price of energy may
somewhat slow the substitution of energy-intensive capital for labor
and thus curb the growth of productivity, most studies indicate that
this effect is likely to be quite small. In the shorter term, however,
given the wage and price rigidities in all industrial economies, the
limited availability of oil acts as a constraint on growth through its
impact on the price of oil and in turn on inflation. Coordinated policies to reduce the demand for energy and increase energy production
are therefore essential tools not only of energy policy but of overall
economic management.




167

THE GLOBAL PATTERN OF PAYMENTS
In 1977 and early 1978 the major imbalances in current account
positions were among the largest industrial countries: sizable surpluses for Japan and Germany and a large deficit for the United
States. During 1978 and into 1979 these imbalances were eliminated.
The United States was near balance in 1979, and both Germany and
Japan had deficits.
The large shift in Japan's current account, from a surplus of over
$16 billion in 1978 to a deficit of about $8 billion in 1979, is particularly striking. Primarily as a result of the appreciation of the yen since
mid-1977, the volume of imports into Japan began to accelerate
sharply during 1978, while export volumes declined. From June 1978
to June 1979 import volumes grew by a remarkable 21 percent. Until
late in 1978, however, these volume trends were not fully reflected in
a declining current account balance. The reason was that the appreciation of the yen also caused the terms of trade to move strongly in
Japan's favor. Import prices in dollar terms grew moderately while
export prices surged. In late 1978 the yen turned around. During the
course of 1979 the yen depreciated by 23 percent and at the same
time both oil and other commodity prices rose sharply. The resulting
61 percent rise in import prices (October 1978 to October 1979),
coupled with the trade-volume trends that had previously become established, led to a very rapid shift toward deficit in the current account. More recently the growth in the volume of imports into Japan
has begun to slow and export volumes to rise again as the lower
value of the yen has made Japanese producers more competitive in
both domestic and foreign markets. Since Japanese payments for oil
will rise substantially further this year, it is not now expected that
these volume shifts will lead to a renewed current account surplus in
1980.
While current account positions within the OECD have become
more nearly balanced, the increase in oil prices has led to a renewed
and substantial imbalance in the pattern of payments among the
three major groupings of countries—the OECD, the oil-exporting
countries, and the other developing countries.
Table 30, which is based on estimates by the OECD, shows the
pattern of surpluses and deficits among major groups of countries in
recent years. The final column gives projections by the Council of
Economic Advisers for the distribution of current accounts among
major groupings in 1980. Between 1978 and 1980 the OPEC surplus
is projected to rise by more than $90 billion. The counterpart to this




168

is a near doubling of the deficits of the other developing countries
and a shift into deficit of about $60 billion in the aggregate position
of the OECD countries.
TABLE 30.—Current account balances, 1975-80
[Billions of dollars,- OECO basis]
Country

1975

OECD countries

1977

1978

1979 >

1980 2

-50

-0.4

Other OECD

9.1

-30.0

-14.1
10.9
4.2
-3.3
.5
2.5
-4.0

-13.9
16.5
8.8
3.9
2.0
6.4
-4.6

.0
-7.5
-3.5
1.5
-5.5
6.3
-6.0

-15.6

-21.5

-10.0

-15.3

27.3

36.5

29.0

7.0

65.0

100

-37.5

Other developing countries

-24.8

4.6
3.7
3.4
-6.1
-1.5
-2.8
-3.9

-11.8

.

3

-18.2

18.3
-.7
3.5
-.1
-4.1
-.8
-4.7

United States
Japan.
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy...
Canada

OPEC countries

1976

-25.5

-24.0

-36.0

-47.0

70

1

Preliminary.
Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Includes Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and
Venezuela.
Sources: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and Council of Economic Advisers.
2

3

The projected rise in the combined deficits of the non-OPEC developing countries reflects not only the very substantial increase in
their payments for oil but also more slowly growing export receipts.
Slower growth in the industrial countries will reduce the demand for
the goods that developing countries export. Rising external debt at
higher interest rates will also add to their deficits, the more so because most of their debt to banks is contracted at a floating rate of
interest.
In relation to GNP, however, the projected rise in the deficit of developing countries is less than that in 1974-75. To some extent this
is explained by the generally better maintenance of world trade that
is foreseen. As a further point, in 1975 most developing countries
chose to finance large deficits, rather than reducing them by slowing
their demand for imports. It seems probable that adjustment actions
now will be somewhat more prompt. Most important, however, the
collapse in prices of raw materials, which greatly weakened the terms
of trade of the developing countries in 1975, is not expected to be
repeated. First, raw materials prices are currently quite low compared
with production costs, whereas they had soared in 1972-73. Second,
low investment since 1975 to expand capacity for producing raw materials has resulted in fairly low levels of excess capacity. Finally, international commodity agreements may moderate price fluctuations
for a number of commodities.




169

THE RECYCLING PROBLEM

The pattern of large surpluses for OPEC and large deficits for developing countries (as well as for some more developed ones) requires that international financial markets once again "recycle" funds
on an enormous scale. The problem, while not insuperable, is more
difficult than in 1974-75 in three respects. First, the OPEC surplus is
likely to persist longer. Second, debt burdens for many developing
countries are larger now than they were in 1974. The increased indebtedness that higher oil bills will once again impose comes on top
of the debts incurred when oil prices rose in 1974. Finally, banks and
other lenders now have a substantially larger exposure in many developing countries than they did in 1974 and may become increasingly reluctant to add yet further to their exposure.
Persistence of OPEC Surpluses

In 1974 it was widely predicted that large OPEC surpluses would
persist for many years. In fact, however, the OPEC surplus of 1974
was cut roughly in half in 1975, largely because the recession in the
industrial countries greatly reduced the demand for oil, while OPEC
imports continued to rise sharply. The surplus widened somewhat in
1976 and 1977 but was increasingly concentrated in the hands of a
small number of "low-absorbing" countries whose revenues were
large relative to their populations. In 1978 the overall surplus declined to modest proportions, and a number of OPEC countries
began to incur deficits.
The reduction of the OPEC surplus is likely to be less rapid and
complete this time. After the initial marked increases in oil prices in
1974, world oil prices then declined relative to the prices of the
goods that OPEC imported. Conditions in oil markets likely to prevail during the next several years, however, suggest that a sustained
decline in the relative price of oil is less likely. In a number of important OPEC countries—and most notably in Iran—trends toward social conservatism may limit the growth of imports, as governments
scale back development plans in order to minimize the disruption
and social strains that rapid growth sometimes entails.
Debt Accumulation

Judgments differ on the rate of debt accumulation that developing
countries can sustain. The external debts of developing countries
have grown rapidly since 1974. Debt service obligations have increased even faster, since maturities have shortened on average and
interest costs have risen as a result of the increased role of commercial relative to concessionary financing. If developing countries incur
deficits on the projected scale, their indebtedness will accelerate substantially in coming years. However, the debt-carrying capacity of




170

many developing countries has also been increasing rapidly. With few
exceptions, the most rapid rises in indebtedness have been among
countries whose growth rates are also high and whose exports are expanding rapidly. Consequently debt burdens—as measured by the
ratio of debt-service payments to exports, for instance—have not
risen sharply on average. Where substantial increases have occurred,
they have been largely in those countries whose prospects for longerterm growth are quite favorable.
In such circumstances it is difficult to judge the appropriate combination of adjustment policies to reduce deficits and additional borrowing. Faced with sharply higher bills for oil imports, a developing
country may borrow to sustain the flow of imports devoted to investment and growth. If the borrowed resources are being effectively invested, the productivity growth that is preserved by borrowing
should more than cover the debt-servicing costs. While the country's
living standards will improve more slowly than they would have done
in the absence of the oil price rise, borrowing to pay for the increased oil import bill can be appropriate and manageable.
For most developing countries, however, some actions to curtail
the growth of imports will be required to compensate for higher oil
bills and weaker export revenues. Some countries, where past adjustment has been inadequate, may have to begin a stringent retrenchment. On balance, a general shift to highly restrictive policies is not
likely to be necessary if the rise of oil prices now begins to slow.
Lenders' Exposure

To some extent OPEC countries directly provide loans or grants to
developing countries. To a far larger extent, however, they have deposited their surpluses in the banks of industrial countries and their
foreign branches. These banks, in turn, have extended loans to countries needing to finance their balance of payments.
Balance of payments financing is not of course exclusively carried
out through banks. Historically the largest portion of developing
countries' deficits has been financed through other mechanisms, including direct investment flows, official financing from international
financial institutions, and bilateral development assistance. In recent
years, however, bank credit has become a major source of funds for
an increasing number of developing countries. The sustainability of
large deficits therefore depends very greatly on the amounts, and
terms, of resources made available through this channel.
Banks making international loans incur a variety of risks. Two in
particular have received the most attention: "maturity risk" and
"country risk." Maturity risk arises from the fact that banks use relatively short-term deposits to make longer-term loans. In 1974-75




171

some feared that this risk would inhibit the recycling process. If
OPEC deposits proved volatile, individual banks would have difficulty
meeting sudden demands of depositors for cash. Such apprehension
proved unwarranted, partly because OPEC deposits were less volatile
than feared. More important, however, was the functioning of the interbank lending market. While autonomous deposits in individual
banks fluctuated, the aggregate level of such deposits to the international banking system as a whole was fairly stable and on a strongly
rising trend. Individual banks could therefore attract funds from
other banks to offset deposit shifts. The depth of this interbank market is indicated by the fact that interbank deposits account for over
two-thirds of total gross Eurocurrency liabilities.
Country risk arises from the recognition that countries may be unable or unwilling to repay all or part of the principal or interest on
their loans, thereby forcing a rescheduling of loans, which might entail losses to the bank. Such reschedulings have occurred periodically
with respect to individual countries, and no doubt they will continue.
Nevertheless, losses to banks from such events have been minimal. In
1978, for instance, the ratio of losses on foreign loans to outstanding
claims averaged .01 percent for a sample of 30 U.S. banks. The comparable loss ratio on domestic loans was .34 percent. On the record
to date at least, international lending is comparatively safe. It is likely, however, that country risk will become an increasingly important
consideration as the debt burdens of a number of countries rise beyond historical levels.
By far the greatest share in the projected rise of the other developing countries' aggregate deficit will accrue to a small number of generally more prosperous nations that have been substantial borrowers
in international markets for a number of years. A further acceleration
in borrowing by some of these countries might encounter resistance
from banks reluctant to increase commensurately their exposure to
risk. To some extent banks may be restricted by internally set "country limits," which specify the maximum lending to be undertaken in
any one country. National banking authorities, moreover, may exercise increased surveillance or, as Japan seems to have done recently,
issue more direct guidance to their banks to limit the growth of international lending.
In practice, however, there appears to be a great deal of flexibility
in banks' international lending. The number of banks participating in
international lending has grown rapidly. Even if individual banks become more cautious, the overall flow could well be maintained. Indeed a striking development in the last few years has been the eagerness of the banking system to provide financing. Interest rate spreads
over the London interbank offered rate have steadily tended down-




172

ward for most developing countries seeking loans. These countries
have used the opportunity to refinance outstanding debts and build
up their reserves by substantial amounts. Larger demands for credit
and somewhat tighter monetary conditions in national markets suggest that spreads over the London rate on new loans may widen over
the coming year. Front-end fees have already become a little more
expensive and maturities on new loans have shortened.
A widening of spreads can be expected to serve a useful rationing
function. Wider spreads, by raising the profitability of lending relative to the cost of obtaining funds, may increase the supply of funds
that banks make available. By raising the costs of borrowing, wider
spreads will also induce borrowing countries to shift their policies in
the direction of greater adjustment in their current account and less
financing. This process does not always work smoothly. A general
widening of spreads may be difficult to achieve even when it is warranted by market conditions. Borrowers have resisted such movements strongly because they, and other lenders, view a narrow spread
as an indicator of creditworthiness. If an increase in the spread is
confined to one or a few countries, other potential lenders to these
countries might shy away, with the possible result of a sudden, sharp
interruption of financing.
While judgments differ on the seriousness of these risks, existing
international channels are probably capable of preventing severe disruptions. The International Monetary Fund in particular has substantial resources that can be drawn upon temporarily by countries encountering financing difficulties while they institute programs to
overcome problems with their balance of payments. Implementation
of such programs, in turn, is likely to restore the confidence of private lenders.
Many developing countries, particularly the poorer ones, do not
have sufficient standing to borrow on international markets. For such
countries an incipient increase in deficits cannot be financed by private recycling, and in consequence a forced adjustment could arise.
While some adjustment may be necessary, retrenchment is not an acceptable solution for poorer countries where large portions of the
population are near or below subsistence levels.
In practice, the poorer countries have received a substantial flow of
resources through bilateral and multilateral development assistance
from outside. This Administration, like the governments of many
other industrial countries, and the International Development Banks
have policies under which a growing proportion of official financing
and other aid flows is directed to these countries. Further additions
to such flows would be appropriate even in the absence of the incremental oil price rise.


http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/ 2 9 4 - 2 8 9
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

173
0 - 8 0 - 1 2

While current assessments indicate that existing financing mechanisms can prevent major widespread disruption, the rise in oil prices
cuts severely into the incomes of most countries. Even rapidly growing countries will be forced into some combination of higher debt
service and lower investment, both of which will adversely affect living standards. The poorer countries especially can ill afford any such
losses. Furthermore, financing mechanisms cannot cope with any and
all increases in oil prices and the associated financing needs. The cumulative effects of large further rises in oil prices could increasingly
threaten to overload the international financial system.
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKETS IN 1979
The strong coordinated actions taken by the United States and
other major countries in November 1978 to strengthen the dollar,
which had been under almost continual downward pressure for more
than a year, had beneficial effects in exchange markets in 1979. On a
trade-weighted basis against an average of foreign currencies, the
dollar fluctuated within a relatively narrow range during the year. In
December 1979 the weighted-average dollar exchange rate was 2.5
percent lower than a year earlier.
This relative stability of the dollar reflected divergent movements
with respect to individual foreign currencies: a depreciation of about
5-10 percent vis-a-vis the mark, most other currencies of the European Monetary System, and the British pound; and an appreciation
of about 23 percent vis-a-vis the Japanese yen.
Shifts in expectations about inflation rates, uncertainties about the
oil market, perceptions of central banks' intentions with respect to intervention policy, and, perhaps most importantly, the conduct of
monetary policy by the major countries affected movements in exchange rates at various times during 1979. Except for Japan, external
balance considerations played only a small role, since successful adjustments had been made. Occasional downward pressure on the dollar in the second half of 1979 primarily reflected the market's assessment of the strength of continued inflationary pressure in the United
States. Rising oil prices and a less secure supply of oil had an especially important effect on the yen. The United Kingdom's favorable
outlook respecting oil independence tended to strengthen the pound
during much of the year, despite an acceleration of inflation. The
market's perception of the new government's policies, particularly
the emphasis on tight monetary policy, also helped strengthen the
pound.
Exchange rate movements between the dollar and the German
mark, as well as between the dollar and those currencies linked to the




174

mark through the European Monetary System, tended to reflect
changes in the market's expectations about relative rates of inflation
in the United States and Germany and about the course of monetary
policy. Prior to October 6 exchange markets tended to consider interest rates in the United States to be low relative to those in Germany, given the inflation rates in the two countries. The dollar
strengthened notably vis-a-vis the mark after the Federal Reserve announced a shift in its operating strategy on October 6, and shortterm interest rates in the United States rose strongly; but at the end
of the year the dollar weakened again, largely because of the increased uncertainty caused by the Iranian situation.
The substantial depreciation of the yen is perhaps the most striking aspect of exchange market developments during the year. Some
portion of the decline may represent a reversal from the overshooting during the yen's previous period of appreciation, but the reversal
went beyond that. Of course Japan is particularly vulnerable to the
rise in oil prices and to a diminished security of supply. Prices of
other raw materials on which Japan is dependent have also risen
sharply. For the major industrial countries, Table 31 shows estimated
changes in terms of trade that would have stemmed from the 1979
changes in oil prices if exchange rates had remained at their December 1978 levels. The terms-of-trade loss is substantially larger for
Japan than for other major countries except the United States. Unlike
the United States, Japan does not have large potential sources of alternative forms of energy. Some decline in the real value of the yen
would thus be consistent with needed longer-term adjustments in exports and imports. Changes in long-term trade volume in response to
exchange rate changes are large, however, and the actual depreciation of the yen may have exceeded the requirements of the adjustment process.
T A B L E 31.—Impact of oil price increase on terms of trade
[Increased oil bills at 1978 oil import volume as percent of value of 1978 merchandise exports]

Country

Percent

31.4
29.8
11.0
17.2
12.2
23.1
7.6

United States
Japan..
Germany
France
United Kingdom
Italy
Canada
Sources: Central Intelligence Agency, International Monetary Fund, and Council of Economic Advisers.

The Japanese government generally resisted the depreciation of
the yen, notably through heavy intervention sales of dollars. Its monetary policies also became somewhat more restrictive, although the




175

rise of interest rates during the year was less in Japan than in a number of other countries.
At several times during 1979 the market's perception of the intervention policy of central banks also affected exchange rates, especially the dollar-mark rate. Early in the year the stability of the dollar
may have been due to perceptions in the market that coordinated actions by central banks could effectively counter large short-term rate
movements. Under such conditions market participants faced a "twoway risk" and acted in ways that helped to keep rates relatively stable. By contrast, after midyear, market participants were less certain
about the goals of intervention policy, and their testing of the intentions of the monetary authorities led to greater volatility in exchange
rates. Problems of this sort inevitably arise when intervention is used
as a tool for limiting erratic fluctuations in exchange rates. On balance, however, the mechanisms of coordination among monetary authorities have kept such problems minor. More important, it is clearly
and generally recognized that intervention per se has limited usefulness when the market is convinced that prevailing exchange rates are
inconsistent with its perceptions of underlying economic conditions
and of monetary and other macroeconomic policies.
Foreign exchange intervention and monetary policy actions affect
exchange rates in different ways. Intervention results in a change in
the market supply of financial assets denominated in one currency
relative to those denominated in another. If demands for the two
currencies are stable, this shift in relative supplies leads to a rise in
the exchange value of the currency whose supply is reduced. Because
assets denominated in the major currencies appear to be close substitutes, however, this exchange rate effect is correspondingly small.
The consequences of intervention are therefore likely to be determined mostly by the way market expectations respond. Intervention
is most likely to succeed in stemming large unwanted changes in
rates if accompanying actions signal an intention to pursue policies
that will justify the existing exchange rate level over the longer term.
Monetary policy affects exchange rates primarily by influencing the
demands for different currencies. For example, a rise in interest rates
in the United States increases the demand for dollars because the interest return on dollar assets is raised. The result is a bidding up of
the exchange rate for the dollar. There is a limit to such appreciation, however, if it is expected that the dollar exchange rate will subsequently move back toward its longer-run equilibrium value. For
this reason exchange rate changes due simply to changes in interest
rate differentials ought not to be very large. Stronger effects, however, are likely when shifts in monetary policy are taken to be a sign of
changed objectives for overall macroeconomic performance. Thus a




176

rise in interest rates that is interpreted as a shift to a more restrictive
policy will lead to expectations of slower growth and less inflation.
Expectational effects will then reinforce the exchange rate movements generated by the attraction of higher interest returns.
How effectively monetary policy can be used to stabilize the domestic economy depends on how accurately exchange markets assess
the policy implications of changes in interest rates. In recent years a
number of countries have begun to define monetary objectives in
terms of quantitative targets for one or more monetary aggregates,
rather than targets for interest rates. Last October the Federal Reserve Board modified its operating techniques to place greater emphasis on achieving target rates of growth in the monetary aggregates. In such a world, even when monetary objectives remain unchanged, short-term interest rates will tend to fluctuate in response
to changes in real growth, or the rate of inflation, or other factors.
Thus an economy in which inflation is moderating or economic activity is weakening will experience a decline in interest rates in the context of unchanged monetary policy. To avoid unwarranted exchange
rate movements, exchange markets must recognize that such interest
rate declines do not represent a shift in monetary policy toward expansion, but in fact spring from developments that are anti-inflationary in character.
THE DOLLAR IN THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM
For many years the dollar has been the key currency of the international monetary system. It is the largest component of official reserves, although not the only one. Relatively smaller amounts of
other currencies are also held; holdings of special drawing rights
(SDRs) and credit positions with the International Monetary Fund are
also reserve assets. Gold holdings are counted in reserves, though
their official use is now quite limited.
The dollar is also the principal intervention currency. For example,
if Switzerland wishes to intervene to support the Swiss franc in relation to the German mark, it is likely to do so by selling dollars to buy
francs. This can put pressure on the dollar if the seller of the Swiss
francs is unwilling to hold the new dollar balances.
Beyond its role in official transactions, the dollar is also the principal international medium in private transactions; international borrowing is conducted in dollars, and settlements for international
transactions in goods and services take place in dollars, even for
trade contracts denominated in other currencies. While an international monetary system based on a single currency offers certain multilateral advantages, there is no inherent reason why the dollar




177

should continue to play this dominant role. Indeed, the international
importance of other currencies has been increasing. International
and foreign bond issues, for instance, were 71 percent dollar denominated on average in the 1960s; in 1978 only 37 percent were
denominated in dollars. Despite considerable reluctance by the Swiss
and German monetary authorities to have their currencies held as official reserves, such holdings have been growing. Recently the Swiss
have allowed foreign governments to hold deposits of Swiss francs
directly with the Swiss National Bank. Until now such holdings have
been primarily Eurodeposits. Intervention in other currencies is also
increasing, particularly with the establishment of the European Monetary System, where member countries often intervene directly in
each other's currencies to maintain bilateral rates within agreed
margins.
Over the longer term a declining relative role for the dollar would
seem a natural consequence of a changing world situation. The U.S.
economy today accounts for a smaller share of world trade than it
did when the dollar-based system evolved, and the U.S. economy has
become relatively smaller. The European Economic Community's
GNP is almost the same size as that of the United States; the Japanese economy alone is almost half the size of the U.S. economy. The
relative preponderance of U.S. capital markets has also diminished.
The share of worldwide long-term funds (essentially bonds and equity issues) raised in the United States has declined from 45 percent in
the 1960s to 32 percent in 1978.
However, the evolution of the international monetary system from
a system based on the dollar to one based on a number of currencies
could be unsettling. The process of reserve and private portfolio diversification through which such an evolution would proceed requires
a gradual increase in the supply of assets denominated in foreign
currencies and a relative reduction in dollar-denominated assets. If
such shifts in relative supplies do not take place to match shifts in
demand, exchange markets would come under pressure. Furthermore, demand shifts may not always be gradual. Pressures for diversification are likely to become greater when expectations for a weaker
dollar are strongly held, and to be arrested when expectations for an
appreciation of the dollar predominate.
There are, however, certain constraints limiting the development
of an international role for other currencies. Private holders of liquid
dollar assets will continue to need these dollars to finance international transactions. Many holders of dollar assets also hold dollardenominated debts and would therefore increase their exposure to risk
by selling dollars. Official diversification on a large scale has not
taken place; and it is inhibited by the limited availability of suitable




178

alternative assets, as well as by the recognition that the attempt to
sell large quantities of dollars would weaken the dollar and hence
cause capital losses on remaining reserves.
Nevertheless it is possible that, if left to evolution, the process of
diversification could generate episodic downward pressure on the
dollar. Such a result might not be welcomed internationally if it tended to generate large current account surpluses for the United States;
and it would be unwelcome domestically if it increased inflationary
pressures.
It is also widely perceived that a multicurrency system—even without considering the transition costs—is far from ideal. Exchange rates
in such a system might be destabilized as a result of shifts in the
composition of reserve assets by central banks, or of attempted shifts
in private holdings. Transaction costs for both official and private
agents would be raised by the need to manage complex portfolios.
Such considerations have given rise to renewed interest in an alternative movement that would place greater reliance on a single international reserve asset, the special drawing right, in preference to the
development of a multicurrency reserve system. A number of steps
have been taken to strengthen the role of the SDR. Most recently the
International Monetary Fund has been considering the possible establishment of a substitution account into which countries could deposit dollars and perhaps other currencies and receive claims denominated in SDRs in exchange.
Such an account could not resolve all the issues raised by the current role of the dollar in the international monetary system. It would
not directly address, for example, the role of the dollar as the principal intervention currency. Countries would still need currencies for
intervention. SDR claims could only be used directly for intervention
if they were widely held in private portfolios and so could be sold
directly in foreign exchange markets to nonofficial participants, a
possibility that could be considered at a future stage of the evolution
of the SDR. In the near term, however, a substitution account would
establish a mechanism to reshape the trend toward a multicurrency
system in a form that did not destabilize exchange markets.
In October 1979 the Interim Committee of the International Monetary Fund agreed that a properly designed substitution account
could make a useful contribution to improving the international monetary system. A number of difficult and complex problems must be
addressed, however, before such an account can be established, and
it is not clear when or whether these issues can be resolved. They
will be the subject of continuing international discussion during the
coming year.




179

WORLD TRADE: PATTERNS AND ISSUES
The slower average rate of growth in the industrial world since
1973 and the more marked decline in the average growth of trade
over the same period have tended in general to intensify the difficulties of absorbing the continuing structural adjustments that trade
necessarily imposes. At the same time the large benefits that come
from open trade are less visible when markets are growing more
slowly. The challenges facing trade policy are difficult: to preserve,
and indeed enhance, an open trading system in the face of strengthened protectionist pressures; to accommodate and absorb the increasing ability of a number of developing countries to compete in a
widening range of product markets; and to ensure that market processes are not subverted as the primary determinants of evolving comparative advantage.
THE MULTILATERAL TRADE NEGOTIATIONS

The signing last December of the agreements reached in the
Tokyo Round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations strengthens the
framework for world trade at a critical time. This set of agreements is
an important commitment by industrial and developing nations to resolve current and future trade problems in ways that preserve the
benefits to world growth that derive from free trade.
The Tokyo Round agreements include significant reductions in tariff and nontariff barriers to trade, and they introduce through a series of codes a set of procedures designed to limit nontariff distortions of trade patterns. The United States and its trading partners
have made reciprocal tariff cuts; the U.S. reductions average about
30 percent, those of Japan 22 percent, and those of the European
Economic Community 27 percent. Negotiations have not been completed on a safeguards code to sharpen and clarify the conditions
under which exceptional relief action could be taken. Five major
codes, however, have been agreed upon in the Tokyo Round. The
government procurement code significantly improves the opportunities for suppliers to compete equally for government orders. The
agreement on standards should speed the certification of foreign
products. The agreement on customs valuation ensures more consistent practices and thus reduces the scope for offsetting tariff concessions by changes in valuation rules. The agreements on subsidies and
countervailing duties and on antidumping actions restrict the use of
subsidies and clarify the circumstances in which countervailing and
antidumping duties may be imposed.
These agreements may owe their greatest significance to the specific rules they establish to help regulate the process by which nontariff




180

barriers to trade are implemented. They emphasize the importance
of transparency—that is, making visible the requirements for licensing and bidding on contracts, and using explicit rather than arbitrary
measures to regulate imports when this is unavoidable. The role of
procedures is stressed; in practice, trade policy is made on a case-bycase basis, and procedural safeguards are needed to ensure that relevant information is brought to bear on any decisions. The agreements embody the realization that the processes whereby trade policy
is implemented must be considered fair by all signatories.
The agreements themselves do not guarantee success in resolving
these difficult and detailed nontariff issues. Only when they are applied in individual circumstances will the procedures specified in the
agreements reveal their adequacy. But in facing these questions
squarely, the parties to these agreements have made significant progress in the continuing effort to reduce barriers to trade and strengthen the rules under which trade and investment are conducted. The
agreements should improve markets for U.S. exports and help reduce
inflation by lowering our own import barriers.
SOURCES OF RISING PROTECTIONISM

Much needs to be done to consolidate the progress represented by
the Tokyo Round agreements. The growing interdependence of the
world economy and the increased frequency of shocks during the
past decade have led in recent years to a growing skepticism about
the benefits of trade. These doubts have several roots: the significant
increase in current account deficits following the oil price increase of
1973; the recession and associated high unemployment experienced
in many industrial countries for most of the last 5 years; the development of long-term structural difficulties in several leading industrial
sectors; and the rapid industrialization of a group of middle-income
developing countries, whose growing exports have increased competition in markets for certain manufactured goods.
Oil price increases in 1979 will give further impetus to calls for
greater protectionism. Current account deficits have already widened
substantially in a number of countries and are likely to be reduced at
a much slower rate than that which followed the 1974 oil price rise.
Individual countries may attempt to curtail imports and accelerate
penetration of foreign markets to pay for increasingly expensive oil.
The slower rate of growth of domestic markets over the next several
years will also invite actions to limit imports and to subsidize exports.
The need to adjust capacity and employment so as to reflect
changed patterns of world consumption and production became
acute in several sectors of the major industrial economies after the
1974-75 recession. The steel industry has begun the process, and its




181

experience suggests the difficult choices that must be made in determining the burden of adjustment within and among countries. The
shipbuilding industry has completed somewhat more of the requisite
adjustment of capacity and employment. The automobile industry is
in the early stages of a complex rationalization and consolidation. As
the adjustments continue, the temptation will be great to put off the
difficult choices by limiting imports.
Calls for higher import barriers will intensify as industrialization
continues in a number of developing countries. Though accelerated
growth in these countries began in the 1960s, the exports integral to
the process aroused concern in the major industrial countries only
during the period of rising unemployment after the 1974-75 recession. They can be expected to occasion continuing concern in the
near future.
The world economy has witnessed several instances of rapid industrialization earlier in the postwar period. Italy in the 1960s is a particularly good example. Such developments in part reflect the exploitation of significant cost advantages in the use of labor or other resources. In part they are a natural consequence of the maturation of
product design and technology, which allows production to be transferred from more industrialized countries to regions that were initially served by exports. These regions subsequently become able to export back to the industrialized countries, or to third countries. In recent years this cycle has accelerated. Technology has been diffused
more quickly, capital has moved more rapidly, and labor skills have
grown impressively outside the major industrial countries. The international spread of production processes by transnational companies
has also quickened the cycle, particularly for newly industrializing
countries enjoying political stability.
The industrial countries, whose own innovations triggered this
process, have responded by focusing production toward more sophisticated, knowledge-intensive products, the direction in which their
comparative advantage is evolving. Problems of adjustment have occurred, in particular because the increases in exports from the newly
industrializing countries have been concentrated in a few very narrow
product lines, such as certain textiles, specific standardized items of
electronic equipment, or footwear. In the aggregate the share of exports from newly industrializing countries to OECD countries is still
quite small. Furthermore most of the former countries, using the
debt-servicing capability that rapid export growth provides, have increased their imports by even larger amounts. Thus increased exports by these countries to OECD countries have been more than
matched by an increased flow of goods (especially capital equipment)
and services in the opposite direction.




182

NEEDED RESPONSES

In developing policies to address these problems one must take
into account a number of important considerations. The first is that
protection, even when it appears attractive from the point of view of
an individual country, is very costly to all countries—including the
one initiating protection—once the likely retaliatory responses of
other countries are taken into account. Trade actions, when judged
necessary, must therefore be implemented in ways that minimize the
risk of an escalating retaliatory cycle. The emphasis on transparency
and procedural safeguards in the Tokyo Round agreements is important in this regard.
Another consideration is that the counterpart to the adjustment
costs imposed on some industries that are facing increased competition from abroad is the benefit to consumers from cheaper goods
and the benefit to the nation from lower inflation. In assessing the
appropriateness of trade actions, one must weigh such costs and
benefits. The increased use of direct or indirect export subsidies by
many countries creates particularly difficult problems in this regard.
In the short run, subsidies provide importing countries with bargainpriced goods. In the longer run, however, the adjustments that the
subsidies induce are likely to be generally harmful. A country that adjusts out of a sector in which its underlying comparative advantage is
favorable, because foreign subsidies have made the sector appear less
competitive, will ultimately face higher prices if foreign subsidies are
removed in the future, or if the market power that subsidies promote
is later used to extract monopoly rents. Because, in the long run, export subsidies reduce the efficiency with which resources are allocated globally, such subsidies are undesirable. Where foreign subsidies create injury to domestic sectors, countervailing action may
therefore be justified to assure an appropriate worldwide pattern of
production.
A final important point is that, over the longer term, expanding
imports will be matched by a concomitant growth of export markets
through the adjustment process. The loss of jobs in sectors of declining comparative advantage will be offset by the growth of new jobs in
higher-wage, high-technology industries. The principal focus of trade
policy must therefore be on adjustment not preservation. Only in this
way can foreign trade approach its potential for improving productivity and reducing inflation.




183




Appendix A
REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES
OF THE
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING 1979




185




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,

Washington, D.C., December 31, 1979.
MR. PRESIDENT:

The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year 1979 in accordance with the requirements of the Congress, as set forth in section 10(d) of the Employment Act of 1946 as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act of 1978.
Cordially,
CHARLES L. SCHULTZE, Chairman




LYLE E. GRAMLEY
GEORGE C. EADS

187




Report to the President on the Activities of the
Council of Economic Advisers during 1979
The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of 1946 to provide economic analysis and advice to the
President and thus to assist in the development and implementation
of national economic policies. The Council also advises the President
with regard to decisions on other matters that affect the health and
operations of the Nation's economy.
With the enactment of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth
Act of 1978—the Humphrey-Hawkins Act—the chartering legislation
of the Council of Economic Advisers was substantially revised for the
first time since 1946. This revision left unchanged the basic mission
of the Council of Economic Advisers but created a new framework
for the government's pursuit of its economic policies. This act was
discussed in detail in the 1979 Report of the Council.
Charles L. Schultze, Chairman, and Lyle E. Gramley, Member, continued to serve in these positions throughout 1979. On February 4,
1979, William D. Nordhaus, Member, resigned to return to Yale University, where he is Professor of Economics and a member of the
Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics. On June 6, 1979,
George C. Eads became a Member of the Council. He was formerly
Director of the Regulatory Policies and Institutions Program of the
Rand Corporation.
RESPONSIBILITIES
Since its creation the responsibilities of the Council of Economic
Advisers have grown steadily as new economic problems placed new
demands on the Council and its staff. Over the last decade the Council's activities have broadened with the growing recognition that
many "noneconomic" decisions have major consequences for our
economy. Today the Council is responsible for advising the President
not only on Federal fiscal policies but also on regulation and regulatory reform, energy policies, and international economic policies.


294-289


189
0 - 8 0 - 1 3

Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below:
Name
Edwin G. Nourse
Leon H. Keyserling

John D. Clark
Roy Blough
Robert C. Turner
Arthur F. Burns
Neil H. Jacoby
Walter W. Stewart
Raymond J. Saulnier
Joseph S. Davis
Paul W. McCracken
Karl Brandt..
Henry C. Wallich
Walter W. Heller
James Tobin
<ermit Gordon
Gardner Ackley
John P. Lewis
Otto Eckstein
Arthur M. Okun
James S. Duesenberry
Merton J. Peck
Warren L Smith
Paul W. McCracken
Hendrik S. Houthakker
Herbert Stein
Ezra Solomon
Marina v.N. Whitman
Gary L Seevers
William J. Fellner
Alan Greenspan
Paul W. MacAvoy
Burton G. Malkiel
William 0. Nordhaus

Position

Oath of office date

Chairman
Vice Chairman
Acting Chairman
Chairman
Member
Vice Chairman
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member

August 9, 1946
August 9, 1949
November 2, 1949
May 10, 1950
August 9, 1946
May 10, 1950
June 29, 1950
September 8, 1952
March 19, 1953
September 15, 1953
December 2, 1953
April 4, 1955
December 3, 1956....
May 2, 1955
December 3, 1956....
November 1, 1958....
May 7, 1959
January 29, 1961
January 29 1961
January 29, 1961
August 3, 1962
November 16, 1964.
May 17, 1963
September 2, 1964..
November 16, 1964.
February 15, 1968...
February 2, 1966
February 15, 1968....
July 1, 1968
February 4, 1969
February 4, 1969
February 4, 1969
January 1, 1972
September 9 1971
March 13 1972
July 23, 1973
October 3 1 , 1973
September 4, 1974
June 13, 1975
July 22, 1975
March 18, 1977

Separation date
November 1, 1949.

January 20, 1953.
February 11, 1953.
August 20, 1952.
January 20, 1953.
December 1, 1956.
February 9, 1955.
April 29, 1955.
January 20, 1961.
October 3 1 , 1958.
January 3 1 , 1959.
January 20, 1961.
January 20, 1961.
November 15, 1964.
July 3 1 , 1962.
December 27, 1962.
February 15, 1968.
August 3 1 , 1964.
February 1, 1966.
January 20, 1969.
June 30, 1968.
January 20, 1969.
January 20, 1969.
December 3 1 , 1971.
July 15, 1971.
August 3 1 , 1974.
March 26 1973
August 15, 1973.
April 15, 1975.
February 25, 1975.
January 20, 1977.
November 15, 1976.
January 20, 1977.
February 4, 1979.

MACROECONOMIC POLICIES
From the outset the Council's fundamental role has been to advise
the President on comprehensive economic policies designed to
achieve the government's objectives for employment, output, and
price stability. To fulfill this responsibility the Council develops economic forecasts several times each year with the assistance of an
Interagency Forecasting Committee. The members of this Committee
include, in addition to the Council, representatives from the Office of
Management and Budget and the Departments of the Treasury,
Commerce, and Labor. This group, which is chaired by a Member of
the Council, meets to analyze the outlook for individual sectors of
the economy and to develop detailed economic forecasts for the period immediately ahead. The Chairman of the Council presents these
forecasts to the Economic Policy Group (EPG), which is made up of
the President's principal economic advisers and meets each week to
discuss and develop the Administration's proposals touching on economic policy. The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers is
a member of the EPG and of its steering group.




190

In the final months of each year, during the preparation of the
President's annual budget, the Council works with other members of
the EPG to develop and present to the President proposals for the
stance and structure of Federal fiscal policies during the coming fiscal year. The Council monitors the progress of the economy and offers advice on when changes in fiscal policies are in order. Advising
the President on macroeconomic policy has remained one of the
Council's major responsibilities.
In addition, the Council has been heavily involved in the anti-inflation program, including the design of the second-year standards and
the discussions with organized labor concerning the National Accord.
The Chairman of the Council also chairs the Interagency Committee on Housing and Housing Finance. In 1979 the Council coordinated efforts to ascertain the impact of the October change in monetary policy on the housing market and prepared a report to the EPG
and the President on the available means for dealing with problems
of housing finance.
MICROECONOMIC POLICIES
Over the years the Council of Economic Advisers has become increasingly involved in the analysis of microeconomic issues—those
economic developments and policy actions that affect individual industries, markets, or sectors of the economy. In 1979 the Council
took part in formulating and articulating the Administration's policies
on agriculture, energy, health insurance, hospital cost containment,
youth employment, welfare reform, regulatory reform, and international trade.
In 1979 the Council continued to chair the interagency Regulatory
Analysis Review Group (RARG) created late in 1977 to review selected analyses of the economic effects of major regulatory proposals.
The President has ordered that each major regulatory proposal issued by a nonindependent regulatory agency must be accompanied
by a regulatory analysis. The analysis is to be developed by the agency originating the proposal and made available in draft form for public comment before the final regulation takes effect. During the period for public comment the Regulatory Analysis Review Group evaluates a select few of these regulatory analyses, and its appraisal is filed
in the agency's record of public comment.
In 1979 five regulations were reviewed by RARG: the Environmental Protection Agency's hazardous waste standards and new source
performance standards for electric utility plants; the Department of
Energy's proposed and interim final coal conversion regulations for
utilites and industrial boilers; and the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare's proposal for labeling to accompany prescription




191

drugs. At year's end reports were being prepared reviewing the Environmental Protection Agency's air carcinogen policy; its guidelines
for water effluents in the leather-tanning industry; and the Department of Energy's building-energy performance standards. The Council's staff served as part of the analytic staff for the RARG and prepared a number of the review group's comments. The Council and
the staff also actively contributed to the continuing progress of the
Administration's legislative proposals for regulation reform.
The Council had a strong role in the development and presentation of the Administration's energy policy initiatives, especially these:
phased decontrol, the windfall profits tax, low-income energy assistance, and the Energy Security Corporation. The Chairman serves as
a member of the Executive Committee of the Energy Coordinating
Committee.
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES
During 1979 the Council of Economic Advisers continued to take
an active part in international economic affairs. The Chairman of the
Council was elected to serve another year as Chairman of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). As such, he chaired two meetings of
the Committee, which consists of senior economic officials from
OECD member governments. The Chairman also coordinated the
work of a group of senior officials from other countries in drafting a
common position paper on economic policy issues for the Tokyo
Summit.
The Council is active in the OECD Economic Policy Committee's
working parties on inflation, balance of payments adjustment, and
medium-term growth. A Member of the Council chairs a task force of
the special high-level group on positive adjustment policies. Council
Members or staff economists represent the U.S. Government at periodic meetings of these working parties during the year.
Economic developments in most Western nations were strongly affected in 1979 by the continued sharp rise in energy prices and the
uncertainty of supplies. Analysis of the impacts of, and appropriate
responses to, the energy price and supply situation dominated many
OECD meetings. The Council assisted in developing the United
States position on energy issues for the Tokyo Summit and in preparing for the International Energy Agency Ministerial Meeting, including the setting of an oil import quota.
PUBLIC INFORMATION
The annual Economic Report is the principal medium through which
the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an
important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration's




192

economic policies, both domestic and international. Distribution of
the Report in recent years has averaged about 50,000 copies. The
Council also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic
Indicators, a publication prepared by the Council's Statistical Office,
under the supervision of Catherine H. Furlong. The Joint Economic
Committee issues the Indicators, which has a distribution of approximately 10,000 copies. Information is also provided to members of
the public through speeches and other public appearances by the
Chairman, Members, and staff economists of the Council. In 1979
the Chairman and Members made 25 appearances before Committees of the Congress to testify on the Administration's economic policies.
ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL
OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN
The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council's
views to the President. This duty is performed through discussions
with the President and written reports on economic developments.
The Chairman also represents the Council at Cabinet meetings and
at many other formal and informal meetings of government officials.
He exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff.
COUNCIL MEMBERS
The two Council Members directly supervise the work of the
Council's professional staff and are responsible for all subject matter
covered by the Council. They represent the Council at numerous
meetings of public and private groups, and they assume major responsibility for the Council's involvement in the activities of the government that affect the economy.
The Chairman and the Council Members work as a team on most
policy issues. Operationally, however, responsibility over major topics
of concern is divided between the two Members. Mr. Gramley has
continued to take primary responsibility for macroeconomic analysis,
including international monetary developments and the preparation
of economic forecasts; and for labor market policies. Mr. Eads has
supervised microeconomic analysis, including analysis of policies related to such matters as energy, agriculture, social welfare, and international trade; and the overseeing of regulatory reform activities.
PROFESSIONAL STAFF
At the end of 1979 the professional staff consisted of the Special
Assistant to the Chairman, 10 senior staff economists, 2 staff economists, 1 statistician, and 5 junior staff economists.




193

The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year
were:
Susan J. Irving

Special Assistant to the Chairman
Senior Staff Economists

William T. Boehm
Paul N. Courant
K. Burke Dillon
David Harrison, Jr
Val L. Koromzay
David S. McClain
David C. Munro
V. Vance Roley
Daniel H. Saks
Charles L. Trozzo

Agriculture and Food Policy
Public Finance, Taxes, State and Local Finance, Social Security, Health, and Welfare
Finance, Money, Housing, and Urban Policy
Regulation and Natural Resources
International Financial and Economic Developments
Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting, Fiscal Policy, and International Trade
Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting,
and Energy
Investment, Research and Development, and
Potential GNP
Labor Market and Anti-Inflation Policies, and
Education
Regulation and Energy
Statistician

Catherine H. Furlong

Senior Statistician
Staff Economists

Michael J. McKee

Kate Stith Pressman

Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting,
Productivity, Prices, and Anti-Inflation Policies
Regulation and Energy
Junior Economists

David W. Berson
Lisa L. Blum
Stephen G. Cecchetti
Judith R. Gelman
Matthew D. Shapiro

Public Finance
International Economic Developments and
Trade
Labor Market Policies
Regulation and Health
Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting

Catherine H. Furlong, Senior Statistician, continued to be in
charge of the Council's Statistical Office. Mrs. Furlong has primary
responsibility for managing the Council's statistical information system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the
preparation of all statistical matter in the Economic Report. She also




194

oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda, testimony, and
speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro and Earnestine Reid assist Mrs. Furlong.
In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff. Also called on for special assistance in connection with the Report were Dorothy L. Reid and
Dorothy Bagovich, former members of the Council's staff.
SUPPORTING STAFF
The Administrative Office of the Council of Economic Advisers
provides general support for the Council's activities. Nancy F. Skidmore, Administrative Officer, prepares and analyzes the Council's
budget and provides general administrative services.
Elizabeth A. Kaminski, Staff Assistant to the Council, handles general personnel management, coordinates the schedule for the Economic Report, and provides general assistance to the Council and the Special Assistant in the management of the Council's activities.
Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council
Members during 1979 were Patricia A. Lee, Linda A. Reilly, Lisa A.
Stockdale, and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional
staff were Catherine Fibich, Bessie M. Lafakis, Joyce A. Pilkerton,
Margaret L. Snyder, and Lillie M. Sturniolo. Bettye T. Siegel provided secretarial assistance in connection with the Report. Robert L.
Gilliam served as a clerk during the summer months. Michael J. Handel served as an intern during preparation of the Report.
DEPARTURES
The Council's professional staff members are in most cases on
leave from universities, other government agencies, or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to 1 or 2
years. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year were
Thomas C. Earley (Schnittker Associates), Robert J. Flanagan (Stanford University), Steven W. Kohlhagen (University of California,
Berkeley), Susan J. Lepper (Senate Budget Committee), David S. Sibley (Civil Aeronautics Board), Lawrence J. White (New York University), David A. Wyss (Data Resources, Inc.), and John M. Yinger (Harvard University). Robert E. Litan, staff economist, resigned to accept
a position with Arnold and Porter. Peter G. Gould also resigned from
the position of Special Assistant to the Chairman to accept a position
with the Department of Commerce.
Junior economists who resigned in 1979 were James P. Luckett
(Brookings Institution), Robert S. Lurie (Yale University), Frederick
W. McKinney (Yale University), Elizabeth A. Savoca (University of
California, Berkeley), and Wanda S. Tseng (International Monetary
Fund).
Florence T. Torrison, secretary to the Chairman, also resigned
from the Council staff.




195




Appendix B
STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME,
EMPLOYMENT, AND PRODUCTION




197




CONTENTS
NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE:
B-l.
Gross national product, 1929-79
B-2.
Gross national product in 1972 dollars, 1929-79
B-3.
Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-79
B-4.
Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures for gross national product and gross domestic product, 1929-79
B-5.
Gross national product by industry in 1972 dollars, 1947-78
B-6.
Gross national product by major type of product, 1929-79
B-7.
Gross national product by major type of product in 1972 dollars,
1929-79
B-8.
Gross national product: Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups, 1929-79
B-9.
Gross national product by sector, 1929-79
B-10. Gross national product by sector in 1972 dollars, 1929-79
B-ll. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business,
1929-79
B-l2. Output, costs, and profits of nonfinancial corporate business,
1948-79
B-13. Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-79
B-14. Gross private domestic investment, 1929-79
B-15. Inventories and final sales of business, 1946-79
B-16. Inventories and final sales of business in 1972 dollars, 1947-79
B-l7. Relation of gross national product and national income, 1929-79 ...
B-18. Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-79
B-19. National income by type of income, 1929-79
B-20. Sources of personal income, 1929-79
B-21. Disposition of personal income, 1929-79
B-22. Total and per capital disposable personal income and personal
consumption expenditures in current and 1972 dollars, 1929-79.
B-23. Gross saving and investment, 1929-79
B-24. Saving by individuals, 1946-79
B-25. Money income (in 1978 dollars) and poverty status of families and
unrelated individuals by race of head, 1947-78
POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY:
B-26. Population by age groups, 1929-79
B-27. Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-79
B-28. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age, 1947-79..
B-29. Selected employment and unemployment data, 1948-79
B-30. Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic, 1948-79
B-31. Unemployment by duration, 1947-79
B-32. Unemployment by reason, 1967-79
B-33. Unemployment insurance programs, selected data, 1946-79




199

Page

203
204
206
208
209
210
211
212
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
226
228
229
230
231
232
233
234
236
237
238
239
240
241

POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY—Cont'd
B-34. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments,
^aSe
1929-79
242
B-35. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries, 1947-79
244
B-36. Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries, 1947-79
245
B-37. Productivity and related data, private business sector, 1947-79
246
B-38. Changes in productivity and related data, private business sector,
1948-79
247
PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY:
B-39. Industrial production indexes, major industry divisions, 1929-79....
B-40. Industrial production indexes, market groupings, 1947-79
B-41. Industrial production indexes, selected manufactures, 1947-79
B-42. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing, 1948-79
B-43. New construction activity, 1929-79
B-44. New housing units started and authorized, 1959-79
B-45. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1947-80
B-46. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade, 1947-79
B-47. Manufacturers' shipments and inventories, 1947-79
B-48. Manufacturers' new and unfilled orders, 1947-79
PRICES:
B-49.
B-50.
B-51.

Consumer price indexes, major expenditure classes, 1929-79
Consumer price indexes, selected expenditure classes, 1939-79
Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups,
1939-79
B-52. Changes in consumer price indexes, major groups, 1948-79
B-53. Changes in special consumer price indexes, 1958-79
B-54. Producer price indexes by stage of processing, 1947-79
B-55. Producer price indexes by stage of processing, special groups,
1974-79
B-56. Producer price indexes by major commodity groups, 1929-79
B-57. Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods, 1948-79
MONEY STOCK, CREDIT, AND FINANCE:
B-58. Money stock measures, 1953-79
B-59. Commercial bank loans and investments, 1939-79
B-60. Liquid asset holdings of private domestic nonfinancial investors,
1952-79
B-61. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors,
1971-79
B-62. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves, 1929-79...
B-63. Aggregate reserves and deposits of member banks, 1959-79
B-64. Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-79
B-65. Consumer credit outstanding and net change, 1950-79
B-66. Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated, 1950-79
B-67. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing,
1939-79
B-68. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder, 1939-79




200

248
249
250
251
252
254
255
256
257
258
259
260
262
263
264
265
267
268
270
271
272
273
274
276
277
278
280
281
282
283

GOVERNMENT FINANCE:
B-69. Federal budget receipts, outlays, and debt, fiscal years 1970-81
B-70. Federal budget receipts and outlays, fiscal years 1929-81
B-71. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the
national income and product accounts to the unified budget,
1979-81
B-72. Government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts, 1929-79
B-73. Federal Government receipts and expenditures, national income
and product accounts, 1953-81
B-74. State and local government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts, 1946-79
B-75. State and local government revenues and expenditures, selected
fiscal years, 1927-77
B-76. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation,
1967-79
B-77. Estimated ownership of public debt securities, 1967-79
B-78. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors, 1967-79.
CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE:
B-79. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption
adjustments, 1946-79
B-80. Corporate profits by industry, 1929-79
B-81. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries, 1929-79
B-82. Sales, profits, and stockholders' equity, all manufacturing corporations, 1950-79
B-83. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales,
all manufacturing corporations, 1947-79
B-84. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales,
all manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1978-79
B-85. Determinants of business fixed investment, 1955-79
B-86. Sources and uses of funds, nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business, 1946-79
B-87. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations, 1939-79
B-88. State and municipal and corporate securities offered, 1934-79
B-89. Common stock prices and yields, 1949-79
B-90. Business formation and business failures, 1929-79
AGRICULTURE:
B-91. Income of farm people and farmers, 1929-79
B-92. Farm output and productivity indexes, 1929-79
B-93. Farm input use, selected inputs, 1929-79
B-94. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, 1940-79
B-95. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities, 1940-79
B-96. Balance sheet of the farming sector, 1929-80
INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS:
B-97. Exchange rates, 1973-79
B-98. U.S. international transactions, 1946-79
B-99. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use
category, 1965-79




201

Page

284
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
293
294

295
296
298
300
301
302
303
304
305
306
307
308
309
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
318

INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS—Continued
B-100. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area, 1973-79
B-101. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups,
1958-79
B-102. International investment position of the United States at year-end,
selected years, 1970-78
B-103. World trade: Exports and imports, 1965, 1970, and 1975-79
B-104. World trade balance and current account balances, 1965, 1970,
and 1975-79
B-105. International reserves, selected years, 1952-79
B-106. Growth rates in real gross national product, 1960-79
B-107. Industrial production and unemployment rate, major industrial
countries, 1960-79
B-108. Consumer prices and hourly compensation, major industrial countries, 1960-79
B-109. Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance, July 1,
1945 to December 31, 1978

General Notes
Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding.
Unless otherwise noted, all dollar figures are in current dollars.
Symbols used:
p
Preliminary.
—Not available (also, not applicable).




202

Page

319
320
321
322
323
324
325
326
327
328

NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE
TABLE B-l.—Gross national product, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net exports of goods and
services
Year or
quarter

Gross
national
product

Gross
Personal
private
consumption domestic
investexpendiment
tures

Net
exports

Government purchases of goods and
services
Federal

Exports

Imports

Total
Total

National
defensel

Nondefense

State
and
local

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
national
product2

7.4

103.4

77.3

16.2

1.1

7.0

5.9

8.8

1.4

55.8

45.8

1.4

.4

2.4

2.0

8.2

2.1

1939

90.8

67.0

9.3

1.1

4.4

3.4

13.5

5.2

1.2

3.9

8.3

6.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

100.0
124.9
158.3
192.0
210.5
212.3
209.6
232.8
259.1
258.0

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

13.1
17.9
9.9
5.8
7.2
10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

1.7
1.3
.0
-2.0
-1.8
-.6
7.6
11.6
6.5
6.2

5.4
5.9
4.8
4.4
5.3
7.2
14.8
19.8
16.9
15.9

3.6
4.6
4.8
6.5
7.1
7.8
7.2
8.2
10.4
9.6

14.2
24.9
59.8
88.9
97.0
82.8
27.5
25.5
32.0
38.4

6.1
16.9
52.0
81.3
89.4
74.6
17.6
12.7
16.7
20.4

2.2
13.7
49.4
79.7
87.4
73.5
14.8
9.0
10.7
13.2

3.9
3.2
2.6
1.6
2.0
1.1
2.8
3.7
6.0
7.2

8.1
8.0
7.8
7.5
7.6
8.2
9.9
12.8
15.3
18.0

10.1
24.9
26.8
21.3
9.6
.9
-1.3
11.1
11.3
-.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.2
330.2
347.2
366.1
366.3
399.3
420.7
442.8
448.9
486.5

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
77.6

1.9
3.8
2.4
.6
2.0
2.2
4.3
6.1
2.5
.6

13.9
18.9
18.2
17.1
18.0
20.0
23.9
26.7
23.3
23.7

12.0
15.1
15.8
16.6
16.0
17.8
19.6
20.7
20.8
23.2

38.5
60.1
75.6
82.5
75.8
75.0
79.4
87.1
95.0
97.6

18.7
38.3
52.4
57.5
47.9
44.5
45.9
50.0
53.9
53.9

14.0
33.5
45.8
48.6
41.1
38.4
40.2
44.0
45.6
45.6

4.7
4.8
6.5
8.9
6.8
6.0
5.7
5.9
8.3
8.3

19.8
21.8
23.2
25.0
27.8
30.6
33.5
37.1
41.1
43.7

10.9
15.4
5.1
5.5
.0
9.0
5.4
5.2
1.4
8.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.0
523.3
563.8
594.7
635.7
688.1
753.0
796.3
868.5
935.5

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.4
430.2
464.8
490.4
535.9
579.7

76.4
74.3
85.2
90.2
96.6
112.0
124.5
120.8
131.5
146.2

4.4
5.8
5.4
6.3
8.9
7.6
5.1
4.9
2.3
1.8

27.6
28.9
30.6
32.7
37.4
39.5
42.8
45.6
49.9
54.7

23.2
23.1
25.2
26.4
28.4
32.0
37.7
40.6
47.7
52.9

100.3
108.2
118.0
123.7
129.8
138.4
158.7
180.2
198.7
207.9

53.7
57.4
63.7
64.6
65.2
67.3
78.8
90.9
98.0
97.5

44.5
47.0
51.1
50.3
49.0
49.4
60.3
71.5
76.9
76.3

ST.3
10.4
12.7
14.3
16.2
17.8
18.5
19.5
21.2
21.2

46.5
50.8
54.3
59.0
64.6
71.1
79.8
89.3
100.7
110.4

4.0
3.4
7.7
5.5
6.9
8.2
9.4
5.8
9.1
7.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 *

982.4
1,063.4
1,171.1
1,306.6
1,412.9
1,528.8
1,702.2
1,899.5
2,127.6
2,368.5

618.8
668.2
733.0
809.9
889.6
979.1
1,089.9
1,210.0
1,350.8
1,509.8

140.8
160.0
188.3
220.0
214.6
190.9
243.0
303.3
351.5
386.2

3.9
1.6
-3.3
7.1
6.0
20.4
8.0
-9.9
-10.3
-3.5

62.5
65.6
72.7
101.6
137.9
147.3
163.3
175.9
207.2
257.4

-58.5
64.0
75.9
94.4
131.9
126.9
155.4
185.8
217.5
260.9

218.9
233.7
253.1
269.5
302.7
338.4
361.3
396.2
435.6
476.1

95.6
96.2
102.1
102.2
111.1
123.1
129.7
144.4
152.6
166.3

73.5
70.2
73.5
73.5
77.0
83.7
86.4
93.7
99.0
108.3

22.1
26.0
28.6
28.7
34.1
39.4
43.3
50.6
53.6
58.0

123.2
137.5
151.0
167.3
191.5
215.4
231.6
251.8
283.0
309.8

5.0
8.2
10.1
11.6
8.1
8.2
11.3
11.6
12.0
11.3

1977.
1
II
III
I
V

1,820.2
1,876.0
1,930.5
1,971.3

1,169.1
1,190.5
1,220.6
1,259.7

280.4
300.0
315.7
316.9

-9.2
-6.0
-6.3
-18.1

170.5
178.6
180.1
174.2

179.8
184.7
186.4
192.3

380.0
391.6
400.5
412.8

138.2
142.6
145.6
151.2

91.6
93.1
93.9
96.4

46.6
49.5
51.7
54.8

241.8
249.0
254.9
261.6

15.4
12.8
12.1
8.7

1978
1
II
III
I
V

2,011.3
2,104.2
2,159.6
2,235.2

1,287.2
1,331.2
1,369.3
1,415.4

327.0
352.3
356.2
370.5

-22.2
-7.6
-6.8
-4.5

184.4
205.7
213.8
224.9

206.6
213.3
220.6
229.4

419.4
428.3
440.9
453.8

150.9
148.2
152.3
159.0

97.6
98.2
99.0
101.2

53.3
50.0
53.3
57.8

268.5
280.1
288.6
294.8

8.4
19.8
10.9
14.8

1979
1
II
III
IV P

2,292.1
2,329.8
2,396.5
2,455.8

1,454.2
1,475.9
1,528.6
1,580.4

373.8
395.4
392.3
383.3

4.0
-8.1
-2.3
-7.7

238.5
243.7
267.3
280.0

234.4
251.9
269.5
287.7

460.1
466.6
477.8
499.8

163.6
161.7
162.9
177.0

103.4
106.0
109.0
114.6

60.2
55.7
53.9
62.4

296.5
304.9
314.9
322.8

10.6
6.7
11.9
10.3

1929...
1933

.. . .

6.1

-4.2

1
This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in "The Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal
Year 1981."
2
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




203

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product in 1972 dollars, 1929-79
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross
national
product

Year or quarter

Gross private domestic investment
Fixed investment

Tntal
IOI3I

Durable
nrtnric
gooos

NonHiirahlo
auraDie Services
goods

Tntal
i oiai

Nonresidential
Total

Total

Structures

Producers'
durable
equipment
16.4

1929

314.6

215.6

21.5

98.1

96.1

55.9

51.3

37.0

20.6

1933

222.1

170.7

10.9

82.9

76.8

8.4

13.3

10.4

4.9

5.5

1939

318.8

220.3

19.1

115.1

86.1

33.6

32.0

20.7

8.6

12.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

343.3
398.5
460.3
530.6
568.6
560.0
476.9
~468.3
487.7
490.7

230.4
244.1
241.7
248.7
255.7
271.4
301.4
306.2
312.8
320.0

21.8
24.7
16.3
14.5
13.5
14.8
25.8
30.6
33.1
36.3

119.9
127.6
129.9
134.0
139.4
150.3
158.9
154.8
155.0
157.4

88.7
91.8
95.5
100.1
102.7
106.3
116.7
120.8
124.6
126.4

44.6
55.8
29.6
18.1
19.8
27.8
71.0
70.1
82.3
65.6

38.4
43.8
24.4
18.0
22.1
31.4
58.8
70.4
76.8
70.0

25.7
30.3
17.6
14.0
18.7
27.6
42.0
48.9
51.0
46.0

9.9
11.9
6.7
4.2
5.5
8.3
18.8
17.3
18.4
17.8

15.8
18.5
10.9
9.8
13.2
19.2
23.2
31.6
32.7
28.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

533.5
576.5
598.5
621.8
613.7
654.8
668.8
680.9
679.5
720.4

338.1
342.3
350.9
364.2
370.9
395.1
406.3
414.7
419.0
441.5

43.4
39.9
38.9
43.1
43.5
52.2
49.8
49.7
46.4
51.8

161.8
165.3
171.2
175.7
177.0
185.4
191.6
194.9
196.8
205.0

132.8
137.1
140.8
145.5
150.4
157.5
164.9
170.2
175.8
184.7

93.7
94.1
83.2
85.6
83.4
104.1
102.9
97.2
87.7
107.4

83.2
80.4
78.9
84.1
85.6
96.3
97.1
95.7
89.6
101.0

50.0
52.9
52.1
56.3
55.4
61.2
65.2
66.0
58.9
62.9

19.1
20.6
20.6
22.5
23.5
25.3
28.1
28.1
26.4
26.8

30.9
32.3
31.5
33.8
31.8
35.9
37.1
37.9
32.5
36.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

736.8
755.3
799.1
830.7
874.4
925.9
981.0
1,007.7
1,051.8
1,078.8

453.0
462.2
482.9
501.4
528.7
558.1
586.1
603.2
633.4
655.4

52.5
50.3
55.7
60.7
65.7
73.4
79.0
79.7
88.2
91.9

208.2
211.9
218.5
223.0
233.3
244.0
255.5
259.5
270.2
276.4

192.3
200.0
208.7
217.6
229.7
240.7
251.6
264.0
275.0
287.2

105.4
103.6
117.4
124.5
132.1
150.1
161.3
152.7
159.5
168.0

101.0
100.7
109.3
116.8
124.8
138.8
144.6
140.7
150.8
157.5

66.0
65.6
70.9
73.5
81.0
95.6
106.1
103.5
108.0
114.3

28.8
29.3
30.8
30.8
33.3
39.6
42.5
41.1
42.0
44.0

37.2
36.3
40.1
42.7
47.7
56.0
63.6
62.4
66.1
70.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

1,075.3
1,107.5
1,171.1
1,235.0
1,217.8
1,202.3
1,273.0
1,340.5
1,399.2
1,431.1

668.9
691.9
733.0
767.7
760.7
774.6
820.6
861.7
900.8
924.5

88.9
98.1
111.2
121.8
112.5
112.7
126.6
138.2
146.7
147.0

282.7
287.5
299.3
309.3
303.9
306.6
321.5
332.7
343.3
349.3

297.3
306.3
322.4
336.5
344.3
355.3
372.5
390.8
410.8
428.2

154.7
166.8
188.3
207.2
183.6
142.6
173.4
200.1
214.3
214.8

150.4
160.2
178.8
190.7
175.6
152.4
166.8
186.9
200.2
204.6

110.0
108.0
116.8
131.0
130.6
113.6
119.0
129.3
140.1
148.2

42.8
41.7
42.5
45.5
42.5
37.1
38.3
39.1
43.9
47.9

67.2
66.3
74.3
85.5
88.1
76.5
80.7
90.1
96.2
100.3

1,315.7
1,331.2
1,353.9
1,361.3

849.2
853.1
863.7
880.9

135.8
136.6
138.2
142.4

328.9
329.6
332.1
340.0

384.5
386.9
393.3
398.5

191.0
199.6
206.7
203.0

179.7
186.2
190.1
191.7

126.3
128.3
130.8
131.7

37.5
39.0
39.9
40.1

88.8
89.3
90.9
91.5

1,367.8
1,395.2
1,407.3
1,426.6

882.7
894.8
905.3
920.3

139.3
147.8
147.5
152.1

337.3
339.4
344.7
351.9

406.1
407.6
413.1
416.3

209.0
216.8
214.0
217.4

192.5
201.2
201.8
205.5

133.1
140.3
141.6
145.5

40.2
43.9
45.1
46.5

93.0
96.4
96.5
98.9

1,430.6
1,422.3
1,433.3
1,438.4

921.8
915 0
925.9
935.2

150.2
144 8
146 9
146.0

3481
3441
349.2
356.0

423 5
4261
429 9
433.2

217 2
2217
214 2
206.2

204 9
203 5
207 1
203.0

147 2
146 9
150 7
148.0

45.8
47 9
48*7
49.3

101.3
99 C
1019
98.7

1977:
|
II
Ill
I
V
1978:
1
II
III
I
V
1979:
1
I
I
III

IV

'.

See next page for continuation of table.




204

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product in 1972 dollars, 1929-79—Continued
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net exports of goods and
services

Gross private domestic investmentcontinued

Government purchases of
goods and services

Fixed investment—continued
Residential

Year or
quarter

Nonfarm
Total

structures

structures

Producers'
durable
equipment

Farm

Change
in
business
inventories

Net
exports

Exports

Imports

Total

Federal

State
and
local

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
n<sti Anol
national
product *

33.8

1929

14.3

13.6

0.6

0.1

4.6

2.2

15.6

13.4

40.9

7.0

1933

2.9

2.6

.2

.1

-4.9

.2

9.4

9.3

42.8

10.9

31.9

-2.2

1939

11.3

10.6

.6

.1

1.6

2.0

13.3

11.4

62.9

22.8

40.2

7.6

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

12.8
13.5
6.8
4.0
3.4
3.8
16.8
21.5
25.8
24.0

11.8
12.5
6.1
3.5
3.0
3.5
15.5
19.8
23.9
22.3

.8
.9
.6
.4
.4
.3
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.4

.1
.2
.1
.0
.0
.1
.2
.3
.3
.3

6.2
12.0
5.2
.1
-2.3
-3.6
12.2
-.2
5.5
-4.4

3.0
.8
-2.5
-7.3
-7.2
-4.5
11.6
16.6
8.5
8.8

14,6
14.7
10.3
9.0
10.0
13.5
26.1
30.2
24.2
24.2

11.5
14.0
12.8
16.3
17.3
18.0
14.6
13.6
15.7
15.4

65.2
97.7
191.5
271.2
300.3
265.3
93.0
75.4
84.1
96.2

26.7
61.0
157.4
239.6
269.7
233.7
58.2
36.1
42.4
48.9

38.5
36.7
34.1
31.6
30.6
31.6
34.7
39.3
41.8
47.4

7.7
16.1
15.5
15.3
7.1
-1.5
-14.8
-1.8
4.1
.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

33.2
27.5
26.8
27.8
30.2
35.1
31.9
29.7
30.6
38.1

31.5
25.9
25.3
26.3
28.8
33.8
30.4
28.3
29.2
36.5

1.3
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.1
.9
1.0
1.0
.9
1.0

.3
.3
.3
.3
.3
.4
.4
.4
.5
.6

10.6
13.7
4.3
1.5
-2.2
7.7
5.8
1.5
-1.8
6.5

4.0
7.4
4.9
2.0
4.5
4.7
7.3
8.9
3.5
.9

21.7
25.9
24.9
23.8
25.3
27.9
32.3
34.8
30.7
31.5

17.7
18.5
20.0
21.8
20.8
23.2
25.0
26.0
27.2
30.6

97.7
132.7
159.5
170.0
154.9
150.9
152.4
160.1
169.3
170.7

47.0
81.3
107.0
114.6
95.2
86.9
85.9
89.8
92.8
91.8

50.7
51.3
52.5
55.4
59.7
64.0
66.5
70.3
76.4
78.9

8.7
8.1
3.8
3.9
-1.3
6.7
2.1
1.8
-.2
6.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

35.0
35.1
38.4
43.2
43.8
43.2
38.5
37.2
42.8
43.2

33.7
33.6
36.9
41.7
42.2
41.6
36.9
35.5
41.1
41.5

.8
1.0
.9
.9
.9
.8
.9
.9
.8
.9

.5
.5
.6
.6
.7
.7
.8
.8
.9
.9

4.4
2.9
8.1
7.8
7.3
11.3
16.7
12.0
8.7
10.6

5.5
6.7
5.8
7.3
10.9
8.2
4.3
3.5
-.4
-1.3

35.8
37.0
39.6
42.2
47.8
49.1
51.6
54.2
58.5
62.2

30.3
30.3
33.9
35.0
36.9
41.0
47.3
50.7
58.9
63.5

172.9
182.8
193.1
197.6
202.7
209.6
229.3
248.3
259.2
256.7

90.8
95.6
103.1
102.2
100.6
100.5
112.5
125.3
128.3
121.8

82.0
87.1
90.0
95.4
102.1
109.1
116.8
123.1
130.9
134.9

2.3
2.5
5.8
4.0
5.3
5.9
5.9
2.7
4.4
2.6

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

40.4
52.2
62.0
59.7
45.0
38.8
47.8
57.7
60.1
56.5

38.9
50.5
60.3
57.9
43.0
37.2
46.0
55.5
57.7
54.1

.6
.7
.7
.5
.9
.7
.7
.9
1.0
.9

.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.1
.9
1.1
1.3
1.4
1.4

4.3
6.6
9.4
16.5
8.0
-9.8
6.6
13.1
14.1
10.2

1.4
-.6
-3.3
7.6
15.9
22.6
15.8
10.3
11.0
17.7

67.1
67.9
72.7
87.4
93.0
90.0
96.1
98.4
108.9
119.8

65.7
68.5
75.9
79.9
77.1
67.5
80.4
88.2
97.9
102.0

250.2
249.4
253.1
252.5
257.7
262.6
263.3
268.5
273.2
274.1

110.7
103.9
102.1
96.6
95.8
96.5
96.4
100.6
98.6
99.2

139.5
145.5
151.0
155.9
161.8
166.1
166.9
167.9
174.6
174.9

-.3
3.0
5.7
5.5
-1.4
-1.3
5.9
5.3
4.4
2.3

1977:
1
II
Ill
IV

53.5
57.9
59.3
60.1

51.2
55.7
57.0
58.0

1.0
1.0
1.0
.7

1.2
1.2
1.3
1.4

11.3
13.4
16.6
11.3

11.1
10.9
13.2
5.8

96.5
99.4
100.5
97.3

85.4
88.5
87.3
91.4

264.5
267.6
270.3
271.5

98.4
100.3
101.8
101.8

166.0
167.3
168.5
169.8

8.9
4.8
7.0
2.2

1978:
1
II
Ill
IV

59.4
60.9
60.2
60.0

56.8
58.6
57.7
57.6

1.1
.8
1.0
1.0

1.4
1.5
1.4
1.4

16.5
15.6
12.2
12.0

5.3
12.3
13.3
12.9

100.7
109.2
111.9
113.8

95.4
96.9
98.5
101.0

270.7
271.3
274.7
276.0

99.9
96.6
98.5
99.3

170.9
174.7
176.2
176.6

1.9
8.3
3.5
5.6

1979:
1
||
III
IV P

57.7
56.7
56.5
55.0

55.6
54.4
54.0
52.5

.8
.9
1.0
1.1

1.4
1.4
1.4
1.5

12.3
18.1
7.1
3.2

17.0
13.2
20.1
20.7

117.0
116.0
122.2
123.9

100.0
102.9
102.1
103.2

274.7
272.4
273.1
276.3

101.1
98.1
97.4
100.4

173.6
174.3
175.6
175.9

1.1
-2.3
3.1
1.4

1
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.


29»+-289


205
O - 80 -

T A B L E B-3.—Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-79
[Index numbers, 1972 = 100, except as noted; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]

Personal consumption expenditures

Year or quarter

Gross private domestic investment1
Fixed investment

Gross
national
productl
Total

.
Durable Nondurable
Services
goods
goods

Nonresidential
Total
Total

Structures

Producers
durable
equipment

1929

32.87

35.8

43.1

38.4

31.6

28.2

28.2

24.1

33.4

1933

25.14

26.8

31.7

26.8

26.1

22.4

22.8

19.1

26.2

1939

28.48

30.4

34.9

30.5

29.2

27.6

28.2

22.8

32.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

29.13
31.34
34.39
36.18
37.03
37.92
43.95
49.70
53.13
52.59

30.8
33.1
36.7
40.0
42.3
44.0
47.7
52.8
55.9
55.7

35.7
39.1
42.1
45.0
49.5
53.7
61.1
66.8
69.1
69.1

30.9
33.6
39.1
43.7
46.2
47.8
52.1
58.7
62.3
60.3

29.5
30.8
32.4
34.2
36.1
37.3
38.9
41.7
44.4
46.1

28.5
30.6
33.4
35.6
36.9
37.1
41.3
48.9
53.6
54.8

29.1
30.9
33.8
35.7
36.6
36.6
39.9
46.8
51.3
52.8

23.1
24.7
28.1
32.0
33.4
33.6
36.3
43.7
48.4
48.0

32.8
34.9
37.3
37.3
38.0
37.9
42.8
48.5
52.9
55.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

53.64
57.27
58.00
58.88
59.69
60.98
62.90
65.02
66.06
67.52

56.8
60.5
61.9
63.1
63.6
64.2
65.5
67.6
69.1
70.4

70.8
74.7
74.8
75.5
73.2
74.0
76.0
79.2
79.4
81.9

60.7
65.8
66.6
66.3
66.6
66.3
67.3
69.4
71.0
71.4

47.4
49.9
52.6
55.4
57.2
58.5
60.2
62.2
64.2
66.0

56.5
60.8
62.1
62.9
63.4
64.8
68.3
70.9
70.8
71.6

54.3
58.9
59.9
61.0
61.4
62.6
67.0
70.7
70.6
72.0

48.8
54.7
55.8
56.8
55.9
57.0
61.8
64.4
63.3
63.6

57.6
61.6
62.5
63.7
65.4
66.5
71.0
75.4
76.5
78.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

68.67
69.28
70.55
71.59
72.71
74.32
76.76
79.02
82.57
86.72

71.7
72.5
73.6
74.7
75.7
77.1
79.3
81.3
84.6
88.5

82.1
82.7
83.9
84.8
85.7
85.6
85.7
87.4
90.7
93.1

72.6
73.3
73.9
74.9
75.8
77.3
80.1
81.9
85.3
89.4

68.0
69.1
70.4
71.7
72.8
74.3
76.5
78.8
82.0
86.1

71.9
71.6
72.0
72.1
72.8
73.8
76.2
78.7
82.1
86.9

72.2
71.8
72.3
72.9
73.6
74.5
76.8
79.3
82.6
86.6

63.1
62.7
63.0
63.5
64.4
65.9
68.8
71.8
75.3
81.1

79.3
79.2
79.4
79.6
80.1
80.6
82.1
84.3
87.3
90.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

91.36
96.02
100.00
105.80
116.02
127.15
133.71
141.70
152 05
165.50

92.5
96.6
100.0
105.5
116.9
126.4
132.8
140.4
150 0
163.3

95.5
99.0
100.0
101.6
108.4
117.7
124.3
129.4
136 5
144.8

93.6
96.6
100.0
107.9
123.8
133.4
138.1
144.7
154 6
170.9

90.5
95.8
100.0
104.7
113.6
123.2
131.2
140.7
150 9
163.5

91.1
95.9
100.0
106.0
117.1
132.3
139.7
150.5
164 4
179.7

91.3
96.4
100.0
103.8
115.3
132.2
138.5
146.6
157 8
171.3

88.0
94.4
100.0
107.8
128.1
144.9
149.5
160.0
174 3
192.5

93.4
97.6
100.0
101.7
109.2
126.0
133.3
140.7
150 3
161.2

1977:
1
II
III
I
V

138.34
140.93
142.59
144.82

137.7
139.6
141.3
143.0

128.4
128.7
129.5
130.9

142.2
144.3
145.4
146.8

137.1
139.4
142.0
144.1

145.3
149.0
151.6
155.7

142.4
145.0
147.7
150.8

154.9
159.0
161.0
164.9

137.1
138.9
141.9
144.7

1978:
I
II
III
I
V

147.05
150.82
153.45
156.68

145.8
148.8
151.3
153.8

133.0
135.6
137.9
139.4

150.0
153.7
155.7
158.6

146.8
149.4
152.3
155.0

158.0
162.3
166.6
170.3

153.0
156.0
159.6
162.3

166.5
171.5
176.5
181.4

147.1
149.0
151.7
153.4

1979:
1
I
I
III
IV p

160.22
163.81
167.20
170.74

157.8
161.3
165.1
169.0

142.4
144.1
145.3
147.6

164.1
168.9
173.2
177.3

158.0
161.0
165.3
169.4

173.0
177.8
182.4
185.7

165.4
169.6
173.8
176.6

185.2
189.0
195.1
200.3

156.4
160.2
163.6
164.7

See next page for continuation of table.




206

TABLE B-3.—Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-79—Continued
[Index numbers, 1972=100, except as noted; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Gross private domestic
investment1—continued
Fixed investment—continued

Exports and
imports of
goods and
servicesx

Residential

Year or quarter

Percent change
from preceding
per od2

Government purchases
of goods and services

Gross
Gross
domestic Gross
product national domestic
product product
implicit implicit
price
price
deflator deflator

Total

Federal

State
and
local

43.8

21.6

20.5

21.8

32.8

22.1

19.3

19.4

19.2

25.2

21

-2.0

33.3

29.6

21.5

22.7

20.7

28.5

—7

-.7

59.6
63.8
71.3
71.4
75.0
84.6
95.2
105.6
111.5
107.9

36.8
40.2
46.5
49.2
52.6
53.6
56.7
65.8
69.8
65.5

31.5
33.2
37.4
39.6
41.1
43.6
49.7
60.7
66.1
62.7

21.7
25.5
31.2
32.8
32.3
31.2
29.6
33.8
38.0
39.9

22.1
27.8
33.0
34.0
33.1
31.9
30.2
35.1
39.4
41.8

21.0
21.7
22.9
23.8
24.9
25.9
28.6
32.5
36.6
38.0

29.1
31.3
34.4
36.2
37.0
37.9
43.9
49.7
53.1
52.6

2.3
7.6
9.7
5.2
2.3
2.4
15.9
13.1
6.9
-1.0

2.3
7.6
9.7
5.2
2.3
2.4
15.9
13.0
6.9
-1.0

59.4
63.8
65.7
66.2
66.5
68.3
70.6
70.9
70.8
70.8

107.4
114.9
114.6
114.2
112.4
109.1
104.3
103.4
101.9
101.8

64.0
73.1
73.0
71.9
71.2
71.8
73.9
76.4
75.7
75.4

67.8
81.8
79.1
75.8
76.9
76.8
78.3
79.5
76.5
75.7

39.4
45.3
47.4
48.5
48.9
49.7
52.1
54.4
56.1
57.2

39.9
47.1
48.9
50.2
50.4
51.1
53.4
55.7
58.1
58.7

39.0
42.4
44.2
45.1
46.6
47.8
50.4
52.8
53.8
55.4

53.6
57.2
57.9
58.8
59.6
60.9
62.8
65.0
66.0
67.5

2.0
6.8
1.3
1.5
1.4
2.2
3.2
3.4
1.6
2.2

2.0
6.7
1.3
1.5
1.4
2.2
3.2
3.4
1.6
2.2

70.9
70.9
71.1
70.5
70.8
72.0
74.2
76.7
80.4
87.5

71.2
70.7
71.3
70.7
71.0
72.3
74.3
76.7
80.5
87.5

100.8
99.1
96.8
95.3
94.3
92.1
90.8
91.0
93.2
95.2

77.1
78.0
77.3
77.5
78.3
80.5
82.8
84.0
85.3
87.9

76.7
76.1
74.5
75.6
77.1
78.0
79.7
80.1
80.9
83.3

58.0
59.2
61.1
62.6
64.0
66.0
69.2
72.6
76.7
81.0

59.1
60.0
61.8
63.3
64.8
67.0
70.1
72.6
76.4
80.0

56.8
58.3
60.3
61.9
63.3
65.1
68.4
72.5
76.9
81.9

68.6
69.2
70.5
71.6
72.7
74.3
76.8
79.0
82.6
86.8

1.7
.9
1.8
1.5
1.6
2.2
3.3
2.9
4.5
5.0

1.7
.9
1.9
1.5
1.6
2.2
3.3
3.0
4.5
5.1

90.6
94.9
100.0
110.8
122.3
132.8
142.5
159.3
179.7
201.7

90.4
94.8
100.0
111.0
122.7
133.2
143.0
160.0
180.8
203.4

90.5
95.0
100.0
110.7
122.7
132.9
142.6
159.7
180.3
203.3

97.5
99.3
100.0
100.1
105.3
116.2
121.9
126.3
132.3
139.6

93.1
96.6
100.0
116.2
148.3
163.6
169.9
178.7
190.3
214.9

89.1
93.5
100.0
118.2
171.0
188.0
193.3
210.7
222.1
255.7

87.5
93.7
100.0
106.7
117.5
128.9
137.2
147.6
159.4
173.7

86.4
92.6
100.0
105.8
115.9
127.5
134.6
143.6
154.8
167.6

88.3
94.5
100.0
107.3
118.4
129.7
138.8
150.0
162.1
177.2

91.4
96.0
100.0
105.7
115.6
126.8
133.3
141.2
151.5
164.6

5.4
5.1
4.1
5.8
9.7
9.6
5.2
6.0
7.3
8.8

5.3
5.1
4.1
5.7
9.3
9.7
5.1
5.9
7.3
8.7

1977
1
II
III
I
V

152.2
157.8
160.1
166.2

152.8
158.5
160.9
167.1

153.5
159.4
161.7
166.7

124.2
125.9
126.5
128.2

176.7
179.6
179.1
179.1

210.5
208.7
213.4
210.3

143.7
146.3
148.1
152.0

140.4
142.1
143.0
148.6

145.6
148.9
151.3
154.1

137.8
140.4
142.0
144.3

6.0
7.7
4.8
6.4

5.7
7.8
4.7
6.6

1978
1
II
III
I
V

169.3
176.7
183.1
189.5

170.2
177.9
184.3
190.8

171.5
176.8
183.8
189.3

129.2
131.4
133.0
135.6

183.1
188.4
191.1
197.6

216.6
220.2
223.9
227.2

154.9
157.8
160.5
164.5

151.1
153.4
154.6
160.1

157.1
160.3
163.8
166.9

146.5
150.2
152.9
156.1

6.3
10.6
7.2
8.7

6.2
10.6
7.2
8.7

1979:
1
II
III
IV P

192.6
199 2
205.5
210.1

194 0
200 7
207.3
212.0

192 7
199 8
206.0
211.3

138 2
139 5
139.6
140.8

203 9
2101
218 7
226.0

234 5
244 9
264.0
278.7

167 5
1713
175.0
180.9

161.9
164 8
167.2
176.3

170.8
174 9
179*3
183.6

159.5
1631
166 2
169.7

9.3
93
85
8.7

9.1
92
80
8.6

ProFarm ducers' Exports Imports
struc- durable
tures equipment

Total

Nonfarm
structures

1929

28.2

27.8

28.6

77.2

45.0

1933

20.7

19.8

19.5

58.8

25.5

1939

26.6

26.3

23.4

61.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

27.4
29.9
32.4
34.9
38.1
40.8
44.6
53.7
58.1
58.7

27.2
29.7
31.8
34.3
37.3
40.0
43.9
53.0
57.4
58.1

23.6
26.6
30.7
35.7
40.8
42.9
46.6
52.8
57.3
58.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

60.0
64.4
66.4
66.9
67.1
68.7
70.9
71.3
71.2
71.0

59.5
63.8
65.8
66.3
66.6
68.2
70.5
70.8
70.7
70.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

71.4
71.3
71.5
70.9
71.2
72.3
74.6
77.0
80.7
87.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978 p
1979

1
Separate deflators are not available for gross private domestic investment, change in business inventories, and net exports of
goods and services.
2
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here. Quarterly data
are at annual rates.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




207

TABLE B-4.—Implicit price deflators and alternative price measures for gross national product and gross
domestic product, 1929- 79
[Quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Percent change from preceding periodx

Index numbers, 1972 = 100
Gross national
product
Year or quarter
Implicit
price
deflator

Fixedweighted
price
index
(1972
weights)

Gross domestic
product

implicit
price
deflator

Fixedweighted
price
index
(1972
weights)

Gross domestic product

Gross national product

Implicit
price
deflator

Fixedweighted
price
index
(1972
weights)

Chain
price
index

Implicit
price
deflator

Fixedweighted
price
index
(1972
weights)

Chain
price
index

32.87

32.8

1933

25.14

25.2

-2 1

-20

1939

28.48

28.5

- 7

- 7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

29.13
31.34
34.39
36.18
37.03
37.92
43.95
49.70
53.13
52.59

29.1
31.3
34.4
36.2
37.0
37.9
43.9
49.7
53.1
52.6

23
76
97
52
23
24
15 9
131
69
-10

23
76
97
52
23
24
15 9
13 0
69
-10

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

53.64
57.27
58.00
58.88
59.69
60.98
62.90
65.02
66.06
67.52

68.'f"
69.1

53.6
57.2
57.9
58.8
59.6
60.9
62.8
65.0
66.0
67.5

68 0
69.1

20
68
13
15
14
22
32
34
16
2.2

1.6

1.6

20
67
13
15
14
22
32
34
16
2.2

1.6

1.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

68.67
69.28
70.55
71.59
72.71
74.32
76.76
79.02
82.57
86.72

70.3
71.1
72.0
72.8
73.7
75.0
77.2
79.5
83.0
87.1

68.6
69.2
70.5
71.6
72.7
74.3
76.8
79.0
82.6
86.8

70.2
71.1
72.0
72.8
73.7
75.0
77.2
79.6
83.0
87.1

1.7
.9
1.8
1.5
1.6
2.2
3.3
2.9
4.5
5.0

1.7
1.1
1.3
1.1
1.2
1.8
2.9
3.0
4.3
5.0

1.7
1.2
1.4
1.3
1.4
1.9
3.1
3.0
4.4
5.0

1.7
.9
1.9
1.5
1.6
2.2
3.3
3.0
4.5
5.1

1.7
1.2
1.3
1.1
1.2
1.8
3.0
3.0
4.4
5.0

1.7
1.2
1.5
1.3
1.4
1.9
3.1
3.1
4.4
5.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

91.36
96.02
100.00
105.80
116.02
127.15
133.71
141.70
152.05
165.50

91.6
96.1
100.0
106.0
116.8
127.7
134.8
143.5
154.2
168.7

91.4
96.0
100.0
105.7
115.6
126.8
133.3
141.2
151.5
164.6

91.7
96.2
100.0
105.9
116.4
127.2
134.4
142.9
153.7
168.0

5.4
5.1
4.1
5.8
9.7
9.6
5.2
6.0
7.3
8.8

5.2
4.9
4.0
6.0
10.2
9.3
5.6
6.4
7.5
9.4

5.3
5.0
4.1
6.0
9.9
9.4
5.6
6.3
7.4
8.9

5.3
5.1
4.1
5.7
9.3
9.7
5.1
5.9
7.3
8.7

5.2
4.9
4.0
5.9
9.9
9.3
5.6
6.4
7.5
9.3

5.3
5.0
4.1
5.9
9.6
9.4
5.6
6.2
7.4
8.8

1977
1
II
III
I
V

138.34
140.93
142.59
144.82

140.1
142.4
144.2
146.7

137.8
140.4
142.0
144.3

139.6
141.9
143.7
146.2

6.0
7.7
4.8
6.4

7.4
6.6
5.1
7.2

7.2
6.6
5.0
6.8

5.7
7.8
4.7
6.6

7.1
6.8
5.0
7.3

6.9
6.7
4.9
7.0

1978
1
II
III
I
V

147.05
150.82
153.45
156.68

149.1
152.6
155.7
159.0

146.5
150.2
152.9
156.1

148.7
152.1
155.2
158.5

6.3
10.6
7.2
8.7

6.8
9.6
8.3
8.9

6.8
9.4
8.2
8.6

6.2
10.6
7.2
8.7

6.8
9.7
8.3
8.9

6.7
9.4
8.2
8.7

1979
1
II
III
IV

160.22
163.81
167.20
170.74

162.8
166.6
170.6
174.7

159.5
163.1
166.2
169.7

162.3
166.0
169.9
173.8

9.3
9.3
8.5
8.7

9.9
9.5
10.0
9.9

9.7
8.8
8.9
9.2

9.1
9.2
8.0
8.6

9.9
9.4
9.6
9.7

9.6
8.7
8.4
8.9

1929

. .

1
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from published indexes shown here.
Quarterly data are at annual rates.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




208

TABLE B-5.—Gross national product by industry in 1972 dollars, 1947-78
[Billions of 1972 dollars]

Manufacturing

Year

Gross
national
product

Agriculture,
forestry,
and
fisheries

Construction
Total

Durable
goods
industries

Nondurable
goods
industries

Transportation,
communication,
and
utilities

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Finance
insurance,
and
real
estate

Services

Government
and
government
enterprises

All
other 1

1947
1948
1949

468.3
487.7
490.7

26.1
28.0
27.8

22.9
26.5
26.5

114.9
121.5
115.0

68.5
72.0
66.3

46.4
49.6
48.8

38.3
38.7
36.4

76.1
78.0
79.9

55.4
57.1
60.7

55.1
56.7
57.2

68.5
69.0
73.1

11.1
12.0
14.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

533.5
576.5
598.5
621.8
613.7

29.1
28.2
29.0
30.3
31.1

29.3
32.5
33.8
34.8
36.0

131.3
146.0
150.7
161.2
149.6

78.1
89.9
94.3
102.6
91.7

53.2
56.1
56.4
58.6
57.9

39.6
44.2
44.3
45.9
45 6

87.6
88.3
91.1
94.0
94.6

64.4
66.7
71.1
74.0
77.7

59.4
60.6
61.6
63.0
63.1

75.4
89.8
96.6
96.4
94.9

17.5
20.2
20.2
22.3
21.1

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

654.8
668.8
680.9
679.5
720.4

31.9
31.4
30.8
32.0
30.9

38.2
40.9
40.9
42.1
45.5

165.8
166.9
167.8
153.3
170.7

103.4
102.5
102.9
88.8
100.7

62.4
64.4
64.9
64.5
70.0

49.4
52.3
53.4
52.2
55.7

103.2
106.2
108.0
107.9
115.8

82.0
85.7
89.8
93.5
98.1

67.5
71.1
73.3
75.8
80.3

95.4
97.6
100.1
101.7
103.6

21.4
16.6
16.8
21.0
20.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

736.8
755.3
799.1
830.7
874.4

32.2
32.3
32.3
32.8
32.1

46.1
46.6
48.3
49.8
53.7

172.0
171.2
186.2
201.0
215.7

101.5
99.3
110.1
119.0
129.3

70.5
72.0
76.2
82.1
86.4

58.0
59.1
62.1
65.6
68.9

117.9
119.2
126.7
131.7
139.7

101.9
106.8
115.3
115.3
119.3

82.2
85.4
88.6
92.2
96.9

107.2
111.1
115.1
118.3
122.6

19.4
23.6
24.5
24.1
25.6

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

925.9
981.0
1,007.7
1,051.8
1,078.8

33.0
31.3
32.6
32.4
33.0

57.0
59.0
59.5
62.5
61.2

235.1
254.0
254.1
268.4
276.2

144.1
157.0
157.2
165.5
169.1

91.0
97.0
96.9
102.9
107.2

74.3
80.0
82.3
88.2
92.9

148.6
156.9
160.7
170.6
174.5

127.2
131.4
136.5
142.9
149.3

101.2
106.5
112.7
116.3
121.4

127.4
136.4
143.5
148.1
151.8

22.1
25.4
25.7
22.4
18.4

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

1,075.3
1,107.5
1,171.1
1,235.0
1,217.8

34.3
36.1
35.4
35.9
35.7

57.1
57.1
58.0
58.3
56.0

260.6
264.1
288.8
313.0
291.9

154.4
155.3
171.9
189.0
176.0

106.2
108.7
116.8
124.1
115.9

95.1
97.3
103.6
112.6
112.4

178.4
186.8
201.2
212.0
205.7

152.9
160.6
167.3
171.1
180.3

124.7
126.6
134.5
143.1
144.7

152.0
153.1
154.9
157.3
160.0

20.4
25.7
27.7
31.7
31.2

1975
1976
1977
1978

1,202.3
1,273.0
1,340.5
1,399.2

37.0
36.2
38.3
38.7

49.8
53.8
56.6
59.2

277.1
303.5
325.8
341.6

162.2
178.4
192.5
203.8

114.9
125.2
133.3
137.8

113.5
118.6
124.9
134.4

206.2
218.9
228.0
239.1

182.3
192.0
205.8
216.1

145.2
151.9
159.5
169.1

162.7
164.7
165.5
168.6

28.5
33.5
36.1
32.3

1
Mining, rest of the world, and residual (GNP in 1972 dollars measured as the sum of final products less GNP in 1972 dollars
measured as the sum of gross product by industry).

Note.—The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




209

TABLE B-6.—Gross national product by major type of product, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Goods
Year or
quarter

Gross
national
product

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Durable goods

Total

Total

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Auto
Nondurable goods Services Struc- output
tures
Final
sales

Inventory
change

1929

103.4

101.7

56.1

54.4

38.3

03
.

35.9

11.4

1933

55.8

57.4

-1.6

27.0

28.6

-1.6

54
.

-.5

23.2

-1.1

25.9

29
.

1939

90.8

90.4

.
4

49.0

48.6

.
4

12.4

.
3

36.2

.
1

34.3

75
.

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

100 0
124.9
158.3
192.0
210.5
212.3
209.6
232.8
259.1
258.0

97 8
120.4
156.5
192.5
211.5
213.4
203.2
233.2
254.4
261.1

22
.
45
.
18
.
-.6
-1.0
-1.0
64
.
-.5
47
.
-3.1

56 0
72.5
93.7
120.4
132.3
128.9
125.3
139.8
154.4
147.7

53 8
68.0
91.9
121.0
133.3
129.9
118.9
140.3
149.7
150.8

22
45
.
18
.
-.6
-1.0
-1.0
64
.
-.5
47
.
-3.1

15 4
23.8
34.5
54.2
58.5
50.1
31.8
44.1
46.9
48.3

1?
31
.
10
.
.0
-.6
-1.3
53
.
17
.
.
7
-2.1

38.4
44.2
57.4
66.8
74.8
79.8
87.1
96.2
102.8
102.5

10
14
.
.
7
-.6
_ 3
.2
11
.
-2.2
40
.
-1.0

35.7
40.6
50.6
62.9
72.2
76.9
68.6
71.3
76.7
81.9

83
.
11.8
14.0
87
.
61
.
65
.
15.7
21.7
28.0
28.4

7.3
89
.
12.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.2
330.2
347.2
366.1
366.3
399.3
420.7
442.8
448.9
486.5

279.4
319.9
344.0
365.7
367.8
393.3
416.0
441.4
450.4
481.2

68
.
10.3
31
.
.
4
-1.5
60
.
47
.
13
.
-1.5
52
.

162.4
189.5
194.6
203.1
196.1
214.5
223.3
232.3
228.2
247.4

155.6
179.2
191.5
202.7
197.6
208.5
218.6
231.0
229.7
242.2

68
.
10.3
31
.
.4
-1.5
60
.
47
.
13
.
-1.5
52
.

54.7
62.5
67.6
71.5
69.0
78.2
82.3
87.3
80.5
87.4

41
.
69
.
11
.
.
9
-2.5
30
.
28
.
13
.
-2.8
27
.

100.9
116.7
123.9
131.2
128.7
130.3
136.3
143.7
149.2
154.8

27
.
34
.
20
.
-.5
10
.
29
.
19
.
.0
13
.
25
.

88.2
102.9
113.1
121.0
125.7
135.3
145.2
157.5
166.9
179.5

35.6
37.8
39.4
42.0
44.5
49.5
52.2
53.0
53.8
59.5

15.5
13.4
12.2
16.3
14.9
21.5
17.2
19.6
14.6
19.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.0
523.3
563.8
594.7
635.7
688.1
753.0
796 3
868.5
935.5

502.2
521.1
557.3
588.8
629.9
678.6
738.7
786 2
860.8
926.2

254.3
256.5
278.0
289.7
309.0
336.6
373.9
387 3
418.9
446.2

250.6
254.3
271.5
283.7
303.2
327.1
359.6
377 2
411.2
436.8

38
.
22
.
65
.
60
.
58
.
95
.
14.3
10.1
77
.
94
.

89.1
90.2
98.4
105.4
115.0
127.0
139.0
143.5
157.4
169.2

24
.
-.1
36
.
27
.
39
.
66
.
10.0
53
50
.
61
.

161.4
164.1
173.2
178.3
188.2
200.1
220.6
233 7
253.8
267.6

14
.
23
.
29
.
33
.
19
.
29
.
43
.
48
28
.
33
.

193.2
206.7
221.5
236.2
254.4
272.7
297.7
3261
356.6
388.7

58.4
60.1
64.3
68.9
72.4
78.8
81.4
82 9
93.0
100.7

21.6
18.1
22.9
25.6
26.5
31.8
31.1
28 8
36.6
36.8

170.7
179.8
202.1
229.6
240.8
267.9
300.6
333.9
366.5
409.7

.
0
18
.
63
.
10.9
71
.
-8.9
53
.
11.9
13.9
13.7

281.7
293.7
314.5
351.3
389.0
429.4
452.0
486.3
541.2
602.5

3 7 424.6
.
4 6 465.5
.
3 2 510.8
.
7 0 560.5
.
1 8 626.8
.
697.6
-1.8
4 7 776.7
.
866.4
10.0
8 4 969.3
.
4 7 1,085.3
.

101.6
118.1
134.3
147.2
147.4
144.7
162.7
190.9
228.2
252.7

30.6
42.2
45.1
50.7
42.9
45.6
62.4
72.3
77.5
76.1

17
.

38
.
22
.
6.5 1
60
.
58
.
95
.
14.3
10.1
77
.
94
.

17
.

16.1

14
.

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978p
1979 .

982.4
1,063.4
1,171.1
1,306.6
1,412.9
1,528.8
1,702.2
1,899.5
2,127.6
2,368.5

38
.
3 8 456.2 452.4
.
978.6
64
.
6 4 479.8 473.5
.
1,057.1
94
.
9 4 526.0 516.6
.
1,161.7
17.9
17.9 598.8 580.9
1,288.6
89
.
8 9 638.6 629.7
.
1,404.0
686.6 697.3 -10.7
1,539.6 -10.7
10.0
10.0 762.7 752.7
1,692.1
21.9
21.9 842.2 820.2
1,877.6
22.3
22.3 930.0 907.7
2,105.2
18.4
18.4 1,030.5 1,012.2
2,350.2

1977:
1
II
Ill
IV

1,820.2
1,876.0
1,930.5
1,971.3

1,800.9
1,853.6
1,902.9
1,952.9

19.3
22.5
27.5
18.5

812.2
834.2
855.5
866.6

793.0
811.8
828.0
848.2

19.3
22.5
27.5
18.5

329.8
329.9
336.7
339.3

88
13.0
14.6
11.3

463.1
481.9
491.3
508.9

10 4
95
.
12.9
71
.

833 5
851.7
878.7
901.9

174 4
190.1
196.3
202.8

72 7
71.5
70.6
74.2

1978:
1
II
Ill
IV

2,011.3
2,104.2
2,159.6
2,235.2

1,988.5
2,078.4
2,139.5
2,214.5

22.8
25.8
20.0
20.6

873.0
922.5
940.9
983.8

850.2
896.7
920.8
963.2

22.8
25.8
20.0
20.6

340.1
364.9
372.3
388.9

18.6
13.1
10.3
13.4

510.1
531.8
548.6
574.3

4 2 934.1
.
956.2
12.7
9 7 981.7
.
7 2 1,005.3
.

204.2
225.6
237.0
246.0

73.9
79.6
75.8
80.6

1979:
1
II
Ill
IV P

2,292.1
2,329.8
2,396.5
2,455.8

2,272.9
2,296.4
2,381.9
2,449.5

19.1
33.4
14.5
64
.

992.7
1,011.8
984.6
1,018.1
1,036.0 1,021.5
1,056.2 1,049.9

19.1
33.4
14.5
64
.

407.1
398.0
417.1
416.4

18.4
24 3
73
.
46
.

585.5
586.6
604.4
633.4

1,041.4
1,064.2
1,100.6
1,135.0

238.9
247.5
259.8
264.6

84.3
77 5
71.2
71.4

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




210

.
7
91
72
.
18
.

TABLE B-7.—Gross national product by major type of product in 1972 dollars,

1929-79

[Billions of 1972 dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Goods

Year or
quarter

Gross
national
product

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Durable goods

Total

Total

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Nondurable goods

Final
sales

Services

Struc-

Auto
output

Inventory
change

44.0

1929..

314.6

310.0

4.6

143.9

139.3

4.6

40.7

3.5

98.6

1.1

126.8

1933..

222.1

226.9

-4.9

97.2

102.1

-4.9

17.6

-2.1

84.5

-2.8

110.9

14.0

1939..

318.8

317.2

1.6

153.9

152.3

1.6

35.6

134.6

30.3

1940..

343.3

337.1

6.2

171.2

165.0

6.2

43.1

3.4

121.8

2.8

139.5

32.6

1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..
1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949..

398.5
460.3
530.6
568.6
560.0
476.9
468.3
487.7
490.7

386.4
455.1
530.5
570.9
563.6
464.7
468.5
482.2
495.1

12.0
5.2
.1
-2.3
-3.6
12.2
-.2
5.5
-4.4

197.4
221.1
263.5
286.8
279.2
238.0
236.8
244.2
239.9

185.4
215.9
263.4
289.1
282.8
225.8
237.0
238.7
244.3

12.0
5.2
.1
-2.3
-3.6
12.2
-.2
5.5
-4.4

57.5
76.0
119.3
135.9
121.9
60.5
74.9
75.6
76.1

8.2
3.5
.7
-1.8
-3.7
10.8
1.8
1.5
-3.7

127.9
140.0
144.1
153.2
161.0
165.3
162.1
163.1
168.2

3.8
1.7
-.6
-.5
.1
1.3
-2.0
4.0

157.6
192.7
240.9
263.6
261.9
199.7
186.9
190.9
197.0

43.4
46.4
26.3
18.1
18.9
39.2
44.7
52.5
53.7

12.9
14.7
18.9

1950..
1951..
1952..
1953..
1954..
1955..
1956..
1957..
1958..
1959..

533.5
576.5
598.5
621.8
613.7
654.8
668.8
680.9
679.5
720.4

522.9
562.8
594.2
620.3
615.8
647.1
663.0
679.4
681.3
714.0

10.6
13.7
4.3
1.5
-2.2
7.7
5.8
1.5
-1.8
6.5

261.5
283.1
292.3
306.9
292.2
316.3
320.9
321.8
312.0
332.5

250.9
269.4
288.0
305.4
294.4
308.6
315.1
320.3
313.8
326.1

10.6
13.7
4.3
1.5
-2.2
7.7
5.8
1.5
-1.8
6.5

84.4
92.6
100.6
105.9
101.7
112.9
113.5
114.6
104.8
110.6

6.3
9.8
1.8
1.4
-3.6
4.2
3.7
1.5
-3.4
3.3

166.5
176.8
187.4
199.5
192.7
195.7
201.6
205.6
209.0
215.5

4.2
3.9
2.5
.1
1.4
3.5
2.1
.0
1.6
3.2

206.0
229.0
240.6
245.5
247.0
257.6
267.2
279.3
285.6
298.0

66.0
64.4
65.6
69.4
74.5
80.9
80.7
79.9
81.9
89.9

24.0
20.4
18.4
23.9
22.9
31.3
24.4
25.8
20.0
24.7

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

736.8
755.3
799.1
830.7
874.4
925.9
981.0
1,007.7
1,051.8
1,078.8

732.4
752.4
791.0
823.0
867.1
914.6
964.3
995.7
1,043.1
1,068.2

4.4
2.9
8.1
7.8
7.3
11.3
16.7
12.0
8.7
10.6

337.1
338.1
362.0
373.0
394.0
421.5
455.6
461.9
481.1
492.3

332.8
335.2
353.8
365.2
386.7
410.2
438.9
449.9
472.4
481.7

4.4
2.9
8.1
7.8
7.3
11.3
16.7
12.0
8.7
10.6

111.6
112.6
121.1
128.4
139.2
152.6
165.2
166.6
175.7
183.3

2.9
-.1
4.4
3.4
5.0
8.0
11.9
6.4
5.6
6.8

221.2
222.7
232.7
236.8
247.5
257.7
273.7
283.3
296.7
298.4

1.5
3.0
3.7
4.3
2.3
3.3
4.8
5.6
3.2
3.7

310.7
325.5
339.9
354.0
372.2
389.1
410.2
432.7
449.9
465.4

89.0
91.7
97.2
103.8
108.1
115.3
115.2
113.1
120.9
121.1

26.8
22.6
27.5
30.3
31.1
37.4
36.7
33.5
40.6
40.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "....

1,075.3
1,107.5
1,171.1
1,235.0
1,217.8
1,202.3
1,273.0
1,340.5
1,399.2
1,431.1

1,071.0
1,100.9
1,161.7
1,218.5
1,209.9
1,212.1
1,266.4
1,327.4
1,385.1
1,421.0

4.3
6.6
9.4
16.5
8.0
-9.8
6.6
13.1
14.1
10.2

483.4
491.6
526.0
569.0
554.2
538.3
578.4
615.6
639.5
652.9

479.1
484.9
516.6
552.5
546.2
548.0
571.8
602.4
625.4
642.8

4.3
6.6
9.4
16.5
8.0
-9.8
6.6
13.1
14.1
10.2

179.1
181.5
202.1
225.9
222.7
219.8
233.2
248.6
261.4
270.7

.1
1.8
6.2
10.6
5.6
-7.0
3.7
8.0
8.6
7.6

300.0
303.4
314.5
326.6
323.5
328.2
338.6
353.9
364.0
372.1

4.2
4.8
3.2
5.9
2.4
-2.7
2.9
5.2
5.5
2.6

477.2
491.1
510.8
531.1
546.4
560.1
582.6
604.4
630.3
649.8

114.6
124.9
134.3
134.8
117.2
104.0
112.1
120.5
129.5
128.4

32.5
42.1
45.1
50.6
40.1
39.4
49.9
55.2
54.9
51.5

1,315.7
1,331.2
1,353.9
1,361.3

1,304.4
1,317.8
1,337.3
1,350.0

11.3
13.4
16.6
11.3

605.0
610.6
622.5
624.2

593.7
597.2
605.9
612.9

11.3
13.4
16.6
11.3

248.5
246.9
249.9
249.0

6.1
8.5
9.6
7.6

345.2
350.3
356.0
364.0

5.2
4.9
7.0
3.7

596.2
599.6
608.2
613.8

114.5
121.1
123.2
123.3

56.1
55.3
54.2
55.1

1978:
I
II
Ill
IV

1,367.8
1,395.2
1,407.3
1,426.6

1,351.3
1,379.6
1,395.1
1,414.6

16.5
15.6
12.2
12.0

621.4
637.2
641.8
657.3

604.9
621.6
629.6
645.3

16.5
15.6
12.2
12.0

248.5
262.8
263.6
270.6

11.8
7.9
6.3
8.5

356.4
358.8
366.0
374.7

4.7
7.6
5.9
3.5

624.2
627.9
633.1
636.0

122.1
130.1
132.4
133.3

53.6
56.8
53.0
56.3

1979:
I
II
Ill
I..
V..

1,430.6
1,422.3
1,433.3
1,438.4

1,418.4
1,404.1
1,426.2
1,435.2

12.3
18.1
7.1
3.2

658.6
647.3
651.3
654.5

646.3
629.1
644.2
651.3

12.3
18.1
7.1
3.2

275.2
265.1
272.9
269.5

10.8
13.2
3.7
2.7

371.2
364.1
371.3
381.8

1.4
4.9
3.4

645.2
647.3
652.0
654.7

126.8
127.7
130.0
129.2

58.1
52.9
47.5
47.5

1977:
I

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




211

116.7

TABLE B-8.—Cross national product: Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars]
(lovernmen

Persons

Total1

Less-.
Interest
paid
and
transfers 2

Expenditures

Net receipts

Disposable personal income
Year or quarter

PerLess:
Personal sonal
TransEquals:
consaving Tax and fers,
Total
nontax
sumption
or
interexcluding expendireceipts
disest
interest
or
tures
saving
and
paid and
(-) accruals subsitransfers
dies 3

Total
Equals:
expendiNet
receipts
tures

Surplus
or
Less: Equals: deficit
PurTrans(-),
chases national
fers,
of
interincome
goods
and
and
product
serv- accounts
subsi3
ices
dies

fn'd

1929

82.3

1.9

80.4

77.3

3.1

11.3

1.5

9.8

10.3

1.5

8.8

1.0

1933

45.5

.7

44.8

45.8

-1.0

9.3

2.5

6.9

10.7

2.5

8.2

-1.4

1939

69.9

.9

69.1

67.0

2.1

15.4

4.1

11.3

17.6

4.1

13.5

-2.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
19461947
1948
1949

75.2
92.0
116.5
132.9
145.5
149.0
158.6
168.4
187.4
187.1

1.0
1.1
.8
.7
.8
.9
1.4
1.7
2.1
2.3

74.3
91.0
115.6
132.1
144.6
148.0
157.3
166.7
185.3
184.9

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

3.3

4.3
3.8
4.2
4.4
6.0
9.9

18.0
17.1
18.5
20.9

13.5
21.2
28.4
44.7
45.2
43.3
33.0
39.9
40.4
35.0

18.4
28.8
64.0
93.3
103.0
92.7
45.6
42.5
50.5
59.3

4.3
3.8
4.2
4.4
6.0
9.9

6.7

17.7
25.0
32.6
49.2
51.2
53.2
51.0
56.9
58.9
55.9

18.0
17.1
18.5
20.9

14.2
24.9
59.8
88.9
97.0
82.8
27.5
25.5
32.0
38.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

205.5
224.8
236.4
250.7
255.7
273.4
291.3
306.9
317.1
336.1

2.7
2.9
3.3
4.0
4.3
4.8
5.6
5.9
6.0
6.5

202.8
221.9
233.1
246.6
251.4
268.6
285.7
301.0
311.1
329.6

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

10.8
14.8
16.0
17.0
15.6
14.9
19.7
20.6
21.7
18.8

69.0
85.2
90.1
94.6
89.9
101.1
109.7
116.2
115.0
129.4

22.5
19.1
18.3
19.0
21.3
23.0
25.1
28.2
32.6
33.4

46.5
66.2
71.8
75.6
68.6
78.1
84.6
88.0
82.4
96.0

61.0
79.2
93.9
101.6
97.0
98.0
104.5
115.3
127.6
131.0

22.5
19.1
18.3
19.0
21.3
23.0
25.1
28.2
32.6
33.4

38.5
60.1
75.6
82.5
75.8
75.0
79.4
87.1
95.0
97.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

349.4
362.9
383.9
402.8
437.0
472.2
510.4
544.5
588.1
630.4

7.4
7.7
8.3
9.4

10.5
11.7
12.6
13.3
14.1
15.6

342.0
355.2
375.6
393.4
426.5
460.4
497.8
531.2
574.0
614.8

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.4
430.2
464.8
490.4
535.9
579.7

17.1
20.2
20.4
18.8
26.1
30.3
33.0
40.9
38.1
35.1

139.5
144.8
156.7
168.5
174.0
188.3
212.3
228.2
263.4
296.3

36.1
40.9
42.4
44.1
46.5
49.5
54.9
62.2
70.2
77.8

103.4
103.9
114.3
124.4
127.5
138.9
157.4
166.0
193.2
218.5

136.4
149.1
160.5
167.8
176.3
187.8
213.6
242.4
268.9
285.6

36.1
40.9
42.4
44.1
46.5
49.5
54.9
62.2
70.2
77.8

100.3
108.2
118.0
123.7
129.8
138.4
158.7
180.2
198.7
207.9

685.9
742.8
801.3
901.7
984.6
1,086.7
1,184.5
1,305.1
1,458.4
1,623.2

16.6
17.3
18.9
21.5
23.4
23.9
26.1
30.2
35.6
40.6

669.4
725.5
782.4
880.2
961.3
1,062.7
1,158.5
1,274.9
1,422.8
1,582.6

618.8
668.2
733.0
809.9
889.6
979.1
1,089.9
1,210.0
1,350.8
1,509.8

50.6
57.3
49.4
70.3
71.7
83.6
68.6
65.0
72 0
72.8

302.6
322.2
367.4
411.2
455.1
468.5
538.3
606.6
685 7
771.9

93.1
106.8
117.8
135.4
155.6
194.4
212.7
229.9
250 4
281.8

209.5
215.5
249.6
275.8
299.5
274.1
325.6
376.7
435 3
490.1

311.9
340.5
370.9
404.9
458.2
532.8
574.0
626.1
686 0
757.9

93.1
106.8
117.8
135.4
155.6
194.4
212.7
229.9
250 4
281.8

218.9
233.7
253.1
269.5
302.7
338.4
361.3
396.2
435 6
476.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

10.2
27.0
32.7
36.5
28.5
13.4

4.9

10.6

See next page for continuation of table.




212

-.7
-3.8
-31.4
-44.1
-51.8
-39.5

5.4

14.4

8.4

-3.4

8.0
6.1

-3.8
-6.9
-7.1

3.1
5.2
.9

-12.6
-1.6

3.1
-4.3
-3.8

.7

-2.3

.5

-1.3
-14.2
-5.5
10.7
-9.4
-18.3
-3.5

6.3

-3.2
-64.4
-35.7
-19.5
_ 3
14.0

TABLE B-8.—Gross national product: Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups, 1929-79—
Continued
[Billions of dollars]

International

Business

Year or quarter
Gross
retained
earnings4

Gross
private
domestic
investment5

Net
Excess of
transearnings
fers and
or of
interest
investpaid to
ment
foreigners •
(—)

Net exports of goods and
services

Excess
of net
transfers
and
Equals: interest
Less:
Net
or of
Exports Imports
exnet
ports
exports
(-)7

Total
income
or
receipts

Statistical
discrepancy

Gross
national
product
or
expend-

iture
iiure

0.4

7.0

5.9

1.1

-0.7

102.3

1.1

.2

2.4

2.0

.4

-.2

55.1

.7

55.8

-.5

.2

4.4

3.4

1.1

-.9

89.4

1.4

90.8

-2.2
-5.8

5.4
5.9
4.8
4.4
5.3
7.2

-1.5
-1.1

98.9
124.3
159.1
193.8
207.8
208.2
208.9
231.0
260.3
257.0

1.1
.5
-.8

14.8
19.8
16.9
15.9

3.6
4.6
4.8
6.5
7.1
7.8
7.2
8.2

1.7
1.3
.0

-14.9
-12.1
-15.8
-3.8

.2
.2
.2
.2
.3
.8
2.9
2.6
4.5
5.6

-23.0
-24.6
-15.1
-15.3
-11.7
-20.8
-22.3
-18.1
-10.6
-19.0

4.0
3.5
2.6
2.5
2.3
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.4
2.6

76.4
74.3
85.2
90.2
96.6
112.0
124.5
120.8
131.5
146.2

-17.7
-14.5
-18.2
-20.1
-20.4
-27.4
-33.3
-27.1
-33.3
-44.5

140.8
160.0
188.3
220.0
214.6
190.9
243.0
303.3
351.5
386.2

-39.5
-44.3
-57.3
-79.8
-76.7
-14.8
-39.7
-72.6
-98.6
-110.2

2.6
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.5
3.7
3.6
3.8
4.3
5.5
6.5
7.7
8.5
8.5
8.7
9.7

1929

11.7

16.2

1933

3.2

1.4

1939

8.8

9.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

10.9
12.0
14.8
16.7
17.7
16.0
15.8
21.8
30.0
31.4

13.1
17.9

10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

30.8
34.6
37.1
38.0
41.0
47.5
48.7
51.1
51.3
58.5

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
77.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

58.7
59.8
67.0
70.1
76.2
84.6
91.2
93.7
98.2
101.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

101.4
115.7
131.0
140.2
137.9
176.2
203.3
230.7
252.9
276.0

9.9
5.8
7.2

-4.4

1.8

4.9

10.9
10.5

5.4

13.3
15.8

1
2
3

10.4

-2.0
-1.8

-.6
7.6

11.6

9.6

6.5
6.2

13.9
18.9
18.2
17.1
18.0
20.0
23.9
26.7
23.3
23.7

12.0
15.1
15.8
16.6
16.0
17.8
19.6
20.7
20.8
23.2

1.9
3.8
2.4
.6
2.0
2.2
4.3
6.1
2.5
.6

27.6
28.9
30.6
32.7
37.4
39.5
42.8
45.6
49.9
54.7

23.2
23.1
25.2
26.4
28.4
32.0
37.7
40.6
47.7
52.9

62.5
65.6
72.7
101.6
137.9
147.3
163.3
175.9
207.2
257.4

58.5
64.0
75.9
94.4
131.9
126.9
155.4
185.8
217.5
260.9

4.4
5.8
5.4
6.3
8.9
7.6
5.1
4.9
2.3
1.8
3.9
1.6

-3.3

7.1
6.0

20.4

8.0

-9.9
-10 3
-3.5

.2
2.2
2.1
1.4

-4.6
-9.0
-2.0

-.6
2.1
-.3
.2
1.9
.3
.3

-1.8
-3.6

-.1
2.0
-1.7
-3.0
-2.4
-3.2
-5.7
-4.3
-1.6
-1.2

1.4
2.0
.3
3.9
9.8
.6
2.5

-11.9

.7

19.6
23 5
19.3

103.4

1.0

100.0
124.9
158.3
192.0
210.5
212.3
209.6
232.8
259.1
258.0

284.1
326.2
344.5
362.8
363.3
396.8
421.5
442.6
447.2
486.7

2.0
4.0
2.7
3.3
3.0
2.5
-.8
.2
1.7
-.2

286.2
330.2
347.2
366.1
366.3
399.3
420.7
442.8
448.9
486.5

506.7
521.7
559.8
591.0
633.5
687.2
749.8
794.6
869.1
938.8

-.7
1.6
4.0
3.7
2.2
.9
3.2
1.7
-.6

506.0
523.3
563.8
594.7
635.7
688.1
753.0
796.3
868.5
935.5

-2.1

982.4
1,063.4
1,171.1
1,306.6
1,412.9
1,528.8
1,702.2
1,899.5
2,127.6
2,368.5

984.5
1,062.1
1,169.4
1,303.9
1,407.1
1,521.5
1,696.0
1,892.0
2,124.2
2,364.6

-1.8

2.7
4.1
.7
1.8

-1.2

-3.3

1.3
1.7
2.6
5.8
7.4
6.1
7.5
3.3
4.0

Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments (fines, penalties, etc.).
Interest paid by consumers to business and net personal transfer payments to foreigners.
Government transfer payments to persons and foreigners, net interest paid by government, subsidies less current surplus of
government enterprises, and disbursements less wage accruals.
4
Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, corporate and noncorporate capital
consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment, and private wage accruals less disbursements.
• See Table B-14.
6
Net transfers to foreigners by persons and government and interest paid by government to foreigners.
7
Capital grants received by the United States (net) less net foreign investment.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




213

TABLE B-9.—Gross national product by sector, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Sross domestic product
Governmeni 2

Business
Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

Statis-

Total
Total

Ni-m

wonfarm 1

Farm

tical
TICdl

discrepancy

Households
and
institutions

Total

Federal

State
and
local

Rest
of the
world

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
domestic
product3

1929

103.4

102.6

95.4

84.7

9.7

1.1

2.9

4.3

0.9

3.5

1933

55.8

55.5

49.1

43.8

4.6

.7

1.7

4.7

1.2

3.5

.3

1939

90.8

90.5

80.6

72.9

6.3

1.4

2.3

7.6

3.4

4.2

.3

7.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

100.0
124.9
158.3
192.0
210.5
212.3
209.6
232.8
259.1
258.0

99.6
124.5
157.9
191.6
210.1
212.0
209.0
231.8
257.9
256.9

89.4
112.6
139.9
162.8
174.2
172.8
183.8
210.0
234.9
231.5

81.8
103.1
127.7
149.3
156.2
152.7
164.2
188.0
212.7
211.7

6.5
8.9
13.0
15.3
15.3
16.0
18.9
20.2
23.3
18.8

1.1
.5
-.8
-1.8
2.7
4.1
.7
1.8
-1.2
1.0

2.4
2.5
2.9
3.2
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.1
5.6
5.9

7.8
9.4
15.1
25.6
32.2
35.2
20.8
16.7
17.4
19.4

3.5
5.0
10.6
20.9
27.2
29.8
14.6
9.4
8.9
10.0

4.3
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.9
5.4
6.2
7.3
8.5
9.4

.4
.4
.4
.3
.4
.3
.5
.9
1.2
1.1

10.1
25.0
26.8
21.4
9.6
.9
-1.4
10.9
11.3
-.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.2
330.2
347.2
366.1
366.3
399.3
420.7
442.8
448.9
486.5

284.8
328.7
345.7
364.6
364.5
397.3
418.5
440.5
446.6
484.0

257.5
294.4
307.3
324.9
323.9
354.0
372.1
390.8
393.1
427.7

235.5
267.4
282.5
301.2
301.3
332.8
354.3
372.3
370.7
408.9

20.0
22.9
22.2
20.3
19.6
18.8
18.6
18.4
20.7
19.1

2.0
4.0
2.7
3.3
3.0
2.5
-.8
.2
1.7
-.2

6.4
6.9
7.2
7.8
8.1
9.1
9.8
10.5
11.4
12.3

20.9
27.4
31.2
31.9
32.5
34.2
36.6
39.1
42.1
44.0

10.7
16.2
18.9
18.6
17.8
18.4
19.0
19.6
20.5
20.9

10.1
11.2
12.3
13.3
14.7
15.8
17.6
19.6
21.6
23.1

1.3
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.4

10.9
15.4
5.2
5.5
-.0
9.0
5.3
5.2
1.4
8.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.0
523.3
563.8
594.7
635.7
688.1
753.0
796.3
868.5
935.5

503.5
520.2
560.2
591.1
631.4
683.4
748.8
791.8
863.7
931.1

442.5
455.3
490.4
516.5
550.7
596.6
651.1
682.7
742.2
798.1

423.0
433.4
465.9
492.2
529.2
573.8
625.0
658.8
720.2
776.2

20.2
20.2
20.5
20.5
19.3
22.0
22.9
22.2
22.6
25.2

-.7
1.6
4.0
3.7
2.2
.9
3.2
1.7
-.6
-3.3

13.8
14.4
15.5
16.6
17.8
19.2
21.1
23.9
26.4
29.2

47.1
50.5
54.3
58.0
62.9
67.6
76.5
85.1
95.2
103.7

21.7
22.6
24.1
25.2
27.0
28.3
32.4
35.6
39.3
41.8

25.5
27.9
30.2
32.9
35.9
39.3
44.1
49.5
55.9
61.9

2.5
3.1
3.6
3.7
4.3
4.7
4.2
4.6
4.8
4.5

4.0
3.3
7.7
5.5
6.8
8.2
9.6
5.7
9.1
7.8

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 *

982.4
1,063.4
1,171.1
1,306.6
1,412.9
1,528.8
1,702.2
1,899.5
2,127.6
2,368.5

977.8
1,056.8
1,164.1
1,297.5
1,399.8
1,518.3
1,687.7
1,881.7
2,107.0
2,343.3

831.5
896.9
989.5
1,108.0
1,193.7
1,289.2
1,437.7
1,609.0
1,807.8
2,017.7

807.6
867.9
955.8
1.055.2
1,139.9
1,232.6
1,385.2
1,552.2
1,745.0
1,944.2

25.9
27.7
32.0
50.1
48.0
49.2
46.4
49.2
59.5
69.5

-2.1
1.3
1.7
2.6
5.8
7.4
6.1
7.5
3.3
4.0

31.6
34.7
37.2
40.5
44.8
50.5
56.4
62.6
69.6
77.2

114.7
125.2
137.4
149.1
161.4
178.6
193.5
210.1
229.6
248.4

44.7
46.8
50.1
51.9
54.9
59.0
62.4
66.4
71.8
77.0

70.0
78.5
87.3
97.1
106.5
119.6
131.2
143.7
157.8
171.4

4.6
6.6
7.0
9.1
13.1
10.5
14.5
17.8
20.5
25.2

5.0
8.1
10.1
11.5
7.9
8.5
11.2
11.5
12.0
11.2

1977
1
II
ill
I
V

1,820.2
1,876.0
1,930.5
1,971.3

1,802.9
1,858.5
1,911.7
1,953.8

1,538.7
1,590.0
1,637.4
1,669.7

1,481.4
1,533.5
1,582.1
1,612.0

48.2
47.9
47.6
53.2

9.1
8.6
7.7
4.6

60.4
61.4
63.2
65.4

203.7
207.1
211.1
218.7

65.2
65.3
65.6
69.6

138.6
141.7
145.5
149.1

17.4
17.6
18.8
17.5

15.0
12.9
12.0
9.1

1978
1
II
III
I
V

2,011.3
2,104.2
2,159.6
2,235.2

1,992.0
2,083.2
2,138.9
2,213.9

1,701.1
1,787.5
1,837.6
1,904.9

1,641.8
1,725.8
1,774.8
1,837.5

56.3
59.4
58.9
63.3

3.0
2.3
3.9
4.1

67.3
68.9
70.3
72.1

223.6
226.8
231.0
237.0

70.2
70.7
71.5
74.8

153.4
156.1
159.4
162.2

19.3
21.0
20.7
21.2

8.1
19.6
11.1
14.8

1979
1
II
III
IV P

2,292.1
2,329.8
2,396.5
2,455.8

2,267.9
2,306.1
2,369.5
2,429.7

1,951.4
1,984.5
2,042.0
2,092.8

1,880.8
1,915.2
1,964.8

70.0
70.6
68.9
68.3

.6
-1.3
8.3

74.8
75.8
77.9
80.4

241.8
245.8
249.6
256.6

75.5
75.8
76.3
80.6

166.3
170.0
173.3
175.9

24.2
23.7
26.9
26.1

10.1
6.9
11.5
10.6

1

0.8
-4.1

Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises.
Compensation of government employees.
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here. See Table B - l
for percent changes in gross national product.
2

3

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




214

TABLE B-10.—Gross national product by sector in 1972 dollars,

1929-79

[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross domestic product
Government3

Business
Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

Total
Total

hlnn

PociH

nonfarm1

Farm

KcSIQ-

ual2

Households
and
institutions

Total

Federal

State
and
local

Percent
change
from
Rest
precedof the
ing
world period,
gross
domestic
product4

1929

314.6

312.8

271.1

244.2

23.8

3.1

15.6

26.1

5.2

20.9

1.9

1933

222.1

220.5

179.7

152.1

25.0

2.6

12.2

28.7

6.6

22.0

1.6

-2.2

1939

318.8

317.7

260.6

230.7

25.3

4.7

15.1

42.0

16.9

25.1

1.2

7.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

343.3
398.5
460.3
530.6
568.6
560.0
476.9
468.3
487.7
490.7

342.0
397.2
459.2
529.7
567.5
559.2
475.8
466.7
485.9
488.8

282.0
326.3
361.0
385.2
403.5
397.9
384.9
392.8
411.2
409.4

253.8
299.1
336.0
363.9
372.7
366.4
362.2
370.8
387.2
382.1

24.7
26.3
28.7
27.8
27.3
25.8
25.8
23.9
25.7
25.5

3.6
.9
-3.8
-6.6
3.5
5.8
-3.0
-1.9
-1.7
1.8

16.1
15.9
16.4
15.2
15.1
15.0
15.1
16.0
16.7
17.3

43.9
55.1
81.8
129.3
149.0
146.2
75.8
57.9
58.0
62.2

18.6
29.6
56.7
105.0
125.2
121.8
49.7
29.8
29.2
31.3

25.3
25.5
25.0
24.4
23.8
24.5
26.1
28.1
28.8
30.9

1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
1.0
.8
1.1
1.6
1.8
1.9

7.7
16.1
15.6
15.4
7.2
-1.5
-14.9
-1.9
4.1
.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

533.5
576.5
598.5
621.8
613.7
654.8
668.8
680.9
679.5
720.4

531.5
574.7
596.7
619.9
611.4
652.2
666.1
678.0
676.5
717.3

448.6
477.2
492.8
515.6
508.0
546.5
557.2
566.0
561.9
600.5

417.9
445.9
460.7
480.6
473.4
512.5
529.3
538.7
528.2
569.6

26.9
25.8
26.3
27.6
28.3
29.2
28.8
28.1
29.3
28.2

3.8
5.5
5.7
7.3
6.2
4.8
-.9
-.8
4.4
2.7

18.3
18.7
18.6
19.3
19.4
21.4
22.5
23.1
24.2
24.9

64.6
78.8
85.3
85.0
83.9
84.4
86.5
88.9
90.4
91.8

32.7
46.2
51.6
49.6
47.2
45.9
45.6
45.8
44.5
44.5

31.9
32.6
33.7
35.5
36.7
38.4
40.8
43.1
45.8
47.3

1.9
1.8
1.8
2.0
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9
3.0
3.2

8.7
8.1
3.8
3.9
-1.4
6.7
2.1
1.8
_ 2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

736.8
755.3
799.1
830.7
874.4
925.9
981.0
1,007.7
1,051.8
1,078.8

733.6
751.2
794.3
825.8
868.7
919.9
975.6
1,001.9
1,045.7
1,073.1

611.8
625.6
663.9
692.0
730.4
776.4
822.4
839.8
878.2
901.5

580.5
590.9
629.6
658.4
697.1
746.7
791.1
807.8
850.6
877.4

29.5
29.6
29.5
30.0
29.2
30.1
28.5
29.6
29.4
29.9

1.8
5.1
4.8
3.6
4.0
-.4
2.8
2.4
-1.8
-5.9

26.8
27.2
28.3
29.0
29.9
31.1
32.8
34.8
35.9
36.6

94.9
98.5
102.1
104.8
108.4
112.4
120.4
127.2
131.7
135.0

45.2
46.2
48.3
48.2
48.5
48.7
53.0
57.2
58.1
58.2

49.7
52.3
53.9
56.6
60.0
63.6
67.5
70.0
73.6
76.8

3.2
4.1
4.8
4.9
5.7
6.1
5.4
5.8
6.1
5.7

2.3
2.4
5.7
4.0
5.2
5.9
6.1
2.7
4.4
2.6

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

1,075.3
1,107.5
1,171.1
1,235.0
1,217.8
1,202.3
1,273.0
1,340.5
1,399.2
1,431.1

1,069.8
1,100.3
1,164.1
1,227.4
1,211.0
1,197.5
1,266.2
1,332.9
1,391.1
1,423.2

898.3
927.6
989.5
1,050.4
1,031.2
1,013.6
1,079.7
1,143.7
1,197.5
1,227.7

871.3
894.9
955.8
1,013.2
993.7
975.3
1,039.9
1,100.7
1,160.0
1,190.7

31.1
32.8
32.0
32.3
32.2
33.7
32.4
34.4
34.2
34.7

-4.2
-.1
1.7
4.9
5.3
4.7
7.4
8.7
3.4
2.4

36.3
36.6
37.2
38.1
38.0
39.4
40.7
42.2
43.6
45.0

135.2
136.0
137.4
138.9
141.9
144.4
145.8
147.0
149.9
150.5

55.2
52.5
50.1
48.3
48.6
48.5
48.5
48.7
49.1
49.1

80.1
83.5
87.3
90.6
93.3
96.0
97.3
98.4
100.8
101.3

5.5
7.2
7.0
7.6
6.8
4.9
6.8
7.6
8.1
7.9

-.3
2.8
5.8
5.4
-1.3
-1.1
5.7
5.3
4.4
2.3

1977
1
I
I
II
I
I
V

1,315.7
1,331.2
1,353.9
1,361.3

1,308.3
1,323.6
1,346.0
1,353.9

1,120.9
1,135.6
1,155.9
1,162.4

1,079.1
1,093.5
1,111.3
1,118.7

32.3
33.0
35.9
36.2

9.5
9.1
8.7
7.5

41.4
41.7
42.5
43.2

146.0
146.2
147.6
148.3

48.6
48.6
48.7
48.7

97.4
97.6
98.8
99.5

7.4
7.6
7.9
7.4

8.8
4.7
6.9
2.4

1978
1
I
I
II
I
I
V

1,367.8
1,395.2
1,407.3
1,426.6

1,359.9
1,386.8
1,399.2
1,418.4

1,167.5
1,193.6
1,205.1
1,223.9

1,126.6
1,156.2
1,169.1
1,188.0

35.7
34.2
33.6
33.2

5.3
3.2
2.4
2.7

43.0
43.4
43.9
44.1

149.4
149.8
150.2
150.4

48.9
49.0
49.2
49.3

100.5
100.8
100.9
101.1

7.8
8.4
8.1
8.1

1.8
8.1
3.6
5.6

1979.
I
I
I
II
I
IV

1,430.6
1,422.3
1,433 3
1,438.4

1,421.7
1,414.2
1425 3
1,431.7

1,226.9
1,219.0
1229 3
1,235.8

1,193.1
1,184.7
1 189 4
1,195.5

33.4
35.1
34 9
35.3

.4
-.8
50
5.0

44.4
44.7
45 4
45.7

150.4
150.5
150 6
150.3

49.2
49.1
49 2
49.0

101.2
101.4
1015
101.2

8.9
8.1
80
6.7

.9
-2.1
32
1.8

1

6!o

Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises.
The difference between gross product in 1972 dollars measured as the sum of final products and that measured as the sum of
gross product by industry.
3
Compensation of government employees.
4
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from those obtained from data shown here. See Table B-2
for percent changes in gross national product in 1972 dollars.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
2




215

TABLE B-ll.—Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net domestic product

Year or
quarter

Gross Capital
domes- consumption
tic
product allowof
ances
nonwith
financial capital Total
corpo- consumprate
tion
busiadjustness
ment

Domestic income
Indirect
business
tax,
etc.1

Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital
consumption adjustments
Total

CompenProfits before tax
sation
of
Profits after tax
Profemploy- Total
its
ees
Total tax
Divi- Undislia- Total dends tributed
profits
bility

Inven- Panital Net
i>apiiai
intertory
valua- consump- est
tion
tion
adjust- adjustment
ment

1929..

50.1

5.4

44.7

3.4

41.3

32.3

7.6

8.4

1.2

7.3

5.2

2.0

0.5

-1.3

1.4

1933

24.4

4.2

20.2

3.8

16.4

16.7 - 2 . 0

.6

.5

.1

2.0

-1.9

-2.1

-.5

1.7

1939

43.7

4.7

39.1

5.1

34.0

28.2

4.3

6.1

1.4

4.7

3.3

1.4

-1.0

1.5

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

50.4
65.6
82.9
98.7
102.1
95.3
99.3
120.0
137.3
133.5

4.8
5.3
6.0
6.1
6.2
6.4
7.3
9.1
10.7
11.6

45.6
60.4
77.0
92.6
95.9
88.9
92.1
110.9
126.5
121.9

5.5
6.4
6.8
7.3
8.1
8.9
10.1
11.2
12.1
12.6

40.1
53.9
70.1
85.3
87.8
80.0
81.9
99.8
114.4
109.3

31.2
39.8
51.0
62.2
65.1
61.9
67.2
79.1
87.8
85.3

7.5
12.8
17.9
22.0
21.7
17.2
14.1
19.9
25.8
23.0

8.8
16.4
20.1
23.6
22.2
17.8
22.0
29.1
31.8
24.9

2.7
7.5
11.2
13.8
12.6
10.2
8.6
10.8
11.8
9.3

6.1
9.0
8.9
9.8
9.6
7.6
13.4
18.3
20.0
15.6

3.6
4.0
3.8
4.0
4.2
4.2
5.1
5.9
6.5
6.5

2.5
4.9
5.1
5.7
5.4
3.4
8.3
12.4
13.5
9.1

-.7
_ 2
-2^5
-1.2
-.8
-.3
-.6
-5.3
-5.9
-2.2
1.9

-1.1
-1.1
-1.0
-.8
-.2
-.1
-2.7
-3.3
-3.9
-3.8

1.4
1.3
1.3
1.1
1.0
1.0
.7
.8
.9
1.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

151.9
174.5
182.3
195.0
191.9
216.7
231.6
242.3
236.3
265.7

12.6
14.6
15.7
17.0
17.9
19.2
21.5
23.7
24.9
26.0

139.3
159.9
166.7
178.1
174.1
197.5
210.1
218.5
211.4
239.7

14.1
15.2
16.8
18.2
17.4
19.2
20.8
22.4
22.8
25.4

125.2
144.7
149.8
159.9
156.6
178.3
189.2
196.2
188.6
214.4

94.7
110.2
118.3
128.7
126.5
138.5
151.4
159.1
155.9
171.6

29.6
33.4
30.3
29.9
28.6
38.2
36.1
35.0
30.1
39.7

38.5
39.1
33.8
34.9
32.1
42.0
41.8
39.8
33.7
43.1

16.9
21.2
17.8
18.5
15.6
20.2
20.1
19.1
16.2
20.7

21.6
17.9
16.0
16.4
16.4
21.8
21.8
20.7
17.5
22.3

7.9
7.8
7.8
8.0
8.2
9.4
10.1
10.4
10.2
10.8

13.6
10.1
8.1
8.4
8.2
12.4
11.6
10.3
7.3
11.5

-5.0
-1.2
1.0
-1.0
-.3
-1.7
-2.7
-1.5
-.3
-.5

-3.9
-4.5
-4.4
-4.0
-3.2
-2.1
-3.0
-3.3
-3.4
-2.9

.9
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.6
1.6
1.7
2.2
2.7
3.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

277.3
284.5
311.0
330.9
357.6
392.1
430.7
452.9
498.4
541.8

27.0
27.8
28.7
29.8
31.0
32.8
35.7
39.3
43.0
47.8

250.3
256.7
282.3
301.1
326.6
359.3
394.9
413.6
455.4
494.0

28.3
30.1
33.0
35.6
38.4
41.1
42.9
45.8
51.6
57.1

222.0
226.5
249.2
265.6
288.3
318.2
352.0
367.9
403.8
437.0

181.1
185.1
199.8
210.7
226.3
246.1
273.5
291.9
321.6
357.4

37.4
37.4
44.9
50.0
56.7
66.1
71.2
67.2
72.1
66.4

39.5
39.2
43.7
48.3
54.6
64.4
(39.5
65.4
71.9
68.4

19.2
19.5
20.6
22.8
24.0
27.2
29.5
21.1
33.6
33.3

20.3 11.5
19.7 11.7
23.1 12.7
25.5 14.1
30.7 15.3
37.2 17.2
40.0 18.1
37.7 18.9
38.3 20.7
35.1 20.7

8.7
8.0
10.3
11.4
15.4
20.0
21.9
18.8
17.6
14.4

.3
.1
.1
-.2
_ 5
-L9
-2.1
-1.7
-3.4
-5.5

-2.3
3.5
-1.8
3.9
1.0 4.5
1.9 4.8
2.6 5.3
3.6 6.1
3.8 7.4
3.6 8.7
3.6 10.1
3.5 13.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

560.6
602.5
671.0
752.0
808.8
874.1
988.0
1,106.3
1,246.9
1,388.3

53.1 507.5 61.8 445.7
58.2 544.2 68.2 476.0
62.6 608.4 73.5 534.8
68.7 683.3 80.5 602.8
80.8 728.0 85.7 642.3
96.8 777.3 92.6 684.6
106.8 881.2 99.8 781.5
116.0 990.3 107.8 882.5
126.9 1,120.0 117.2 1,002.7
140.8 1,247.5 126.3 1,121.2

377.1
399.4
443.8
503.8
552.9
576.9
650.2
732.6
834.7
940.7

51.6
58.7
72.0
76.0
59.5
76.9
100.9
116.5
128.3
133.3

55.1
63.3
75.9
92.7
102.9
101.3
130.0
143.5
166.1
190.8

27.3
29.9
33.5
39.6
42.7
40.6
52.5
59.6
68.8
75.4

27.9
33.3
42.4
53.1
60.2
60.7
77.4
83.8
97.4
115.5

19.9
20.0
21.7
23.9
26.0
28.5
33.1
37.2
41.8
47.2

8.0
13.3
20.7
29.2
34.2
32.2
44.3
46.6
55.5
68.3

-5.1
-5.0
-6.6
-18.6
-40.4
-12.4
-14.6
-15.2
-25.2
-41.9

1.5
.5
2.7
1.8
-3.0
-11.9
-14.4
-11.8
-12.6
-15.6

17.0
17.9
19.1
23.1
29.9
30.8
30.4
33.4
39.7
47.2

1977:
1
II
Ill
IV

1.054.6
1.093.3
1,128.9
1,148.6

111.7 942.9 104.9
114.5 978.8 106.3
117.5 1,011.4 109.1
120.5 1,028.1 111.1

838.1
872.5
902.4
917.0

700.5
723.6
742.8
763.4

106.2
116.4
125.5
117.8

137.4
143.5
145.4
147.5

57.4
59.9
60.2
60.9

80.0
83.6
85.1
86.6

35.6
36.6
37.6
39.1

44.5
47.0
47.5
47.5

-18.7
-15.9
-8.9
-17.0

-12.5
-11.2
-10.9
-12.7

31.4
32.5
34.0
35.8

1978:
I
II
Ill
IV

11691
1,236.5
1,267.9
1,314.1

123 2
125.8
128.2
130.5

113 2 932 6
117.4 993.4
117.5 1,022.2
120.7 1,062.8

791 4
824.6
846.5
876.5

104 3
130.0
135.1
143.8

140 2
167.3
171.3
185.7

56 5
69.5
71.2
77.9

83 8
97.8
100.1
107.8

40 4
40.0
42.8
44.1

43 3
57.7
57.3
63.7

-23 9
-25.1
-23.0
-28.8

— 12 1
-12.1
-13.2
-13.1

37 0
38.8
40.6
42.4

1979:
1
II
Ill
IV "

1,346.4
1,370.4
1,401.3

133.4 1,213.0 122.8 1,090.2
138.4 1,232.0 124.2 1,107.8
143.4 1,257.9 127.6 1,130.3
130.7 1,156.4
148.0

910.0 135.9 189.5 74.7 114.8 46.2
928.4 133.9 184.2 71.8 112.5 47.3
949.7 132.3 192.7 76.3 116.3 46.3
48 8
974.5

68.6
65.2
70.0

-39.9
-36.6
-44.0
-46.9

-13.6
-13.8
-16.4
-18.7

44.2
45.5
48.3
50.7

1045 8
1,110.8
1,139.7
1,183.5

1
Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




216

TABLE B-12.—Output,

costs, and profits of nonfinancial corporate business, 1948-79

[Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or quarter

Gross domestic
product of
nonfinancial
corporate
business (billions
of dollars)

Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output (dollars)l

Total
cost
and
profit2

Capital
consumption
allowIndirect Compenances
busisation
Net
ness
with
of
interest
tax,
capital
employ3
etc.
conees
sumption
adjustment

Corporate profits with
inventory valuation and
capital consumption
adjustments

Output
Compent
hour of sation
per hour
all
of all
employ- employees
ees
(1972 (dollars)
dollars)
uper

Profits
tax
liability

Profits
after
tax4

0.112
.105

0.051
.042

0.061
.062

.004
.004
.004
.004
.006

.120
.124
.110
.102
.101

.068
.079
065
.063
055

.051
.045
046
.039
.046

.439
.467
.484
.497
.494

.005
.005
.007
.009
.009

.121
112
.106
.096
.114

.064
062
.058
.052
.060

.057
050
.048
.044
.055

5.201
5.428

2.587
2.682

.079
.082
.083
.084
.084

.505
.505
.500
.495
.497

.010
.011
.011
.011
.012

.104
.102
.112
.118
.125

.053
.053
.052
.054
.053

.051
.049
.061
.064
.072

5.539
5.715
5.992
6.238
6.475

2.795
2.885
2.996
3.089
3.218

.066
.067
.072
.074
.079

.083
.080
.084
.089
.094

.497
.513
.535
.553
.589

.012
.014
.016
.017
.022

.134
.134
.123
.124
.109

.055
.055
.051
.058
.055

.079
.078
.072
.066
.055

6.685
6.828
6.906
7.133
7.154

3.325
3.504
3.694
3.944
4.207

.933
.973
1.000
1.044
1.164

.088
.094
.093
.095
.116

.103
.110
.110
.112
.123

.628
.645
.661
.699
.796

.028
.029
.028
.032
.043

.086
.095
.107
.105
.086

.045
.048
.050
.055
.061

.041
.046
.057
.050
.024

7.147
7.389
7.631
7.790
7.492

4.487
4.766
5.047
5.447
5.961

680.0
730.4
770.7
818.7
844.0

1.285
1.353
1.436
1.523
1.645

.142
.146
.151
.155
.167

.136
.137
.140
.143
.150

.848
.890
.951
1.020
1.114

.045
.042
.043
.048
.056

.113
.138
.151
.157
.158

.060
.072
.077
.084
.089

.053
.066
.074
.073
.069

7.726
7.973
8.064
8.142

6.554
7.098
7.666
8.302

1,054.6
1,093.3
1,128.9
1,148.6

755.2
766.1
778.5
782.9

1.396
1.427
1.450
1.467

.148
.149
.151
.154

.139
.139
.140
.142

.928
.945
.954
.975

.042
.042
.044
.046

.141
.152
.161
.150

.076
.078
.077
.078

.065
.074
.084
.073

8.063
8.042
8.110
8.059

7.480
7.596
7.738
7.859

1978
1
II
III
IV

1,169.1
1,236.5
1,267.9
1,314.1

789.8
817.1
826.3
841.4

1.480
1.513
1.535
1.562

.156
.154
.155
.155

.143
.144
.142
.143

1.002
1.009
1.024
1.042

.047
.047
.049
.050

.132
.159
.163
.171

.071
.085
.086
.093

.061
.074
.077
.078

8.056
8.138
8.179
8.201

8.071
8.212
8.379
8.544

1979
1
II
III

1,346.4
1,370.4
1,401.3

846.6
841.0
842.4

1.590
1.629
1.664

.158
.165
.170

.145
.148
.151

1.075
1.104
1.127

.052
.054
.057

.161
.159
.157

.088
.085
.091

.072
.074
.066

8.159
8.100
8.095

8.770
8.941
9.127

Current
dollars

1972
dollars

1948
1949

137.3
133.5

229.7
219.9

0.598
.607

0.047
.053

0.053
.057

0.382
.388

0.004
.004

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

151.9
174.5
182 3
195.0
191.9

247.5
270.2
275 2
292.0
283 5

.614
.646
663
.668
.677

.051
.054
.057
.058
.063

.057
.056
.061
.062
.061

.383
.408
.430
.441
.446

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

216.7
2316
242.3
236.3
265.7

315.1
3241
328.3
313.4
347.3

.688
715
.738
.754
.765

.061
.066
.072
.080
.075

.061
064
.068
.073
.073

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

277.3
284.5
311.0
330.9
357.6

358.9
366.7
399.7
425.4
455.2

.773
.776
.778
.778
.786

.075
.076
.072
.070
.068

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

392.1
430.7
452.9
498.4
541.8

494.6
532.9
545.8
581.6
607.3

.793
.808
.830
.857
.892

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

560.6
602.5
671.0
752.0
808.8

600.6
619.3
671.0
720.4
695.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

874.1
988.0
1,106.3
1,246.9
1,388.3

1977
1
II
III
IV

1

Total

Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in 1972 dollars.
This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two
places to the left.
3
Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies.
4
With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).
2




217

TABLE B-13.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Durable goods1

Year or
quarter

Personal
consumption
expenditures

Motor
Total

vehicles
and
parts

Services1

Nondurable goods1

Furniture
and
household
equipment

Total

Food

Clothing
and
shoes

Gasoline
and

Fuel
oil
and
coal

Household
operationx
Total

Housing 2

Total

Electricity
and
gas

Transportation

1929

77.3

9.2

4.7

37.7

19.5

9.4

1.8

30.3

11.7

4.0

1.2

1933

45.8

3.5

1.9

22.3

11.5

4.6

1.5

20.1

8.1

2.8

1.1

1.5

1939

67.0

6.7

3.4

35.1

19.1

7.1

2.2

25.2

9.4

3.8

1.4

2.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

7.8
9.7
6.9
6.5
6.7
8.0
15.8
20.4
22.9
25.0

1.0
4.1
6.6
8.0
10.6

3.8
4.8
4.6
3.9
3.8
4.5
8.4
10.6
11.5
11.3

37.0
42.9
50.8
58.6
64.3
71.9
82.7
90.9
96.6
94.9

20.2
23.4
28.4
33.2
36.7
40.6
47.4
52.3
54.2
52.5

7.5
8.8
11.0
13.4
14.6
16.5
18.2
18.8
20.1
19.3

2.3
2.6
2.1
1.3
1.4
1.8
3.4
4.0
4.8
5.3

26.2
28.2
31.0
34.3
37.1
39.6
45.3
50.4
55.3
58.2

9.7
10.4
11.2
11.8
12.3
12.8
14.2
16.0
17.9
19.6

4.0
4.3
4.8
5.2
5.9
6.4
6.8
7.5
8.1
8.5

1.5
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.6
2.9

2.1
2.4
2.7
3.4
3.7
4.0
5.0
5.3
5.8
5.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

30.8
29.8
29.1
32.5
31.8
38.6
37.9
39.3
36.8
42.4

13.7
12.2
11.3
13.9
13.0
17.8
15.8
17.2
14.8
18.9

13.7
14.0
14.0
14.6
14.6
16.2
17.1
16.9
16.6
17.8

98.2
108.8
113.9
116.5
118.0
122.9
128.9
135.2
139.8
146.4

53.9
60.4
63.4
64.4
65.4
67.2
69.9
73.6
76.4
79.1

19.6
21.2
21.9
22.1
22.1
23.1
24.1
24.3
24.7
26.1

5.5
6.1
6.8
7.4
7.8
8.6
9.4
10.2
10.6
11.3

63.0
68.5
74.0
80.6
86.1
92.1
99.2
105.9
112.8
121.9

21.7
24.3
27.0
29.8
32.2
34.3
36.7
39.3
42.0
45.0

9.5
10.4
11.1
12.0
12.6
14.0
15.2
16.2
17.3
18.5

3.3
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.1
6.5
7.1
7.6

6.2
6.7
7.1
7.8
7.9
8.2
8.6
9.0
9.3
10.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.4
430.2
464.8
490.4
535.9
579.7

43.1
41.6
46.7
51.4
56.3
62.8
67.7
69.6
80.0
85.5

19.7
17.8
21.5
24.4
26.0
29.8
30.1
29.7
35.8
37.7

17.7
17.9
18.9
20.3
22.8
24.7
27.7
29.5
32.6
35.0

151.1
155.3
161.6
167.1
176.9
188.6
204.7
212.6
230.4
247.0

81.1
83.2
85.5
87.8
92.7
98.9
106.6
109.6
118.3
126.1

26.7
27.4
28.7
29.5
31.9
33.5
36.6
38.2
41.8
45.1

12.0
12.0
12.6
12.9
13.5
14.7
16.0
17.0
18.4
20.4

130.7
138.1
147.0
156.1
167.1
178.7
192.4
208.1
225.6
247.2

48.1
51.2
54.7
58.0
61.4
65.5
69.5
74.1
79.9
86.8

20.1
21.0
22.2
23.4
24.8
26.3
28.0
30.6
32.7
35.5

8.3
8.8
9.4
9.9
10.4
10.9
11.5
12.2
13.1
14.2

10.7
11.2
11.7
12.2
12.8
13.7
15.0
16.2
17.4
18.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 P

618.8
668.2
733.0
809.9
889.6
979.1
1,089.9
1,210.0
1,350.8
1,509.8

84.9
97.1
111.2
123.7
122.0
132.6
157.4
178.8
200.3
212.8

34.9
43.8
50.6
55.2
48.0
53.4
70.0
81.6
91.2
91.3

36.7
39.4
44.8
50.7
54.9
58.0
64.0
70.9
77.6

136.3
140.6
150.4
168.1
189.8
209.6
227.1
246.7
271.7
301.9

46.6
50.5
55.1
61.3
65.3
70.1
75.9
82.4
91.2
99.6

22.0
23.4
24.9
27.8
36.4
39.5
42.9
46.7
50.9
65.1

5.4
5.5
6.3
7.7
9.6
10.2
12.0
13.1
14.0
18.3

269.1
293.4
322.4
352.3
391.3
437.5
488.5
549.8
619.8

85.7

264.7
277.7
299.3
333.8
376.3
408.9
443.9
481.3
530.6
597.0

700.0

94.0 38.3
102.7 41.6
112.3 45.9
123.2 50.2
136.5 56.1
150.2 64.5
166.2 72.8
187.3 82.0
212.2 91.4
241.6 102.0

15.5
17.0
18.9
20.6
24.1
29.3
33.0
38.3
42.6
48.8

21.1
23.8
26.0
27.9
30.7
32.6
37.9
43.6
49.2
55.8

1977:
I
I
I
Ill
IV

1,169.1
1,190.5
1,220.6
1,259.7

174.3
175.7
178.9
186.4

81.7
80.6
80.5
83.7

68.1
69.8
71.6
74.0

467.7
475.5
483.0
499.2

283.8
245.8
248.0
254.4

79.2
79.7
82.8
87.9

46.5
46.6
46.4
47.3

13.4
12.8
13.0
13.1

527.1
539.3
558.7
574.1

178.7
184.3
190.0
196.1

80.6
78.7
84.0
84.8

38.4
35.7
39.8
39.3

40.6
42.9
44.4
46.6

1978:
I
II
Ill
IV

1,287.2
1,331,2
1,369.3
1,415.4

185.3
200.3
203.5
212.1

84.1
93.5
92.4
94.9

72.4
76.5
78.9
82.7

505.9
521.8
536.7
558.1

260.6
267.7
274.5
283.9

85.4
89.9
92.7
96.8

48.1
49.0
51.5
55.0

14.6
14.4
13.4
13.6

596.0
609.1
629.1
645.1

202.5
209.0
215.0
222.1

90.4
88.9
92.5
93.7

43.4
40.8
42.8
43.4

47.6
48.6
49.7
50.8

1979:
I
I
I
Ill
IV P

1,454.2
1,475.9
1,528.6
1,580.4

213.8
208.7
213.4
215.5

97.7
89.1
89.8
88.6

82.1
84.2
87.3
89.4

571.1
581.2
604.7
631.0

292.9 95.5
296.7 96.9
303.1 101.0
315.1 105.0

58.4
60.2
68.3
73.4

15.4
17.2
20.4
20.0

669.3
686.0
710.6
733.9

229.5 99.1
236.3 99.7
244.9 103.5
255.7 105.6

47.7
47.3
49.6
50.5

52.9
54.5
56.8
58.9

1

Total includes "other" category, not shown separately.

2

Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




218

2.6

TABLE B-14.—Gross private domestic investment, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Change in
business
inventories

Fixed investment

Year or quarter

Gross
private
domestic
investment

Nonresidential
Total

Residential
Producers'
durable
equipment

Structures
Total
Total

Nonfarm

Total

Total

Nonfarm
structures

Nonfarm

ProFarm ducers'
struc- durable
tures equipment

Total

Nonfarm

1929

16.2

14.5

10.5

5.0

4.8

5.5

4.8

4.0

3.8

0.2

0.1

1.7

1.8

1933.

1.4

3.0

2.4

.9

.9

1.4

1.3

.6

.5

.0

.0

-1.6

-1.4

1939

9.3

8.8

5.8

2.0

1.9

3.9

3.3

3.0

2.8

.1

.1

.4

.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

13.1
17.9
9.9
5.8
7.2
10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

10.9
13.4
8.1
6.4
8.1
11.7
24.3
34.4
41.1
38.4

7.5
9.4
6.0
5.0
6.8
10.1
16.8
22.9
26.2
24.3

2.3
2.9
1.9
1.3
1.8
2.8
6.8
7.6
8.9
8.6

2.2
2.8
1.8
1.2
1.7
2.6
6.1
6.8
8.1
7.8

5.2
6.4
4.1
3.7
5.0
7.3
9.9
15.3
17.3
15.7

4.5
5.5
3.5
3.2
4.2
6.3
9.0
13.4
14.7
12.8

3.5
4.0
2.2
1.4
1.3
1.6
7.5
11.5
15.0
14.1

3.2
3.7
1.9
1.2
1.1
1.4
6.8
10.5
13.8
12.9

.2
.2
.2
.2
.1
.1
.5
.7
.9
.8

.1
.1
.1
.0
.0
.0
.2
.3
.3
.3

2.2
4.5
1.8
-.6
-1.0
-1.0
6.4
-.5
4.7
-3.1

1.9
4.0
.7
-.6
-.6
-.6
6.4
1.3
3.0
-2.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
77.6

47.0
48.9
49.0
52.9
54.3
62.4
66.3
67.9
63.4
72.3

27.1
31.1
31.2
34.3
34.0
38.3
43.7
46.7
41.6
45.3

9.3
11.3
11.5
12.8
13.2
14.4
17.4
18.1
16.7
17.0

8.6
10.5
10.6
12.0
12.4
13.7
16.6
17.4
16.0
16.1

17.8
19.9
19.7
21.5
20.8
23.9
26.3
28.6
24.9
28.3

14.9
16.9
17.1
18.7
18.4
21.3
24.1
26.2
21.9
25.2

19.9
17.7
17.8
18.6
20.3
24.1
22.6
21.2
21.8
27.0

18.7
16.6
16.6
17.5
19.2
23.0
21.4
20.0
20.7
25.8

.8
.8
.8
.8
.7
.6
.7
.7
.7
.7

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.5
.5
.5
.6

6.8
10.3
3.1
.4
-1.5
6.0
4.7
1.3
-1.5
5.2

6.0
9.1
2.1
1.1
-2.1
5.5
5.1
.8
-2.3
5.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

76.4
74.3
85.2
90.2
96.6
112.0
124.5
120.8
131.5
146.2

72.7
72.1
78.7
84.2
90.8
102.5
110.2
110.7
123.8
136.8

47.7
47.1
51.2
53.6
59.7
71.3
81.4
82.1
89.3
98.9

18.2
18.4
19.4
19.6
21.5
26.1
29.2
29.5
31.6
35.7

17.3
17.5
18.5
18.6
20.5
25.1
28.1
28.2
30.4
34.3

29.5
28.7
31.8
34.0
38.2
45.1
52.2
52.6
57.7
63.3

27.0
26.1
28.9
30.6
34.6
41.2
47.9
48.0
53.4
58.9

25.0 » 23.9
23.8
25.0
26.3
27.4
29.4
30.6
29.9
31.2
29.9
31.2
27.4
28.7
27.2
28.6
33.1
34.5
36.3
37.9

.6
.7
.6
.7
.7
.6
.7
.7
.6
.7

.5
.5
.5
.6
.6
.7
.7
.7
.8
.9

3.8
2.2
6.5
6.0
5.8
9.5
14.3
10.1
7.7
9.4

3.5
1.9
5.8
5.2
6.4
8.5
14.5
9.4
7.6
9.2

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978 p
1979

140.8
160.0
188.3
220.0
214.6
190.9
243.0
303.3
351.5
386.2

137.0
153.6
178.8
202.1
205.7
201.6
233.0
281.3
329.1
367.8

100.5
104.1
116.8
136.0
150.6
150.2
164.9
189.4
221.1
253.9

37.7
39.3
42.5
49.0
54.5
53.8
57.3
62.6
76.5
92.3

36.1
37.8
41.1
46.9
51.8
51.3
54.7
59.8
73.3
88.6

62.8
64.7
74.3
87.0
96.2
96.4
107.6
126.8
144.6
161.6

58.1
59.9
69.1
80.1
88.2
87.4
97.4
116.3
132.6
147.3

36.6
49.6
62.0
66.1
55.1
51.5
68.1
91.9
108.0
113.9

35.1
47.9
60.3
64.3
52.7
49.5
65.7
88.8
104.4
110.0

.6
.7
.7
.6
1.2
.9
1.1
1.5
1.8
1.9

.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.3
1.6
1.9
2.0

3.8
6.4
9.4
17.9
8.9
-10.7
10.0
21.9
22.3
18.4

3.7
5.1
8.8
14.7
10.8
-14.3
12.1
20.7
21.3
16.6

1977:
1
II
III
I
V

280.4
300.0
315.7
316.9

261.1
277.5
288.2
298.5

179.8
186.1
193.2
198.6

58.1
62.1
64.2
66.2

55.5
59.2
61.2
63.3

121.7
124.1
129.0
132.4

110.9
113.6
118.8
121.8

81.3
91.4
95.0
99.9

78.3
88.3
91.7
97.0

1.6
1.6
1.6
1.2

1.5
1.5
1.6
1.7

19.3
22.5
27.5
18.5

20.1
21.5
25.6
15.7

1978:
1
II
III
I
V

327.0
352.3
356.2
370.5

304.1
326.5
336.1
349.8

203.7
218.8
225.9
236.1

66.9
75.2
79.7
84.4

63.8
72.0
76.4
81.1

136.8
143.6
146.3
151.8

126.4
131.9
133.5
138.9

100.5
107.7
110.2
113.7

96.8
104.3
106.4
110.0

1.9
1.4
1.9
1.9

1.9
2.0
1.9
1.9

22.8
25.8
20.0
20.6

22.0
25.3
18.5
19.3

19791
II
III
IV

373.8
395.4
392.3
383.3

354.6
361.9
377.8
376.9

243.4
249.1
261.8
261.3

84.9
90.5
95.0
98.7

81.2
86.8
91.4
94.9

158.5
158.6
166.7
162.6

146.1
144.5
150.0
148.5

111.2
112.9
116.0
115.6

107.8
109.1
112.0
111.2

1.5
1.8
2.0
2.3

1.9
2.0
2.0
2.1

19.1
33.4
14.5
6.4

18.8
32.6
12.6
2.3

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




219

TABLE B-15.—Inventories and final sales of business, 1946-79
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; seasonally adjusted]
Inventories1

Inventory—final
sales ratio

Nonfarm
Year and quarter

Total

Manufacturing

Farm
Total

Fourth quarter:
1946
1947
1948
1949

Wholesale
trade

Final
sales 2
Retail
trade

Total

Other

Nonfarm3

73.7
86.9
90.6
81.0

21.8
25 8
23.4
19.5

51.9
611
67.2
61.4

26.7
31.8
34.8
31.0

9.6
10.6
12.1
11.7

11.9
14.1
15.3
14.3

3.7
4.6
4.9
4.4

192.0
219.6
235.7
234.6

0.384
.396
.384
.345

0.270
.278
.285
.262

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

98.8
112.1
109.4
110.1
107.2

24.2
26.5
23.1
21.6
20.5

74.6
85.6
86.3
88.5
86.7

37.4
46.2
47.3
49.3
47.0

14.3
14.9
14.9
15.1
15.4

17.7
18.3
17.9
18.5
18.7

5.2
6.2
6.2
5.5
5.6

259.8
295.6
313.3
325.8
330.1

.380
.379
.349
.338
.325

.287
.290
.275
.272
.263

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

112.1
121.8
126.7
128.9
132.3

17.6
18.3
20.9
24.9
23.6

94.6
103.5
105.8
103.9
108.7

51.4
57.5
57.9
56.0
57.5

16.7
17.8
18.1
18.1
19.2

20.9
21.8
22.9
22.9
24.1

5.6
6.4
6.9
6.9
8.0

356.5
377.0
392.7
405.0
426.7

.315
.323
.323
.318
.310

.265
.274
.269
.257
.255

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

136.2
138.4
145.2
151.5
157.6

24.8
25.0
26.6
26.9
25.7

111.3
113.4
118.6
124.6
131.8

58.1
59.5
62.5
64.8
68.5

19.6
20.2
20.9
22.4
23.6

25.6
25.1
26.7
28.2
29.8

8.1
8.7
8.6
9.2
9.9

442.1
465.3
492.7
524.2
553.1

.308
.297
.295
.289
.285

.252
.244
.241
.238
.238

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

172.7
189.1
202.2
215.3
236.2

29.7
28.9
29.2
30.4
33.4

143.0
160.2
173.0
184.9
202.8

73.7
83.4
91.1
97.4
107.1

25.3
28.6
30.6
32.4
35.3

33.1
36.6
37.8
40.7
44.4

10.9
11.6
13.5
14.4
16.1

610.7
647.5
688.0
757.6
804.5

.283
.292
.294
.284
.294

.234
.247
.251
.244
.252

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

244.2
261.9
288.6
355.8
425.6

31.7
36.8
44.6
66.2
61.9

212.5
225.1
243.9
289.6
363.7

110.8
113.6
120.4
143.6
186.4

38.3
41.2
45.7
55.2
69.8

45.6
51.0
55.9
64.4
72.3

17.7
19.2
21.8
26.4
35.2

839.4
915.2
1,019.9
1,120.5
1,216.0

.291
.286
.283
.318
.350

.253
.246
.239
.258
.299

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979".

428.3
460.5
506.0
586.9
684.3

64.3
60.8
61.5
76.7
81.8

364.0
399.7
444.5
510.2
602.5

187.9
203.9
222.5
253.7
305.3

68.1
76.6
86.4
102.0
118.6

72.1
80.5
91.6
105.4
118.7

35.9
38.8
44.1
49.1
59.9

1,355.1
1,480.9
1,651.3
1,884.3
2,086.5

.316
.311
.306
.311
.328

.269
.270
.269
.271
.289

1977:
1
II
III
IV

474.6
479.2
490.1
506.0

61.5
57.6
57.1
61.5

413.0
421.6
433.0
444.5

208.7
213.2
217.4
222.5

80.2
81.0
83.4
86.4

83.6
85.7
88.9
91.6

40.5
41.7
43.2
44.1

1,519.5
1,567.6
1,609.9
1,651.3

.312
.306
.304
.306

.272
.269
.269
.269

1978:
1
II
III
I
V

526.4
544.7
563.2
586.9

66.1
69.0
71.5
76.7

460.3
475.7
491.7
510.2

230.3
237.0
245.5
253.7

90.9
94.2
97.1
102.0

95.0
98.8
102.0
105.4

44.1
45.7
47.0
49.1

1,678.3
1,761.7
1,817.6
1,884.3

.314
.309
.310
.311

.274
.270
.271
.271

1979
1
II
II
I
IV P

613.4
635.1
662.9
684.3

79.8
81.2
79.9
81.8

533.5
553.9
583.0
602.5

267.4
277.7
294.4
305.3

106.9
111.0
116.3
118.6

107.6
111.6
114.5
118.7

51.6
53.5
57.8
59.9

1,932.2
1,951.1
2,027.5
2,086.5

.317
.325
.327
.328

.276
.284
.288
.289

1

End of quarter.
Annual rates.
Ratio based on total final sales, which include a small amount of final sales by farms.
Note.—The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) beginning in 1948 and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
2
3




220

TABLE B-16.—Inventories and final sales of business in 1972 dollars, 1947-79
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; seasonally adjusted]
Inventories1

Inventory—final
sales ratio

Nonfarm

Final
sales 2 '

Year and quarter
Total

Fourth quarter:
1947
1948 ....
1949

Farm

Manufacturing

Total

Wholesale
trade

Retail
trade

Other

Total

Nonfarm3

i

118.6
124.1
119.7

25.7
26 7
26.2

93.0
97.3
93.5

49.9
51.3
48.6

13.8
16.1
16.1

20.5
21.3
20.9

8.7
8.6
7.8

397.2
412.0
415.1 |

0.299
.301
.288

0.234
.236
.225

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

130.2
143.9
148.2
149.7
147.5

27.5
29.1
30.4
30.2
31.1

102.7
114.8
117.9
119.6
116.5

51.8
62.5
65.2
66.9
63.3

18.3
18.9
19.2
19.4
19.7

23.9
23.9
23.9
24.5
24.6

8.7
9.5
9.6
8.7
8.8

442.6
476.5
499.1
516.2
517.0

.294
.302
.297
.290
.285

.232
.241
.236
.232
.225

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

155.3
161.1
162.6
160.8
167.2

31.5
30.7
31.4
32.4
32.4

123.7
130.3
131.2
128.4
134.8

66.7
71.6
71.1
68.6
71.1

21.4
22.0
21.9
21.8
23.7

27.2
27.5
28.4
28.2
29.6

8.4
9.2
9.8
9.8
10.5

547.4
557.6
565.3
577.2
596.8

.284
.289
.288
.279
.280

.226
.234
.232
.222
.226

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

171.6
174.5
182.6
190.4
197.7

32.8
33.2
34.5
35.7
35.1

138.8
141.2
148.1
154.7
162.6

72.4
74.2
78.4
80.8
84.7

24.3
25.0
25.9
27.8
29.1

31.5
30.6
32.5
34.1
36.0

10.7
11.4
11.4
12.0
12.8

609.0
636.6
664.2
699.3
730.7

.282
.274
.275
.272
.271

.228
.221
.223
.221
.223

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

209.0
225.7
237.7
246.4
257.0

36.2
36.0
36.8
37.0
37.3

172.8
189.7
200.9
209.4
219.7

89.1
99.0
105.9
110.7
115.8

30.5
33.7
35.5
36.6
38.2

39.4
42.7
43.1
45.3
47.7

13.8
14.3
16.3
16.8
18.0

791.3
809.2
837.2
882.8
892.2

.264
.279
.284
.279
.288

.218
.234
.240
.237
.246

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

261.3
267.9
277.4
293.9
301.8

37.7
39.2
39.8
42.1
41.8

223.6
228.8
237.6
251.8
260.1

117.1
115.4
117.5
123.6
128.6

40.4
42.0
44.4
47.4
50.6

47.3
51.9
54.4
58.2
56.5

18.8
19.5
21.3
22.7
24.5

891.7
935.0
1,007.6
1,031.8
1,005.3

.293
.287
.275
.285
.300

.251
.245
.236
.244
.259

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 p.

292.1
298.7
311.8
325.9
336.1

43.0
41.1
41.0
41.3
42.3

249.1
257.6
270.8
284.6
293.8

124.2
126.8
131.0
136.3
143.5

47.2
50.3
53.7
58.2
59.5

54.0
56.8
61.6
64.8
65.1

23.6
23.6
24.5
25.3
25.8

1,043.3
1,092.7
1,151.2
1,212.0
1,232.6

.280
.273
.271
.269
.273

.239
.236
.235
.235
.238

1977:
1
II
III
I
V

301.5
304.8
309.0
311.8

40.7
40.7
40.7
41.0

260.8
264.2
268.2
270.8

127.6
129.3
130.4
131.0

51.4
51.8
52.8
53.7

57.9
59.0
60.6
61.6

23.8
24.1
24.4
24.5

1,109.6
1,122.2
1,139.3
1,151.2

.272
.272
.271
.271

.235
.235
.235
.235

1978.
1
II
III
I
V

315.9
319.8
322.9
325.9

41.0
41.0
41.2
41.3

274.9
278.8
281.7
284.6

132.6
134.3
135.6
136.3

55.5
56.3
56.8
58.2

62.6
63.5
64.4
64.8

24.3
24.7
24.9
25.3

1.151.0
1,178.0
1,192.9
1,212.0

.274
.271
.271
.269

.239
.237
.236
.235

1979:
1
II
III
IV

328.9
333.5
335.3
336.1

41.4
41.5
41.7
42.3

287.6
292.0
293.5
293.8

138.4
141.1
142.5
143.5

59.3
59.4
60.0
59.5

64.4
65.8
65.3
65.1

25.5
25.7
25.7
25.8

1,214.6
1,200.9
1,222.2
1,232.6

.271
.278
.274
.273

.237
.243
.240
.238

1
2
3

End of quarter.
Annual rates.
Ratio based on total final sales, which include a small amount of final sales by farms.

Note.—The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) beginning in 1948 and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.


291-289 O - 80 - 15


221

TABLE B-17.—Relation of gross na^ onal product and national income, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

Less:
Capital
consumption
allowances
with
capital
consumption
adjustment

Equals:
Net
national
product

PIUS:
Subsidies
less
current
surplus
of
government
enterprises

Less:

Indirect
business
tax and
nontax
liability

Business
transfer
navments

Statistical
discrepancy

Equals:
National
income

103.4

9.7

93.7

-0.2

7.1

0.6

1.1

84.8

1933

55.8

7.5

48.3

-.0

7.1

.7

.7

39.9

1939

90.8

8.7

82.1

.4

9.4

.5

1.4

71.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

100.0
124.9
158.3
192.0
210.5
212.3
209.6
232.8
259.1
258.0

9.0

.4
.1
.1
.1
.6
.7
.9
-.2
-.1
-.3

10.1
11.3
11.8
12.8
14.2
15.5
17.1
18.4
20.1
21.3

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
.6
.7
.8

1.1
.5
-.8

13.8
17.2
20.3
22.0

91.0
114.9
147.1
180.5
198.7
200.0
195.7
215.6
238.8
236.1

79.7
102.6
135.7
169.1
181.9
180.6
178.3
194.6
219.0
212.7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.2
330.2
347.2
366.1
366.3
399.3
420.7
442.8
448.9
486.5

23.9
27.6
29.6
31.6
33.1
35.3
38.9
42.0
44.1
46.1

262.3
302.6
317.6
334.5
333.2
364.0
381.8
400.8
404.8
440.4

.1
-.1
-.3
-.5
-.3
-.0
.7
.7
1.1
.1

23.4
25.3
27.7
29.7
29.6
32.2
35.1
37.5
38.7
41.8

.8
.9
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.8

2.0
4.0
2.7
3.3
3.0
2.5
-.8
.2
1.7

236.2
272.3
285.8
299.7
299.1
328.0
346.9
362.3
364.0
397.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.0
523.3
563.8
594.7
635.7
688.1
753.0
796.3
868.5
935.5

47.7
49.1
50.5
52.2
54.6
57.5
61.7
67.0
73.8
82.5

458.3
474.2
513.3
542.5
581.2
630.6
691.3
729.3
794.7
853.1

.4
1.7
1.8
1.1
1.7
1.6
2.5
1.6
1.3
1.8

45.4
48.0
51.6
54.6
58.8
62.6
65.3
70.2
78.8
86.4

2.0
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.7
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.4
3.8

-.7
1.6
4.0
3.7
2.2
.9
3.2
1.7
-.6

412.0
424.2
457.4
482.8
519.2
566.0
622.2
655.8
714.4
767.9

982.4
1,063.4
1,171.1
1,306.6
1,412.9
1,528.8
1,702.2
1,899.5
2,127.6
2,368.5

90.8
98.8
105.4
117.7
137.7
162.0
177.8
195.4
216.9
243.0

891.6
964.7
1,065.8
1,188.9
1,275.2
1,366.9
1,524.4
1,704.1
1,910.7
2,125.6

2.7
2.4
3.6
3.9
1.0
2.3
1.0
3.1
4.2
2.3

94.0
103.4
111.0
120.2
128.6
139.2
151.4
165.1
178.1
189.5

4.0
4.2
4.7
5.4
5.9
7.6
8.0
8.7
9.2

-2.1

10.2

1.3
1.7
2.6
5.8
7.4
6.1
7.5
3.3
4.0

798.4
858.1
951.9
1,064.6
1,136.0
1,215.0
1,359.8
1,525.8
1,724.3
1,924.2

1,820.2
1,876.0
1,930.5
1,971.3

186.9
191.9
198.7
204.3

1,633.3
1,684.1
1,731.8
1,767.0

1.5
1.2
2.8
6.8

160.1
162.7
166.9
170.6

8.6
8.7
8.9
8.9

9.1
8.6
7.7
4.6

1,456.9
1,505.3
1,551.1
1,589.8

2,011.3
2,104.2
2,159.6
2,235.2

209.1
214.4
219.6
224.6

1,802.2
1,889.8
1,940.0
2,010.6

4.3
4.6
2.8
5.1

173.6
179.3
177.2
182.1

8.9
9.0
9.2
9.5

3.0
2.3
3.9
4.1

1,621.0
1,703.9
1,752.5
1,820.0

2,292.1
2,329.8
2,396.5
2,455.8

229.9
239.0
247.9
255.1

2,062.2
2,090.8
2,148.5
2,200.8

1.8
2.6
3.2
1.5

184.8
186.9
191.1
195.2

9.6
9.9

-1.3

.6

10.4
10.8

1,869.0
1,897.9
1,941.9

1929

.

.

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 p

10.0
11.2
11.5
1' 3

U.3

-1.8

2.7
4.1
.7
1.8

-1.2

1.0

_ 2

-3.3

1977:

1
II
III
IV
1978

1
II
III
IV
1979:

1
II
III

IV P

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




222

8.3

TABLE B-18.—Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or quarter

National
income

Equals

Plus

Less
Corporate
profits
with
inventory
valuation
Net
and
interest
capital
consumption
adjustments

GovernWage
ment
Contribu- accruals
transfer
tions for
less
payments
social
disburseto
insurance
ments
persons

Business Personal
Personal
interest Dividends transfer
income
payments
income

1929

84.8

9.2

4.7

0.2

0.0

0.9

6.9

5.8

0.6

84.9

1933

39.9

-1.7

4.1

.3

.0

1.5

5.5

2.0

.7

46.9

1939

71.3

5.3

3.6

2.1

.0

2.5

5.4

3.8

.5

72.4

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

79.7
102.6
135.7
169.1
181.9
180.6
178.3
194.6
219.0
212.7

8.7
14.1
19.3
23.5
23.6
19.0
16.6
22.2
29.1
26.9

3.3
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.4
2.2
1.6
2.1
2.1
2.2

2.3
2.8
3.5
4.5
5.2
6.1
6.1
5.8
5.4
5.9

.0
.0
.0
.2
-.2
.0
-.0
.0
.0
-.0

2.7
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.1
5.6
10.8
11.2
10.6
11.7

5.3
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.2
5.9
6.4
7.3
7.7
8.2

4.0
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.6
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
.6
.7
.8

77.8
95.3
122.4
150.7
164.4
169.8
177.3
189.8
208.5
205.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

236.2
272.3
285.8
299.7
299.1
328.0
346.9
362.3
364.0
397.1

33.7
38.1
35.4
35.5
34.6
44.6
42.9
42.1
37.5
48.2

2.3
2.7
3.0
3.4
4.3
4.8
5.2
6.5
8.0
8.8

7.1
8.5
9.0
9.1
10.1
11.5
12.9
14.9
15.2
18.0

.0
.1
-.0
-.1
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

14.4
11.6
12.1
12.9
15.1
16.2
17.3
20.1
24.3
25.2

8.9
9.6
10.3
11.4
12.7
13.8
15.3
17.4
18.8
20.9

8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1
10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

.8
.9
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.8

226.1
253.7
270.4
286.1
288.2
308.8
330.9
349.3
359.3
382.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

412.0
424.2
457.4
482.8
519.2
566.0
622.2
655.8
714.4
767.9

46.6
46.9
54.9
59.6
67.0
77.1
82.5
79.3
85.8
81.4

9.8
11.2
12.8
14.3
15.9
18.5
21.9
24.3
26.8
30.8

21.1
21.9
24.3
27.3
28.7
30.0
38.8
43.4
48.1
54.9

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

27.0
30.8
31.6
33.4
34.8
37.6
41.6
49.5
56.5
62.7

23.3
24.6
27.1
30.2
33.3
37.2
41.8
45.0
49.6
55.9

12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3
19.1
19.4
20.1
21.9
22.6

2.0
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.7
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.4
3.8

399.7
415.0
440.7
463.1
495.7
537.0
584.9
626.6
685.2
745.8

798.4
858.1
951.9
1,064.6
1,136.0
1,215.0
1,359.8
1,525.8
1,724.3
1,924.2

67.9
77.2
92.1
99.1
83.6
95.9
126.8
150.0
167.7
178.5

37.5
42.8
47.0
52.3
69.0
78.6
83.8
94.0
109.5
129.7

58.7
64.8
73.6
91.5
103.8
110.6
126.0
142.5
164.1
189.8

.0
.6
.0
-.1
-.5
.0
.0
.0
.2
-.2

75.9
89.9
99.4
113.5
134.9
170.6
185.8
199.6
214.9
241.9

64.3
69.3
74.6
84.1
103.0
115.5
127.0
141.7
163.3
191.8

22.9
23.0
24.6
27.8
31.0
31.9
37.5
42.1
47.2
52.7

4.0
4.2
4.7
5.4
5.9
7.6
8.0
8.7
9.2
10.2

801.3
859.1
942.5
1,052.4
1,154.9
1,255.5
1,381.6
1,531.6
1,717.4
1,923.1

1,456.9
1,505.3
1,551.1
1,589.8

137.1
148.9
160.8
153.0

89.3
92.7
95.8
98.2

137.7
140.7
143.8
147.6

.0
.0
.0
.0

194.5
195.6
202.4
206.0

135.6
140.2
143.9
147.2

40.8
41.5
42.7
43.4

8.6
8.7
8.9
8.9

1,472.5
1,509.0
1,548.5
1,596.4

1978:
1
II
III
I
V

1,621.0
1,703.9
1,752.5
1,820.0

141.2
169.4
175.2
184.8

101.5
106.8
111.9
117.6

158.3
162.6
165.7
170.0

.0
.0
.5
.4

208.5
209.8
219.1
222.3

152.2
159.4
167.2
174.3

45.1
46.0
47.8
49.7

8.9
9.0
9.2
9.5

1,634.8
1,689.3
1,742.5
1,803.1

1979:
1
II
III
IV P

1,869.0
1,897.9
1,941.9

178.9
176.6
180.8

122.6
125.6
131.5
138.9

184.6
187.7
191.1
195.9

.1
-.9
— 1
.2

227.7
233.7
250.4
255.8

181.0
187.6
194.4
204.3

51.5
52.3
52.8
54.4

9.6
9.9
10.4
10.8

1,852.6
1,892.5
1,946.6
2,000.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 P
1977:
1
II
III
I
V

.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




223

TABLE B-19.—National income by type of income, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Proprietors' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption
adjustments

Compensation
of employees
Year or
quarter

National
income1

Total

Wages
and
salaries

Supplements
to
wages
and
salaries 2
0.6

Inven- Capital
tory
valua- consumption
tion
adjust- adjustment
ment

Total

Income

0.1

-0.2

3.2

3.9

-.5

-.2

6.3
2.5

2.1

11.7

4.4

4.4

-.0

7.3

7.6

-.2

-.1

49.9
62.1
82.1
105.8
116.7
117.5
112.0
123.1
135.5
134.7

2.3
2.7
3.2
3.8
4.5
5.6
6.0
6.1
5.9
6.6

12.9
17.4
24.0
29.0
30.2
31.7
36.6
35.8
40.7
36.1

4.5
6.4
9.8
11.7
11.6
12.2
14.9
15.2
17.5
12.7

4.5
6.5
10.3
12.2
12.2
12.6
15.1
15.6
18.1
13.4

-.0
-.0
-.5

8.4
10.9
14.3
17.3
18.6
19.4
21.6
20.6
23.2
23.5

8.6
11.7
14.4
17.1
18.3
19.3
23.3
21.8
23.1
22.2

-.0
-.6
-.4
-.2
-.1
-.1
-1.7
-1.5
-.4
.5

-.1
-.1
.2
.3
.4
.2
.0
.4
.5

154.8
181.0
195.7
209.6
208.4
224.9
243.5
256.5
258.2
279.6

147.0
171.3
185.3
198.5
196.8
211.7
228.3
239.3
240.5
258.9

7.8
9.7
10.4
11.0
11.6
13.2
15.2
17.2
17.7
20.6

38.4
42.8
42.9
41.3
40.8
42.5
43.6
45.0
47.4
47.2

13.5
15.8
14.9
12.9
12.3
11.3
11.2
11.0
13.1
10.7

14.1
16.6
15.7
13.7
12.9
11.9
11.8
11.8
13.9
11.6

25.1
26.4
26.9
27.6
27.6
30.5
31.8
33.1
33.2
35.3

-1.1
-.3
.2
-.2
-.0
-.2
-.5
-.3
-.1
-.1

.9
.9
.9
.9
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.3

412.0
424.2
457.4
482.8
519.2
566.0
622.2
655.8
714.4
767.9

294.9
303.6
325.1
342.9
368.0
396.5
439.3
471.9
519.8
571.4

271.9
279.5
298.0
313.4
336.1
362.0
398.4
427.5
469.5
514.6

23.0
24.1
27.1
29.5
31.8
34.5
40.9
44.4
50.3
56.8

47.0
48.3
49.6
50.3
52.2
56.7
60.3
61.0
63.4
66.2

11.4
11.8
11.9
11.6
10.3
12.6
13.6
12.1
12.0
13.9

12.3
12.7
12.8
12.5
11.2
13.5
14.6
13.2
13.3
15.4

-.9
_ g
-.9
-1.0
-.9
-1.0
-.9
-1.0
-1.2
-1.3
-1.4

24.9
27.0
28.0
28.4
28.5
31.2
32.4
33.9
34.3
36.6
35.6
36.4
37.7
38.7
42.0
44.1
46.7
48.9
51.4
52.3

34.2
35.3
36.4
37.2
40.2
42.7
45.3
47.5
50.4
51.3

.1
-.1
-.0
-.0
-.0
-.2
-.3
-.3
-.4
-.5

1.3
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.4

798.4
858.1
951.9
1,064.6
1,136.0
1,215.0
1,359.8
1,525.8
1,724.3
1,924.2

609.2
650.3
715.1
799.2
875.8
931.1
1,037.8
1,156.9
1,304.5
1,459.1

546.5
580.0
633.8
701.2
764.1
805.9
890.0
984.0
1,103.5
1,227.3

62.7
70.3
81.4
98.0
111.7
125.2
147.8
172.9
201.0
231.8

65.1
67.7
76.1
92.4
86.2
87.0
89.3
100.2
116.8
130.0

13.9
14.3
18.0
32.0
25.4
23.5
18.3
19.6
27.7
32.1

15.3
16.0
20.0
34.2
27.9
27.1
22.3
24.0
32.6
37.5

-1.4
-1.7
-2.0
-2.2
-2.5
-3.7
-4.0
-4.3
-4.9
-5.4

51.2
53.4
58.1
60.4
60.9
63.5
71.0
80.5
89.1
98.0

50.7
52.8
56.4
60.3
62.9
64.0
72.2
81.9
92.2
103.7

-.5
-.4
-.7
-1.7
-3.6
-1.2
-1.2
-1.3
-2.1
-3.0

1.0
1.1
2.5
1.8
1.6
.6
-.0
-.1
-1.0
-2.8

1,456.9
1,505.3
1,551.1
1,589.8

1,110.1
1,141.5
1,170.7
1,205.5

945.8
971.8
995.0
1,023.4

164.3
169.7
175.7
182.1

96.9
97.6
98.6
107.6

19.2
17.9
16.8
24.7

23.1
22.1
21.3
29.4

-4.0
-4.2
-4.5
-4.7

77.7
79.8
81.7
82.9

79.3
81.0
82.6
84.5

-1.7
-1.2
-1.3

.1
.0
-.1
-.3

1,621.0
1,703.9
1,752.5
1,820.0

1,244.0
1,288.2
1,321.1
1,364.8

1,052.0
1,090.0
1,117.4
1,154.7

192.0
198.3
203.7
210.1

109.1
115.0
117.4
125.7

25.7
27.7
26.1
31.3

30.4
32.5
31.1
36.4

-4.7
-4.9
-5.0
-5.1

83.4
87.3
91.3
94.4

85.6
90.1
94.5
98.5

-1.7
-2.0
-2.0
-2.4

-1.1
-1.6

1,869.0
1,897.9
1,941.9

1,411.2
1,439.7
1,472.8
1,512.8

1,189.4
1,211.5
1,238.0
1,270.3

221.8
228.2
234.8
242.6

129.0
129.3
130.3
131.5

34.2
33.7
30.9
29.5

39.3
39.0
36.2
35.5

-5.1
-5.3
-5.3
-6.0

94.8
95.5
99.4
102.0

99.8
100.5
106.0
108.6

-3.1
-2.5
-3.1
-3.1

-1.9
-2.5
-3.4
-3.4

29.0

1939...

71.3

48.1

46.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

79.7
102.6
135.7
169.1
181.9
180.6
178.3
194.6
219.0
212.7

52.1
64.8
85.3
109.5
121.2
123.1
118.1
129.2
141.4
141.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

236.2
272.3
285.8
299.7
299.1
328.0
346.9
362.3
364.0
397.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1979:
I
II
IV P

-0.1

4

6.2

50.5

29.5

1978:
I

Income

3

2.6

51.1

39.9

II
Ill
IV

Total

5.8

84.8

1977:

Total

Nonfarm
Capital
consumption
adjustment

14.9

1929
1933

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 »

Farm

See next page for continuation of table.




224

-'.S
-.4
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.7
-.7
-.7
-.6
-.6
-.6

-.5

TABLE B-19.—National income by type of income, 1929-79—Continued
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Rental income of persons
with capital consumption
adjustment

Year or quarter
Total

1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

4.9
2.2
2.6
2.7
3.1
4.0
44
4.5
4.6
5.5
5.3
5.7
6.1
7.1
7.7
8.8

Capital
Rental
conincome sumption
of
adjustpersons
ment

Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments
Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without
capital consumption adjustment
Profits before tax
Total

Profits after tax
Total
Total

9.2

10.5

10.0

-1.7

-1.2

5.3
8.7

6.3
9.8

1.0
7.0

-1.8
-2.5
-2.8
-2.8

14.1
19.3
23.5
23.6
19.0
16.6
22.2
29.1
26.9

15.2
20.3
24.4
23.8
19.2
19.3
25.6
33.0
30.8

10.0
17.7
21.5
25.1
24.1
19.7
24.6
31.5
35.2
28.9

-2.9
-3.3
-3.4
-3.4
-3.3
-3.5
-3.6
-3.6
-3.8
-4.0

33.7
38.1
35.4
35.5
34.6
44.6
42.9
42.1
37.5
48.2

37.6
42.7
39.8
39.5
37.8
46.7
45.9
45.4
40.8
51.2

5.7
2.3
3.1
3.3
3.9
5.0
56
5.9
6.2
7.3
7.7
8.5
8.9

-1.0

-0.8

-.1
-.6
-.6
-.8
-12

-1.4

-16

Profits
tax
liability

1.4
.5
1.4
2.8
7.6
11.4

141

12.9
10.7

9.1

Total

8.6
.4
5.6
7.2
10.1
10.1
11.1
11.2

9.0

UndisDividends tributed
profits

5.8
2.0
3.8
4.0
4.4
4.3
44
4.6
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2
8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1

Inventory
valuation
adjustment

Capital
consumption
adjustment

2.8

0.5

-1.6

-2.1

-.5

-.7

-1.0

_ 2
-2^5
-1.2

-1.1
-1.1
-1.0

-.8
-.3
-.6

-.8
-.2
-.1

1.8
3.2
5.7
5.9
66
6.5
4.4
9.9

11.3
12.4
10.2

15.5
20.2
22.7
18.7

42.6
43.9
38.9
40.5
38.1
48.4
48.6
46.9
41.1
51.6

17.9
22.6
19.4
20.3
17.6
22.0
22.0
21.4
19.0
23.6

24.7
21.3
19.5
20.2
20.5
26.4
26.6
25.5
22.1
28.0

10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

15.9
12.8
11.0
11.5
11.4
16.1
15.5
14.0
10.8
15.8

13.9
15.7
11.5

-5.3
-5.9
-2.2

1.9
-5.0
-1.2

-1.3

-2.7
-3.4
-3.9
-3.8
-4.0
-4.6
-4.5
-4.1
-3.2
-2.1
-3.0
-3.3
-3.4
-2.9

Net
interest

4.7
4.1
3.6
3.3
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.4
2.2
1.6
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.7
3.0
3.4
4.3
4.8
5.2
6.5
8.0
8.8
9.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

10.0
11.0
11.3
11.6
12.2
12.9
13.2

10.0
11.0
12.2
13.4
14.4
14.8
15.2
15.9
16.7
17.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

13.8
14.3
15.0
15.7
16.1
17.1
18.2
19.4
18.6
18.1

17.8
18.3
19.0
19.6
20.1
21.0
22.1
23.4
23.8
24.8

-4.1
-4.0
-4.0
-3.9
-4.0
-3.9
-3.9
-4.0
-5.2
-6.7

46.6
46.9
54.9
59.6
67,0
77.1
82.5
79.3
85.8
81.4

48.9
48.7
53.7
57.6
64.2
73.3
78.6
75.6
82.1
77.9

48.5
48.6
53.6
57.7
64.7
75.2
80.7
77.3
85.6
83.4

22.7
22.8
24.0
26.2
28.0
30.9
33.7
32.5
39.4
39.7

25.8
25.8
29.6
31.5
36.7
44.3
47.1
44.9
46.2
43.8

12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3
19.1
19.4
20.1
21.9
22.6

13.0
12.5
15.2
16.0
19.4
25.2
27.6
24.7
24.2
21.2

-1.9
-2.1
-1.7
-3.4
-5.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 P

18.6
20.1
21.5
21.6
21.4
22.4
22.1
24.7
25.9
26.9

25.8
27.7
29.4
31.3
33.7
36.9
38.3
44.2
49.3
55.0

-7.1
-7.6
-7.9
-9.8
-12.3
-14.5
-16.2
-19.5
-23 4
-28.1

67.9
77.2
92.1
99.1
83.6
95.9
126.8
150.0
167.7
178.5

66.4
76.9
89.6
97.2
86.5
107.9
141.3
162.0
180.8
195.2

71.5
82.0
96.2
115.8
126.9
120.4
156.0
177.1
206.0
237.0

34.5
37.7
41.5
48.7
52.4
49.8
63.8
72.6
84.5
92.7

37.0
44.3
54.6
67.1
74.5
70.6
92.2
104.5
121.5
144.4

22.9
23.0
24.6
27.8
31.0
31.9
37.5
42.1
47.2
52.7

14.1
21.3
30.0
39.3
43.6
38.7
54.7
62.4
74.3
91.7

-5.1
-5.0
-6.6
-18.6
-40.4
-12.4
-14.6
-15.2
-25.2
-41.9

-2.9
-12.0
-14.5
-12.0
-13.1
-16.7

37.5
42.8
47.0
52.3
69.0
78.6
83.8
94.0
109.5
129.7

1
II
III
IV

23.6
24.6
25.2
25.5

41.4
43.5
45.2
46.7

-17.8
-18.9
-20.0
-21.2

137.1
148.9
160.8
153.0

149.7
160.3
172.0
166.0

168.4
176.2
180.9
183.0

69.2
72.5
73.7
75.1

99.2
103.7
107.2
107.9

40.8
41.5
42.7
43.4

58.3
62.2
64.6
64.5

-18.7
-15.9
-8.9
-17.0

-12.6
-11.4
-11.2
-13.0

89.3
92.7
95.8
98.2

1978:
I
II
Ill
IV

25.2
24.4
26.8
27.1

46.9
47.3
50.9
52.1

-21.7
-22.9
-24.1
-25.0

141.2
169.4
175.2
184.8

153.6
182.0
189.0
198.6

177.5
207 2
212.0
227.4

70.8
84 7
87.5
95.1

106.7
122 4
124.6
132.3

45.1
46 0
47.8
49.7

61.6
76 4
76.8
82.6

-23.9
-251
-23.0
-28.8

-12.4
-12.6
-13.8
-13.8

101.5
106 8
111.9
117.6

27.3
26 8
26.6
27.0

53.0

-25.7
-27 3
-29.5
29.8

178.9
176 6
180.8

193.3
1913
198.3

233.3
227 9
242.3

91.3
88 7
94.0

142.0
139 3
148^3

51.5
52 3
52.8
54 4

90.5
87 0
95^5

-39.9
-36 6
-44.0
-46.9

-14.5
-14 7

122.6
125 6
13L5
138.9

1.0

-1.0

-.3

-1.7
-2.7
-1.5

-.3
-.5
.3
.1
.1
-.2
-.5

-2.3
-1.8

1.2
2.1
2.8
3.8
3.9
3.7
3.7
3.5
1.5
.3
2.5
1.9

11.2
12.8
14.3
15.9
18.5
21.9
24.3
26.8
30.8

1977:

1979:
1
Ill
IV P

541

56.0
56.8

1

-R6
-20.1

National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes
depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business
taxes. See Table B-17.
2
Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension, health, and welfare funds; workmen's compensation; directors'
fees; and a few other minor items.
3
With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment.
4
Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




225

TABLE B-20.—Sources of personal income, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Wage and salary disbursementsl

Year or quarter

Personal
income

Commodityproducing
industries
Total
Total

Manufacturing

GovernOther
Distrib- Service ment
labor
and
utive indus- governincome1
indusment
tries
tries
enterprises

Proprietors'
income wnn
inventory
valuation and
capital
consumption
adjustments
Farm

Nonfarm

1929

84.9

50.5

21.5

16.1

15.6

8.4

5.0

0.5

6.2

8.8

1933

46.9

29.0

9.8

7.8

8.8

5.2

5.2

.4

2.6

3.2

1939

72.4

46.0

17.4

13.6

13.3

7.1

8.2

.6

4.4

7.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

77.8
95.3
122.4
150.7
164.4
169.8
177.3
189.8
208.5
205.6

49.9
62.1
82.1
105.6
116.9
117.5
112.0
123.1
135.5
134.8

19.7
27.5
39.1
49.0
50.4
45.9
46.0
54.2
61.1
57.8

15.6
21.7
30.9
40.9
42.9
38.2
36.5
42.5
47.1
44.6

14.2
16.3
18.0
20.1
22.7
24.8
31.0
35.2
37.5
37.7

7.5
8.1
9.0
9.9
10.9
11.9
14.3
16.1
17.9
18.5

8.5
10.2
16.0
26.6
33.0
34.9
20.7
17.5
19.0
20.8

.6
.7
.9
1.1
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.4
2.7
2.9

4.5
6.4
9.8
11.7
11.6
12.2
14.9
15.2
17.5
12.7

8.4
10.9
14.3
17.3
18.6
19.4
21.6
20.6
23.2
23.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

226.1
253.7
270.4
286.1
288.2
308.8
330.9
349.3
359.3
382.1

147.0
171.3
185.4
198.6
196.8
211.7
228.3
239.3
240.5
258.9

64.8
76.3
82.0
89.6
85.7
93.1
100.6
104.2
100.0
109.6

50.3
59.3
64.1
71.2
67.5
73.8
79.4
82.4
78.6
86.8

39.8
44.3
46.9
49.7
50.1
53.4
57.7
60.5
60.8
64.8

19.8
21.5
23.1
24.9
26.1
28.6
31.3
33.6
35.6
38.5

22.6
29.2
33.3
34.4
34.9
36.6
38.8
41.0
44.1
46.0

3.7
4.6
5.2
5.9
6.1
7.0
8.0
9.0
9.4
10.6

13.5
15.8
14.9
12.9
12.3
11.3
11.2
11.0
13.1
10.7

24.9
27.0
28.0
28.4
28.5
31.2
32.4
33.9
34.3
36.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

399.7
415.0
440.7
463.1
495.7
537.0
584.9
626.6
685.2
745.8

271.9
279.5
298.0
313.4
336.1
362.0
398.4
427.5
469.5
514.6

113.1
113.7
121.8
126.9
135.4
146.0
161.0
168.3
183.4
199.6

89.7
89.8
96.7
100.6
107.1
115.5
128.0
134.1
145.8
157.5

68.2
69.3
72.8
76.3
81.4
87.2
94.4
100.9
109.9
120.7

41.4
44.1
47.2
50.2
54.4
58.9
64.7
71.8
79.8
89.4

49.2
52.4
56.3
60.0
64.9
69.9
78.3
86.4
96.4
104.9

11.2
11.8
13.0
14.0
15.7
17.8
19.9
21.7
25.1
28.2

11.4
11.8
11.9
11.6
10.3
12.6
13.6
12.1
12.0
13.9

35.6
36.4
37.7
38.7
42.0
44.1
46.7
48.9
51.4
52.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

801.3
859.1
942.5
1,052.4
1,154.9
1,255.5
1,381.6
1,531.6
1 717.4
1,923.1

546.5
579.4
633.8
701.3
764.6
805.9
890.0
984.0
1,103 3
1,227.5

202.9
208.3
227.3
254.3
274.6
275.0
307.2
343.1
387.4
435.2

158.2
160.3
175.4
196.2
211.4
211.0
237.4
266.0
298 3
330.9

130.1
139.3
151.9
168.1
184.3
195.3
216.3
239.1
269.4
300.8

97.5
106.2
117.2
130.3
145.1
160.1
178.5
200.5
228.7
257.8

116.0
125.6
137.3
148.6
160.5
175.4
188.0
201.3
217 8
233.7

32.0
36.2
42.0
48.7
55.6
65.1
77.4
91.8
106 5
122.7

13.9
14.3
18.0
32.0
25.4
23.5
18.3
19.6
111
32.1

51.2
53.4
58.1
60.4
60.9
63.5
71.0
80.5
891
98.0

1977:
I
||
III
I
V

1,472.5
15090
1,548.5
1,596.4

945.8
9718
995 0
1,023.4

327.9
340 5
348.1
356.1

254 8
263 3
269 4
276.4

230.0
236 0
241.8
248.5

192 2
196 8
202.9
210.0

195.7
198 5
202 2
208.8

86 2
89 7
93 7
97.4

19 2
17 9
16 8
24.7

111
79 8
817
82.9

1978:
|
||
III
IV ...

1,634.8
1689 3
1,742.5
1,803.1

1,052 0
1,090 0
1,116.8
1,154.3

363.9
383 4
393.7
408.6

285 6
2941
300.8
312.7

257 6
265 9
272.5
281.6

218 2
225 4
231.9
239.4

212.3
215 3
218.7
224.7

1011
104 7
108.2
111.9

25 7
27 7
26.1
31.3

83 4
87 3
91.3
94.4

1,852.6
1,892.5
1946 6
2,000.5

1,189.3
1,212.4
1238 1
1,270.1

423.0
431.7
438 3
447.9

324 8
328.5
3319
338^6

2911
295.8
304 0
312^2

247 2
252.8
2613
2693

228.0
232.1
234 5
240il

116.0
120.3
124 9
12916

34 2
33.7
30 9
29^5

94.8
95.5
99 4
102^0

1979:
II ....
Ill

IV

See next page for continuation of table.




226

TABLE B-20.—Sources of personal income, 1929-79—Continued

[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or
quarter

1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

Rental
income
of
persons
Personal
Divi- interest
with
capital dends income
consumption
adjustment

4.9
2.2
2.6
27
3.1
4.0
4.4
4.5
4.6
5.5
5.3
5.7
6.1
7.1
7.7
8.8

5.8
2.0
3.8
40
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.6
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2
8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1

6.9
5.5
5.4
53
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.2
5.9
6.4
7.3
7.7
8.2
8.9
9.6

Transfer payments

Total

1.5
2.1
3.0
31
3.1
3.1
3.0
3.6
6.2

11.3
11.7
11.3
12.5

Old-age,
GovernGovernsurvivors,
ment
ment
disability,
employunemand
Veterans
ee
ployment
health
benefits
retireinsurinsurment
ance
ance
benefits
benefits
benefits

0.4
5
.4
.4
.1
.1
.4
1.1
.8
.9
1.9
1.5
.9
1.1
1.0
2.2
1.5
1.5
1.9
4.1
2.8
3.0
4.3
3.1
3.0
2.7
2.3
1.9
2.2
2.1
2.2
4.0
5.8
5.6
4.3
6.6

0.0
0
.1
.1
.2
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
1.0
1.9
2.2
3.0
3.6
4.9
5.7
7.3
8.5

10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

10.3
11.4
12.7
13.8
15.3
17.4
18.8
20.9

15.2
12.6
13.1
14.1
16.2
17.5
18.7
21.6
25.9
27.0

10.2

13.8
14.3
15.0
15.7
16.1
17.1
18.2
19.4
18.6
18.1

12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3
19.1
19.4
20.1
21.9
22.6

23.3
24.6
27.1
30.2
33.3
37.2
41.8
45.0
49.6
55.9

28.9
32.8
33.8
35.8
37.4
40.4
44.7
52.6
59.9
66.5

11.1
12.6
14.3
15.2
16.0
18.1
20.8
25.5
30.2
32.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

18.6
20.1
21.5
21.6
21.4
22.4
22.1
24.7
25 9
26.9

22.9
23.0
24.6
27.8
31.0
31.9
37.5
42.1
47 2
52.7

64.3
69.3
74.6
84.1
103.0
115.5
127.0
141.7
163 3
191.8

79.9
94.1
104.1
118.9
140.8
178.2
193.8
208.4
224 1
252.1

38.5
44.5
49.6
60.4
70.1
81.4
92.9
104.9
116 3
132.4

1977:
i
II
Ill
IV

23 6
24.6
25.2
25.5

40 8
41.5
42.7
43.4

135 6
140.2
143.9
147.2

203 1
204.2
211.3
214.8

25.2
24 4
26.8
27.1

45.1
46 0
47.8
49.7

152.2
159 4
167.2
174.3

27.3
26 8
26.6
27.0

51.5
52 3
52.8
54.4

181.0
187 6
194.4
204.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

10.0
11.0
11.3
11.6
12.2
12.9
13.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1978:
1
||
III

IV
1979:
1

||

III
IV P

0.6
.6
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
1.0
3.0
7.0
7.0
5.9
5.3
7.7
4.6
4.3
4.1
4.2
4.4
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.6
4.6
5.0
4.7
4.8
4.7
4.9
4.9
5.6
5.9
6.7
7.7
8.8
9.7

0.1
.2
.3
3
.3
.3
.4
.4
.5
.7
.7
.7
.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.1
3.4
3.7
4.2
4.7
5.2
6.1
6.9
7.7
8.6

Aid to
families
with
dependent
children
(AFDC)

Other

0.8
U
1./
1J
li
U
U
2.()
)
2.C
2.]

.3
.4
.5
.6
.6
.5
.5
.6
.6
.6
.7
.8
.9
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.3
2.8
3.5
4.8
6.2
6.9
7.2
7.9

2.5
2.9
3.3
3.5
3.6
3.8
4.1
4.1
4.3
4.5
4.9
5.3
5.8
6.2
6.4
6.7
7.3
7.8
8.3
9.2

Less:
Personal Nonfarm
contributions for personal
income2
social
insurance

0.1
.2
.6
7
.8
1.2
1.8
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.9
3.4
3.8
4.0
4.6
5.2
5.8
6.7

6.9 i

7.9
9.3
9.7

10.2
11.1
12.5

384.4
399.0
424.5
447.0
480.7
519.5
566.1
609.1
667.5
725.8

14.9
17.2
18.9
21.0
25.5
33.0
35.2
37.3
41 1
47.7

28.0
30.8
34.2
42.2
47.7
50.5
55.6
61.3
69 6
80.7

780.7
838.0
917.3
1,011.9
1,119.3
1,220.8
1,350.6
1,498.1
1674 2
1,873.1

59 5
60.8
61.8
63.0

1439 9
1,477.5
1,517.6
.1,557.3
1,594.5
1 646 6
1J00.6
1,755.3
1,801.3
1 8410
U97.6
1,952.4

92
9.3

10.4
11.8
14.5
14.4
13.8
13 9
14.3

9.2
10.1
10.6
10 7
11.0

99 6
101.7
108.4
110.0

14 7
12.6
11.4
11.2

14 3
13.9
13.4
13.7

27 6
28.9
29.6
30.8

10 4
10.6
10.7
10.7

36 4

217.4
218 8
228.3
231.8

111.4
112 4
119.8
121.5

10.5

14.0
13 7
13.7
14.1

31.4
32 5
33.1
34.6

10.7
10 8
10.7
10.7

39.5
40 3
42.6

67.3
69 0
70.2
71.8

237.3
243 6
260.8
266.7

123.8
127 1
138.7
140.2

8.7
88
9.6

14.5
14 1
14.2
14.5

35.3
36 7
37.9
39.7

10.7
10 8
10.9
11.5

44.3
46 2
49.6
50.7

78.7
79 8
81.2
83.0

92
9.0
8.2

10.0

1

209.3
234.4
252.0
269.9
272.7
294.3
316.4
335.0
342.6
367.7

10.3
11.8
12.6
13.3
17.8
20.6
22.8
26.3

10.1
11.7
13.5
15.6
18.8
22.7
25.9
29.2
32 9
37.4

17.4
15.5
12.5

159.6
171.5
187.7
189.9

367

37.8
38.5

4Z0

The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-19 in that
it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements.
2
Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors' income, farm wages, farm other labor income, and agricultural net interest.
Note.—The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors' income is on an establishment basis and is
based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) beginning 1948 and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




227

TABLE B-21.—Disposition of personal income, 1929-79

[Billions of dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
L
.ess: Personal outlays

Percent of disposable
personal income

Par

Year or quarter

Personal
income

Less:
Personal
tax and
nontax
payments

Equals:
Disposable
personal
income

Total

rersonal
Interest
Personal paid by transfer
conpaysumption consum- ments
ers to
to
expendibusifortures
ness
eigners
(net)

Personal outlays
Equals:
Personal
saving
Total

Consump- Personal
tion
saving
expenditures

1929

84.9

2.6

82.3

79.1

77.3

1.5

0.3

3.1

96.2

93.9

3.8

1933

46.9

1.4

45.5

46.5

45.8

.5

.2

-1.0

102.2

100.7

-2.2

1939

72.4

2.4

69.9

67.8

67.0

.7

.2

2.1

97.0

95.8

3.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

77.8
95.3
122.4
150.7
164.4
169.8
177.3
189.8
208.5
205.6

2.6
3.3
5.9

72.0
81.8
89.4
100.1
109.0
120.4
145.2
163.5
176.9
180.4

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

.8
.9
.7
.5
.5
.5
.7
1.0
1.4
1.7

.2
.2

3.3

6.7

95.6
88.9
76.8
75.4
74.9
80.8
91.5
97.1
94.3
96.4

94.3
87.7
76.1
74.8
74.4
80.2
90.6
96.1
93.2
95.2

4.4

17.8
18.9
20.8
18.7
21.4
21.0
18.5

75.2
92.0
116.5
132.9
145.5
149.0
158.6
168.4
187.4
187.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

226.1
253.7
270.4
286.1
288.2
308.8
330.9
349.3
359.3
382.1

20.6
28.9
34.0
35.5
32.5
35.4
39.7
42.4
42.1
46.0

205.5
224.8
236.4
250.7
255.7
273.4
291.3
306.9
317.1
336.1

194.7
210.0
220.4
233.7
240.1
258.5
271.6
286.4
295.4
317.3

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

2.3
2.5
2.9
3.6
3.8
4.4
5.1
5.5
5.6
6.1

.4
.4
.4
.5
.5
.4
.5
.5
.4
.4

10.8
14.8
16.0
17.0
15.6
14.9
19.7
20.6
21.7
18.8

94.7
93.4
93.2
93.2
93.9
94.6
93.2
93.3
93.2
94.4

93.4
92.1
91.8
91.6
92.2
92.8
91.3
91.4
91.3
92.5

5.3
6.6
6.8
6.8
6.1
5.4
6.8
6.7
6.8
5.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

399.7
415.0
440.7
463.1
495.7
537.0
584.9
626.6
685.2
745.8

50.4
52.1
56.8
60.3
58.6
64.9
74.5
82.1
97.1
115.4

349.4
362.9
383.9
402.8
437.0
472.2
510.4
544.5
588.1
630.4

332.3
342.7
363.5
384.0
410.9
441.9
477.4
503.7
550.1
595.3

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.4
430.2
464.8
490.4
535.9
579.7

7.0
7.3
7.8
8.8
9.9
11.1
12.0
12.5
13.3
14.7

.4
.4
.5
.6
.6
.7
.6
.9
.8
.9

17.1
20.2
20.4
18.8
26.1
30.3
33.0
40.9
38.1
35.1

95.1
94.4
94.7
95.3
94.0
93.6
93.5
92.5
93.5
94.4

93.0
92.3
92.5
93.0
91.6
91.1
91.1
90.0
91.1
92.0

4.9
5.6
5.3
4.7
6.0
6.4
6.5
7.5
6.5
5.6

801.3
859.1
942.5
1,052.4
1,154.9
1,255.5
1,381.6
1,531.6
1,717.4
1,923.1

115.3
116.3
141.2
150.8
170.3
168.8
197.1
226.4
259.0
299.9

685.9
742.8
801.3
901.7
984.6
1,086.7
1,184.5
1,305.1
1,458.4
1,623.2

635.4
685.5
751.9
831.3
913.0
1,003.0
1,115.9
1,240.2
1,386.4
1,550.4

618.8
668.2
733.0
809.9
889.6
979.1
1,089.9
1,210.0
1,350.8
1,509.8

15.5
16.2
17.9
20.2
22.4
23.0
25.1
29.3
34.8
39.6

1.1
1.1
1.0
1.3
1.0
.9
.9
.9
.8
.9

50.6
57.3
49.4
70.3
71.7
83.6
68.6
65.0
72.0
72.8

92.6
92.3
93.8
92.2
92.7
92.3
94.2
95.0
95.1
95.5

90.2
90.0
91.5
89.8
90.3
90.1
92.0
92.7
92.6
93.0

7.4
7.7
6.2
7.8
7.3
7.7
5.8
5.0
4.9
4.5

1,472.5
1,509.0
1,548.5
1,596.4

222.4
223.0
225.3
235.2

1,250.1
1,286.0
1,323.2
1,361.2

1,197.6
1,220.2
1,251.3
1,291.7

1,169.1
1,190.5
1,220.6
1,259.7

27.5
28.7
29.8
31.1

1.0
1.0
.9
.9

52.5
65.9
71.9
69.5

95.8
94.9
94.6
94.9

93.5
92.6
92.2
92.5

4.2
5.1
5.4
5.1

1,634.8
1,689.3
1,742.5
1,803.1

239.8
252.1
266.0
278.2

1,395.0
1,437.3
1,476.5
1,524.8

1,320.4
1,366.1
1,405.6
1,453.4

1,287.2
1,331.2
1,369.3
1,415.4

32.4
34.0
35.6
37.1

.8
.9
.7
.9

74.6
71.2
70.9
71.5

94.7
95.0
95.2
95.3

92.3
92.6
92.7
92.8

5.3
5.0
4.8
4.7

1,852.6
1,892.5
1,946.6
2,000.5

280.4
290.7
306.6
321.7

1,572.2
1,601.7
1,640.0
1,678.8

1,493.0
1,515.8
1,569.7
1,622.9

1,454.2
1,475.9
1,528.6
1,580.4

37.7
39.0
40.2
41.6

1.1
.9
.9
.9

79.2
85.9
70.3
55.9

95.0
94.6
95.7
96.7

92.5
92.1
93.2
94.1

5.0
5.4
4.3
3.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

.2
A
.5
.7
.7
.7
.5

10.2
27.0
32.7
36.5
28.5
13.4

4.9

10.6

11.1
23.2
24.6
25.1
19.2

8.5
2.9
5.7
3.6

1977

1
II
III
IV
19781

II
III
IV
1979:

1
II
III
IV

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




228

TABLE B-22.—Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in
current and 1972 dollars, 1929-79
[Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates, except as noted]
Personal consumption expenditures

Disposable personal income
Year or quarter

Total (billions of
dollars)

Per capita
(dollars)

Total (billions of
dollars)
1972
dollars

Per capita
(dollars)

Population
(thousands) »

1972
dollars

Current
dollars

1972
dollars

Current
dollars

1972
dollars

Current
dollars

1929

82.3

229.8

675

1,886

77.3

215.6

634

1,769

1933

45.5

169.7

362

1,350

45.8

170.7

364

1,358

125,690

1939

69.9

230.1

534

1,756

67.0

220.3

511

1,681

131,028

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

75.2
92.0
116.5
132.9
145.5
149.0
158.6
168.4
187.4
187.1

244.3
278.1
317.3
332.2
343.9
338.6
332.4
318.8
335.5
336.1

570
690
863
972
1,051
1,065
1,122
1,168
1,278
1,254

1,849
2,084
2,353
2,429
2,485
2,420
2,351
2,212
2,288
2,253

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

230.4
244.1
241.7
248.7
255.7
271.4
301.4
306.2
312.8
320.0

537
605
657
727
781
854
1,017
1,122
1,192
1,194

1,744
1,830
1,792
1,819
1,847
1,939
2,131
2,124
2,133
2,145

132,122
133,402
134,860
136,739
138,397
139,928
141,389
144,126
146,631
149,188

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

205.5
224.8
236.4
250.7
255.7
273.4
291.3
306.9
317.1
336.1

361.9
371.6
382.1
397.5
402.1
425.9
444.9
453.9
459.0
477.4

1,355
1,457
1,506
1,571
1,574
1,654
1,731
1,792
1,821
1,898

2,386
2,408
2,434
2,491
2,476
2,577
2,643
2,650
2,636
2,696

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

338.1
342.3
350.9
364.2
370.9
395.1
406.3
414.7
419.0
441.5

1,266
1,342
1,383
1,439
1,452
1,535
1,581
1,637
1,662
1,755

2,229
2,219
2,236
2,283
2,284
2,391
2,415
2,421
2,406
2,493

151,684
154,287
156,954
159,565
162,391
165,275
168,221
171,274
174,141
177,073

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

349.4
362.9
383.9
402.8
437.0
472.2
510.4
544.5
588.1
630.4

487.3
500.6
521.6
539.2
577.3
612.4
643.6
669.8
695.2
712.3

1,934
1,976
2,058
2,128
2,278
2,430
2,597
2,740
2,930
3,111

2,697
2,725
2,796
2,849
3,009
3,152
3,274
3,371
3,464
3,515

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.4
430.2
464.8
490.4
535.9
579.7

453.0
462.2
482.9
501.4
528.7
558.1
586.1
603.2
633.4
655.4

1,798
1,824
1,904
1,979
2,087
2,214
2,365
2,468
2,670
2,860

2,507
2,516
2,589
2,649
2,755
2,872
2,982
3,035
3,156
3,234

180,671
183,691
186,538
189,242
191,889
194,303
196,560
198,712
200,706
202,677

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

685.9
742.8
801.3
901.7
984.6
1,086.7
1,184.5
1,305.1
1,458.4
1,623.2

741.6
769.0
801.3
854.7
842.0
859.7
891.8
929.5
972.5
994.1

3,348
3,588
3,837
4,285
4,646
5,088
5,504
6,017
6,672
7,363

3,619
3,714
3,837
4,062
3,973
4,025
4,144
4,285
4,449
4,509

618.8
668.2
733.0
809.9
889.6
979.1
1,089.9
1,210.0
1,350.8
1,509.8

668.9
691.9
733.0
767.7
760.7
774.6
820.6
861.7
900.8
924.5

3,020
3,227
3,510
3,849
4,197
4,584
5,064
5,579
6,179
6,848

3,265
3,342
3,510
3,648
3,589
3,627
3,813
3,973
4,121
4,193

204,878
207,053
208,846
210,410
211,945
213,566
215,203
216,898
218,594
220,466

1,250.1
1,286.0
1,323.2
1,361.2

908.0
921.5
936.3
951.8

5,781
5,936
6,094
6,256

4,199
4,254
4,312
4,374

1,169.1
1,190.5
1,220.6
1,259.7

849.2
853.1
863.7
880.9

5,406
5,495
5,622
5,789

3,927
3,938
3,978
4,049

216,244
216,643
217,119
217,586

1,395.0
1,437.3
1,476.5
1,524.8

956.6
966.1
976.2
991.5

6,401
6,583
6,748
6,954

4,389
4,425
4,461
4,522

1,287.2
1,331.2
1,369.3
1,415.4

882.7
894.8
905.3
920.3

5,906
6,097
6,258
6,455

4,050
4,098
4,137
4,197

217,942
218,335
218,814
219,286

1,572.2
1,601.7
1,640.0
1,678.8

996.6
993.0
993.4
993.4

7,157
7,275
7,430
7,586

4,536
4,510
4,501
4,489

1,454.2
1,475.9
1,528.6
1,580.4

921.8
915.0
925.9
935.2

6,619
6,704
6,926
7,142

4,196
4,156
4,195
4,226

219,690
220,166
220,715
221,291

1977
1

I
I
I
I
I
I
V

Current
dollars

121,875

1978

1
I
I
I
I
I
I
V
1979
1

I
I
II
I
IV

1
Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning 1960. Annual data are for
July 1 through 1973 and are averages of quarterly data beginning 1974. Quarterly data are average for the period.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census).




229

TABLE B-23.—Gross saving and investment, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross saving

Year or
quarter

Gross private saving
Total
Personal
saving

Gross
business
saving 1

14.9

3.1

11.7

2.2

-1.0

3.2

Total

15.9

1929
1933

Gross investment

Government surplus or
deficit ( - ) , national
income and product
accounts

Capital
grants
received
by the
United
States
(net)*

Total

Gross
private
domestic
investment

Federal

State
and
local

1.0

1.2

-0.2

17.0

16.2

-1.4

-1.3

-.1

1.6

Net
foreign
investment 3

Statistical
discrepancy

1.4

Total

0.8

1.1

1.4

1939

8.7

10.9

2.1

-2.2

-2.2

10.1

9.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

13.5
18.5
10.5
5.3
2.3
5.1
34.6
41.2
49.0
34.8

14.2
22.2
41.9
49.4
54.1
44.6
29.2
26.8
40.6
38.2

3.3
10.2
27.0
32.7
36.5
28.5
13.4
4.9
10.6
6.7

10.9
12.0
14.8
16.7
17.7
16.0
15.8
21.8
30.0
31.4

-.7
-3.8
-31.4
-44.1
-51.8
-39.5
5.4
14.4
8.4
-3.4

-1.3
-5.1
-33.1
-46.6
-54.5
-42.1
3.5
13.4
8.3
-2.6

.6
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.7
2.6
1.9
1.0
.1
-.7

14.6
19.0
9.7
3.5
5.1
9.2
35.3
42.9
47.8
35.9

13.1
17.9
9.9
5.8
7.2
10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

1.5
1.1
-.2
-2.2
-2.1
-1.4
4.6
9.0
2.0
.6

~'.B
-1.8
2.7
4.1
.7
1.8
-1.2
1.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

49.7
55.5
49.3
48.1
49.4
65.6
73.6
72.6
60.4
75.8

41.6
49.4
53.1
55.0
56.5
62.4
68.4
71.7
73.0
77.3

10.8
14.8
16.0
17.0
15.6
14.9
19.7
20.6
21.7
18.8

30.8
34.6
37.1
38.0
41.0
47.5
48.7
51.1
51.3
58.5

8.0
6.1
-3.8
-6.9
-7.1
3.1
5.2
.9
-12.6
-1.6

9.2
6.5
-3.7
-7.1
-6.0
4.4
6.1
2.3
-10.3
-1.1

-1.2
-.4
-.0
.1
-1.1
-1.3
-.9
-1.4
-2.4
-.4

51.7
59.5
51.9
51.4
52.4
68.0
72.8
72.8
62.0
75.5

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
77.6

-2.1
.3
-.2
-1.9
-.3
-.3
1.8
3.6
.1
-2.0

2.0
4.0
2.7
3.3
3.0
2.5
-.8
.2
1.7
-.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

78.9
75.8
83.6
89.6
100.1
115.4
122.9
120.3
130.8
147.5

75.8
80.0
87.4
88.9
102.4
114.9
124.2
134.6
136.3
136.8

17.1
20.2
20.4
18.8
26.1
30.3
33.0
40.9
38.1
35.1

58.7
59.8
67.0
70.1
76.2
84.6
91.2
93.7
98.2
101.7

3.1
-4.3
-3.8
.7
-2.3
.5
-1.3
-14.2
-5.5
10.7

3.0
-3.9
-4.2

-1.8
-13.2
-5.8
8.5

.1
-.4
.5
.5
1.0
-.0
.5
-1.1
.3
2.1

78.2
77.3
87.6
93.4
102.3
116.3
126.1
122.1
130.2
144.2

76.4
74.3
85.2
90.2
96.6
112.0
124.5
120.8
131.5
146.2

1.7
3.0
2.4
3.2
5.7
4.3
1.6
1.2
-1.4
-2.0

_ 7
L6
4.0
3.7
2.2
.9
3.2
1.7

-1.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "....

143.4
155.4
177.5
216.8
204.4
195.4
236.2
276.1
324.6
364.0

151.9
173.0
180.4
210.5
209.5
259.8
271.9
295.6
324.9
348.9

50.6
57.3
49.4
70.3
71.7
83.6
68.6
65.0
72.0
72.8

101.4
115.7
131.0
140.2
137.9
176.2
203.3
230.7
252.9
276.0

-9.4
-18.3
-3.5
6.3
-3.2
-64.4
-35.7
-19.5
-.3
14.0

-12.1
-22.0
-17.3
-6.7
-10.7
-70.6
-53.6
-46.3
-27.7
-10.5

2.8
3.7
13.7
13.0
7.6
6.2
17.9
26.8
27.4
24.4

141.4
156.8
179.2
219.4
210.1
202.8
242.3
283.6
327.9
368.0

140.8
160.0
188.3
220.0
214.6
190.9
243.0
303.3
351.5
386.2

.5
-3.2
-9.0
-.6
-4.5
11.9
-.7
-19.6
-23.5
-18.2

-2.1
1.3
1.7
2.6
5.8
7.4
6.1
7.5
3.3
4.0

253.3
276.0
291.6
283.6

266.4
292.7
315.1
308.4

52.5
65.9
71.9
69.5

213.9
226.8
243.2
238.9

-13.1
-16.6
-23.5
-24.8

-37.2
-40.9
-53.6
-53.6

24.2
24.2
30.1
28.8

262.5
284.7
299.3
288.1

280.4
300.0
315.7
316.9

-17.9
-15.3
-16.4
-28.8

9.1
8.6
7.7
4.6

289.7
329.2
332.7
346.9

308.9
324.2
330.4
336.1

74.6
71.2
70.9
71.5

234.3
253.0
259.5
264.6

-19.2
5.0
2.3
10.8

-49.4
-24.6
-20.4
-16.3

30.2
29.6
22.7
27.1

292.7
331.5
336.5
351.0

327.0
352.3
356.2
370.5

-34.2
-20.8
-19.6
-19.4

3.0
2.3
3.9
4.1

362.2
374.3
367.3

345.2
360.5
352.1

79.2
85.9
70.3
55.9

266.0
274.6
281.9

15.8
12.7
14.0

-11.7
-7.0
-11.3

27.6
19.7
25.3

362.8
373.1
375.6
360.4

373.8
395.4
392.3
383.3

-11.0
-22.3
-16.7
-22.8

.6
-1.3
8.3

1977:
I
II
IV

1978:
I
II
IV

1979:
I
II
Ill
IV

P....

-13

1

0.9
.7
.7
.0
4
-2.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
1.1

Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, corporate and noncorporate capital
consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment, and private wage accruals less disbursements.
2
Allocations of special drawing rights (SDR), except as noted in footnote 4.
3
Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants
received by the United States, net.
4
In February 1974, the U.S. Government paid to India $2,010 million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade
Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners, i.e., a - $ 2 . 0 billion entry in
capital grants received by the United States, net.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




230

TABLE B-24.—Saving by individuals, 1946-79x
[Billions of dollars,- quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Increase in financial assets

Year or quarter

Total
Total5

Securities
CurMoney
rency
SavCorpomarand
ings
Govern- rate
ket
acment
and
demand
fund
fordepos- counts
securishares
eign
its
ties 3
bonds

Net investment in

NonMortInsurcorgage
ance
ConNonporate debt
ConCorpoand
sumei
Other
busisumer
farm
on
rate pension
duradebt67
credit
ness
nonhomes
equibles
reasfarm
ties 4 serves 5
sets 6 homes

5.3
5.4
5.3
5.6

3.6
6.7
9.1
8.4

6.1
8.8
9.8
10.9

2.1
2.0
7.1
2.0

3.6
4.7
4.6
4.4

3.1
3.7
3.2
3.2

-0.5
2.2
2.8
2.2

6.9
6.3
7.7
7.9
7.8

11.8
11.7
11.3
12.3
12.7

14.9
11.3
8.4
9.4
6.9

7.0
4.4
2.0
.8
1.5

6.7
6.6
6.2
7.6
8.7

4.8
1.6
5.3
4.2
1.5

5.0
3.6
2.8
1.9
5.5

1.0
2.0
1.5
1.5
.6

8.5
9.5
9.5
10.4
11.9

16.7
15.6
13.2
12.1
15.9

11.9
8.7
7.6
3.4
6.9

2.4
.5
2.1
2.3
3.4

12.2
11.2
8.9
9.5
12.8

7.2
3.9
2.9
.5
8.0

6.4
3.2
3.8
6.0
7.2

-.5
.3
-2.0
-2.6
-.1

11.5
12.1
12.7
13.9
16.1

14.3
12.0
12.8
13.4
13.9

6.7
4.1
8.2
11.8
15.1

3.1
3.3
6.3
8.5
7.7

11.7
12.2
14.1
16.2
17.5

4.4
2.5
6.3
8.9
9.8

4.8
6.5
7.2
10.8
9.8

-2.1
1.3 - . 6
3.9 - 4 . 2
4.3 - 6 . 4
5.4 - 3 . 6

16.9
19.2
18.6
19.8
21.5

13.4
12.6
10.9
14.3
14.2

20.2
22.8
20.9
26.3
26.2

11.2
9.4
8.5
9.4
11.4

17.0
13.8
12.5
17.1
18.5

10.6
6.5
5.7
11.5
10.8

12.6
10.8
15.0
15.3
13.3

9.5
8.8
5.0
2.0
5.1

-1.5
-5.1
-5.6
-6.7
-2.2

24.0
27.5
29.4
33.0
36.3

11.7
18.8
26.0
28.2
23.1

20.2
26.2
35.1
41.1
28.6

9.8
13.5
17.7
20.3
2.8

14.1
26.4
41.5
47.1
35.4

5.4
14.7
19.8
26.0
9.9

14.8
21.8
29.5
26.5
22.7

8.4
22.9
12.0
5.8
18.3 - 3 . 3
30.2 - 1 . 4

-3.6
-3.2
-6.1
-6.2

43.5
52.6
65.4
77.9

20.8
33.1
48.1
59.2

26.6 - . 2 38.1
40.6 - 1 . 0 61.3
50.9
5.9 93.2
57.5
6.9 103.8

9.7
25.6
40.6
50.6

16.6
29.2
40.0
46.2

5.6
4.9
13.1 - 5 . 1
7.7 - 4 . 7
46.9 - 8 . 3

-11.0
-3.5
-1.7
-8.3

56.9
60.0
80.6
63.8

39.8
45.7
52.0
54.9

50.8
49.8
49.8
53.1

77.5
93.5
101.6
100.2

30.7
42.5
39.3
49.7

47.0
37.6
40.8
34.7

-8.9 - 8 . 8
1.5
-1.0
3.0 -10.2

71.0
73.2
90.7
76.4

56.6
58.3
59.8
62.0

48.1
59.5
58.8
63.4

5.3 95.3
5.2 102.8
6.7 104.1
10.4 113.2

43.4
56.9
48.8
53.3

38.1
53.0
55.7
38.0

52.2 - 1 . 0 -9.5
51.1
8.5 -13.1
-10.5 - 1 . 4 -3.6

70.5
85.1
90.8

60.4
58.5
56.6

61.3
52.5
53.6

111.5
117.4
101.5

50.7
44.7
42.4

44.9
54.5
58.6

-1.5 -0.9
1.6
1.3 - . 1
1.8 - . 4

1946
1947
1948
1949

24.4
20.2
24.5
21.3

18.8
13.2
9.1
9.9

5.6
.1
-2.9
-2.0

6.3
3.4
2.2
2.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

30.9
34.7
30.7
31.6
27.7

13.7
19.1
23.2
22.8
22.2

2.6
4.6
1.6
1.0
2.2

2.4
4.7
7.8
8.1
9.1

-.1
-.6
2.5
2.5
1.0

.2
-.0
-.1
-.9

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

33.4
36.7
35.8
33.4
35.6

28.0
30.2
28.6
31.6
37.4

1.2
1.8
-.4
3.8

8.6
9.4
11.9
13.9
11.1

5.8
3.9
2.3
-2.5
10.1

.5
1.1
.9
1.2
.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

35.6
34.1
40.3
45.2
55.7

32.5
35.9
40.6
47.3
56.1

1.0
-.9
-1.2
4.2
5.2

12.1
18.3
26.1
26.3
26.1

2.4
1.8
1.8
1.2
5.1

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

63.8
72.1
77.6
82.2
73.7

59.0
58.4
70.4
76.2
64.5

7.5
2.4
9.9
11.1
-2.5

27.8
19.0
35.3
31.1
9.1

3.9
11.7
-.7
5.7
25.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

86.1
98.7
116.9
138.4
128.9

78.8
103.0
128.8
148.5
142.4

8.9
12.2
13.9
14.1
7.1

43.6
67.8
74.5
63.8
55.9

-7.3
-10.1
1.9
24.1
27.8

1975....
1976...
1977....
1978....

150.0
164.6
172.8
198.2

167.2
208.1
241.7
275.3

4.0 84.0
14.9 109.3
22.7 109.2
18.3 105.2

162.4
166.5
189.7
172.7

223.7
236.8
263.8
242.6

23.7 115.8
31.1 103.5
25.5 120.6
10.4 96.9

176.6
196.7
205.4
214.2

243.4
286.4
288.6
282.9

26.7 91.2
17.2 113.7
14.7 117.1
14.7 98.8

170.5 248.8
201.6 300.4
194.1 281.8

-24.0 90.0
16.2 83.2
17.7 108.5

1977:
in
iv
1978:
I
II
Ill
IV

,

1979:
I
II

Less: Net increase in
debt

—9

35.3
32.5
26.5
27.1
28.8
31.6
33.1

.7
-.1
-.5
.2
— .5

1

7.0
6.7
4.6

Saving by households, personal trust funds, nonprofit institutions, farms, and other noncorporate business.
Includes commercial paper and miscellaneous financial assets, not shown separately.
Consists of U.S. sayings bonds, other U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities,
and State and local obligations.
:
Includes investment company shares.
5
Private life insurance reserves, private insured and noninsured pension reserves, and government insurance and pension reserves.
6
Includes data for corporate farms.
7
Other debt consists of security credit, policy loans, noncorporate business mortgage debt, and other debt.
2
3

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




231

TABLE B-25.—Money income (in 1978 dollars) and poverty status of families and unrelated individuals by
race of head, 1947-78

Vaar

FAMILIES
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1974*
1975
1976
1977
1978

Percent with
incomes—

Total
number
(millions)

Median
income

37 2
38.6
39.3
39.9
40.6
40.8
41.2
42.0
42 9
43 5
43 7
44.2
45.1
3
45.5
3
46.4
3
47.1
3
47.5
3
48.0
3
48.5
3
49.2
3
50.1
3
50.8
3
51.6
3
52.2
53.3
54.4
55.1
55.7
55.7
56.2
56.7
57.2
57.8

$8 848
8,634
8,500
8,991
9,310
9,557
10,342
10,110
10 759
11468
11505
11,472
12,119
12,374
12,500
12,838
13,309
13,810
14,378
15,134
15,493
16,179
16,778
16,569
16,559
17,326
17,683
16,973
17,060
16,621
17,134
17,226
17,640

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951.
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966.
1967
1968.
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1974 4
1975
1976.
1977
1978

Total
number
Below $25,000
(millions)
poverty
and
level
over1

18.5
18.1
18.1
17.2
15.9
15.0
13.9
11.8
11.4
10.0
9.7
10.1
10.0
9.3
8.8
9.2
8.8
9.7
9.4
9.3
9.1

40 8
38.9
38.1
42.0
18.1
4.0
4.9
5.1
56
69
63
7.0
8.5
9.4
10.6
11.1
12.4
13.5
14.8
16.8
18.2
20.4
22.6
11.1
11A
25.2
25.4
22.6
25.6
23.6
24.9
26.3
27.9

341
35.3

38.2
39 0
39 5
39 7
40.2
40.9
41.1
41.9
42.4
42.7
43.1
43.5
44.1
44.8
45.4
46.0
46.5
47.6
48.5
48.9
49.5
49.4
49.9
50.1
50.5
50.9

Percent with
incomes—

Median
income

$9 217
8,965
8,839
9,331
9,687
10,107
10,723
10,525
11233
12 001
11973
11,953
12,624
12,848
13,036
13,445
13,947
14,417
14,986
15,723
16,081
16,750
17,420
17,189
17,183
18,001
18,481
17,660
17,729
17,286
17,797
18,013
18,368

8.2
84
9.0
9.4
91
9.7
9.5
9.7
99
9.8
10.4
10 9
10 9
311 1

3H2
3
11.0
3
11 2
3
12.1
3
12.2
3
12 5
3
13.2
3
13 9
3
14.6
3
15.5
16.3
16.8
18 3
18.9
18 9
20.2
215
231
24.6

$2,861
2 699
2,872
2,830
2 999
3,462
3,403
2,965
3 208
3,420
3,460
3 351
3 484
3 787
3 823
3,778
3 834
4,169
4,449
4 601
4,646
5 222
5,213
5,268
5,339
5,488
6 066
5,870
6 086
5,915
6157
6 356
6,705

46 1
45 2
45 9
45.4
44 2
42.7
39 8
38 3
381
34 0
34.0
32 9
31.6
29 0
25 6
25.5
241
25.1
24 9
22 6
22.1

7.5
59
7.0
7.7
16
2.4
2.6
24
30
3.1
41
45
47
48
59
7.5
78
8.3
92
91
101
12 1
11.9
12.5
12.6
13.4
14 9
13.2
13 8
13.4
13 9
14 8
16.6

Percent with
incomes—

Total
number
Below $25,000
(milpoverty
lions)
and
level
over1

15.2
14.9
14.8
13.9
12.8
12.2
11.1
9.3
9.0
8.0
7.7
8.0
7.9
7.1
6.6
7.0
6.8
7.7
7.1
7.0
6.9

43 3
41.4
40.4
44.6
19.6
4.3
5.3
5.6
62
75
69
7.5
9.2
10.1
11.4
12.0
13.4
14.5
16.0
18.1
19.4
21.6
24.0
24.0
23.8
26.8
27.0
24.2
27.1
25.1
26.5
27.9
29.5

2
31
2

3.3

2

3.8
239

2
40
2
40
2
4.0
2

4.2

2
4.3
2

4.5
2
4.6
2
4.8
2
4.8
2
4.8
2
5.0
4.6
4.6
4.8
4.9
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.5
5.6
5.8
5.8
5.9

Median
income

2

$4 711
2
4,790
2
4,514
2
5,062
2
5,101
2
5,744
2
6,012
2
5,862
2
6 195
26 314
2
6 401
2
6,123
2
6,521
2
7,113
2
6,955
2
7,173
2
7,379
2
8,068
2
8,253
2
9,425
9,521
10,046
10,670
10,544
10,369
10,699
10,666
10,324
10,586
10,636
10,586
10,290
10,879

Below $15,000
poverty
and
level
over1

Below $15,000
poverty
and
level
over1

UNRELATED
INDIVIDUALS

Black

White

Total

7.2
73

83
85
8.5
89
92
93
96
96
9.5
97
10.4
10 5
10 7
113
12 0
12.5
13.4
14.2
14 5
15 8
16.3
16 3
17.5
18 6
19 9
21.3

$3 023
2 852
3,101
3,019
3157
3,731
3,591
3191
3 410
3 512
3 701
3 590
3 722
4 094
4109
4,043
4 019
4,390
4 640
4 838
4 824
5 533
5,475
5 513
5,579
5 731
6 265
6130
6 306
6178
6 421
6597
7^030

44 1
43 0
43 2
42.7
42 0
40.7
381
361
36 5
32 2
32.1
30 8
29.6
27 1
23 7
23 2
218
111
111
20 4
19.8

82
64
8.1
84
18
2.7
32
27
35
34
47
52
52
54
68
8.4
87
9.2
10 2
101
10 9
13 1
13.0
13 6
13.6
14 2
15 6
14 1
14 6
14 3
14 8
15 6
17.3

Below $25,00C
poverty
and
level
over1
2

14 2
213.1
11.6
2
12.2
2
3.4
2
.6
2
.7
2
.7
2
6
2
9
2
7
2
1.4
2
1.4
2
2.5
2
3.2
2
2.7
2
3.4
2
4.2
2
4.5
2
5.4
6.1
7.8
8.8
9.7
9.1
11.1
10.1
8.5
10.8
9.9
10.7
11.1
13.4
2

48.1

2
49.0
2

49.0
2
48.0
2
43.7
2
40.0
2
39.7
35.5
33.9
29.4
27.9
29.5
28.8
29.0
28.1
27.8
26.9
27.1
27.9
28.2
27.5

Below $15,000
poverty
and
level
over1
2
1.0
2

10

214
214
2
13
2
15
2
16
2
16
2
15
2I6
2
1.5
2
15
2
1.6
2
17
2
16
16
17
1.8
17
1.9
20
22
23
24
24
26
29
2.9

2

2
31
2

$2 178

2
2 137
2
2,241
2
2 212
2
2 332
2
2,581
2
2 824
2
2 119
2
2 277
2
2 607
2
2 352
2

2 435
2 404
2 351
2
2 523
2
2^700
2
2 758
2
3]008
2
3 383
2
3 042
3437
3 681
3J46
3 555
3,623
4 004
4 629
4 045
4 254
3 982
4 317
4 773
4,411
2
2

17
2
5
32
2
6
2 4
2 2
2
5
2 2
2
8
2
5
2
8
2
15
214
2
17
2
2.7
221
2
3.2
2
30
229
36
41
3.7
48
5.1
73
93
73
80
76
82
95
11.3
2

57 0
59 3
2527
2
62!l
2
58 3
2
55.0
250 7
54 4
49 3
46 3
46.7
48 3
46.0
42 9
37 9
410
39 3
421
39 8
37 0
38.6
2

^ o r families, restricted to "$10,000 and over" for the years 1947 to 1950 and "$15,000 and over" for the year 1951; for unrelated
individuals restricted to "$10,000 and over" for the years 1947 to 1950.
2
Data for Black include "other" races.
3
Revised using population controls based on the 1970 census. Such controls are not available by race.
4
Based on revised methodology procedures.
Note.—The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in 1969. That index reflects
different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition, sex and age of family head, and farm—nonfarm
residence. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see
"Current Population Reports," Series P-60, No. 119, Bureau of the Census.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




232

POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY
T A B L E B-26.—Population by age groups, 1929-79
[Thousands of persons]
Age (years)
July 1

Total
Under 5

5-15

16-19

20-24

25-44

45-64

65 and
over
6,474

1929

121,767

11,734

26,800

9,127

10,694

35,862

21,076

1933

125,579

10,612

26,897

9,302

11,152

37,319

22,933

7,363

1939

130,880

10,418

25,179

9,822

11,519

39,354

25,823

8,764

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

132,122
133,402
134,860
136,739
138,397

10,579
10,850
11,301
12,016
12,524

24,811
24,516
24,231
24,093
23,949

9,895
9,840
9,730
9,607
9,561

11,690
11,807
11,955
12,064
12,062

39,868
40,383
40,861
41,420
42,016

26,249
26,718
27,196
27,671
28,138

9,031
9,288
9,584
9,867
10,147

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

139,928
141,389
144,126
146,631
149,188

12,979
13,244
14,406
14,919
15,607

23,907
24,103
24,468
25,209
25,852

9,361
9,119
9,097
8,952
8,788

12,036
12,004
11,814
11,794
11,700

42,521
43,027
43,657
44,288
44,916

28,630
29,064
29,498
29,931
30,405

10,494
10,828
11,185
11,538
11,921

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

152,271
154,878
157,553
160,184
163,026

16,410
17,333
17,312
17,638
18,057

26,721
27,279
28,894
30,227
31,480

8,542
8,446
8,414
8,460
8,637

11,680
11,552
11,350
11,062
10,832

45,672
46,103
46,495
46,786
47,001

30,849
31,362
31,884
32,394
32,942

12,397
12,803
13,203
13,617
14,076

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

165,931
168,903
171,984
174,882
177,830

18,566
19,003
19,494
19,887
20,175

32,682
33,994
35,272
36,445
37,368

8,744
8,916
9,195
9,543
10,215

10,714
10,616
10,603
10,756
10,969

47,194
47,379
47,440
47,337
47,192

33,506
34,057
34,591
35,109
35,663

14,525
14,938
15,388
15,806
16,248

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

180,671
183,691
186,538
189,242
191,889

20,341
20,522
20,469
20,342
20,165

38,494
39,765
41,205
41,626
42,297

10,683
11,025
11,180
12,007
12,736

11,134
11,483
11,959
12,714
13,269

47,140
47,084
47,013
46,994
46,958

36,203
36,722
37,255
37,782
38,338

16,675
17,089
17,457
17,778
18,127

194,303
196,560
198,712
200,706
202,677

19,824
19,208
18,563
17,913
17,376

42,938
43,702
44,244
44,622
44,840

13,516
14,311
14,200
14,452
14,800

13,746
14,050
15,248
15,786
16,480

46,912
47,001
47,194
47,721
48,064

38,916
39,534
40,193
40,846
41,437

18,451
18,755
19,071
19,365
19,680

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

204,878
207,053
208,846
210,410
211,901

17,148
17,177
16,990
16,694
16,288

44,774
44,441
43,948
43,227
42,538

15,275
15,635
15,946
16,310
16,590

17,184
18,089
18,032
18,345
18,741

48,435
48,811
50,254
51,411
52,593

41,975
42,413
42,785
43,077
43,319

20,087
20,488
20,892
21,346
21,833

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

213,559
215,152
216,880
218,717
220 584

15,879
15,345
15,248
15,378
15,649

41,956
41,459
40,575
39,623
38,643

16,793
16,928
16,966
16,935
16,838

19,229
19,630
20,077
20,461
20,726

53,735
55,129
56,706
58,380
60,161

43,546
43,707
43,795
43,876
43,910

22,420
22,954
23,513
24,064
24,658

Note. —Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning 1940. Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning 1950.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




233

TABLE B-27.—Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-79
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Civilian labor force
participation rate2

Civilian labor force

Year or month

Noninstitutional
Armed
popula- Forcesx
tion1

Unemployment rate
(percent
of civilian
labor
Unemforce)
ployment

Employment
Total
Total

Agricultural

Total

Males Females

Nonagricultural
Percent

Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over
47,630

10,450

37,180

1,550

3.2

51,590

38,760

10,090

28,670

12,830

24.9

55,230

45,750

9,610

36,140

9,480

17.2

260

49,180

1933

250

1939

370

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

100,380
101,520
102,610
103,660
104,630

540
1,620
3,970
9,020
11,410

55,640
55,910
56,410
55,540
54,630

47,520
50,350
53,750
54,470
53,960

9,540
9,100
9,250
9,080
8,950

37,980
41,250
44,500
45,390
45,010

8,120
5,560
2,660
1,070
670

14.6
9.9
4.7
1.9
1.2

55.7
56.0
57.2
58.7
58.6

83.7
84.3
85.6
86.4
87.0

28.2
28.7
31.3
36.0
36.5

1945
1946
1947

105,530
106,520
107,608

11,440
3,450
1,590

53,860
57,520
60,168

52,820
55,250
57,812

8,580
8,320
8,256

44,240
46,930
49,557

1,040
2,270
2,356

1.9
3.9
3.9

57.2
55.8
56.8

84.8
82.6
84.0

35.9
31.2
31.0

103,418
104,527
105,611

1,591
1,459
1,617

59,350
60,621
61,286

57,038
58,343
57,651

7,890
7,629
7,658

49,148
50,714
49,993

2,311
2,276
3,637

3.9
3.8
5.9

58.3
58.8
58.9

86.4
86.6
86.4

31.8
32.7
33.1

en en en en en

1929

106,645
107,721
108,823
110,601
111,671

1,650
3,100
3,592
3,545
3,350

62,208
62,017
62,138
63,015
63,643

58,918
59,961
60,250
61,179
60,109

7,160
6,726
6,500
6,260
6,205

51,758
53,235
53,749
54,919
53,904

3,288
2,055
1,883
1,834
3,532

5.3
3.3
3.0
2.9
5.5

59.2
59.3
59.0
58.9
58.8

86.4
86.5
86.3
86.0
85.5

33.9
34.6
34.7
34.4
34.6

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

112,732
113,811
115,065
116,363
117,881

3,049
2,857
2,800
2,636
2,552

65,023
66,552
66,929
67,639
68,369

62,170
63,799
64,071
63,036
64,630

6,450
6,283
5,947
5,586
5,565

55,722
57,514
58,123
57,450
59,065

2,852
2,750
2,859
4,602
3,740

4.4
4.1
4.3
6.8
5.5

59.3
60.0
59.6
59.5
59.3

85.3
85.5
84.8
84.2
83.7

35.7
36.9
36.9
37.1
37.1

I960 3
1961
19623
1963
1964

119,759
121,343
122,981
125,154
127,224

2,514
2,572
2,828
2,738
2,739

69,628
70,459
70,614
71,833
73,091

65,778
65,746
66,702
67,762
69,305

5,458
5,200
4,944
4,687
4,523

60,318
60,546
61,759
63,076
64,782

3,852
4,714
3,911
4,070
3,786

5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7
5.2

59.4
59.3
58.8
58.7
58.7

83.3
82.9
82.0
81.4
81.0

37.7
38.1
37.9
38.3
38.7

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

129,236
131,180
133,319
135,562
137,841

2,723
3,123
3,446
3,535
3,506

74,455
75,770
77,347
78,737
80,734

71,088
72,895
74,372
75,920
77,902

4,361
3,979
3,844
3,817
3,606

66,726
68,915
70,527
72,103
74,296

3,366
2,875
2,975
2,817
2,832

4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

58.9
59.2
59.6
59.6
60.1

80.7
80.4
80.4
80.1
79.8

39.3
40.3
41.1
41.6
42.7

1970
1971
1972 3
1973 3
1974

140,182
142,596
145,775
148,263
150,827

3,188
2,816
2,449
2,326
2,229

82,715
84,113
86,542
88,714
91,011

78,627
79,120
81,702
84,409
85,935

3,462
3,387
3,472
3,452
3,492

75,165
75,732
78,230
80,957
82,443

4,088
4,993
4,840
4,304
5,076

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6

60.4
60.2
60.4
60.8
61.2

79.7
79.1
79.0
78.8
78.7

43.3
43.3
43.9
44.7
45.6

1975
1976
1977
1978 3
1979

153,449
156,048
158,559
161,058
163,620

2,180
2,144
2,133
2,117
2,088

92,613
94,773
97,401
100,420
102,908

84,783
87,485
90,546
94,373
96,945

3,380
3,297
3,244
3,342
3,297

81,403
84,188
87,302
91,031
93,648

7,830
7,288
6,855
6,047
5,963

8.5
7.7
7.0
6.0
5.8

61.2
61.6
62.3
63.2
63.7

77.9
77.5
77.7
77.9
77.9

46.3
47.3
48.4
50.0
51.0

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over

CO CO CO CO CO

1947
1948
1949

See next page for continuation of table.




234

TABLE B-27.—Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-79—Continued
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Civilian labor force
participation rate 2

Civilian labor force
Year or month

Noninsti- Armed
tutional
popula- Forces1
tion 1

Unemployment rate
(percent
of civilian
Unemlabor
Total Males Females
force)
ployment

Employment
Total
Agricultural

Total

Nonagricultural
Percent

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over
1977:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

157,381
157,584
157,782
157,986
158,228
158,456

2,133
2,137
2,138
2,132
2,128
2,129

95,688
96,225
96,544
96,776
97,155
97,475

88,566
88,959
89,397
89,843
90,291
90,429

3,142
3,175
3,181
3,271
3,396
3,288

85,424
85,784
86,216
86,572
86,895
87,141

7,122
7,266
7,147
6,933
6,864
7,046

7.4
7.6
7.4
7.2
7.1
7.2

61.6
61.9
62.0
62.1
62.2
62.4

77.3
77.6
77.5
77.5
77.6
77.8

47.6
47.9
48.1
48.3
48.4
48.5

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

158,682
97,759
159,114
159,334
159,522
159,736

2,135
2,137
2,131
2,134
2,132
2,129

97,344
97,759
97,812
98,136
98,859
98,758

90,603
90,958
91,177
91,514
92,221
92,589

3,201
3,213
3,171
3,236
3,340
3,297

87,402
87,745
88,006
88,278
88,881
89,292

6,741
6,801
6,635
6,622
6,638
6,169

6.9
7.0
6.8
6.7
6.7
6.2

62.2
62.4
62.3
62.4
62.8
62.7

77.6
77.7
77.3
77.8
78.0
78.0

48.4
48.6
48.8
48.6
49.2
48.9

1978:
Jan 3
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

159,937
160,128
160,313
160,504
160,713
160,928

2,121
2,124
2,122
2,118
2,113
2,098

99,118
99,009
99,281
99,819
100,242
100,458

92,813
92,921
93,128
93,763
94,116
94,556

3,388
3,268
3,315
3,295
3,298
3,415

89,425
89,653
89,813
90,468
90,818
91,141

6,305
6,088
6,153
6,056
6,126
5,902

6.4
6.1
6.2
6.1
6.1
5.9

62.8
62.7
62.8
63.0
63.2
63.2

77.9
77.7
77.8
77.8
77.9
77.9

49.3
49.1
49.3
49.7
50.0
50.1

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

161,148
161,348
161,570
161,829
162,033
162,250

2,116
2,122
2,123
2,122
2,117
2,108

100,656
100,731
100,944
101,189
101,610
101,815

94,428
94,802
94,973
95,401
95,728
95,831

3,382
3,345
3,375
3,377
3,240
3,375

91,046
91,457
91,598
92,024
92,488
92,456

6,228
5,929
5,971
5,788
5,882
5,984

6.2
5.9
5.9
5.7
5.8
5.9

63.3
63.3
63.3
63.4
63.5
63.6

77.8
77.8
77.7
77.8
78.0
78.0

50.3
50.2
50.4
50.4
50.5
50.6

May
June

162,448
162,633
162,909
163,008
163,260
163,469

2,094
2,094
2,090
2,082
2,078
2,076

102,061
102,379
102,505
102,198
102,398
102,476

96,157
96,496
96,623
96,254
96,495
96,652

3,260
3,307
3,320
3,215
3,246
3,243

92,897
93,189
93,303
93,039
93,249
93,409

5,904
5,883
5,882
5,944
5,903
5,824

5.8
5.7
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.7

63.6
63.8
63.7
63.5
63.5
63.5

78.2
78.2
78.1
77.9
77.8
77.7

50.6
50.8
50.9
50.6
50.7
50.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

163,685
163,891
164,106
164,468
164,682
164,898

2,082
2,090
2,092
2,093
2,092
2,089

103,093
103,128
103,494
103,595
103,652
103,999

97,184
97,004
97,504
97,474
97,608
97,912

3,267
3,315
3,364
3,294
3,385
3,359

93,917
93,689
94,140
94,180
94,223
94,553

5,909
6,124
5,990
6,121
6,044
6,087

5.7
5.9
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.9

63.8
63.7
63.9
63.8
63.8
63.9

77.9
77.7
78.0
77.7
77.6
77.6

51.1
51.2
51.2
51.3
51.3
51.5

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar

1
2
3

Not seasonally adjusted.
Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population.
Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows: Beginning 1953, introduction of 1950 census
data added about 600,000 to population and about 350,000 to labor force, total employment, and agricultural employment. Beginning
1960, inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about 500,000 to population, about 300,000 to labor force, and about 240,000 to
nonagricultural employment. Beginning 1962, introduction of 1960 census data reduced population by about 50,000 and labor force and
employment by about 200,000. Beginning 1972, introduction of 1970 census data added about 800,000 to civilian noninstitutional
population and about 333,000 to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on 1970 census in March 1973 added
60,000 to labor force and to employment. Beginning 1978, changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the
household survey added about 250,000 to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly
affected.
Note.—Labor force data in Tables B-27 through B-32 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including
the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms, area samples used, historic comparability of the data, comparability with other series,
etc., see "Employment and Earnings."
Source.- Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




235

TABLE B-28.—Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age, 1947-79
[Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Employment

Unemployment

Males
Year or month
Total
Total

16-19
years

Females
20
years
and
over

Total

2,218 38,776 16,045
2,345 39,382 16,617
2,124 38,803 16,723

Males

Females

Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total

1,691 14,354 2,311
1,683 14,937 2,276
1,588 15,137 3,637

1,692
1,559
2,572

270
255
352

1,422
1,305
2,219

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

619
717
1,065

144
152
223

475
564
841

1947
1948
1949

57,038 40,995
58,343 41,725
57,651 40,925

1950
1951
1952
1953»
1954

58,918
59,961
60,250
61,179
60,109

41,578 2,186
41,780 2,156
41,682 2,106
42,430 2,135
41,619 1,985

39,394
39,626
39,578
40,296
39,634

17,340
18,181
18,568
18,749
18,490

1,517
1,611
1,612
1,584
1,490

15,824 3,288
16,570 2,055
16,958 1,883
17,164 1,834
17,000 3,532

2,239
1,221
1,185
1,202
2,344

318
191
205
184
310

1,922
1,029
980
1,019
2,035

1,049
834
698
632
1,188

195
145
140
123
191

854
689
559
510
997

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

62,170
63,799
64,071
63,036
64,630

42,621
43,379
43,357
42,423
43,466

2,095
2,164
2,117
2,012
2,198

40,526
41,216
41,239
40,411
41,267

19,551
20,419
20,714
20,613
21,164

1,548
1,654
1,663
1,570
1,640

18,002
18,767
19,052
19,043
19,524

2,852
2,750
2,859
4,602
3,740

1,854
1,711
1,841
3,098
2,420

274
269
299
416
398

1,580
1,442
1,541
2,681
2,022

998
1,039
1,018
1,504
1,320

176
209
197
262
256

823
832
821
1,242
1,063

I9601
1961 l
1962
1963
1964

65,778
65,746
66,702
67,762
69,305

43,904
43,656
44,177
44,657
45,474

2,360
2,314
2,362
2,406
2,587

41,543
41,342
41,815
42,251
42,886

21,874
22,090
22,525
23,105
23,831

1,769
1,793
1,833
1,849
1,929

20,105
20,296
20,693
21,257
21,903

3,852
4,714
3,911
4,070
3,786

2,486
2,997
2,423
2,472
2,205

425
479
407
500
487

2,060
2,518
2,016
1,971
1,718

1,366
1,717
1,488
1,598
1,581

286
349
313
383
386

1,080
1,368
1,175
1,216
1,195

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

71,088
72,895
74,372
75,920
77,902

46,340
46,919
47,479
48,114
48,818

2,918
3,252
3,186
3,255
3,430

43,422
43,668
44,293
44,859
45,388

24,748
25,976
26,893
27,807
29,084

2,118
2,469
2,497
2,525
2,686

22,630
23,510
24,397
25,281
26,397

3,366
2,875
2,975
2,817
2,832

1,914
1,551
1,508
1,419
1,403

479
432
448
427
441

1,435
1,120
1,060
993
963

1,452
1,324
1,468
1,397
1,429

395
404
391
412
412

1,056
921
1,078
985
1,016

1970
1971 l
1972
1973»
1974

78,627
79,120
81,702
84,409
85,935

48,960
49,245
50,630
51,963
52,518

3,407
3,470
3,750
4,017
4,074

45,553
45,775
46,880
47,946
48,445

29,667
29,875
31,072
32,446
33,417

2,734
2,725
2,972
3,219
3,329

26,933
27,149
28,100
29,228
30,088

4,088
4,993
4,840
4,304
5,076

2,235
2,776
2,635
2,240
2,668

599
691
707
647
749

1,636
2,086
1,928
1,594
1,918

1,853
2,217
2,205
2,064
2,408

506
567
595
579
660

1,347
1,650
1,610
1,485
1,748

1975
1976
1977
1978»
1979

84,783
87,485
90,546
94,373
96,945

51,230
52,391
53,861
55,491
56,499

3,803
3,904
4,124
4,279
4,326

47,427
48,486
49,737
51,212
52,264

33,553
35,095
36,685
38,882
40,446

3,243
3,365
3,486
3,702
3,748

30,310 7,830
31,730 7,288
33,199 6,855
35,180 6,047
36,698 5,963

4,385
3,968
3,588
3,051
3,018

957
928
861
799
795

3,428
3,041
2,727
2,252
2,223

3,445
3,320
3,267
2,996
2,945

795
773
781
760
733

2,649
2,546
2,486
2,236
2,213

92,813
92,921
93,128
93,763
94,116
94,556

54,910
54,884
54,973
55,211
55,403
55,648

4,281
4,191
4,201
4,212
4,268
4,382

50,629
50,693
50,772
50,999
51,135
51,266

37,903
38,037
38,155
38,552
38,713
38,908

3,564
3,546
3,534
3,649
3,762
3,756

34,339
34,491
34,621
34,903
34,951
35,152

6,305
6,088
6,153
6,056
6,126
5,902

3,228
3,196
3,212
3,087
3,050
2,882

791
835
833
813
772
711

2,437
2,361
2,379
2,274
2,278
2,171

3,077
2,892
2,941
2,969
3,076
3,020

763
766
770
750
781
745

2,314
2,126
2,171
2,219
2,295
2,275

94,428
94,802
\ 94,973
95,401
95,728
95,831

55,529
55,668
55,611
55,821
56,123
56,087

4,293
4,373
4,295
4,316
4,279
4,226

51,236
51,295
51,316
51,505
51,844
51,861

38,899 3,743 35,156
39,134 3,817 35,317
39,362 3,750 35,612
39,580 3,772 35,808
39,605 3,769 35,836
39,744 3,800 35,944

6,228
5,929
5,971
5,788
5,882
5,984

2,994
2,944
2,967
2,969
2,917
3,035

804
767
787
830
807
837

2,190
2,177
2,180
2,139
2,110
2,198

3,234
2,985
3,004
2,819
2,965
2,949

809
766
763
712
750
737

2,425
2,219
2,241
2,107
2,215
2,212

96,157
96,496
96,623
96,254
96,495
96,652

56,326
56,476
56,449
56,294
56,372
56,477

4,302
4,265
4,298
4,245
4,214
4,276

52,024
52,211
52,151
52,049
52,158
52,201

39,831
40,020
40,174
39,960
40,123
40,175

3,819
3,823
3,812
3,744
3,712
3,718

36,012
36,197
36,362
36,216
36,411
36,457

5,904
5,883
5,882
5,944
5,903
5,824

2,997
2,958
2,972
2,999
2,941
2,893

830
820
811
724

2,167
2,138
2,164
2,190
2,130
2,169

2,907
2,925
2,910
2,945
2,962
2,931

712
723
698
746
754
735

2,195
2,202
2,212
2,199
2,208
2,196

97,184
97,004
97,504
97,474
97,608
97,912

56,570
56,408
56,714
56,629
56,580
56,734

4,245
4,097
4,261
4,186
4,206
4,256

52,325
52,311
52,453
52,443
52,374
52,478

40,614
40,596
40,790
40,845
41,028
41,178

3,741
3,596
3,715
3,733
3,780
3,776

36,873
37,000
37,075
37,112
37,248
37,402

5,909
6,124
5,990
6,121
6,044
6,087

3,027
3,083
3,098
3,098
3,124
3,089

773
797
816
781
789
786

2,254
2,286
2,282
2,317
2,335
2,303

2,882
3,041
2,892
3,023
2,920
2,998

722
737
728
773
723
741

2,160
2,304
2,164
2,250
2,197
2,257

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar

fez:

June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar

liajZZZZZZZZ

June

i««y
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1
See footnote 3, Table B-27.
Note.—See Note, Table B-27.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




236

TABLE 3-29.—Selected

employment and unemployment data,

1948-79

[Percent;1 monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Employment as percent of
population5

Unemployment rate l
By sex and age
Year or
month

All
workers

Both
sexes
16-19
years

Males
20 years
and over

Females
20 years
and over

36
5.3

43
6.8

5.1
4.0
3.2
2.9
5.5

6.0
3.7
3.3
3.2
6.2

1948
1949

38
5.9

92
13.4

32

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

5.3
3.3
3.0
2.9
5.5

12.2

4.7

8.2
8.5

6.8
5.5

7.6
12.6
11.0
11.1
11.6
15.9
14.6

2.5
2.4
2.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7
5.2
4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

4.9

4.4
4.1
4.3

5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6
8.5
7.7
7.0
6.0
5.8

By selected groups
Experienced
wage and
salary
workers

5.4

4.9

3.8
3.4
3.6

4.4
4.2
4.1

Married

men 2

Women
who
head
families

35

4.8
4.4

5.4

46
15
14
17
40
28
26
28
51
36

5.0
2.6
2.5

6.2
4.7

6.1
5.2

4.6
7.2
5.7

14.7
16.8
14.7
17.2
16.2
14.8
12.8
12.8
12.7
12.2

4.7
5.7
4.6
4.5
3.9
3.2
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.1

5.1
6.3
5.4
5.4
5.2
4.5
3.8
4.2
3.8
3.7

5.7
6.8
5.6
5.5
5.0
4.3
3.5
3.6
3.4
3.3

15.2
16.9
16.2
14.5
16.0
19.9
19.0
17.7
16.3
16.1

3.5

4.8
5.7
5.4
4.8
5.5
8.0

2.6
3.2
2.8
2.3
2.7
5.1

7.0
6.0
5.7

4.8
5.7
5.3
4.5
5.3
8.2
7.3
6.6
5.6
5.4

...........

3.8
3.7
4.0

37
46
36
34

4.4

4.0
3.2
3.8
6.7
5.9
5.2
4.2
4.1

7.4

Full-time
workers 3

7.2

""6.7"
5.5

28
24

19
18
16
15

49'
44
44

5.4
7.3
7.2
7.0
7.0

4.2

10.0
10.0

3.6
2.8
2.7

9.3
8.5
8.3
8.3
7.7

Bluecollar
workers4

42
8.0
7.2
3.9
3.6
3.4
7.2
5.8
5.1
6.2

Black
and
other

55.2
55.7
55.4
55.3
53.8
55.1
56.1
55.7
54.2
54.8

10.2

7.6
7.8
9.2
74
7.3
6.3
5.3

54.9
54.2
54.2
54.1
54.5
55.0
55.6
55.8
56.0
56.5

54.0
54.3
54.8
55.4
55.7
55.9
56.5

55.2
56.1
56.8
57.2
56.9
56.6
56.7

56.1
55.5
56.0
56.9
57.0
55.3
56.1
57.1
58.6
59.3

56.2
55.7
56.4
57.3
57.5
55.9
56.8
57.9
59.3
60.0

55.5
53.7
53.0
53.9
53.0
50.0
50.6
51.1
53.3
53.6

58.0
58.0
58.1
58.4
58.6
58.8

58.8
58.8
58.8
59.2
59.3
59.5

52.4
52.9
52.9
53.0
53.2
53.4

6.7
6.4
6.7

58.6
58.8
58.8
59.0
59.1
59.1

59.3
59.5
59.5
59.7
59.8
59.8

53.2
53.5
53.8
53.8
53.7
53.6

6.5
6.5
6.6
6.9
6.8
6.6

59.2
59.3
59.3
59.0
59.1
59.1

60.0
60.2
60.1
59.9
59.9
59.9

53.4
53.4
53.8
53.2
53.3
53.5

6.8
7.3
7.1
7.2
7.5
7.2

59.4
59.2
59.4
59.3
59.3
59.4

60.1
59.9
60.2
60.1
60.1
60.2

54.1
53.8
54.0
53.9
53.7
53.4

4.2
4.4
4.1

4.5
5.5

6.2
7.4

4.3
5.1
8.1
7.3
6.5
5.5
5.3

White

55 8
54.6

4.9
4.2
3.5
3.4
3.1
3.1

5.1

Total

3.9

6.5
5.3
6.7

11.7

9.4
8.1
6.9
6.9

1978

6.4
6.1
6.2
6.1
6.1

16.5
17.1
17.2
16.6
16.2
15.2

4.6
4.5
4.5
4.3
4.3

6.3
5.8
5.9
6.0
6.2

5.9
5.7
5.8
5.6
5.7

3.0
2.9
3.0
2.8
2.9

Aug

6.2
5.9

6.5
5.9
5.9
5.6
5.8
5.8

5.6

5.4
5.3

2.7
2.7
2.7
2.6
2.4

5.9

4.1
4.1
4.1
4.0
3.9
4.1

5.7
5.4

Oct
Nov
Dec

16.7
15.8
16.2
16.0
16.2
16.4

5.5

2.6

16.0
16.0
15.7
16.3
16.5
15.4

4.0
3.9
4.0
4.0

5.7
5.7
5.7
5.7

5.4
5.3

2.6
2.6

3.9

5.7
5.7

5.4
5.3

2.5
2.7

8.0
8.3
8.2
8.3
8.6
9.0

4.1

5.5
5.9
5.5
5.7
5.6
5.7

5.4
5.7
5.5
5.6
5.5
5.5

2.8
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.8

8.1
7.9
7.7
8.4
8.4
8.4

Jan
Feb
Mr
a

I

June

:

July
Sept

1979
Jan

Feb
Mr
a
My
a
June
July

Aug

Sept

Oct
Nov
Dec

5.9

5.9
5.7
5.8

5.8
5.7
5.7

5.8
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.9
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.9

4.1

4.0

15.8
16.6
16.2
16.4

4.2

15.9
16.0

4.3
4.2

4.2
4.2

6.1

5.5

5.4
5.4

2.8

2.6
2.7

1
2
3
4

8.7
10.0

9.1
8.7

9.8
8.0
8.1
7.5
7.8
7.9

5.9
5.7
5.7
5.5
5.6

7.4

5.7
5.4
5.4
5.2
5.2

6.8

5.3

5.3
5.2

5.2
5.2
5.3
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.3
5.4

5.4
5.4

7.2
7.2
6.7
6.7
6.7

6.7
6.9

Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified.
Married men living with their wives. Data for 1949 and 1951-54 are for April; 1950, for March.
Data for 1949-61 are for May.
Includes craft and kindred workers, operatives, and nonfarm laborers. Data for 1948-57 are based on data for January, April, July,
and October.
5
Civilian employment as percent of total noninstitutional population.
Note.—See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-27.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.


http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/ 2 9 4 - 2 8 9
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

237
0 - 8 0 - 1 6

TABLE B-30.—Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic, 1948-79
[Percent; * monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Black and other

White
Males

Females

Males

Females

Year or month
Total
Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total
Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

1948
1949

3.5
5.6

3.4
5.6

3.8
57

5.9
8.9

5.8
9.6

61
79

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

49
3.1
2.8
2.7
5.0

4.7
2.6
25
2.5
4.8

13.4

4.4

5.3
4.2
3.3
3.1
5.5

10.4

5.1

9.0
5.3
5.4
4.5
9.9

9.4
4.9
5.2
4.8
10.3

14 4

99

84
61
57
41
92

20 6

84

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

3.9
3.6
3.8
6.1
4.8

3.7
3.4
3.6
6.1
4.6

11.3
10.5
11.5
15.7
14.0

3.3
3.0
3.2
5.5
4.1

4.3
4.2
4.3
6.2
5.3

9.1
9.7
9.5
12.7
12.0

3.9
3.7
3.8
5.6
4.7

8.7
8.3
7.9
12.6
10.7

8.8
7.9
8.3
13.7
11.5

13.4
15.0
18.4
26.8
25.2

8.4
7.4
7.6
12.7
10.5

8.5
8.9
7.3
10.8
9.4

19.2
22.8
20.2
28.4
27.7

7.7
7.8
6.4
9.5
8.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

4.9
6.0
4.9
5.0
4.6

4.8
5.7
4.6
4.7
4.1

14.0
15.7
13.7
15.9
14.7

4.2
5.1
4.0
3.9
3.4

5.3
6.5
5.5
5.8
5.5

12.7
14.8
12.8
15.1
14.9

4.6
5.7
4.7
4.8
4.6

10.2
12.4
10.9
10.8
9.6

10.7
12.8
10.9
10.5
8.9

24.0
26.8
22.0
27.3
24.3

9.6
11.7
10.0
9.2
7.7

9.4
11.9
11.0
11.2
10.7

24.8
29.2
30.2
34.7
31.6

8.3
10.6
9.6
9.4
9.0

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

4.1
3.3
3.4
3.2
3.1

3.6
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5

12.9
10.5
10.7
10.1
10.0

2.9
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.9

5.0
4.3
4.6
4.3
4.2

14.0
12.1
11.5
12.1
11.5

4.0
3.3
3.8
3.4
3.4

8.1
7.3
7.4
6.7
6.4

7.4
6.3
6.1
5.6
5.3

23.3
21.3
23.9
22.1
21.4

6.0
4.9
4.3
3.9
3.7

9.2
8.7
9.1
8.3
7.8

31.7
31.3
29.6
28.7
27.6

7.5
6.6
7.1
6.3
5.8

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4.5
5.4
5.0
4.3
5.0

4.0
4.9
4.5
3.7
4.3

13.7
15.1
14.2
12.3
13.5

3.2
4.0
3.6
2.9
3.5

5.4
6.3
5.9
5.3
6.1

13.4
15.1
14.2
13.0
14.5

4.4
5.3
4.9
4.3
5.0

8.2
9.9
10.0
8.9
9.9

7.3
9.1
8.9
7.6
9.1

25.0
28.9
29.7
26.9
31.6

5.6
7.2
6.8
5.7
6.8

9.3
10.8
11.3
10.5
10.7

34.4
35.4
38.5
34.5
34.6

6.9
8.7
8.8
8.2
8.4

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7.8
7.0
6.2
5.2
5.1

7.2
6.4
5.5
4.5
4.4

18.3
17.3
15.0
13.5
13.9

6.2
5.4
4.6
3.7
3.6

8.6
7.9
7.3
6.2
5.9

17.4
16.4
15.9
14.4
13.9

7.5
6.8
6.2
5.2
5.0

13.9
13.1
13.1
11.9
11.3

13.7
12.7
12.4
10.9
10.3

35.4
35.4
37.0
34.4
31.5

11.7
10.6
10.0
8.6
8.4

14.0
13.6
14.0
13.1
12.3

38.5
39.0
39.9
38.4
35.7

11.5
11.3
11.7
10.6
10.1

June

5.5
5.4
5.3
5.3
5.3
5.0

4.7
4.8
4.9
4.5
4.5
4.3

13.1
14.2
14.0
13.7
12.7
11.8

4.0
3.9
4.0
3.7
3.7
3.6

6.6
6.3
6.1
6.3
6.4
6.2

14.7
15.0
15.0
14.8
14.8
13.2

5.6
5.2
5.0
5.3
5.4
5.3

12.9
11.8
12.5
11.8
12.3
11.9

12.2
11.2
11.2
11.1
11.3
10.4

36.2
34.7
36.7
33.8
37.5
32.4

9.9
8.8
8.7
8.9
8.8
8.3

13.6
12.5
14.0
12.5
13.4
13.5

42.6
41.2
41.1
36.6
37.9
40.6

11.0
9.9
11.5
10.4
11.0
10.8

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

5.3
5.1
5.2
5.0
5.0
5.1

4.4
4.4
4.4
4.5
4.2
4.5

13.5
13.1
13.2
14.3
13.3
14.4

3.6
3.6
3.6
3.5
3.3
3.5

6.6
6.2
6.2
5.7
6.0
6.1

14.5
14.3
14.5
13.3
14.3
13.9

5.6
5.2
5.2
4.8
5.0
5.1

12.5
11.6
11.5
11.2
11.7
11.4

10.7
10.6
10.5
10.1
10.9
10.5

32.6
31.6
34.7
31.9
36.9
33.8

8.4
8.6
8.3
8.0
8.4
8.3

14.4
12.6
12.5
12.4
12.7
12.4

41.0
36.3
36.3
36.5
35.6
35.6

11.7
10.3
10.2
10.1
10.5
10.2

My
a
June

5.0
4.9
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.9

4.4
4.3
4.3
4.4
4.3
4.3

14.0
13.8
13.8
13.9
14.4
12.6

3.5
3.4
3.4
3.5
3.4
3.5

5.9
5.9
5.9
5.9
6.0
5.9

13.6
13.4
13.4
13.9
14.0
13.8

5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.9

11.3
11.8
11.3
11.7
11.5
11.2

10.3
10.9
10.8
10.6
10.3
10.0

33.9
34.2
31.5
32.0
30.4
31.4

8.0
8.6
8.7
8.6
8.4
8.1

12.4
12.7
11.8
12.9
12.8
12.5

31.9
35.6
31.6
36.8
42.5
35.9

10.5
10.4
10.0
10.5
10.0
10.4

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

5.0
5.3
5.1
5.1
5.1
5.1

4.5
4.6
4.6
4.5
4.6
4.5

13.6
14.9
14.4
13.8
14.1
13.7

3.6
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.7
3.7

5.8
6.2
5.8
6.0
5.8
6.0

13.9
14.7
14.1
14.4
13.8
14.1

4.8
5.2
4.8
5.0
49
5.0

11.0
11.0
10.8
11.5
10 9
11.3

10.1
9.8
9.8
10.5
10 2
10.5

30.5
28.4
29.6
32.0
311
33.2

8.4
8.1
8.0
8.6
84
8.6

11.9
12.4
11.9
12.5
116
12.2

32.7
37.5
35.4
38.4
34 6
35.4

10.0
10.3
9.8
10.2
95
10.0

1978
Jan
Feb
Mr
a

1979
Jan
Feb
Mr
a

1
Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified.
Note.—See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-27.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




238

TABLE B-31.—Unemployment by duration, 1947-79
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted1]

Year or month

Total
unemployment

Duration of unemployment
Less than
5 weeks

5-14
weeks

15-26
weeks

27 weeks
and over

Average
(mean)
duration
in weeks

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over
1947
1948
1949

2,311
2,276
3,637

1,210
1,300
1,756

704
669
1,194

234
193
428

164
116
256

86
.
10.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

3,288
2,055
1,883
1,834
3,532

1,450
1,177
1,135
1,142
1,605

1,055
574
516
482
1,116

425
166
148
132
495

357
137
84
78
317

12.1
97
.
84
.
80
.
11.8

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

2,852
2,750
2,859
4,602
3,740

1,335
1,412
1,408
1,753
1,585

815
805
891
1,396
1,114

366
301
321
785
469

336
232
239
667
571

13.0
11.3
10.5
13.9
14.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

3,852
4,714
3,911
4,070
3,786

1,719
1,806
1,663
1,751
1,697

1,176
1,376
1,134
1,231
1,117

503
728
534
535
491

454
804
585
553
482

12.8
15.6
14.7
14.0
13.3

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

3,366
2,875
2,975
2,817
2,832

1,628
1,573
1,634
1,594
1,629

983
779
893
810
827

404
287
271
256
242

351
239
177
156
133

11.8
10.4
88
.
84
.
79
.

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4,088
4,993
4,840
4,304
5,076

2,137
2,234
2,223
2,196
2,567

1,289
1,578
1,459
1,296
1,572

427
665
597
475
563

235
517
562
337
373

87
.
11.3
12.0
10.0
97
.

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7,830
7,288
6,855
6,047
5,963

2,894
2,790
2,856
2,793
2,869

2,452
2,159
2,089
1,875
1,892

1,290
1,003
896
746
684

1,193
1,336
1,015
633
518

14.1
15.8
14.3
11.9
10.8

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
Ar
p

6,305
6,088
6,153
6,056
6,126
5,902

2,771
2,671
2,805
2,699
2,902
2,736

1,900
1,877
1,908
1,856
1,824
1,933

818
882
783
795
717
709

802
656
686
668
679
619

13.0
12.6
12.4
12.4
12.0
12.1

July

6,228
5,929
5,971
5,788
5,882
5,984

3,005
2,761
2,807
2,702
2,797
2,858

1,846
1,895
1,855
1,788
1,836
1,937

684
624
684
711
683
732

646
605
608
585
518
485

11.9
11.5
11.5
11.8
11.1
10.6

5 904
5,883
5,882
5,944
5,903
5,824

2 751
2,779
2,769
2,876
2,823
2,880

1881
1,877
1,860
1,884
1,919
1,808

708
700
729
687
705
656

521
539
562
536
507
496

112
11.3
11.8
11.0
10.9
10.5

5,909
6,124
5,990
6,121
6,044
6,087

2,820
3,168
2,778
2,955
2,919
2,916

1,934
1,738
2,035
1,963
1,869
1,966

615
658
644
678
660
711

452
527
508

10.1
10.7
10.7
10.5
10.6
10.5

1978

May
June

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e
1979:

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
My
a
June
July

Ag
u

sr
Nv
o
Dec

1
Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series, detail will not add to totals.
Note.—See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-27.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




239

57
1
51
3
59
1

TABLE B-32.—Unemployment by reason, 1967-79
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted 1 ]

Year or month

Total
unemployment

Job losers

Job leavers

Reentrants

entrants

Thousands of persons 16 years o f age and over
1967
1968
1969

2,975
2,817
2,832

1,229
1,070
1,017

438
431
436

945
909
965

396
407
413

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4,088
4,993
4,840
4,304
5,076

1,809
2,313
2,089
1,666
2,205

549
587
635
674
756

1,227
1,466
1,444
1,323
1,441

503
627
672
642
672

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7,830
7,288
6,855
6,047
5,963

4,341
3,625
3,103
2,514
2,555

812
886
889
851
854

1,865
1,895
1,926
1,814
1,758

812
882
938
867
797

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

5,904
5,883
5,882
5,944
5,903
5,824

2,441
2,475
2,457
2,520
2,356
2,449

900
828
864
847
940
857

1,721
1,766
1,766
1,778
1,767
1,753

824
858
808
800
824
781

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec.

5,909
6,124
5,990
6,121
6,044
6,087

2,526
2,680
2,632
2,731
2,729
2,728

846
875
825
835
845
800

1,762
1,788
1,760
1,762
1,698
1,771

726
745
801
804
736
858

Percent of civilian labor force
1967
1968
1969

3.8
3.6
3.5

1.6
1.3
1.2

06
.5
.5

1.2
1.2
1.2

05
.5
.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6

2.2
2.8
2.4
1.9
2.4

.7
.7
.7
.8
.8

1.5
1.7
1.7
1.5
1.6

.6
.7
.8
.7
.7

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

8.5
7.7
7.0
6.0
5.8

4.7
3.8
3.2
2.5
2.5

.9
.9
.9
.8
.8

2.0
2.0
2.0
1.8
1.7

.9
.9
1.0
.9
.8

2.4
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.3
2.4

.9
.8
.8
.8
.9
.8

1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7

.8
.8
.8

May
June

58
5.7
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

5.7
5.9
5.8
5.9
5.8
5.9

2.5
2.6
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.6

.8
.8
.8
.8
.8
.8

1.7
1.7
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.7

.7
.7
.8
.8
.7
.8

1979
Jan
Feb
Mar

1
Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series, detail will not add to totals.
Note.—See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-27.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




240

.8

TABLE B-33.—Unemployment insurance programs, selected data,

State programs

All programs

Year or month

Insured
Covered unemployment
employ- (weekly
ment 1
average)«»

Total
benefits
Insured
paid
unem(millions
of 2 4 ployment
dollars)

May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct"
Nov" ....
Dec"

31,856
33,876
34,646
33,098
34,308
36,334
37,006
38,072
36,622
40,018
42,751
43,436
44,411
45,728
46,334
46,266
47,776
48,434
49,637
51,580
54,739
56,342
57,977
59,999
59,526
59,375
66,458
69,897
72,451
71,037
73,459
76,419
8
88,804

Initial
claims

Exhaustions 5

Insured
Benefits paid
unemployment as
percent
Total
Average
weekly
(millions
of
check
covered
of 4
employ- dollars) (dollars)6
ment

Weekly average; thousands

Thousands
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978"
1979"
1978Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1979
Jan
Feb
Mar

1946-79

2,804
1,793
1,446
2,474
1,605
1,000
1,069
1,067
2,051
1,399
1,323
1,571
3,269
2,099
2,071
2,994
1,946
7
1,973
1,753
1,450
1,129
1,270
1,187
1,177
2,070
2,608
2,192
1,793
2,558
4,937
3,846
3,308
2,645
2,619

2,878.5
1,785.5
1,328.7
2,269.8
1,467.6
862.9
1,043.5
1,050.6
2,291.6
1,560.2
1,540.6
1,913.0
4,290.6
2,854.3
3,022.8
4,358.1
3,145.1
3,025.9
2,749.2
2,360.4
1,890.9
2,221.5
2,191.0
2,298.6
4,209.3
6,154.0
5,491.1
4,517.3
6,933.9
16,802.4
12,344.8
10,998.9
9,006.3

1,295
997
980
1,973
1,513
969
1,044
990
1,870
1,265
1,215
1,446
2,526
1,684
1,908
2,290
1,783
7
1,806
1,605
1,328
1,061
1,205
1,111
1,101
1,805
2,150
1,848
1,632
2,262
3,986
2,991
2,655
2,359
2,460

189
187
200
340
236
208
215
218
304
226
111
270
369
111
331
350
302
7
298
268
232
203
226
201
200
296
295
261
247
363
478
386
375
346
388

38
24
20
37
36
16
18
15
34
25
20
23
50
33
31
46
32
30
26
21
15
17
16
16
25
39
35
29
37
81
63
55
39

4.3 1,094.9
3.1
775.1
3.0
789.9
6.2 1,736.0
4.6 1,373.1
2.8
840.4
2.9
998.2
2.8
962.2
5.2 2,026.9
3.5 1,350.3
3.2 1,380.7
3.6 1,733.9
6.4 3,512.7
4.4 2,279.0
4.8 2,726.7
5.6 3,422.7
4.4 2,675.4
4.3 2,774.7
3.8 2,522.1
3.0 2,166.0
2.3 1,771.3
2.5 2,092.3
2.2 2,031.6
2.1 2,127.9
3.4 3,848.5
4.1 4,957.0
3.5 4,471.0
2.7 4,007.6
3.5 5,974.9
6.0 11,754.7
4.6 8,974.5
3.9 8,357.2
3.3 7,716.6
3.0

18.50
17.83
19.03
20.48
20.76
21.09
22.79
23.58
24.93
25.04
27.02
28.17
30.58
30.41
32.87
33.80
34.56
35.27
35.92
37.19
39.75
41.25
43.43
46.17
50.34
53.23
56.76
59.00
64.25
70.23
75.16
78.79
83.67

3,781
3,638
3,212
2,659
2,369
2,297
2,581
2,394
2,064
1,999
2,148
2,567

1,091.0
1,053.6
1,128.9
805.4
753.9
706.7
663.8
771.5
595.6
589.9
605.6
700.3

2,463
2,499
2,458
2,307
2,266
2,274
2,371
2,418
2,295
2,246
2,232
2,259

348
373
344
336
332
342
356
344
328
327
332
342

48
46
46
48
42
40
36
34
33
30
33
36

3.6
3.6
3.6
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.2
3.0
3.0
3.1

909.4
918.8
1,001.5
708.0
639.8
580.0
557.0
677.8
521.0
517.8
554.1
649.0

84.10
85.80
85.48
84.33
82.70
81.69
80.77
81.53
81.90
83.42
83.89
86.14

3,198
3,209
2,921
2,610
2,230
2,119
2,429
2,377
2,164
2,236
2,559
3,034

1,036.6
972.1
1,043.0
844.2
793.2
662.9
715.1
820.2
656.1
741.1

2,345
2,329
2,336
2,381
2,307
2,320
2,409
2,492
2,488
2,540
2 643
2,631

352
346
359
433
355
380
390
394
394
402
405
416

40
40
44
44
42
39
38
36
35
35
35

3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
2.9
2.9
2.9
3.0
3.0
3.0
31
3.1

972.8
915.1
975.6
777.7
725.2
610.3
665.7
765.0
606.3
673.9

88.28
90.31
90.28
89.28
88.37
87.25
86.40
88.56
89.10
90.59

*Monthly data are seasonally adjusted.
1
Includes persons under the State, UCFE (Federal employee, effective January 1955), and RRB (Railroad Retirement Board)
programs. Beginning October 1958, also includes the UCX program (unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen).
2
Includes State, UCFE, RR, UCX, UCV (unemployment compensation for veterans, October 1952-January 1960), and SRA
(Servicemen's Readjustment Act, September 1944-September 1951) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit
programs. Does not include FSB (Federal supplemental benefits) and SUA (special unemployment assistance) programs.
3
Covered workers who have completed at least 1 week of unemployment.
4
Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts.
5
Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year.
6
For total unemployment only.
7
Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July 1963.
8
Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about 94 percent of the total.
Source: Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration.




241

TABLE B-34.— Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-79
[Thousands of persons; monthly data seasonally adjusted]

Year or month

Total
wage
and
salary
workers

Manufacturing

Total

NonDurable durable
goods
goods

Mining Construction

Government
Transpor- Whole- Finance,
insurtation
sale
ance,
State
and
and
Services
and
and
public
retail
Federal
real
local
utilities
trade
estate

1929

31,324

10,702

1,087

1,512

3,916

6,123

1,494

3,425

533

2,532

1933

23,699

7,397

744

824

2,672

4,755

1,280

2,861

565

2,601

1939...

30,603

10,278

4,715

5,564

854

1,165

2,936

6,426

1,447

3,502

905

3,090

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

32,361
36,539
40,106
42,434
41,864

10,985
13,192
15,280
17,602
17,328

5,363
6,968
8,823
11,084
10,856

5,622
6,225
6,458
6,518
6,472

925
957
992
925
892

1,311
1,814
2,198
1,587
1,108

3,038
3,274
3,460
3,647
3,829

6,750
7,210
7,118
6,982
7,058

1,485
1,525
1,509
1,481
1,461

3,665
3,905
4,066
4,130
4,145

996
1,340
2,213
2,905
2,928

3,206
3,320
3,270
3,175
3,116

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

40,374
41,652
43,857
44,866
43,754

15,524
14,703
15,545
15,582
14,441

9,074
7,742
8,385
8,326
7,489

6,450
6,962
7,159
7,256
6,953

836
862
955
994
930

1,147
1,683
2,009
2,198
2,194

3,906
4,061
4,166
4,189
4,001

7,314
8,376
8,955
9,272
9,264

1,481
1,675
1,728
1,800
1,828

4,222
4,697
5,025
5,181
5,240

2,808
2,254
1,892
1,863
1,908

3,137
3,341
3,582
3,787
3,948

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

45,197
47,819
48,793
50,202
48,990

15,241
16,393
16,632
17,549
16,314

8,094
9,089
9,349
10,110
9,129

7,147
7,304
7,284
7,438
7,185

901
929
898
866
791

2,364
2,637
2,668
2,659
2,646

4,034 9,386
4,226 9,742
4,248 10,004
4,290 10,247
4,084 10,235

1,888
1,956
2,035
2,111
2,200

5,357
5,547
5,699
5,835
5,969

1,928
2,302
2,420
2,305
2,188

4,098
4,087
4,188
4.340
4,563

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

50,641
52,369
52,853
51,324
53,268

16,882
17,243
17,174
15,945
16,675

9,541
9,833
9,855
8,829
9,373

7,341
7,411
7,321
7,116
7,303

792
822
828
751
732

2,839
3,039
2,962
2,817
3,004

4,141
4,244
4,241
3,976
4,011

10,535
10,858
10,886
10,750
11,127

2,298
2,389
2,438
2,481
2,549

6,240
6,497
6,708
6,765
7,087

2,187
2,209
2,217
2,191
2,233

4,727
5,069
5,399
5,648
5,850

1960
1961
1962
1963.,
1964

54,189
53,999
55,549
56,653
58,283

16,796
16,326
16,853
16,995
17,274

9,459
9,070
9,480
9,616
9,816

7,337
7,256
7,373
7,380
7,458

712
672
650
635
634

2,926
2,859
2,948
3,010
3,097

4,004
3,903
3,906
3,903
3,951

11,391
11,337
11,566
11,778
12,160

2,629
2,688
2,754
2,830
2,911

7,378
7,620
7,982
8,277
8,660

2,270
2,279
2,340
2,358
2,348

6,083
6,315
6,550
6,868
7,248

1965.
1966..
1967.
1968.
1969..

60,765
63,901
65,803
67,897
70,384

18,062
19,214
19,447
19,781
20,167

10,405
11,282
11,439
11,626
11,895

7,656
7,930
8,007
8,155
8,272

632
627
613
606
619

3,232
3,317
3,248
3,350
3,575

4,036
4,158
4,268
4,318
4,442

12,716
13,245
13,606
14,099
14,705

2,977
3,058
3,185
3,337
3,512

9,036
9,498
10,045
10,567
11,169

2,378
2,564
2,719
2,737
2,758

7,696
8,220
8,672
9,102
9,437

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

70,880
71,214
73,675
76,790
78,265

19,367
18,623
19,151
20,154
20,077

11,208
10,636
11,049
11,891
11,925

8,158
7,987
8,102
8,262
8,152

623
609
628
642
697

3,588
3,704
3,889
4,097
4,020

4,515
4,476
4,541
4,656
4,725

15,040
15,352
15,949
16,607
16,987

3,645
3,772
3,908
4,046
4,148

11,548
11,797
12,276
12,857
13,441

2,731
2,696
2,684
2,663
2,724

9,823
10,185
10,649
11,068
11,446

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 p

76,945
79,382
82,423
86,446
89,497

18,323
18,997
19,682
20,476
20,979

10,688
11,077
11,597
12,246
12,694

7,635
7,920
8,086
8,230
8,285

752
779
813
851
958

3,525
3,576
3,851
4,271
4,642

4,542
4,582
4,713
4,927
5,154

17,060
17,755
18,516
19,499
20,140

4,165
4,271
4,467
4,727
4,964

13,892
14,551
15,303
16,220
17,047

2,748
2,733
2,727
2,753
2,773

11,937
12,138
12,352
12,723
12,840

„

See next page for continuation of table.




242

TABLE B-34.— Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-79—Continued
[Thousands of persons; monthly data seasonally adjusted]

Year or month

Total
wage
and
salary
workers

Manufacturing

Total

Durable
goods

Nondurable
goods

Mininc

Construction

Finance,
Government
Transpor- Whole- insursale
tation
ance, Services
State
and
and
and
public
retail
ano
Federal
and
real
trade
real
utilities
local
estate

1977:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

80,565
80,794
81,233
81,622
81,986
82,369

19,272
19,324
19,456
19,568
19,655
19,721

11,301
11,320
11,423
11,485
11,554
11,603

7,971
8,004
8,033
8,083
8,101
8,118

801
806
819
825
827
839

3,579
3,666
3,741
3,798
3,844
3,873

4,640
4,652
4,654
4,679
4,702
4,712

18,065
18,117
18,213
18,309
18,393
18,484

4,364
4,374
4,403
4,423
4,438
4,456

14,919
14,949
15,025
15,093
15,147
15,230

2,724
2,724
2,730
2,724
2,725
2,730

12,201
12,182
12,192
12,203
12,255
12,324

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

82,616
82,849
83,287
83,549
83,908
84,125

19,761
19,785
19,805
19,858
19,927
20,055

11,649
11,686
11,699
11,749
11,794
11,896

8,112
8,099
8,106
8,109
8,133
8,159

814
802
837
840
847
696

3,905
3,903
3,923
3,937
3,966
3,999

4,719
4,726
4,756
4,754
4,769
4,781

18,551
18,633
18,710
18,786
18,900
18,981

4,467
4,488
4,511
4,535
4,561
4,583

15,301
15,386
15,526
15,606
15,675
15,748

2,721
2,730
2,728
2,728
2,727
2,725

12,377
12,396
12,491
12,505
12,536
12,557

84,421
84,735
85,246
85,961
86,227
86,590

20,148
20,226
20,317
20,389
20,414
20,457

11,970
12,030
12,085
12,144
12,168
12,204

8,178
8,196
8,232
8,245
8,246
8,253

691
696
710
883
882
890

3,999
3,971
4,080
4,215
4,238
4,305

4,797
4,829
4,857
4,895
4,910
4,947

19,078
19,138
19,228
19,333
19,417
19,507

4,602
4,635
4,651
4,672
4,693
4,723

15,777
15,862
15,966
16,068
16,124
16,196

2,738
2,739
2,741
2,747
2,753
2,766

12,591
12,639
12,696
12,759
12,796
12,799

86,686
87,032
87,424
87,840
88,133

20,474
20,476
20,511
20,633
20,772
20,881

12,247
12,263
12,308
12,419
12,510
12,583

8,227
8,213
8,203
8,214
8,262
8,298

895
899
904
910
919
922

4,341
4,341
4,352
4,398
4,429
4,469

4,899
4,936
4,941
5,014
5,038
5,054

19,562
19,612
19,653
19,744
19,829
19,858

4,743
4,761
4,774
4,793
4,827
4,847

16,230
16,335
16,423
16,464
16,554
16,630

2,763
2,763
2,755
2,760
2,757
2,734

12,779
12,757
12,719
12,708
12,715
12,738

May!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
June

88,433
88,700
89,039
89,036
89,398
89,626

20,958
21,025
21,073
21,066
21,059
21,063

12,640
12,715
12,751
12,752
12,739
12,760

8,318
8,310
8,322
8,314
8,320
8,303

927
937
940
940
944
949

4,497
4,486
4,614
4,559
4,648
4,662

5,071
5,094
5,116
5,024
5,130
5,190

19,965
20,016
20,054
20,088
20,129
20,116

4,868
4,884
4,899
4,915
4,936
4,958

16,670
16,763
16,833
16,880
16,954
17,051

2,758
2,757
2,757
2,758
2,770
2,788

12,719
12,738
12,753
12,806
12,828
12,849

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov.
Dec".

89,713
89,762
89,803
89,982
90,109
90,426

21,079
20,957
20,949
20,899
20,846
20,954

12,786
12,714
12,737
12,650
12,597
12,660

8,293
8,243
8,212
8,249
8,249
8,294

956
968
973
979
984
999

4,688
4,674
4,671
4,694
4,712
4,759

5,169
5,194
5,180
5,218
5,227
5,224

20,122
20,126
20,169
20,243
20,303
20,300

4,972
5,003
4,997
5,018
5,041
5,070

17,092
17,141
17,191
17,257
17,314
17,385

2,785
2,813
2,762
2,770
2,771
2,787

12,850
12,886
12,911
12,904
12,911
12,948

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar
May"!!!!!!!!!!!!."!!!
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct

Nov
Dec

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar

Note.—Data in Tables B-34 through B-36 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage
and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes
the 12th of the month.
Not comparable with labor force data (Tables B-27 through B-32), which include proprietors, self-employed persons, domestic
servants, and unpaid family workers; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes, bad
weather, etc., even if they are not paid for the time off; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population, whereas the
estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments.
For description and details of the various establishment data, see "Employment and Earnings."
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




243

TABLE B-35.—Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural

industries,

1947-79
[For production or nonsupervisory workers; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Average gross hourly earnings,
current dollars

Average weekly hours

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Total
private
nonagricultural >

38.2
38.1
37.7

40.5
40.4
40.5

$1,131
1.225
1.275

$1,216
1.327
1.376

40.5
40.6
40.7
40.5
39.6

37.4
38.1
38.9
37.9
37.2

40.5
40.5
40.0
39.5
39.5

1.335
1.45
1.52
1.61
1.65

1.439
1.56
1.64
1.74
1.78

1.863
2.02
2.13
2.28
2.38

39.6
39.3
38.8
38.5
39.0

40.7
40.4
39.8
39.2
40.3

37.1
37.5
37.0
36.8
37.0

39.4
39.1
38.7
38.6
38.8

1.71
1.80
1.89
1.95
2.02

1.85
1.95
2.04
2.10
2.19

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

38.6
38.6
38.7
38.8
38.7

39.7
39.8
40.4
40.5
40.7

36.7
36.9
37.0
37.3
37.2

38.6
38.3
38.2
38.1
37.9

2.09
2.14
2.22
2.28
2.36

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

38.8
38.6
38.0
37.8
37.7

41.2
41.4
40.6
40.7
40.6

37.4
37.6
37.7
37.3
37.9

37.7
37.1
36.6
36.1
35.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

37.1
36.9
37.0
36.9
36.5

39.8
39.9
40.5
40.7
40.0

37.3
37.2
36.5
36.8
36.6

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

36.1
36.1
36.0
35.8
35.7

39.5
40.1
40.3
40.4
40.2

35.5
35.7
35.9
36.0
35.9
35.9
35.9
35.8
35.8
35.8
35.8
35.8

Total
private
nonagriculturaM

Manufacturing

1947
1948
1949

40.3
40.0
39.4

40.4
40.0
39.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

39.8
39.9
39.9
39.6
39.1

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

Year or month

Construction

Manufacturing

Construction

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Adjusted hourly earnings, total
private nonagriculturalz

Index,
1967 = 100
1967

Percent change
from a year
earlier 4

1967

Current
dollars

dollars3

Current
dollars

dollars

42.6
46.0
48.2

63.7
63.8
67.5

8.0
4.8

0.2
5.8

1.100
1.18
1.23
1.30
1.35

50.0
53.7
56.4
59.6
61.7

69.3
69.0
70.9
74.4
76.6

3.7
7.4
5.0
5.7
3.5

2.7
-.4
2.8
4.9
3.0

2.45
2.57
2.71
2.82
2.93

1.40
1.47
1.54
1.60
1.66

63.7
67.0
70.3
73.2
75.8

79.4
82.3
83.4
84.5
86.8

3.2
5.2
4.9
4.1
3.6

3.7
3.7
1.3
1.3
2.7

2.26
2.32
2.39
2.45
2.53

3.07
3.20
3.31
3.41
3.55

1.71
1.76
1.83
1.89
1.97

78.4
80.8
83.5
85.9
88.2

88.4
90.2
92.2
93.7
95.0

3.4
3.1
3.3
2.9
2.7

1.8
2.0
2.2
1.6
1.4

2.46
2.56
2.68
2.85
3.04

2.61
2.71
2.82
3.01
3.19

3.70
3.89
4.11
4.41
4.79

2.04
2.14
2.25
2.41
2.56

91.2
95.3
100.0
106.2
113.2

96.6
98.0
100.0
101.9
103.1

3.4
4.5
4.9
6.2
6.6

1.7
1.4
2.0
1.9
1.2

35.3
35.1
34.9
34.6
34.2

3.23
3.45
3.70
3.94
4.24

3.35
3.57
3.82
4.09
4.42

5.24
5.69
6.06
6.41
6.81

2.72
2.88
3.05
3.23
3.48

120.7
129.2
137.5
146.0
157.5

103.8
106.5
109.7
109.7
106.7

6.6
7.0
6.4
6.2
7.9

.7
2.6
3.0
.0
-2.7

36.4
36.8
36.5
36.8
36.9

33.9
33.7
33.3
32.9
32.6

4.53
4.86
5.25
5.69
6.16

4.83
5.22
5.68
6.17
6.69

7.31
7.71
8.10
8.65
9.25

3.73
3.97
4.28
4.67
5.06

170.6
183.0
196.8
212.9
229.8

105.9
107.3
108.4
109.0
105.6

8.3
7.3
7.5
8.2
7.9

-.7
1.3
1.0
.6
-3.1

39.6
40.0
40.5
40.7
40.4
40.5
40.5
40.4
40.5
40.5
40.6
40.6

35.1
35.8
36.3
36.9
36.6
37.2
37.2
37.0
37.0
36.9
36.8
37.0

32.8
32.8
33.0
32.9
32.9
32.9
32.9
32.8
32.8
32.9
32.8
32.8

5.47
5.50
5.54
5.61
5.63
5.67
5.72
5.74
5.78
5.84
5.87
5.92

5.94
5.98
6.01
6.06
6.09
6.13
6.19
6.21
6.26
6.33
6.38
6.43

8.32
8.36
8.46
8.48
8.57
8.63
8.66
8.73
8.77
8.78
8.85
8.88

4.52
4.51
4.54
4.60
4.61
4.64
4.68
4.71
4.75
4.79
4.81
4.85

205.9
206.6
208.1
210.1
211.1
212.4
214.0
214.9
216.5
218.1
219.2
220.9

109.8
109.4
109.4
109.5
109.1
108.9
109.1
108.9
108.9
108.7
108.6
108.7

7.8
7.7
7.9
8.2
8.0
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.3
8.3
8.5

1.0
1.2
1.2
1.4
.8
.7
.5
.4
.1
-.5
-.5
-.5

35.8
35.7
35.9
35.3
35.7
35.6

40.6
40.6
40.6
39.1
40.2
40.1

37.1
36.6
37.1
35.5
37.1
37.2

32.5
32.5
32.7
32.8
32.6
32.6

5.96
6.00
6.04
6.04
6.09
6.13

6.46
6.51
6.56
6.56
6.65
6.68

8.94
9.06
9.03
9.11
9.20
9.19

4.92
4.93
4.96
4.99
5.00
5.03

222.6
224.0
225.2
226.8
227.5
229.0

108.5
107.8
107.3
106.9
106.1
105.7

8.1
8.4
8.2
8.0
7.8
7.8

-1.2
-1.5
-2.0
-2.4
-2.8
-2.9

35.6
35.6
35.7
35.6
35.7
35.7

40.2
40.1
40.2
40.2
40.1
40.3

36.8
37.2
37.5
36.6
36.8
37.1

32.6
32.5
32.6
32.6
32.7
32.6

6.18
6.22
6.26
6.28
6.33
6.39

6.72
6.74
6.78
6.82
6.87
6.91

9.27
9.32
9.39
9.38
9.45
9.48

5.07
5.10
5.12
5.14
5.19
5.22

230.9
232.2
234.3
234.9
237.1
239.1

105.6
105.1
104.9
104.2
104.1
103.8

7.9
8.1
8.2
7.7
8.2
8.2

-3.2
-3.5
-3.6
-4.1
-4.1
-5.3

$1,540 $0,940
1.712 1.010
1.792 1.060

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

July
Aug.
Sept

Oct
Nov
Dec

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar

\Hvi~IZZ.

June

July
Aug
Sept

Oct
Nov"
Dec"
1

Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34.
Adjusted for overtime (in manufacturing only) and for interindustry employment shifts.
Current dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index (revised index for urban wage earners and clerical workers used
ieginning 1978).
4
Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places.
2

3

Note.—See Note, Table B-34.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




244

TABLE B-36.—Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries, 1947-79
[For production or nonsupervisory workers; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Average gross weekly earnings
Total private
nonagriculturall

Construction
(current
dollars)

Wholesale
and retail

Current
dollars

1967
dollars2

Manufacturing
(current
dollars)

1947
1948
1949

$45.58
49.00
50.24

$68.13
67.96
70.36

$49.13
53.08
53.80

$58.83
65.23
67.56

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

53.13
57.86
60.65
63.76
64.52

73.69
74.37
76.29
79.60
80.15

58.28
63.34
66.75
70.47
70.49

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

67.72
70.74
73.33
75.08
78.78

84.44
86.90
86.99
86.70
90.24

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

80.67
82.60
85.91
88.46
91.33

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

Year or month

Percent change from
a year earlier, total
private
nonagricultural3
Current
dollars

1967
dollars

$38.07
40.80
42.93

7.5
2.5

-0.2
3.5

69.68
76.96
82.86
86.41
88.54

44.55
47.79
49.20
51.35
53.33

5.8
8.9
4.8
5.1
1.2

4.7
.9
2.6
4.3

75.30
78.78
81.19
82.32
88.26

90.90
96.38
100.27
103.78
108.41

55.16
57.48
59.60
61.76
64.41

5.0
4.5
3.7
2.4
4.9

5.4
2.9
.1
-.3
4.1

90.95
92.19
94.82
96.47
98.31

89.72
92.34
96.56
99.23
102.97

112.67
118.08
122.47
127.19
132.06

66.01
67.41
69.91
72.01
74.66

2.4
2.4
4.0
3.0
3.2

.8
1.4
2.9
1.7
1.9

95.45
98.82
101.84
107.73
114.61

101.01
101.67
101.84
103.39
104.38

107.53
112.19
114.49
122.51
129.51

138.38
146.26
154.95
164.49
181.54

76.91
79.39
82.35
87.00
91.39

4.5
3.5
3.1
5.8
6.4

2.7
.7
.2
1.5
1.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

119.83
127.31
136.90
145.39
154.76

103.04
104.95
109.26
109.23
104.78

133.33
142.44
154.71
166.46
176.80

195.45
211.67
221.19
235.89
249.25

96.02
101.09
106.45
111.76
119.02

4.6
6.2
7.5
6.2
6.4

-1.3
1.9
4.1
-.0
-4.1

1975
1976
1977 .
1978
1979'

163.53
175.45
189.00
203.70
219.91

101.45
102.90
104.13
104.30
101.02

190.79
209.32
228.90
249.27
268.94

266.08
283.73
295.65
318.32
341.33

126.45
133.79
142.52
153.64
164.96

5.7
7.3
7.7
7.8
8.0

-3.2
1.4
1.2
.2
-3.1

194.19
196.35
198.89
201.96
202.12
203.55

103.51
104.00
104.57
105.30
104.51
104.38

235.22
239.20
243.41
246.64
246.04
248.27

292.03
299.29
307.10
312.91
313.66
321.04

148.26
147.93
149.82
151.34
151.67
152.66

7.5
6.3
8.0
8.5
7.5
8.1

.7
-.0
1.5
1.8
.4
.7

205.35
205.49
206.92
209.07
210.15
211.94

104.66
104.15
104.03
104.22
104.14
104.30

250.70
250.88
253.53
256.37
259.03
261.06

322.15
323.01
324.49
323.98
325.68
328.56

153.97
154.49
155.80
157.59
157.77
159.08

8.3
8.3
8.2
8.3
8.6
8.9

.5
.4
-.0
-.4
-.2

213 37
214.20
216.84
213.21
217.41
218 23

103 98
103.13
103.31
100.48
101.40
100 75

262 28
264.31
266.34
256.50
267.33
267 87

33167
331.60
335.01
323.41
341.32
34187

159 90
160.23
162.19
163.67
163.00
163 98

92

1

9.4
8.6
5.6
7.8
72

.5
-1.6
-4.6
-2.8
34

220.01
221.43
223.48
223.57
225 98
228.12

100.60
100.24
100.04
99.19
99 24
99.05

270.14
270.27
272.56
274.16
275 49
278.47

341.14
346.70
352.13
343.31
347 76
351.71

165.28
165.75
166.91
167.56
169 71
170.17

7.2
7.8
8.1
7.1
72

3.9
-3.8
3.8
-4.8
49
-5.3

1978.
Jan
Feb
Mar

t
June
July
Aug

a*

Nov
Dec
1979:
Jan
Feb
Mr
a
Apr
My
a
June
July
Aug
Sept

oct
Nov"
Dec"

::.::::

:.::.:::::::::::::::::::::::::

1
2

(current
dollars)

7.4

Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-34.
Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index (revised index for urban wage earners and clerical workers used
beginning 1978).
3
Based on unadjusted data.
Note.—See Note, Table B-34.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




245

TABLE B-37.—Productivity and related data, private business sector. 1947-79
[1967 = 100; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Hours of all
persons2

Output >
Year or
quarter

Output per hour of
all persons

Compensation per
hour3

Unit labor cost

Implicit price
deflator4

Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm
business business business business business business business business business business business business
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector

1947
1948
1949

48.7
50.9
50.0

47.5
49.6
48.7

90.9
91.5
88.5

79.1
80.4
77.3

53.6
55.6
56.5

60.1
61.7
63.0

36.0
39.0
39.7

38.4
41.7
42.9

67.1
70.1
70.2

63.9
67.6
68.1

65.1
70.6
69.8

62.3
67.5
68.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

54.6
57.8
59.5
62.0
60.9

53.3
56.8
58.5
60.9
59.7

89.5
92.1
92.2
93.2
90.1

79.7
83.4
84.3
86.4
83.5

61.0
62.7
64.5
66.5
67.6

66.9
68.1
69.4
70.4
71.5

42.4
46.6
49.6
52.8
54.5

45.4
49.4
52.1
55.0
56.7

69.6
74.3
76.8
79.3
80.6

67.9
72.5
75.1
78.1
79.4

70.8
76.0
77.1
77.9
78.6

69.1
73.6
75.2
76.8
77.8

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

65.7
67.6
68.5
67.0
71.9

64.6
66.6
67.6
65.9
71.1

93.5
94.9
93.5
89.3
92.8

86.9
89.1
88.7
85.0
88.7

70.3
71.2
73.2
75.1
77.5

74.3
74.7
76.2
77.5
80.1

55.8
59.5
63.4
66.2
69.0

58.7
62.3
65.9
68.3
71.1

79.4
83.5
86.5
88.1
89.0

79.1
83.4
86.4
88.1
88.7

79.8
82.2
84.8
86.4
88.1

79.4
81.9
84.6
85.9
88.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

73.2
74.2
78.8
82.3
86.9

72.2
73.3
78.1
81.6
86.5

92.9
91.5
92.9
93.4
94.9

89.3
88.3
90.2
91.1
93.2

78.7
81.1
84.8
88.1
91.6

80.9
83.0
86.6
89.6
92.8

71.9
74.6
78.1
81.0
85.3

74.2
76.6
79.7
82.5
86.3

91.3
92.0
92.0
92.0
93.1

91.7
92.3
92.0
92.1
93.0

89.3
89.8
90.6
91.4
92.7

89.2
89.8
90.5
91.5
92.9

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

92.9
98.1
100.0
105.1
108.3

92.6
98.1
100.0
105.3
108.5

97.8
100.0
100.0
101.8
104.6

96.5
99.8
100.0
102.1
105.5

95.0
98.0
100.0
103.3
103.5

95.9
98.4
100.0
103.2
102.9

88.7
94.9
100.0
107.6
114.9

89.4
94.8
100.0
107.3
114.1

93.3
96.8
100.0
104.1
111.0

93.2
96.4
100.0
104.0
110.9

94.2
97.2
100.0
103.9
108.8

94.1
96.8
100.0
104.0
108.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

107.3
110.3
117.5
124.4
121.4

107.4
110.2
117.8
124.9
121.8

103.0
102.4
105.5
109.6
110.3

104.2
103.8
107.0
111.5
112.3

104.2
107.7
111.4
113.6
110.1

103.0
106.2
110.1
112.0
108.5

123.1
131.4
139.7
151.2
164.9

121.7
129.9
138.4
149.2
162.8

118.2
122.0
125.4
133.1
149.8

118.1
122.3
125.7
133.2
150.0

113.9
118.9
123.2
130.3
143.1

114.0
119.2
122.9
127.9
141.4

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 "

118.7
126.4
133.8
140.7
144.0

118.8
126.9
134.3
141.5
144.8

105.6
108.6
112.8
118.1
122.0

107.4
111.0
115.6
121.1
125.4

112.4
116.4
118.6
119.2
118.1

110.5
114.4
116.2
116.8
115.5

181.3
197.2
213.0
231.2
252.8

178.9
193.8
209.3
227.3
247.6

161.3
169.4
179.6
194.0
214.1

161.8
169.4
180.1
194.5
214.4

157.5
165.5
174.8
187.2
203.8

156.4
164.8
174.5
186.1
202.2

1977:
1
II
Ill
IV

131.0
132.8
135.2
136.1

131.7
133.4
135.6
136.4

110.6
112.6
113.2
114.5

113.2
115.2
116.2
117.3

118.5
117.9
119.4
118.8

116.4
115.8
116.7
116.3

207.7
210.8
215.3
218.5

204.1
207.3
211.2
214.8

175.2
178.8
180.2
183.8

175.4
179.0
180.9
184.7

170.5
173.9
176.0
178.6

169.8
173.6
176.2
178.3

1978:
I
II
Ill
IV

136.9
140.3
141.8
144.0

137.3
141.1
142.7
145.0

115.6
117.9
118.4
120.2

118.4
121.1
121.6
123.4

118.4
119.0
119.7
119.8

116.0
116.5
117.3
117.6

224.2
228.5
233.6
238.4

220.6
224.6
229.4
234.3

189.4
192.1
195.2
199.0

190.2
192.7
195.6
199.3

180.9
185.8
188.9
192.9

180.2
184.7
187.8
191.4

144.4
143.4
143.8
144.4

145.5
144.2
144.6
145.2

121.5
121.3
122.0
123.1

124.8
124.9
125.7
126.4

118.9
118.2
117.8
117.3

116.6
115.4
115.0
114.9

244.8
250.3
255.6
260.0

240.2
244.8
249.9
255.2

205.9
211.7
217.0
221.5

206.0
212.1
217.3
222.2

197.2
202.0
206.1
210.0

195.1
200.3
204.7
208.9

1979:
1
II
Ill

IV
1

Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in 1972 dollars.
Hours of all persons engaged in the sector, including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on
establishment data.
3
Wages and salaries of employees plus employers' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an
estimate of wages, salaries, and supplemental payments for the self-employed.
4
Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product.
2

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




246

TABLE B-38.—Changes in productivity and related data, private business sector, 1948-79
[Percent change from preceding period; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Tear or
quarter

Output per hour of
all persons

Hours of all
persons2

Outputx
Voor nr

Compensation per
hour3

Implicit price
deflator*

Unit labor cost

Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm
business business business business business business business business business business business business
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector

1948
1949

4.5
-1.8

4.4
-1.8

1.6
-3.8

3.8
1.6

2.7
2.1

8.5
1.6

8.6
3.0

4.5

5.7

8.4

-3.3

.1

.8

-1.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

9.2
5.9
3.0

9.4
6.5
3.0
4.1

1.1
2.9
.1
1.0

3.1
4.6
1.0
2.5

7.9
2.8
2.8
3.1
1.6

6.1
1.8
1.9
1.5
1.5

7.0
9.8
6.4
6.5
3.2

5.8
8.7
5.5
5.6
3.1

-.9

— 3

6.8
3.4
3.3
1.5

6^8
3.5
4.0
1.6

1.5
7.3
1.5

.1.0

.9

1.6
6.5
2.1
2.1
1.3

-1.5

5.2
3.6
1.9
1.0

-.4
5.5
3.6
2.0
.7

1.5
3.0
3.2
1.8
2.0

2.1
3.2
3.3
1.5
2.4

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

0.7

8.3
.8

4.1
-1.7

-2.0

-3.3

-3.4

8.0
2.8
1.3

8.2
3.0
1.5

3.8
1.5

4.1
2.5
-.5

4.0
1.3
2.8
2.5
3.2

4.0
.5
2.0
1.8
3.3

2.5
6.5
6.5
4.3

3.6
6.0
5.7
3.8
4.0

1.0
2.6
4.3
3.4
3.6

4.2
3.8
4.6
3.8
5.3

4.4
3.3
4.0
3.5
4.6

2.6
.7
.1
-.1
1.2

3.4
.6
-.3
.1
1.0

1.4
.6
.9
.9
1.4

1.4
.6
.8
1.0
1.5

-2.1

-2.5

-1.5
-4.5

7.3

7.9

3.9

-4.1
4.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

1.8
1.4
6.2
4.4
5.6

1.6
1.5
6.5
4.5
5.9

.2

.6

-1.6

-1.1

1.6
.5
1.5

2.1
1.1
2.3

1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
4.0

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

7.0

7.1
6.0
1.9
5.3
3.0

3.1
2.3
.0
1.8
2.8

3.6
3.3
.2
2.1
3.4

3.8
3.2
2.0
3.3
.2

3.4
2.5
1.6
3.2
-.3

4.0
7.0
5.3
7.6
6.8

3.5
6.1
5.5
7.3
6.3

.2
3.8
3.3
4.1
6.6

.1
3.5
3.8
4.0
6.7

1.6
3.2
2.9
3.9
4.7

1.3
2.9
3.3
4.0
4.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

-.9
2.8
6.6
5.9

-1.1

-1.6

-2.5

-.6
3.0
3.9
.7

-1.2
_ 4

-2.4

2.6
6.9
6.0

.7
3.3
3.5
1.9

.1
3.1
3.7
1.7

-3.1

6.7
6.7
6.5
7.8
9.1

6.4
3.3
2.8
6.2

6.5
3.5
2.8
6.0

12.5

12.7

4.7
4.4
3.6
5.8
9.8

4.9
4.5
3.1
4.1

-3.0

7.1
6.7
6.3
8.2
9.1

10.5

-2.3

-2.5

-4.3

-4.3

2.9
3.9
4.7
3.3

3.3
4.1
4.8
3.6

9.9
8.8
8.0
8.5
9.3

9.9
8.3
8.0
8.6
8.9

7.7
5.0
6.0
8.0

10.4

7.9
4.7
6.3
8.0

10.6

6.9
5.8
5.4
2.3

1.9
3.5
1.6
.5

10.1

6.5
5.8
5.2
2.3

2.1
3.5
1.9
.5
-.9

10.2

5.0
5.6
7.1
8.9

5.4
5.9
6.6
8.7

10.5

11.1

5.4
7.6
2.5

5.3
6.6
2.4

5.7
7.6
2.1
4.6

5.8
7.2
3.4

5.1

8.2
6.2
8.7
6.1

8.7
6.4
7.7
7.0

3.4
8.5
3.1
8.3

3.4
8.4
4.5
8.6

8.4
4.7
6.1

5.2

4.1
9.1
6.2
4.8

2.4
10.5

2.7
11.5
4.5
6.8

8.4
1.7

5.3
11.2

4.4
10.2
7.0
7.8

1.2
-3.6
1.2
1.7

4.4
-.7
2.4

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

5.5
2.0
5.1
3.0

31
4.2
.7

-1.2

4.4

1977

1
II
III
IV
1978
1

II
III
IV

4.2
6.4

3.9
6.1

4.6

-2.1

-1.8

5.4

3.1

4.0

-2.0

-1.5

3.6
9.4
1.8
5.9

-1.5

10.9
7.9
9.2

12.6

12.4

.3

-.9
1.9
2.7
.8

11.4

2.0
2.4

8.5

7.5
8.8
8.8

5.8
6.6

5.4
6.0

4.6

-3.0
-2.2
-1.3
-1.6

-3.2
-4.1
-1.4
-.4

11.1
9.3
8.8
6.9

10.4
7.9

14.6
11.8
10.3

14.0
12.5
10.1

9.3
10.1
8.3

8.7

9.3

7.8

8.1

8.0

6.9
8.7

1979

1
II

III
IV "

1.2

-2.9

1.1
1.8

3.5

.5
2.6
2.1

1
2

8.5
8.9

8.1
11.0
9.0
8.4

Output refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in 1972 dollars.
Hours of all persons engaged in the sector, including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on
establishment data.
3
Wages and salaries of employees plus employers' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an
estimate of wages, salaries, and supplemental payments for the self-employed.
4
Current doffar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product.
Note.—Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table
B—37.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




247

PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY
TABLE B-39.—Industrial production indexes, major industry divisions, 1929-79
[1967 = 100; monthly data seasonally adjusted]

Manufacturing
Year or month

Total
industrial
production

Mining
Total

1967 proportion
1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 *
1978
Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
Apr
May
June
July
Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e
1979
Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
My
a
June
July
Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c

Nov
Dec"

Utilities

Nondurable

100.00

87.95

51.98

35.97

6.36

5.69

21.6
13.7
21.7
25.0
31.6
36.3
44.0
47.4
40.7
35.0
39.4
41.1
38.8
44.9
48.7
50.6
54.8
51.9
58.5
61.1
61.9
57.9
64.8
66.2
66.7
72.2
76.5
81.7
89.8
97.8
100.0
106.3
111.1
107.8
109.6
119.7
129.8
129.3
117.8
130.5
138.2
146.1
152.2

22.8
14.0
21.5
25.4
32.4
37.8
47.0
50.9
42.6
35.3
39.4
40.9
38.7
45.0
48.6
50.6
55.2
51.5
58.2
60.5
61.2
57.0
64.2
65.4
65.6
71.5
75.8
81.0
89.7
97.9
100.0
106.4
111.0
106.4
108.2
118.9
129.8
129.4
116.3
130.3
138.4
146.8
153.3

22.5
91
.
17.7
23.5
31.4
39.9
54.2
59.9
45.2
31.6
37.7
39.3
35.7
43.5
48.9
51.9
58.7
51.8
59.2
61.1
61.6
53.9
61.9
62.9
61.8
68.6
73.1
78.3
89.0
98.9
100.0
106.5
110.6
102.3
102.4
113.7
127.1
125.7
109.3
122.3
130.0
139.7
146.3

23.2
19.9
26.1
27.5
33.3
34.6
37.1
38.6
38.5
39.7
41.3
42.7
42.0
46.7
48.3
49.2
51.2
51.6
57.2
60.1
61.1
61.6
67.7
69.3
71.5
75.8
80.0
85.2
90.9
96.7
100.0
106.2
111.5
112.3
116.6
126.5
133.8
134.6
126.4
141.8
150.5
156.9
163.3

43.1
30.6
42.1
46.8
49.7
51.3
52.5
56.2
55.1
54.2
61.3
64.4
57.1
63.8
70.0
69.4
71.2
69.9
77.9
82.0
82.1
75.3
78.7
80.3
80.8
83.1
86.4
89.9
93.2
98.2
100.0
104.2
108.3
112.2
109.8
113.1
114.7
115.3
112.8
114.2
118.2
124.0
125.1

74
.
67
.
10.7
11.8
13.3
14.9
16.5
17.5
17.8
18.6
20.1
22.4
23.9
27.2
31.0
33.7
36.5
39.3
43.9
48.2
51.5
53.9
59.3
63.4
67.0
72.0
77.0
83.6
88.7
95.5
100.0
108.4
117.3
124.5
130.5
139.4
145.4
143.7
146.0
151.7
156.5
161.4
165.6

140.0
140.3
142.1
144.4
144.8
146.1
147.1
148.0
148.6
149.7
150.6
151.8

140.4
140.7
142.7
144.9
145.2
146.4
147.7
148.6
149.6
150.7
151.6
152.9

132.1
132.3
135.0
137.6
137.9
139.0
141.1
141.8
142.9
144.6
145.5
146.8

152.4
152.9
153.8
155.5
155.8
157.0
157.2
158.4
159.3
159.5
160.4
161.7

114.5
114.4
119.5
125.5
126.5
127.4
127.1
126.2
124.4
127.9
128.0
127.4

160.2
159.9
158.4
158.5
159.5
160.6
162.0
162.2
163.0
163.2
163.7
164.7

151.5
152.0
153.0
150.8
152.4
152.6
152.8
151.6
152.4
152.2
151.8
152.2

152.5
153.3
154.5
151.6
153.8
153.9
154.1
152.4
153.5
153.2
152.6
153.1

146.8
147.2
148.6
144.6
147.6
147.6
147.2
144.2
145.9
145.8
144.7
144.8

160.7
162.0
163.0
161.7
162.8
163.0
164.1
164.3
164.6
163.9
164.2
165.1

123.8
120.9
122.3
122.7
122.8
123.9
124.7
126.4
125.8
127.8
129.2
130.8

166.2
167.7
167.1
167.4
166.5
164.2
164.8
165.5
165.3
164.8
164.6
164.7

1

Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, except as noted.




Durable

248

TABLE B-40.—Industrial production indexes, market groupings, 1947-79
[1967=100; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Materials3

Final products

Year or month

Total
industrial
production

Equipment2

Consumer goods1
Total
Total

Automotive
products

Home
goods

Total

Intermediate
products

Total

Business

NonDurable durable
goods goods

10.47

100.00

47.82

27.68

2.83

5.06

20.14

12.63

12.89

39.29

20.35

1947
1948
1949

39.4
41.1
38.8

38.6
40.0
38.8

42.4
43.7
43.4

45.3
47.4
47.0

37.5
39.1
36.2

30.6
32.2
28.7

38.0
39.5
34.5

41.9
44.3
42.0

39.5
41.2
37.6

38.3
39.4
35.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

44.9
48.7
50 6
54.8
51.9

43 7
47.2
50 7
54.1
51.3

49.6
49.1
50 2
53.2
52.9

59.1
52.3
47.1
59.5
55.4

49.9
43.0
43.0
48.6
44.9

31.1
43.3
51.9
56.3
49.3

37 0
45.2
512
53.3
46.8

48 8
51.3
50 9
54.5
54.3

45.0
49.8
50 5
56.1
51.8

44.4
50.5
51.6
60.3
52.0

45.9

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

58.5
61.1
61.9
57.9
64.8

55.4
58.6
60.3
57.6
63.2

59.0
61.2
62.6
62.1
68.1

73.6
60.6
63.5
50.5
63.3

53.0
55.7
54.5
51.4
59.0

50.4
55.3
57.5
51.5
56.5

50.8
58.8
61.1
51.5
57.9

61.7
64.4
64.4
63.0
69.5

61.3
62.8
62.8
56.5
65.2

63.7
63.9
63.8
53.7
64.0

52.5
54.9
54.7
54.4
62.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

66.2
66.7
111
76.5
81.7

65.3
65.8
71.4
75.5
79.7

70.7
72.2
77.1
81.3
85.9

72.5
66.1
80.1
87.7
91.9

59.4
61.3
66.5
71.8
78.4

58.1
57.3
63.7
67.5
71.4

59.4
57.7
62.7
65.8
73.7

70.0
71.4
75.7
79.9
85.2

66.1
66.2
72.1
76.7
82.9

64.8
63.3
70.4
75.1
81.9

63.2
65.8
71.3
75.6
82.2

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

89.8
97.8
100.0
106.3
111.1

87.6
95.9
100.0
106.2
109.6

92.6
97.3
100.0
105.9
109.8

113.3
112.8
100.0
119.4
118.1

88.9
97.9
100.0
106.4
113.2

80.7
94.0
100.0
106.5
109.3

84.4
97.7
100.0
105.5
112.5

90.6
96.2
100.0
106.3
112.9

92.4
100.7
100.0
106.5
112.5

93.8
103.3
100.0
106.2
112.1

90.3
97.5
100.0
108.8
115.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

107.8
109.6
119.7
129.8
129.3

105.3
106.3
115.7
124.4
125.1

109.0
114.7
124.4
131.5
128.9

98.8
124.4
141.4
153.0
132.8

110.2
115.6
129.5
142.5
136.8

100.1
94.7
103.8
114.5
120.0

107.0
104.1
118.0
134.2
142.4

112.9
116.7
126.5
137.2
135.3

109.2
111.3
122.3
133.9
132.4

103.8
104.9
117.7
134.6
132.7

115.4
120.2
132.9
142.2
142.6

1975
1976
1977
1978 4
1979

117.8
130.5
138.2
146.1
152.2

118.2
127.6
135.9
142.2
147.0

124.0
137.1
145.3
149.1
150.5

125.8
155.7
175.6
179.9
168.2

118.8
134.1
141.9
147.7
148.6

110.2
114.6
123.0
132.8
142.2

128.2
135.4
147.8
160.3
171.2

123.1
137.2
145.1
154.1
159.9

115.5
131.7
138.6
148.3
155.9

109.1
128.0
136.1
149.0
157.7

126.6
147.8
155.6
165.6
174.8

1978
Jan
Feb
Mr
a
Ar
p
My
a
June

140.0
140.3
142.1
144.4
144.8
146.1

136.0
137.3
139.9
141.6
141.4
142.1

143.2
145.2
147.5
149.5
149.0
149.3

157.6
163.9
176.4
185.9
181.2
181.6

141.8
144.5
147.1
149.2
148.4
149.6

126.1
126.5
129.4
130.7
131.0
132.3

152.0
153.6
156.5
158.0
158.4
160.1

150.5
150.2
150.4
152.0
152.4
154.0

141.3
140.7
142.2
145.4
146.5
148.3

140.7
139.7
141.1
144.7
145.5
147.7

158.7
161.0
162.9
164.6
164.8
166.3

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

147.1
148.0
148.6
149.7
150.6
151.8

143.2
144.2
144.5
145.1
145.3
146.1

149.8
150.6
150.8
151.2
151.3
151.5

183.8
183.5
179.5
187.6
190.2
186.9

150.0
149.2
149.9
148.6
147.6
147.7

134.0
135.3
135.9
136.6
137.1
138.6

161.7
163.4
163.8
164.8
165.0
166.8

154.7
155.6
155.6
156.4
157.8
159.9

149.3
150.2
151.2
153.2
154.5
156.2

150.5
151.9
153.4
155.5
157.0
159.5

164.5
165.3
167.8
168.8
170.2
171.9

t

June

151.5
152.0
153.0
150.8
152.4
152.6

146.1
146.8
148.2
145.4
147.8
147.6

150.6
151.5
152.9
149.1
152.0
151.8

181.4
179.3
186.8
163.0
182.7
175.9

148.6
150.9
150.6
145.2
148.1
148.8

139.9
140.4
141.7
140.4
141.9
141.9

168.1
169.0
170.8
168.7
171.4
171.5

160.8
161.4
160.4
159.7
159.5
159.5

155.0
155.2
156.3
154.5
155.7
156.5

158.1
158.0
159.2
155.7
157.9
159.5

171.0
172.4
173.1
173.0
173.8
173.4

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

152.8
151.6
152.4
152.2
151.8
152.2

147.1
145.6
147.2
146.8
146.6
147.3

150.8
148.2
149.7
149.6
148.9
149.1

170.3
147.3
157.6
159.5
151.6
146.0

149.8
147.7
148.5
148.4
148.1
148.6

142.1
141.8
143.9
143.0
143.5
144.8

171.4
171.5
173.6
171.7
172.1
173.8

159.4
160.6
159.8
159.6
159.6
159.5

157.6
156.0
156.3
156.4
155.6
155.8

160.7
157.7
157.6
157.4
155.5
155.3

174.6
175.8
176.7
177.2
177.2
178.7

1967 proportion

1979
Jan
Feb
Mr
a

1
2
3
4

Also includes clothing and consumer staples, not shown separately.
Also includes defense and space equipment, not shown separately.
Also includes energy materials, not shown separately.
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, except as noted.




249

TABLE B-41.—Industrial production indexes, selected manufactures, 1947-79
[1967 = 100; monthly data seasonally adjusted]

Durable manufactures

Year or month

Primary
metals
Total

Iron
and
steel

Fabricated
metal
products

NonElectrieleccal
trical machinmachinery
ery

Nondurable manufactures
Transportation
equipment
Total

Motor
vehicles
and
parts

Foods

1967 proportion..

6.57

5.93

9.15

8.05

9.27

1.64

3.31

4.72

7.74

8.75

1947..
1948
1949

63.3
65.8
55.4

49.9
50.8
45.8

39.0
39.2
33.4

22.2
23.0
21.6

31.8
34.8
34.9

58.9
61.3
54.1

57.8
60.3
59.7

43.3
45.4
46.6

19.7
21.3
21.0

55.8
55.2
55.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

69.7
75.8
69.2
78.5
63.5

70.1

56.1
59.9
58.5
66.0
59.4

37.5
47.7
51.9
54.0
46.1

29.6
29.8
34.0
39.0
34.7

41.8
46.6
54.2
68.0
59.2

60.5

65.7
65.5
64.7
68.4
68.0

64.3
63.1
66.3
67.2
66.4

48.9
49.7
49.7
52.0
54.1

26.2
29.7
31.1
33.6
34.1

57.9
59.0
60.2
61.4
62.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

82.5
82.0
78.5
62.3
72.7

93.2
91.5
88.2
66.5
76.5

67.8
68.8
70.6
63.3
71.0

50.6
58.0
57.9
48.6
56.7

39.9
43.1
42.8
39.2
47.6

68.0
66.0
70.7
55.8
63.2

81.2
65.8
69.0
51.0
66.2

75.9
75.0
68.8
69.9
79.3

73.3
75.0
74.9
72.8
80.1

59.5
63.2
65.4
63.9
68.2

39.8
42.7
45.2
46.6
54.3

66.3
70.1
71.1
72.9
76.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

72.4
71.1
76.3
82.3
92.8

77.7
74.2
77.3
84.3
95.9

71.1
69.4
75.4
77.8
82.6

56.9
55.4
62.1
66.3
75.6

51.6
54.8
62.9
64.7
68.4

65.4
61.5
71.1
78.0
80.0

74.7
65.5
79.8
88.3
90.7

74.7
78.2
82.5
86.3
92.7

81.7
82.2
85.5
89.1
92.2

71.0
71.3
73.9
77.8
82.6

56.4
59.2
65.7
71.8
78.8

78.6
80.9
83.4
86.4
90.4

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

102.1
108.4
100.0
104.3
113.8

105.2
108.4
100.0
103.2
112.6

90.8
97.2
100.0
105.6
107.9

85.0
98.8
100.0
101.8
109.3

81.7
97.9
100.0
105.5
111.9

95.1
102.0
100.0
111.1
108.4

115.9
113.9
100.0
120.3
116.5

96.3
100.0
100.0
105.5
107.9

97.4
99.9
100.0
102.9
106.7

87.9
94.6
100.0
103.2
107.4

87.8
95.7
100.0
109.5
118.4

92.4
96.0
100.0
102.6
106.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

106.6
100.2
112.1
126.7
123.1

104.7
96.1
107.1
122.3
119.8

102.4
103.5
112.1
124.7
124.2

104.4
100.2
116.0
133.7
140.1

108.1
107.7
122.2
143.1
143.8

89.5
97.9
108.2
118.3
108.7

92.3
118.6
135.8
148.8
128.2

105.6
113.8
120.8
126.0
116.2

101.4
104.7
109.4
117.3
114.3

107.0
107.1
112.7
118.2
118.2

120.4
125.9
143.6
154.5
159.4

108.9
112.8
116.8
120.9
124.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979»

96.4
109.7
111.1
119.9
121.5

95.8
104.8
103.8
113.2
113.9

109.9
123.9
131.0
141.6
148.6

125.1
134.5
143.6
153.6
163.7

116.5
134.8
145.4
159.4
174.6

97.4
111.1
122.2
132.5
135.3

111.1
142.0
161.1
169.9
159.9

107.6
123.2
131.2
136.3
137.4

107.6
125.7
134.2
134.2
131.1

113.3
122.5
127.6
131.5
136.9

147.2
170.9
185.7
197.4
209.8

123.4
133.0
138.8
142.7
147.8

Jan
Feb..
Mar.
May
June.

110.4
107.7
108.0
115.5
116.0
118.3

102.6
97.3
98.4
110.2
111.0
113.1

136.4
136.6
137.6
139.0
140.2
141.1

148.2
148.9
149.8
150.6
151.4
152.9

149.5
150.9
154.4
156.8
157.6
158.8

118.8
120.4
128.4
132.6
131.0
131.4

150.4
154.6
166.2
173.2
169.1
168.9

134.0
132.5
134.0
135.1
134.4
136.3

126.5
129.8
133.3
135.3
132.7
133.7

130.5
129.8
130.2
130.1
129.8
131.1

190.7
190.5
191.2
193.0
194.1
196.4

139.7
140.6
141.4
143.1
142.9
142.8

July.
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov.
Dec

122.5
124.9
127.4
129.4
130.8
132.1

116.5
118.3
121.3
123.8
124.4
125.3

142.8
143.7
144.2
144.9
145.6
147.1

154.7
155.5
156.4
157.5
157.8
158.1

162.5
161.5
163.3
164.2
165.2
167.7

133.4
134.2
134.9
139.7
142.1
142.9

171.5
171.6
171.0
178.9
181.9
182.1

136.2
136.0
136.2
138.1
140.1
144.0

132.7
1.37.7
139.6
136.8
135.8
136.5

131.4
131.9
132.6
132.6
133.7
134.4

198.6
199.3
201.3
202.7
204.6
207.2

143.1
143.9
143.7
143.2
143.7
144.7

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

123.4
120.4
123.7
121.7
121.0
124.3

113.3
110.8
116.2
115.8
114.3
118.1

149.1
150.8
150.2
148.8
150.3
149.3

161.2
162.9
164.0
161.8
164.3
164.5

170.9
173.2
174.2
170.6
174.7
175.1

141.2
139.9
143.7
131.6
141.9
139.4

177.9
173.1
179.7
156.0
176.3
169.6

137.3
137.2
137.7
137.2
136.1
136.8

130.3
133.5
136.5
130.8
128.2
132.0

135.6
138.2
137.3
135.7
136.8
136.9

206.5
208.6
207.4
207.7
209.7
207.8

143.9
145.5
147.6
147.0
149.2
149.5

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov"
Dec"

127.1
121.0
121.7
118.7
117.6
117.5

119.0
112.0
115.0
109.4
108.9

149.3
147.6
146.5
147.5
146.4
147.4

165.3
166.2
165.1
162.3
162.6
163.3

174.4
171.7
176.7
177.0
177.7
179.0

135.5
124.7
131.7
133.5
128.3
126.0

160.2
138.5
150.6
150.6
139.7
134.8

135.2
138.0
138.6
138.7
138.4

129.7
130.1
131.2
128.5

135.6
137.7
137.1
136.9
136.9
137.8

210.5
213.1
212.0
211.0
213.1

149.4
148.1
148.8
148.6
143.3

4.21

450

Lumber Apparel Printing Chemicals
and
and
prod- publish- and
products
products
ing
ucts

1978:

1979:

1
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers. Where unadjusted data are not available for 12 months, data are averages of
seasonally adjusted indexes shown.

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, except as noted.




250

TABLE B-42.—Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing, 1948-79
[Percent; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Wharton series3

Commerce series2

FRB series'

AdPrimary- Advanced
NonNonTotal
Total
Total
Primary vanced
procmanufac- Durable durable
manufac- process- process- manufac- Durable durable processed
goods goods
essed
goods goods
turing
turing
turing
goods
ing
ing
goods

Year or quarter

1948
1949

82 5
74.2

87 3
76.2

80 0
73.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

82.8
85.8
85.4
89.2
80.3

88.5
90.2
84.9
89.4
80.6

79.8
83.4
85.9
89.3
80.1

881

85 3

92 0

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

87.1
86.4
83.7
75.2
81.9

92.1
89.7
84.7
75.4
83.4

84.3
84.5
83.1
75.1
81.1

90 5
87 9
84 0
74 2
78 9

88 3
85 3

93 6

816

68 0
73 7

87 4
83 0
86 3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

80.2
77.4
81.6
83.5
85.6

79.8
77.9
81.6
83.8
87.8

80.4
77.2
81.7
83.4
84.6

76 9
73 7
76 5
77 7
79 5

719

841

67 7

718

73 4
75 5

82 5
83 3
83 8
85 2

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

89.6
91.1
86.9
87.1
86.2

91.1
91.4
85.7
87.7
88.5

88.9
91.1
87.6
86.8
85.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

79.3
78.4
83.5
87.6
83.8

82.9
82.3
88.2
92.5
87.8

77.4
76.3
81.0
85.0
81.5

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

72.9
79.5
81.9
84.4
85.7

73.7
81.9
84.0
86.9
87.8

72.5
78.2
80.8
83.0
84.5

85.5
85.5
85.1
79.1

90.8
90.3
89.4
80.8

70.3
70.7
74.6
76.1

915

86
86
84
85
85
81
80
83
86
83
77
81
83
84

88
87
83
84
84
78
78
82
85
82
76
81
84
84

85
86
85
86
86
83
83
85
86
84
79
82
82
83

89
88
87
86
87
83
82
85
89
85
76
82
83
84

85
85
83
84
84
79
80
82
84
82
77
81
83
84

84.2
88.2
86.9
89.2
90.2

82.3
88.0
86.2
88.8
89.6

86.9
88.5
87.9
89.8
91.1

84.1
82.7
87.9
93.2
90.5

80.8
78.3
84.5
92.0
89.2

88.8
89.0
92.9
94.9
92.4

79.8
86.0
88.7
91.7

76.5
82.6
85.8
90.4

84.5
90.9
93.0
93.6

82.6
82.7
82.7
78.2

84
84
84
78

83
84
84
76

85
85
84
80

87
87
86
79

83
83
83
77

91.8
92.0
92.0
86.3

90.0
90.3
91.0
85.6

94.5
94.4
93.4
87.4

69.9
70.4
76.2
78.4

70.4
71.0
73.8
74.9

75
75
79
79

74
73
78
77

76
78
80
81

75
73
78
78

75
76
79
79

77.3
77.7
81.4
82.7

75.4
74.7
77.8
78.2

80.2
82.0
86.7
89.1

78.4
79.5
80.0
80.0

81.0
81.9
82.6
82.1

77.0
78.1
78.5
78.8

82
82
80
81

81
83
79
81

82
81
82
82

83
83
82
80

81
82
79
82

85.2
86.0
86.3
86.5

81.1
82.7
83.4
83.2

91.1
90.9
90.6
91.1

80.7
82.1
82.4
82.6

82.2
84.4
84.5
84.7

79.8
80.8
81.3
81.3

83
84
82
82

84
86
82
82

82
82
82
82

83
84
82
82

84
84
82
83

87.4
88.9
89.2
89.5

83.8
85.8
86.4
87.0

92.6
93.2
93.2
93.0

82.0
83.9
85.2
86.4

84.0
86.3
87.9
89.5

80.9
82.7
83.7
84.6

84
84
83
84

84
85
83
85

83
82
82
83

83
84
84
85

84
84
82
84

89.2
91.2
92.4
94.0

86.9
89.6
91.5
93.7

92.4
93.6
93.8
94.5

86.7
85.9
85.4
84.6

88.7
87.9
88.0
86.6

85.6
84.8
84.0
83.5

84
83
82

85
84
82

83
82
82

85
84
83

84
83
81

94.4
93.6
93.1

94.6
93.5
92.5

94.2
93.8
93.9

1974

1
II
III
I
V
1975

1
II
III
I
V
1976
1

II
III
I
V
1977

1
II
III
I
V
1978

1
II
III
I
V
1979

|

II

Ill
IV

'.

1
2

For description of the series, see "Federal Reserve Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization," February 1978.
Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes, except for 1965 (December index) and
1966-67 (averages of June and December indexes). For description of the series, see "Survey of Current Business," July 1974.
3
Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series, see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers, "The
Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization: A Ten Year Perspective, 1973 Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section,
American Statistical Association.
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), and Wharton
School of Finance.




251

TABLE B-43.—New construction activity, 1929-79
[Value put in place, billions of dollars; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Private construction
Year or month

Total
new
construction

Presidential buildings and other
construction *

Residential
buildings'
Total

Public construction

Total2 housing Total Commercial3
units

Total

Industrial

Other4

Federal State and
local *

1929

10.8

8.3

3.6

3.0

4.7

1.1

0.9

2.6

2.5

0.2

1933

2.9

1.2

.5

.3

.8

.1

.2

.5

1.6

.5

1.1

1939.

8.2

4.4

2.7

2.3

1.7

.3

.3

1.2

3.8

.8

3.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

8.7
12.0
14.1
8.3
5.3

5.1
6.2
3.4
2.0
2.2

3.0
3.5
1.7
.9
.8

2.6
3.0
1.4
.7
.6

2.1
2.7
1.7
1.1
1.4

.3
.4
.2
.0
.1

.4
.8
.3
.2
.2

1.3
1.5
1.2
.9
1.1

3.6
5.8
10.7
6.3
3.1

1.2
3.8
9.3
5.6
2.5

2.4
2.0
1.3
.7
.6

1945
1946

5.8
14.3

3.4
12.1

1.3
6.2

.7
4.8

2.1
5.8

.2
1.2

.6
1.7

1.3
3.0

2.4
2.2

1.7
.9

.7
1.4

New series
1947
1948
1949

20.0
26.1
26.7

16.7
21.4
20.5

9.9
13.1
12.4

7.8
10.5
10.0

6.9
8.2
8.0

1.0
1.4
1.2

1.7
1.4
1.0

4.2
5.5
5.9

3.3
4.7
6.3

.8
1.2
1.5

2.5
3.5
4.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

33.6
35.4
36.8
39.1
41.4

26.7
26.2
26.0
27.9
29.7

18.1
15.9
15.8
16.6
18.2

15.6
13.2
12.9
13.4
14.9

8.6
10.3
10.2
11.3
11.5

1.4
1.5
1.1
1.8
2.2

1.1
2.1
2.3
2.2
2.0

6.1
6.7
6.8
7.3
7.2

6.9
9.3
10.8
11.2
11.7

1.6
3.0
4.2
4.1
3.4

5.2
6.3
6.6
7.1
8.3

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

46.5
47.6
49.1
50.0
55.4

34.8
34.9
35.1
34.6
39.3

21.9
20.2
19.0
19.8
24.3

18.2
16.1
14.7
15.4
19.2

12.9
14.7
16.1
14.8
15.1

3.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.9

2.4
3.1
3.6
2.4
2.1

7.3
8.0
9.0
8.8
9.0

11.7
12.7
14.1
15.5
16.1

2.8
2.7
3.0
3.4
3.7

8.9
10.0
11.1
12.1
12.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

54.7
56.4
60.2
64.8
67.7

38.9
39.3
42.3
45.5
47.3

23.0
23.1
25.2
27.9
28.0

17.3
17.1
19.4
21.7
21.8

15.9
16.2
17.2
17.6
19.3

4.2
4.7
5.1
5.0
5.4

2.9
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.6

8.9
8.7
9.2
9.7
10.3

15.9
17.1
17.9
19.4
20.4

3.6
3.9
3.9
4.0
3.9

12.2
13.3
14.0
15.4
16.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

73.7
76.4
78.1
87.1
93.9

517
52.4
52.5
59.5
66.0

27 9
25.7
25.6
30.6
33.2

217
19.4
19.0
24.0
25.9

23 8
26.7
27.0
28.9
32.8

7.8
9.4

6.0
6.8

15.1
16.6

22 1
24.0
25 5
27.6
28.0

40
40
35
3.4
3.3

18 0
20 0
221
24.2
24.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

94.9
110.0
124.1
137.9
138.5

66.8
80.1
93.9
105.4
100.2

31.9
43.3
54.3
59.7
50.4

24.3
35.1
44.9
50.1
40.6

34.9
36.8
39.6
45.7
49.8

9.8
11.6
13.5
15.5
15.9

6.5
5.4
4.7
6.2
7.9

18.6
19.8
21.5
24.0
25.9

28.1
29.9
30.2
32.5
38.3

3.3
4.0
4.4
4.9
5.3

24.8
25.9
25.8
27.7
33.0

1975
1976
1977
1978

134.5
151.1
174.0
206.2

93.7
111.9
135.8
160.4

46.5
60.5
81.0
93.4

34.4
47.3
65.7
75.8

47.2
51.4
54.9
67.0

12.8
12.8
14.8
18.6

8.0
7.2
7.7
11.0

26.4
31.5
32.4
37.4

40.9
39.1
38.2
45.8

6.3
7.0
7.3
8.3

34.6
32.1
30.9
37.5

See next page for continuation of table.




252

2.3

TABLE B-43.—New construction activity, 1929-79—Continued
[Value put in place, billions of dollars; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Private construction
Year or month

Total
new
construction

Residential
buildings1
Total

Public construction

Nonresidential buildings and other
construction'

New
Total 2 housing Total Commercial 3
units

Industrial

Total

Federal

State and
local 5

Other 4

1978:

t

June

174.9
181.0
188.6
198.3
204.4
206.2

137.3
144.4
149.4
155.0
158.6
161.5

79.9
86.4
88.7
91.4
93.7
94.9

65.1
71.6
73.0
74.1
75.3
76.7

57.4
58.0
60.7
63.6
64.9
66.6

15.7
15.4
16.3
17.3
18.8
19.4

8.1
8.3
9.3
9.5
9.2
10.6

33.6
34.2
35.0
36.8
36.9
36.5

37.6
36.6
39.2
43.4
45.9
44.7

7.6
7.5
7.7
8:4
8.0
7.3

30.0
29.1
31.5
35.0
37.8
37.4

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

212.8
213.7
215.3
217.8
220.0
223.2

164.6
165.1
166.5
168.5
170.7
173.8

95.6
95.8
96.0
95.9
97.5
99.7

77.6
77.7
77.7
77.6
78.9
80.7

69.0
69.3
70.5
72.6
73.2
74.0

19.2
19.2
19.2
19.9
20.4
20.5

11.6
12.0
12.5
13.0
12.9
13.5

38.2
38.1
38.7
39.7
39.9
40.1

48.2
48.6
48.8
49.3
49.3
49.4

9.4
9.4
9.2
8.3
8.7
8.5

38.8
39.3
39.5
41.1
40.6
40.9

MPay".Z
June

212.3
210.9
216.7
216.4
223.4
224.3

165.9
169.3
172.7
171.9
175.0
178.3

93.7
97.8
96.5
95.7
95.2
96.9

73.6
77.2
75.9
76.0
75.7
77.7

72.1
71.5
76.2
76.2
79.8
81.4

19.8
19.0
21.0
21.5
23.6
24.8

12.7
13.4
15.2
14.0
14.5
14.7

39.6
39.2
40.0
40.7
41.7
41.9

46.4
41.6
44.0
44.5
48.4
46.0

8.8
7.8
9.7
8.1
9.3
8.1

37.6
33.8
34.3
36.4
39.1
37.9

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov'

231.1
230.3
232.6
238.5
235.3

180.1
180.6
181.6
185.6
184.1

97.0
97.5
99.0
99.2
98.3

77.7
78.3
79.1
78.3
77.0

83.1
83.1
82.6
86.3
85.7

24.8
25.8
25.7
26.7
26.6

15.5
13.8
13.7
15.0
14.7

42.7
43.5
43.2
44.6
44.4

51.0
49.7
50.9
52.9
51.2

9.6
9.6
9.7
8.2
8.7

41.3
40.1
41.2
44.7
42.5

Jan
Feb.
Mar

1979:

Jan
Feb
Mar

1
Beginning 1960, farm residential buildings included in residential buildings; prior to I960, included in nonresidential buildings and
other construction.
2
Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units, not shown separately.
3
Office buildings, warehouses, stores, restaurants, garages, etc.
4
Religious, educational, hospital and institutional, miscellaneous nonresidential, farm (see also footnote 1), public utilities, and all
other private.
5
Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census).

294-289



0 - 8 0 - 1 7

253

TABLE B-44.—New housing units started and authorized, 1959-79
[Thousands of units]
New private housing units
authorized2

New housing units started
Private1

Private and public*

Type of structure

Total (farm and nonfarm)

Year or month
Total
(farm and
nonfarm)

Total

Type of structure

Nonfarm
Total

One unit

2 to 4
units

1959

1,553.7

1,531.3

1,517.0

1,234.0

I960..
1961
1962
1963
1964

1,296.1
1,365.0
1,492.5
1,634.9
1,561.0

1,274.0
1,336.8
1,468.7
1,614.8
1,534.0

1,252.2
1,313.0
1,462.9
1,603.2
1,528.8

994.7
974.3
991.4
1,012.4
970.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1,509.7
1,195.8
1,321.9
1,545.4
1,499.5

1,487.5
1,172.8
1,298.8
1,521.4
1,482.3

1,472.8
1,164.9
1,291.6
1,507.6
1,466.8

963.7
778.6
843.9
899.4
810.6

86.6
61.1
71.6
80.9
85.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

1,469.0
2,084.5
2,378.5
2,057.5
1,352.5

1,433.6
2,052.2
2,356.6
2,045.3
1,337.7

812.9
1,151.0
1,309.2
1,132.0
888.1

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

1,171.4
1,547.6
1,989.8
2,023.3
1,746.6

1,160.4
1,537.5
1,987.1
2,020.3
1,742.5

892.2
1,162.4
1,450.9
1,433.3
1,193.3

One unit

2to4
units

5 units
or more

5 units
or more

1,208.3

938.3

77.1

192.9

998.0
1,064.2
1,186.6
1,334.7
1,285.8

746.1
722.8
716.2
750.2
720.1

64.6
67.6
87.1
118.9
100.8

187.4
273.8
383.3
465.6
464.9

422.5
325.1
376.1
527.3
571.2

1,239.8
971.9
1,141.0
1,353.4
1,323.7

709.9
563.2
650.6
694.7
625.9

84.8
61.0
73.0
84.3
85.2

445.1
347.7
417.5
574.4
612.7

84.8
120.3
141.3
118.3
68.1

535.9
780.9
906.2
795.0
381.6

1,351.5
1,924.6
2,218.9
1,819.5
1,074.4

646.8
906.1
1,033.1
882.1
643.8

88.1
132.9
148.6
117.0
64.3

616.7
885.7
1,037.2
820.5
366.2

64.0
85.9
121.7
125.0
122.3

204.3
289.2
414.4
462.0
426.9

939.2
1,296.2
1,690.0
1,800.5
1,537.3

675.5
893.6
1,126.1
1,182.6
971.0

63.9
93.1
121.3
130.6
124.8

199.8
309.5
442.7
487.3
441.5

283.0

257.4
338.7
471.5
590.8
108.4
450.0

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

1978:

June

88.6
101.3
172.3
197.5
211.1
216.1

1,744
1,659
2,011
2,176
2,037
2,093

1,290
1,171
1,413
1,482
1,463
1,439

110
88
126
138
92
143

344
400
472
556
482
511

1,723
1,705
1,742
1,914
1,756
1,983

1,167
1,097
1,130
1,275
1,175
1,245

112
119
131
124
122
169

444
489
481
515
459
569

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

192.3
190.9
181.1
192.1
158.6
121.4

2,104
2,004
2,024
2,054
2,107
2,074

1,455
1,431
1,432
1,436
1,502
1,539

134
137
112
135
150
119

515
436
480
483
455
416

1,765
1,716
1,838
1,835
1,789
1,827

1,140
1,129
1,184
1,209
1,172
1,268

116
124
131
135
134
139

509
463
523
491
483
420

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

88.4
84.7
153.3
161.3
189.1
192.0

1,679
1,381
1,786
1,745
1,835
1,923

1,139
953
1,266
1,278
1,226
1,288

124
76
116
115
119
123

416
352
404
352
490
512

1,451
1,425
1,621
1,517
1,618
1,639

929
881
1,056
1,036
1,047
1,012

125
95
126
119
116
132

396
449
439
362
455
495

July...
Aug...
Sept..
Oct....
Nov"
Dec ".

165.0
171.4
163.8
169.0
119.2
89.2

1,788
1,793
1,921
1,764
1,522
1,527

1,220
1,239
1,254
1,159
985
1,071

138
156
122
139
123
106

430
398
545
466
414
350

1,528
1,654
1,775
1,542
1,263
1,204

1,001
1,030
1,015
927
751
768

135
151
151
137
99
104

392
473
609
478
413
332

Jan
Feb.,
Mar.

1979:

1
Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of
Housing and Urban Development "Turnkey" program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts, including those financed
with mortgages insured by FHA under Section 803 of the National Housing Act, are included in publicly owned starts and excluded from
total private starts.
2
Authorized by issuance of local building permit: in 16,000 permit-issuing places beginning 1978; in 14,000 places for 1972-77; in
13,000 places for 1967-71; in 12,000 places for 1963-66; and in 10,000 places prior to 1963.
3
Not available separately beginning January 1970.

Note.—Only the series on private and public nonfarm housing units started is available prior to 1959. See 1976 "Economic Report"
for this earlier series.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




254

TABLE B-45.—Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1947-80x
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Nonmanufacturing

Manufacturing
Year or quarter

Total
Total

NonDurable durable Total
goods goods

Transportation
Mining
Railroad

Public Commu- Commerutilities nication cial and
other2

Ar Other
i

1947
1948
1949

19.33
21.30
18.98

8.44
9.01
7.12

3.25
3.30
2.45

5.19
5.71
4.68

10.89
12.29
11.86

0.69
.93
.88

0.91
1.37
1.42

0.17
.10
.12

1.13
1.17
.76

1.54
2.54
3.10

1.40
1.74
1.34

5.05
4.42
4.24

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

20.21
25.46
26.43
28.20
27.19

7.39
10.71
11.45
11.86
11.24

2.94
4.82
5.21
5.31
4.91

4.45
5.89
6.24
6.56
6.33

12.82
14.75
14.98
16.34
15.95

.84
1.11
1.21
1.25
1.28

1.18
1.58
1.50
1.42
.93

.10
.14
.24
.24
.24

1.09
1.33
1.23
1.29
1.22

3.24
3.56
3.74
4.34
3.99

1.14
1.37
1.61
1.78
1.82

5.22
5.67
5.45
6.02
6.45

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

29.53
35.73
37.94
31.89
33.55

11.89
15.40
16.51
12.38
12.77

5.41
7.45
7.84
5.61
5.81

6.48
7.95
8.68
6.77
6.95

17.64
20.34
21.43
19.51
20.78

1.31
1.64
1.69
1.43
1.36

1.02
1.37
1.58
.86
1.02

.26
.35
.41
.37
.78

1.30
1.31
1.30
1.06
1.33

4.03
4.52
5.67
5.52
5.14

2.11
2.82
3.19
2.79
2.72

7.63
8.32
7.60
7.48
8.44

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

36.75
35.91
38.39
40.77
46.97

15.09
14.33
15.06
16.22
19.34

7.23
6.31
6.79
7.53
9.28

7.85
8.02
8.26
8.70
10.07

21.66
21.58
23.33
24.55
27.62

1.30
1.29
1.40
1.27
1.34

1.16
.82
1.02
1.26
1.66

.66
.73
.52
.40
1.02

1.30
1.23
1.65
1.58
1.50

5.24
5.00
4.90
4.98
5.49

3.24
3.39
3.85
4.06
4.61

8.75
9.13
9.99
10.99
12.02

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

54.42
63.51
65.47
67.76
75.56

23.44
28.20
28.51
28.37
31.68

11.50
14.06
14.06
14.12
15.96

11.94
14.14
14.45
14.25
15.72

30.98
35.32
36.96
39.40
43.88

1.46
1.62
1.65
1.63
1.86

1.99
2.37
1.86
1.45
1.86

1.22
1.74
2.29
2.56
2.51

1.68
1.64
1.48
1.59
1.68

6.13
7.43
8.74
10.20
11.61

5.30
6.02
6.34
6.83
8.30

13.19
14.48
14.59
15.14
16.05

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

79.71
81.21
88.44
99.74
112.40

31.95
29.99
31.35
38.01
46.01

15.80
14.15
15.64
19.25
22.62

16.15
15.84
15.72
18.76
23.39

47.76
51.22
57.09
61.73
66.39

1.89
2.16
2.42
2.74
3.18

1.78
1.67
1.80
1.96
2.54

3.03
1.88
2.46
2.41
2.00

1.23
1.38
1.46
1.66
2.12

13.14
15.30
17.00
18.71
20.55

10.10
10.77
11.89
12.85
13.96

16.59
18.05
20.07
21.40
22.05

1975
1976
1977
1978 3
19793
1980

112.78
120.49
135.80
153.82
176.37
195 67

47.95
52.48
60.16
67.62
78.30
89 51

21.84
23.68
27.77
31.66
37.89
43 76

26.11 64.82
28.81 68.01
32.39 75.64
35.96 86.19
40.41 98.07
45 75 106 16

3.79
4.00
4.50
4.78
5.52
6 45

2.55
2.52
2.80
3.32
3.88
4 40

1.84
1.30
1.62
2.30
3.34
3 44

3.18
3.63
2.51
2.43
2.97
3 41

20.14
22.28
25.80
29.48
33.18
34 39

12.74
13.30
15.45
18.16
20.18
54 07

20.60
20.99
22.97
25.71
28.98

1978:
1
I
I
II
I
IV

144.25
150.76
155.41
163.96

61.57
67.20
67.75
73.24

28.72
31.40
32.25
33.99

32.86
35.80
35.50
39.26

82.68
83.56
87.66
90.71

4.45
4.81
4.99
4.98

3.35
3.09
3.38
3.49

2.67
2.08
2.20
2.39

2.44
2.23
2.47
2.55

27.92
28.46
29.62
31.73

17.07
18.18
18.90
18.46

24.76
24.71
26.09
27.12

1979:
1
I
I
II
I
IV 3

165.94
173.48
179.33
184.32

71.56
76.42
80.22
83.04

34.00
36.86
39.72
40.16

37.56 94.38
39.56 97.06
40.50 99.12
42.88 101.28

5.46
5.31
5.42
5.91

4.02
3.66
4.03
4.00

3.35
3.26
3.10
3.74

2.71
2.79
3.16
3.22

32.35
33.24
33.33
33.76

27.73
18.75
28.51
20.29
20.41
29.66
50 65

1980:
I33
II

189.32
195.76

85.02
89.11

42.32
44.44

42.70 104.29
44.68 106.65

4.95

3.92

5.09

3.75

33.07

. .
. .

53 5?

1
Excludes agricultural business; real estate operators-, medical, legal, educational, and cultural services; and nonprofit organizations.
These figures do not agree precisely with the nonresidential fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates, mainly
because those data incTude investment by farmers, professionals, nonprofit institutions, and real estate firms, and certain outlays
charged to current account.
2
Commercial and other includes trade, service, construction, finance, and insurance.
3
Planned capital expenditures as reported by business in late October-December 1979. Plans are adjusted when necessary for
systematic bias.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




255

TABLE B-46.—Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade, 1947-79
[Amounts in millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Total manufacturing and
trade

Retail trade

Merchant wholesalers

Manufacturing

Year or month
Sales l

Inventories2

Ratio3

Sales1

Inventories2

Ratio3 Sales 1

Inven3
tories2 Ratio

Sales 1

3
Inventories2 Ratio

1947
1948
1949

35,260
33,788

52,507
49,497

1.42
1.53

15,513
17,316
16,126

25,897
28,543
26,321

1.58
1.57
1.75

6,808
6,514

7,957
7,706

1.13
1.19

10,200
11,135
11,149

14,241
16,007
15,470

1.26
1.39
1.41

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

38,596
43,356
44,840
47,987
46,443

59,822
70,242
72,377
76,122
73,175

1.36
1.55
1.58
1.58
1.60

18,634
21,714
22,529
24,843
23,355

31,078
39,306
41,136
43,948
41,612

1.48
1.66
1.78
1.76
1.81

7,695
8,597
8,782
9,052
8,993

9,284
9,886
10,210
10,686
10,637

1.07
1.16
1.12
1.17
1.18

12,268
13,046
13,529
14,091
14,095

19,460
21,050
21,031
21,488
20,926

1.38
1.64
1.52
1.53
1.51

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

51,694
54,063
55,879
54,201
59,729

79,516
87,304
89,052
87,093
92,129

1.47
1.55
1.59
1.60
1.50

26,480
27,740
28,736
27,247
30,286

45,069
50,642
51,871
50,241
52,945

1.62
1.73
1.80
1.84
1.70

9,893
10,513
10,475
10,257
11,491

11,678
13,260
12,730
12,739
13,879

1.13
1.19
1.23
1.24
1.15

15,321
15,811
16,667
16,696
17,951

22,769
23,402
24,451
24,113
25,305

1.43
1.47
1.44
1.43
1.40

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

60,827 94,713
61,159 95,594
65,662 101,063
68,995 105,480
73,682 111,503

1.56
1.54
1.50
1.49
1.47

30,879
30,923
33,357
35,058
37,331

53,780
54,885
58,186
60,046
63,409

1.75
1.74
1.70
1.69
1.64

11,656
11,988
12,674
13,382
14,529

14,120
14,488
14,936
16,048
17,000

1.22
1.20
1.16
1.15
1.14

18,294
18,249
19,630
20,556
21,823

26,813
26,221
27,941
29,386
31,094

1.45
1.43
1.38
1.39
1.40

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

80,283
87,187
90,348
98,143
105,042

120,907
136,790
145,335
156,166
169,841

1.45
1.47
1.56
1.54
1.55

40,995
44,870
46,487
50,268
53,540

68,185
77,952
84,659
90,617
98,210

1.60
1.62
1.76
1.74
1.77

15,611 18,317
16,987 20,765
19,448 25,377
20,846 26,604
22,609 29,114

1.15
1.15
1.25
1.25
1.23

23,677 34,405
25,330 38,073
24,413 35,299
27,030 38,945
28,893 42,517

1.39
1.44
1.43
1.38
1.41

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

107,475
116,035
130,049
151,720
175,350

178,337
188,563
203,161
234,163
285,519

1.62
1.58
1.50
1.44
1.47

52,832
55,925
63,042
72,954
84,821

101,667
102,677
108,296
124,672
157,915

1.90
1.83
1.67
1.58
1.65

23,943
26,257
29,584
36,822
45,836

32,803
35,823
39,786
46,254
56,537

1.29
1.30
1.27
1.17
1.12

30,700 43,867
33,853 50,063
37,422 55,079
41,944 63,237
44,692 71,067

1.41
1.41
1.40
1.41
1.49

1975
1976
1977
1978

179,982
201,814
224,686
254,125

285,035
310,736
338,099
379,630

1.58
1.48
1.45
1.41

86,617
98,810
110,842
124,714

158,178
170,156
179,981
198,041

1.83
1.66
1.59
1.52

44,633 55,113
48,408 61,307
53,509 67,998
62,842 80,771

1.24
1.21
1.21
1.19

48,731 71,744
54,597 79,273
60,335 90,120
66,568 100,818

1.45
1.39
1.40
1.44

232,439
238,873
242,926
249,868
251,588
252,380

341,516
344,337
349,407
353,863
357,248
360,065

1.47
1.44
1.44
1.42
1.42
1.43

114,287
118,246
120,048
123,082
122,895
123,760

181,322
182,798
184,066
185,826
187,536
189,267

1.58
1.54
1.53
1.51
1.52
1.53

56,260 69,191
57,729 70,325
58,803 72,629
61,640 74,327
63,171 74,779
62,656 75,191

1.23
1.22
1.24
1.21
1.18
1.20

61,892
62,898
64,075
65,146
65,522
65,964

91,003
91,214
92,712
93,710
94,933
95,607

1.47
1.45
1.45
1.44
1.45
1.45

252,728
259,226
260,099
266,724
269,792
272,537

363,048
366,574
369,227
372,404
376,812
379,630

1.44
1.41
1.42
1.40
1.40
1.39

123,079 190,783
127,029 192,412
127,483 193,764
130,415 194,500
132,082 196,803
133,796 198,041

1.55
1.51
1.52
1.49
1.49
1.48

63,425 75,744
64,894 76,338
64,531 77,113
67,338 78,625
67,552 79,526
67,823 80,771

1.19
1.18
1.19
1.17
1.18
1.19

66,224
67,303
68,085
68,971
70,158
70,918

96,521
97,824
98,350
99,279
100,483
100,818

1.46
1.45
1.44
1.44
1.43
1.42

273,304
274,579
285,372
275,936
287,139
283,388

384,190
387,822
391,893
397,530
401,504
405,966

1.41
1.41
1.37
1.44
1.40
1.43

135,301
135,962
142,503
134,126
142,288
138,960

200,908
203,642
205,589
209,178
211,085
214,339

1.48
1.50
1.44
1.56
1.48
1.54

67,148 81,543
67,495 83,005
70,824 84,078
70,444 84,973
72,937 85,257
72,625 85,245

1.21
1.23
1.19
1.21
1.17
1.17

70,855
71,122
72,045
71,366
71,914
71,803

101,739
101,175
102,226
103,379
105,162
106,382

1.44
1.42
1.42
1.45
1.46
1.48

289,206
293,059
296,394
299,077
298,433

413,395
416,956
417,334
421,205
424,149

1.43
1.42
1.41
1.41
1.42

141,730
142,532
143,201
145,551
144,141

216,560
219,137
221,417
223,450
226,159

1.53
1.54
1.55
1.54
1.57

75,106 88,144
75,733 88,727
76,264 88,393
77,915 88,784
78,117 88,648

1.17
1.17
1.16
1.14
1.13

72,370
74,794
76,929
75,611
76,175
77,020

108,691
109,092
107,524
108,971
109,342

1.50
1.46
1.40
1.44
1.44

1978.
Jan
Feb

Mar

£

June

:

July
Aug
Sept
Oct

Nov
Dec
1979
Jan

Feb
Mar
May
June
July
Aug
Sept

Oct
Nov

Dec"
1
2
3

Monthly average for year and total for month.
Seasonally adjusted, end of period.
Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods, ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales; for monthly data, ratio of
inventories at end of month to sales for month.
Note.—Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning 1958 for manufacturing and beginning 1967 for wholesale and
retail trade.
The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national
product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business, and show inventories in terms of current book
value without adjustment for revaluation.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census).




256

TABLE B-47.—Manufacturers' shipments and inventories, 1947-79

[Millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Shipments1
Year or month
Total

Inventories'

Dura- Nonble durable
goods goods
indus- industries
tries

Durable goods industries
Total
Total

Mate- Work
rials
in
and
procsupplies ess

Nondurable goods industries

Finished
goods

Total

Mate- Work
in
rials
procand
supplies ess

Finished
goods

1947
1948
1949

15,513
17,316
16,126

6,694
7,579
7,191

8,819 25,897
9,738 28,543
8,935 26,321

13,061
14,662
13,060

12,836
13,881
13,261

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

18,634
21,714
22,529
24,843
23,355

8,845
10,493
11,313
13,349
11,828

9,789 31,078
11,221 39,306
11,216 41,136
11,494 43,948
11,527 41,612

15,539
20,991
23,731
25,878
23,710

15,539
18,315
17,405
6,206 18,070
6,040 17,902

8,317
8,167

2,472
2,440

7,409
7,415

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

26,480
27,740
28,736
27,247
30,286

14,071
14,715
15,237
13,563
15,609

12,409 45,069
13,025 50,642
13,499 51,871
13,684 50,241
14,677 52,945

26,405
30,447
31,728
30,258
32,077

9,194
10,417
10,608
10,032
10,776

10,756
12,317
12,837
12,387
13,063

6,348
7,565
8,125
7,839
8,239

18,664
20,195
20,143
19,983
20,868

8,556
8,971
8,775
8,662
9,080

2,571
2,721
2,864
2,828
2,944

7,666
8,622
8,624
8,491
8,845

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

30,879
30,923
33,357
35,058
37,331

15,883
15,616
17,262
18,280
19,637

14,996
15,307
16,095
16,778
17,694

53,780 32,371
54,885 32,544
58,186 34,632
60,046 35,866
63,409 38,506

10,353
10,279
10,810
11,068
11,970

12,772
13,203
14,159
14,871
16,191

9,245
9,063
9,662
9,925
10,344

21,409
22,341
23,554
24,180
24,903

9,082
9,493
9,813
9,978
10,131

2,946
3,110
3,296
3,406
3,511

9,380
9,738
10,444
10,796
11,261

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

40,995
44,870
46,487
50,268
53,540

22,221
24,649
25,267
27,698
29,477

18,774 68,185 42,257
20,220 77,952 49,920
21,220 84,659 54,996
22,570 90,617 58,871
24,064 98,210 64,739

13,325
15,489
16,454
17,389
18,710

18,075
21,939
25,001
27,314
30,377

10,854
12,491
13,542
14,167
15,651

25,928
28,032
29,662
31,746
33,471

10,448
11,155
11,715
12,289
12,726

3,806
4,204
4,423
4,849
5,124

11,674
12,673
13,524
14,608
15,621

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

52,832
55,925
63,042
72,954
84,821

28,215
29,973
34,043
39,703
44,253

24,617
25,952
28,999
33,251
40,568

101,667
102,677
108,296
124,672
157,915

66,790
66,313
70,308
81,426
101,866

19,198
19,778
20,893
26,062
35,228

29,836
28,654
30,819
35,546
42,683

17,756
17,882
18,597
19,818
23,956

34,877
36,364
37,987
43,245
56,048

13,154
13,680
14,676
18,134
23,689

5,275
5,669
5,983
6,713
8,179

16,448
17,015
17,328
18,398
24,180

1975
1976
1977
1978

86,617
98,810
110,842
124,714

43,678
50,697
58,010
66,505

42,939
48,113
52,832
58,210

158,178
170,156
179,981
198,041

101,766 33,629 42,923
109,095 36,562 44,843
115,552 38,745 46,990
129,226 41,468 55,449

25,214
27,690
29,816
32,309

56,412
61,061
64,430
68,816

23,199 8,692
25,056 9,576
25,227 10,142
26,610 10,717

24,521
26,429
29,061
31,489

114,287
118,246
120,048
123,082
122,895
123,760

59,856
62,552
63,764
65,556
65,018
65,593

54,431
55,694
56,284
57,526
57,877
58,167

181,322
182,798
184,066
185,826
187,536
189,267

116,467
117,728
118,731
119,901
121,426
122,529

47,761
48,661
49,300
50,137
50,963
51,558

30,345
30,335
30,708
30,841
31,038
31,294

64,855
65,070
65,335
65,925
66,110
66,739

25,310
25,380
25,758
25,720
25,762
26,184

10,152
10,268
10,239
10,334
10,315
10,278

29,393
29,422
29,338
29,871
30,033
30,277

123,079
127,029
127,483
130,415
132,082
133,796

65,106
67,972
68,476
70,096
71,392
72,637

57,972
59,057
59,007
60,319
60,689
61,159

190,783
192,412
193,764
194,500
196,803
198,041

123,624 39,751 52,525
124,952 40,205 53,137
126,108 41,093 53,324
126,715 40,869 54,114
128,422 41,276 54,889
129,226 41,468 55,449

31,347
31,611
31,691
31,732
32,256
32,309

67,158
67,460
67,657
67,785
68,381
68,816

26,037
25,956
26,059
26,165
26,427
26,610

10,366
10,370
10,469
10,663
10,695
10,717

30,755
31,134
31,129
30,957
31,259
31,489

135,301
135,962
142,503
134,126
142,288
138,960

72,897
73,646
76,855
70,996
75,698
72,629

62,404
62,316
65,648
63,130
66,590
66,331

200,908
203,642
205,589
209,178
211,085
214,339

131,699
133,994
135,278
137,903
139,502
141,700

42,030
42,615
43,570
43,848
44,504
44,885

56,275
57,262
57,656
58,995
59,975
61,461

33,394
34,117
34,052
35,060
35,023
35,354

69,209
69,648
70,311
71,275
71,583
72,639

27,098
27,292
27,712
28,089
28,079
28,400

10,839
10,990
10,982
11,149
11,248
11,335

31,272
31,366
31,617
32,037
32,256
32,904

141,730
142,532
143,201
145,551
144,141

73,585
74,416
74,012
75,570
73,657

68,145
68,116
69,189
69,981
70,484

216,560
219,137
221,417
223,450
226,159

143,369
144,966
145,927
148,042
150,332

45,538
46,492
46,382
47,734
48,406

62,006
62,776
63,828
64,892
66,096

35,825
35,698
35,717
35,416
35,830

73,191
74,171
75,490
75,408
75,827

28,515
29,266
29,369
29,577
30,044

11,548
11,598
11,890
11,981
11,871

33,128
33,307
34,231
33,850
33,912

1978.
Jan
Feb
Mar

£
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1979Jan
Feb
Mar

t

June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
1

8,966 10,720
7,894 9,721

38,361
38,733
38,723
38,923
39,425
39,677

Monthly average for year and total for month.
Book value, seasonally adjusted, end of period, except as noted.
Note.—Data beginning 1958 are not strictly comparable with earlier data.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
2




257

TABLE B-48.—Manufacturers'

new and unfilled orders, 1947-79

[Amounts in millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
New orders1

Unfilled orders—shipments
ratio 3

Unfilled orders2

Durable goods
industries
Year or month
Total
Total

NonCapital durable
goods
goods
indus- industries
tries,
nondefense

Total

NonDurable
durable
goods
goods
industries industries

Total

NonDurable durable
goods
goods
industries industries

1947.
1948
1949

15,256
17,693
15,614

6,388
8,126
6,633

9,566
8,981

34,473
30,736
24,045

28,579
26,619
19,622

5,894
4,117
4,423

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

20,110
23,907
23,204
23,586
22,335

10,165
12,841
12,061
12,147
10,768

9,945
11,066
11,143
11,439
11,566

41,456
67,266
75,857
61,178
48,266

35,435
63,394
72,680
58,637
45,250

6,021
3,872
3,177
2,541
3,016

3.42

4.12

0.96

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

27,465
28,368
27,559
27,002
30,724

14,996
15,365
14,111
13,290
16,003

12,469
13,003
13,448
13,712
14,720

60,004
67,375
53,183
47,370
52,732

56,241
63,880
50,352
44,559
49,373

3,763
3,495
2,831
2,811
3,359

3.63
3.87
3.35
3.09
3.01

4.27
4.55
4.00
3.69
3.54

1.12
1.04
.85
.86
.94

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

30,235
31,104
33,436
35,524
38,357

15,303
15,759
17,374
18,709
20,652

14,932
15,345
16,061
16,815
17,705

45,080
47,407
48,577
54,327
66,882

42,514
44,375
45,965
51,270
63,691

2,566
3,032
2,612
3,057
3,191

2.78
2.63
2.69
2.80
3.10

3.37
3.13
3.24
3.37
3.72

.72
.79
.68
.73
.72

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

42,100
46,402
47,062
50,684
53,967

23,278
26,177
25,831
28,113
29,887

7,070
7,746

18,823
20,225
21,231
22,571
24,079

80,071
98,401
105,030
109,912
115,142

76,298
94,575
101,058
105,935
110,969

3,773
3,826
3,972
3,977
4,173

3.33
3.81
3.71
3.84
3.74

3.95
4.55
4.42
4.64
4.48

.76
.73
.69
.69

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

52,068
55,990
64,162
76,183
87,157

27,418
30,004
35,059
42,853
46,740

6,800
7,517
8,803
11,089
12,737

24,650
25,986
29,104
33,330
40,417

105,916
106,772
120,395
159,468
187,574

101,323
101,744
114,059
152,089
182,037

4,593
5,028
6,336
7,379
5,537

3.64
3.37
3.29
3.87
4.12

4.38
4.04
3.89
4.58
4.94

.77
.77
.88
.93
.64

1975
1976
1977
1978

85,082
99,184
112,451
128,488

41,957
51,047
59,562
70,145

10,772
12,501
15,084
18,308

43,125
48,137
52,889
58,343

169,126
173,646
193,150
238,652

161,286
165,509
184,319
228,181

7,840
8,137
8,831
10,471

3.69
3.20
3.17
3.35

4.42
3.83
3.77
3.92

.83
.74
.73
.81

June.

117,197
121,220
124,585
126,896
127,022
126,651

62,611
65,541
68,138
69,249
68,895
68,313

16,173
17,190
17,182
17,277
17,608
17,608

54,585 196,061
55,679 199,035
56,448 203,575
57,647 207,388
58,127 211,514
58,338 214,406

187,075
190,064
194,440
198,132
202,009
204,729

8,986
8,971
9,135
9,255
9,506
9,677

3.31
3.22
3.23
3.20
3.29
3.29

3.95
3.82
3.83
3.80
3.92
3.91

.76
.74
.74
.73
.75
.76

July..
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov.
Dec...

124,076
129,870
131,608
136,714
137,794
138,069

65,935
70,593
72,399
76,463
76,912
76,831

17,450
18,358
19,835
21,032
20,754
19,132

58,141 215,403
59,277 218,244
59,208 222,368
60,250 228,667
60,882 234,381
61,238 238,652

205,557
208,178
212,101
218,468
223,989
228,181

9,845
10,066
10,267
10,199
10,392
10,471

3.32
3.23
3.27
3.31
3.35
3.35

3.95
3.81
3.84
3.90
3.94
3.92

.76
.78
.81
.78
.79
.81

Jan
Feb.
Mar
MPay
June.

141,748
144,036
148,586
139,332
143,594
142,269

79,647
81,312
83,088
76,099
77,027
75,820

21,410
22,868
23,978
20,767
20,965
21,753

62,101
62,724
65,498
63,233
66,567
66,449

245,113
253,187
259,267
264,479
265,782
269,086

234,943
242,608
248,839
253,948
255,273
258,457

10,170
10,579
10,428
10,531
10,509
10,629

3.44
3.51
3.41
3.71
3.53
3.65

4.06
4.13
4.01
4.42
4.19
4.34

.76
.79
.75
.76
.73
.75

July..
Aug
Sept.
Oct

140,508
142,664
147,154
146,640
146,569

72,545
74,029
77,560
76,663
75,417

20,232
20,737
21,815
20,999
21,419

67,963 267,863
68,635 267,994
69,594 271,946
69,977 273,047
71,152 275,471

257,417
257,029
260,576
261,679
263,435

10,446
10,965
11,370
11,368
12,036

3.57
3.56
3.63
3.56
3.66

4.27
4.22
3.74
4.22
4.34

.71
.76
.79
.77
.82

1978:
Jan..
Feb.
Mar.

1979:

Nov....
1
2
3

Monthly average for year and total for month.
Seasonally adjusted, end of period.
Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures relate
to seasonally adjusted data for December.
Note.—Data beginning 1958 are not strictly comparable with earlier data.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




258

PRICES
TABLE B-49.—Consumer price indexes, major expenditure classes, 1929-79
[1967 = 100]

Year or month

All
items

1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1978:
Jan...
Feb...
Mar..
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar
May"!
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

Food and
beverages
Total *

51.3
38.8
41.6
42.0
44.1
48.8
51.8
52.7
53.9
58.5
66.9
72.1
71.4
72.1
77.8
79.5
80.1
80.5
80.2
81.4
84.3
86.6
87.3
88.7
89.6
90.6
91.7
92.9
94.5
97.2
100.0
104.2
109.8
116.3
121.3
125.3
133.1
147.7
161.2
170.5
181.5
195.4
217.4

100.0
103.6
108.8
114.7
118.3
123.2
139.5
158.7
172.1
177.4
188.0
206.3
228.5

187.2
188.4
189.8
191.5
193.3
195.3
196.7
197.8
199.3
200.9
202.0
202.9

194.6
197.3
199.5
202.6
205.2
208.5
209.7
210.1
210.3
211.6
212.5
214.1

204.7
207.1
209.1
211.5
214.1
216.6
218.9
221.1
223.4
225.4
227.5
229.9

Food

Total

2

Housing
Other
Apparel Trans- Medical EnterRent, Home Fuel and
and portation care tainment goods Enerand
gy4
resi- owner- other
upkeep
services
dential ship utilities 3

48.3
30.6
34.6

52.2

76.0
54.1
56.0

48.5
36.9
42.4

43.0

36.7

35.2
38.4
45.1
50.3
49.6
50.7
58.1
70.6
76.6
73.5

52.4
53.7
56.2
56.8
58.1
59.1
60.6
65.2
69.8
70.9

56.2
57.2
58.5
58.5
58.6
58.8
59.2
61.1
65.1
68.0

42.8
44.8
52.3
54.6
58.5
61.5
67.5
78.2
83.3
80.1

42.7
44.2
48.1
47.9
47.9
47.8
50.3
55.5
61.8
66.4

36.8
37.0
38.0
39.9
41.1
42.1
44.4
48.1
51.1
52.7

74.5
82.8
84.3
83.0
82.8
81.6
82.2
84.9
88.5
87.1

72.8
77.2
78.7
80.8
81.7
82.3
83.6
86.2
87.7
88.6

70.4
73.2
76.2
80.3
83.2
84.3
85.9
87.5
89.1
90.4

75.0
76.3
77.0
78.3
81.7
83.5
84.4

83.0
83.5
85.1
87.3
89.9
91.7
93.8

79.0
86.1
85.3
84.6
84.5
84.1
85.8
87.3
87.5
88.2

68.2
72.5
77.3
79.5
78.3
77.4
78.8
83.3
86.0
89.6

53.7
56.3
59 3
61.4
63.4
64.8
67 2
69.9
73.2
76.4

90.1
90.3
91.8

88.0
89.1
89.9
91.2
92.4
94.4
99.1
100.0
103.6
108.9

90.2
90.9
91.7
92.7
93.8
94.9
97.2
100.0
104.0
110.4

91.7
92.9
94.0
95.0
95.9
96.9
98.2
100.0
102.4
105.7

86.3
86.9
87.9
89.0
90.8
92.7
96.3
100.0
105.7
116.0

95.9
97.1
97.3
98.2
98.4
98.3
98.8
100.0
101.3
103.6

89.6
90.4
90.9
91.9
92.7
93.7
96.1
100.0
105.4
111.5

89.6
90.6
92.5
93.0
94.3
95.9
97.2
100.0
103.2
107.2

79.1
814
83.5
85.6
87 3
895
93.4
100.0
106.1
113.4

100.0
105.7
111.0

100.0
105.2
110.4

94.2
94.4
94.7
95.0
94.6
96 3
97.8
100.0
101.5
104.2

114.9
118.4
123.5
141.4
161.7
175.4
180.8
192.2
211.4
234.5

118.2
123.4
128.1
133.7
148.8
164.5
174.6
186.5
202.8
227.6

110.1
115.2
119.2
124.3
130.6
137.3
144.7
153.5
164.0
176.0

128.5
133.7
140.1
146.7
163.2
181.7
191.7
204.9
227.2
262.4

107.6
115.0
120.1
126.9
150.2
167.8
182.7
202.2
216.0
239.3

116.1
119.8
122.3
126.8
136.2
142.3
147.6
154.2
159.6
166.6

112.7
118.6
119.9
123.8
137.7
150.6
165.5
177.2
185.5
212.0

120.6
128.4
132.5
137.7
150.5
168.6
184.7
202.4
219.4
239.7

116.7
122.9
126.5
130.0
139.8
152.2
159.8
167.7
176.6
188.5

116.8
122.4
127.5
132.5
142.0
153.9
162.7
172.2
183.3
196.7

107.0
111.2
114.3
123.5
159.7
176.6
189.3
207.3
220.4
275.9

199.2
202.0
204.2
207.5
210.3
213.8

193.8
195.0
196.7
198.3
199.9
202.0

158.8
159.7
160.5
161.5
162.7
163.6

215.0
216.4
218.3
220.4
222.5
225.3

208.5
210.6
212.6
213.9
215.5
217.5

155.7
154.5
156.5
158.4
159.8
159.9

179.0
179.4
179.9
181.1
183.2
185.5

211.2
213.3
214.5
215.7
216.9
217.9

171.9
172.9
174.1
175.6
176.2
176.2

178.5
179.0
179.3
179.8
180.4
181.0

211.8
213.0
214.3
215.7
217.7

215.0
215.4
215.6
216.8
217.8
219.4

203.8
205.2
207.5
209.5
210.6
211.5

164.2
165.1
166.4
167.4
168.5
169.5

228.3
230.6
234.2
237.0
238.8
239.5

218.0
218.1
218.8
220.1
218.5
219.9

158.0
159.6
161.9
163.3
164.1
163.2

187.2
188.1
188.7
189.7
191.4
192.6

219.4
221.4
222.6
224.7
227.0
227.8

177.0
177.4
178.3
179.3
179.5
180.9

183.1
184.0
187.8
188.3
188.8
189.1

220.7
222.4
223.7
225.1
226.5
225.9
228.3

218.3
222.4
224.4
226.3
228.2
229.3

223.9
228.2
230.4
232.3
234.3
235.4

213.1
215.6
217.6
219.8
222.4
225.5

170.3
171.0
171.3
172.0
173.8
174.7

241.6
245.6
248.2
251.7
254.9
258.8

221.5
223.3
225.9
227.5
232.2
239.0

160.7
161.4
164.3
165.4
166.1
165.7

193.9
195.6
198.1
202.9
207.7
212.6

230.7
232.6
233.9
235.1
236.3
237.7

182.3
183.2
184.8
186.5
187.8
188.2

190.5
191.9
192.8
193.2
193.9
194.5

231.5
235.0
241.2
250.2
260.8
275.4

230.7
230.2
231.0
232.1
233.1
235.5

236.9
236.3
237.1
238.2
239.1
241.7

228.4
231.5
234.6
237.7
240.8
243.6

175.9
177.5
179.0
181.4
182.1
182.9

263.0
267.6
271.9
276.7
282.4
286.9

243.5
247.2
251.2
252.9
252.0
255.1

164.3
166.3
169.8
171.0
171.7
172.2

216.6
219.6
221.4
222.7
224.9
227.7

239.9
241.8
243.7
245.9
248.0
250.7

189.1
190.2
191.1
192.0
192.8
193.4

195.2
197.0
201.7
202.3
202.9
204.0

287.1
296.3
304.3
307.5
307.8
313.7

1
2
3

Includes alcoholic beverages, not shown separately.
Includes other items, not shown separately. Series beginning 1967 not comparable with series for earlier years.
Gas (piped) and electricity; fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; and other utilities and public services.
4
Gas (piped) and electricity; fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; and gasoline, motor oil, coolant, etc.
Note.—Data beginning January 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




259

TABLE B-50.—Consumer price indexes, selected expenditure classes, 1939-79
[1967 = 100]

Homeownership

Food and beverages

Fuel arid other utilities
Household fuels

Food
Year or
month

Mnmo

Total

Total

At
home

Away
from
home

Total

purchase

ing,"
taxes,
and
insurance

Maintenance
and
repair

Total

Total

Gas
and
electricity

Fuel
oil,
coal,
and
bottled
gas

Other
utilities
and
public
services

1939

34 6

82 9

37 1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

35 2
38 4
451
50.3
49 6
50.7
581
70.6
76 6
73.5

73.5
79.8
76.7

821
81.4
810
80.6
80 3
79.6
77 4
77.1
791
81.0

38 2
40 5
431
45.2
47 1
48.0
513
58.4
68 6
70.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

74.5
82 8
84 3
83.0
82.8
81.6
82 2
84.9
88.5
87.1

77.6
86.3
87 8
86.2
85.8
84.1
84.4
87.2
91.0
88.8

68.9
70.1
70.8
72 2
74.9
77.2
79.3

75.0
76.3
77.0
78.3
81.7
83.5
84.4

86.5
87.1
87.3
87 6
90.0
913
91.3

71.2
72.4
74.1
77.2
80.5
81.8
83.2

83.0
83.5
85.1
87 3
89.9
91.7
93.8

81.2
81.5
82 6
84.2
85.3
87.5
88 4
89.3
92.4
94.7

72.7
76 5
78 0
815
81.2
82.3
85 9
90.3
88 7
89.8

I960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
L968
1969

100.0
103.6
108.8

88.0
891
89.9
912
92.4
94.4
991
100.0
103.6
108.9

89.6
90.4
91.0
92.2
93.2
95.5
100.3
100.0
103.2
108.2

81.4
83 2
85.4
87.3
88.9
90.9
951
100.0
105.2
111.6

86.3
86.9
87.9
89.0
90.8
92.7
96.3
100.0
105.7
116.0

91.8
92 3
93.2
94 2
95.7
97.0
98 6
100.0
102.8
109.5

100.0
108.3
123.7

84.6
85.9
86.5
87.7
89.5
91.3
95.2
100.0
106.1
115.0

95.9
971
97.3
98 2
98.4
98.3
98 8
100.0
101.3
103.6

100.0
1014
103.4

98.6
99 4
99.4
99.4
99.4
99.4
99.6
100.0
100.9
102.8

89.2
910
91.5
93 2
92.7
94.6
97 0
100.0
103.1
105.6

100.0
101.2
104.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

114.7
118.3
123.2
139.5
158.7
172.1
177.4
188.0
206.3
228.5

114.9
118.4
123.5
141.4
161.7
175.4
180.8
192.2
211.4
234.5

113.7
116.4
121.6
141.4
162.4
175.8
179.5
190.2
210.2
232.9

128.5
119.9
133.7
126.1
131.1 • 140.1
146.7
141.4
163.2
159.4
181.7
174.3
191.7
186.1
204.9
200.3
227.2
218.4
262.4
242.9

118.3
124.8
130.0
132.7
142.7
160.3
168.4
179.5
196.7
223.1

142.3
143.5
150.8
160.6
181.1
201.9
212.8
227.2
257.8
308.9

124.0
133.7
140.7
151.0
171.6
187.6
199.6
214.7
233.0
256.4

107.6
115.0
120.1
126.9
150.2
167.8
182.7
202.2
216.0
239.3

107.9
115.3
120.1
128.4
160.7
183.8
202.3
228.6
247.4
286.4

107.3
114.7
120.5
126.4
145.8
169.6
189.0
213.4
232.6
257.8

110.1
117.5
118.5
136.0
214.6
235.3
250.8
283.4
298.3
403.1

107.4
114.7
120.6
124.1
130.3
137.1
145.4
152.0
158.3
159.5

June

194.6
197.3
199.5
202.6
205.2
208.5

199.2
202.0
204.2
207.5
210.3
213.8

197.0
200.1
202.5
206.5
209.7
213.9

208.2
210.5
212.3
214.0
215.8
217.8

215.0
216.4
218.3
220.4
222.5
225.3

188.1
189.0
190.5
191.7
193.4
195.3

240.5
242.4
244.8
247.7
250.8
254.7

222.4
223.5
225.5
228.4
229.6
231.9

208.5
210.6
212.6
213.9
215.5
217.5

235.9
239.2
242.1
244.2
246.8
250.2

219.7
223.3
226.6
229.2
232.5
236.5

295.2
296.9
297.2
296.6
295.6
295.1

156.3
156.8
157.3
157.7
157.7
157.9

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

209.7
210.1
210.3
211.6
212.5
214.1

215.0
215.4
215.6
216.8
217.8
219.4

214.7
214.5
214.1
215.4
216.1
217.9

219.9
221.7
223.2
224.6
225.9
227.4

228.3
230.6
234.2
237.0
238.8
239.5

197.4
197.9
201.2
203.4
204.8
207.1

259.3
264.1
268.9
272.4
274.7
273.1

234.4
236.1
237.5
240.7
242.3
243.3

218.0
218.1
218.8
220.1
218.5
219.9

250.7
250.4
251.5
254.0
250.6
252.7

237.2
236.9
237.9
240.0
234.9
236.2

294.5
294.2
295.7
300.1
306.1
311.8

158.4
159.1
159.2
158.9
159.7
160.1

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
|y|3y
June

218.3
222.4
224.4
226.3
228.2
229.3

223.9
228.2
230.4
232.3
234.3
235.4

223.1
228.0
229.9
231.7
233.4
234.2

230.2
233.4
236.0
238.4
241.1
242.7

241.6
245.6
248.2
251.7
254.9
258.8

208.1
210.9
212.7
215.4
217.6
220.9

276.6
283.5
287.7
292.1
297.2
302.2

245.2
245.9
247.5
250.6
252.4
255.5

221.5
223.3
225.9
227.5
232.2
239.0

256.3
259.3
264.0
266.8
274.6
286.2

239.5
241.2
244.0
245.3
251.6
259.9

316.4
326.1
339.5
349.8
364.3
391.2

159.0
159.C
158.8
158.8
159.C
159.2

230.7
230.2
231.0
232.1
233.1
235.5

236.9
236.3
237.1
238.2
239.1
241.7

235.5
233.9
234.7
235.4
236.0
238.7

244.9
246.5
247.6
249.6
251.3
253.4

263.0
267.6
271.9
276.7
282.4
286.9

224.0
226.9
229.8
233.4
237.3
239.9

308.6
316.4
323.0
330.5
340.1
348.3

257.9
259.7
262.5
264.7
266.4
268.3

243.5
247.2
251.2
252.9
252.0
255.1

293.8
299.7
306.6
310.3
307.0
311.8

264.5
266.5
270.1
272.5
267.3
270.8

412.9
438.6
461.6
470.8
477.4
488.0

159.4
159.S
159.8
158.fi
161.C
161.9

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar

tHayZ'Z.'.

July
Aug
Oct
Nov
Dec

See next page for continuation of table.




260

TABLE B-50.—Consumer price indexes, selected expenditure classes,

1939-79—Continued

[1967 = 100]
Medical care

Transportation
Private
Year or month
Total
Total

Used
cars

cars

Gasoline

Maintenance
and
repair

Other

Public
transportation

Total

Medical
care
services

Medical
care
commodities

1939

43.0

44.2

43.2

49.0

43.1

33.1

36.7

32.5

71.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

42.7
44.2
48.1
47 9
47.9
47.8
50.3
55.5
61.8
66.4

43.6
45.9
52.3
514
51.4
51.3
54.3
61.5
68.2
72.3

43.3
46.6

69.2
75.6
82.8

48.1
50.5
53.4
54.0
54.2
53.8
54.9
62.2
70.4
72.3

43.0
44.9
48.8
49 4
50.0
50.4
52.0
56 4
59.6
61.1

33.1
33.1
33.3
33.4
33.5
33.5
34.4
36.0
40.7
45.2

36.8
37.0
38.0
39.9
41.1
42.1
44.4
48.1
51.1
52.7

32.5
32.7
33.7
35.4
36.9
37.9
40.1
43.5
46.4
48.1

70.8
71.4
73.0
73.5
74.3
74.8
76.2
81.8
86.1
87.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

68.2
72.5
77.3
79 5
78.3
77.4
78.8
83.3
86 0
89.6

72.5
75.8
80.8
82 4
80.3
78.9
80.1
84.7
87 4
91.1

83.4
87.4
94.9
95.8
94.3
90.9
93.5
98.4
1015
105.9

71.8
73.9
75.8
80 3
82.5
83.6
86.5
90.0
88 8
89.9

62.3
67.0
68.6
72.3
74.8
76.5
79.5
82.4
83 7
85.5

48.9
54.0
57.5
61.3
65.5
67.4
70.0
72.7
761
78.3

53.7
56.3
59.3
61.4
63.4
64.8
67.2
69.9
73 2
76.4

49.2
51.7
55.0
57.0
58.7
60.4
62.8
65.5
68.7
72.0

88.5
91.0
91.8
92.6
93.7
94.7
96.7
99.3
102 8
104.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

89.6
90.6
92 5
93.0
94 3
95.9
97 2
100.0
103.2
107.2

90.6
91.3
93 0
93.4
94 7
96.3
97 5
100.0
103.0
106.5

104.5
104.5
1041
103.5
103 2
100.9
991
100.0
102.8
104.4

83.6
86.9
94 8
96.0
1001
99.4
97 0
100.0
103.1

92.5
91.4
919
91.8
914
94.9
97 0
100.0
101.4
104.7

87.2
89.3
90 4
91.6
92 8
94.5
96 2
100.0
105.5
112.2

100.0
103.4
109.7

81.0
84.6
87 4
88.5
901
91.9
95 2
100.0
104.6
112.7

79.1
81.4
83 5
85.6
87 3
89.5
93 4
100.0
106.1
113.4

74.9
77.7
80 2
82.6
84.6
87.3
92 0
100.0
107.3
116.0

104.5
103.3
1017
100.8
100.5
100.2
100 5
100.0
100.2
101.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

112.7
118.6
119.9
123.8
137.7
150.6
165.5
177.2
185 5
212.0

111.1
116.6
117.5
121.5
136.6
149.8
164.6
176.6
185 0
212.3

107.6
112.0
111.0
111.1
117.5
127.6
135.7
142.9
153.8
166.0

104.3
110.2
110.5
117.6
122.6
146.4
167.9
182.8
186.5
201.0

105.6
106.3
107.6
118.1
159.9
170.8
177.9
188.2
196.3
265.6

120.6
129.2
135.1
142.2
156.8
176.6
189.7
203.7
220.6
242.6

119.2
128.4
129.1
127.8
132.4
141.2
163.1
177.3
184.6
198.6

128.5
137.7
143.4
144.8
148.0
158.6
174.2
182.4
187.8
200.3

120.6
128.4
132.5
137.7
150.5
168.6
184.7
202.4
219.4
239.7

124.2
133.3
138.2
144.3
159.1
179.1
197.1
216.7
235.4
258.3

103.6
105.4
105.6
105.9
109.6
118.8
126.0
134.1
143.5
153.8

MPay
June

179.0
179.4
179.9
181.1
183.2
185.5

178.2
178.6
179.1
180.3
182.6
185.0

150.9
151.2
151.1
151.2
152.5
153.5

169.8
170.0
172.3
177.3
184.6
191.5

190.0
189.5
189.4
190.2
191.8
194.4

212.0
214.1
215.3
216.3
217.7
219.5

181.7
182.5
182.5
182.6
182.8
183.4

186.6
186.8
187.2
187.3
187.4
187.2

211.2
213.3
214.5
215.7
216.9
217.9

226.5
228.7
229.9
231.3
232.5
233.5

138.8
140.1
141.0
141.8
142.7
143.4

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nv
o
Dec

187.2
188.1
188.7
189.7
191.4
192.6

186.8
187.7
188.3
189.4
191.1
192.5

153.9
153.8
153.5
155.5
158.5
159.8

195.9
196.7
195.9
195.4
194.7
194.0

197.2
199.8
201.5
201.9
203.5
206.2

220.9
222.5
224.4
226.4
228.2
229.3

183.9
184.3
185.3
186.9
189.0
190.6

187.7
187.6
188.2
189.3
189.7
189.1

219.4
221.4
222.6
224.7
227.0
227.8

235.4
237.7
239.1
241.5
244.1
244.8

144.0
144.5
145.1
145.9
147.0
148.0

My
a
June

193.9
195.6
198.1
202.9
207.7
212.6

193.8
195.5
198.1
203.2
208.1
213.3

161.2
162.3
162.7
164.3
165.8
166.3

193.6
193.4
195.4
200.0
205.4
208.9

209.1
213.0
220.6
234.7
247.7
265.0

231.3
233.9
236.3
238.2
240.1
242.0

191.4
192.5
193.4
194.8
196.4
197.3

190.0
190.7
191.5
192.6
193.3
194.0

230.7
232.6
233.9
235.1
236.3
237.7

248.3
250.4
251.8
253.1
254.4
255.9

148.8
150.1
150.7
151.6
152.4
153.3

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nv
o
Dec

216.6
219.6
221.4
222.7
224.9
227.7

217.4
220.4
222.0
223.1
225.0
227.5

166.7
166.6
166.1
167.5
170.6
171.7

209.2
207.0
202.9
199.9
198.4
198.2

280.0
292.0
301.0
303.8
306.9
313.9

244.0
245.7
247.1
249.1
250.8
252.6

198.5
200.5
201.7
203.7
205.5
207.5

197.1
200.8
205.2
209.1
216.5
223.0

239.9
241.8
243.7
245.9
248.0
250.7

258.5
260.6
262.8
265.3
267.6
270.7

154.1
155.0
155.8
156.6
157.8
159.2

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar

1979Jan
Feb
Mar

89.2
75.9
71.8
69.1
77.4
80 2
89.5

1
Not available.
Note.—Data beginning January 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




261

TABLE B-51.—Consumer price indexes by commodity and service groups, 1939-79
[1967 = 100]

Special indexes

Services

Commodities
Commodities less food
All
items

Year or month

All
commodities

Food
Al
l

All
NonDurable durable services

Rent

Services
less
rent

Al
l
All
All items
items items less
less
less food
food energy and
energy

1939

41.6

40.2

34.6

47.7

48.5

44.3

43.5

56.0

38.1

47.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

42.0
44.1
48.8
51.8
52.7
53.9
58.5
66.9
72.1
71.4

40.6
43.3
49.6
54.0
54.7
56.3
62.4
75.0
80.4
78.3

35.2
38.4
45.1
50.3
49.6
50.7
58.1
70.6
76.6
73.5

48.0
50.4
56.0
58.4
61.6
64.1
68.1
76.8
82.7
81.5

48.1
51.4
58.4
60.3
65.9
70.9
74.1
80.3
86.2
87.4

44.7
46.7
51.6
53.8
56.6
58.6
62.9
72.2
77.8
76.3

43.6
44.2
45.6
46.4
47.5
48.2
49.1
51.1
54.3
56.9

56.2
57.2
58.5
58.5
58.6
58.8
59.2
61.1
65.1
68.0

38.1
38.6
40.3
42.1
44.2
45.1
46.7
49.0
51.9
54.5

47.3
48.7
52.1
53.6
55.7
56.9
59.4
64.9
69.6
70.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

72.1
77.8
79.5
80.1
80.5
80.2
81.4
84.3
86.6
87.3

78.8
85.9
87.0
86.7
85.9
85.1
85.9
88.6
90.6
90.7

74.5
82.8
84.3
83.0
82.8
81.6
82.2
84.9
88.5
87.1

81.4
87.5
88.3
88.5
87.5
86.9
87.8
90.5
91.5
92.7

88.4
95.1
96.4
95.7
93.3
91.5
91.5
94.4
95.9
97.3

76.2
82.0
82.4
83.1
83.5
83.5
85.3
87.6
88.2
89.3

58.7
61.8
64.5
67.3
69.5
70.9
72.7
75.6
78.5
80.8

70.4
73.2
76.2
80.3
83.2
84.3
85.9
87.5
89.1
90.4

56.0
59.3
62.2
64.8
66.7
68.2
70.1
73.3
76.4
79.0

71.1
75.7
77.5
79.0
79.5
79.7
81.1
83.8
85.7
87.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

88.7
89.6
90.6
91.7
92.9
94.5
97.2
100.0
104.2
109.8

91.5
92.0
92.8
93.6
94.6
95.7
98.2
100.0
103.7
108.4

88.0
89.1
89.9
91.2
92.4
94.4
99.1
100.0
103.6
108.9

93.1
93.4
94.1
94.8
95.6
96.2
97.5
100.0
103.7
108.1

96.7
96.6
97.6
97.9
98.8
98.4
98.5
100.0
103.1
107.0

90.7
91.2
91.8
92.7
93.5
94.8
97.0
100.0
104.1
108.8

83.5
85.2
86.8
88.5
90.2
92.2
95.8
100.0
105.2
112.5

91.7
92.9
94.0
95.0
95.9
96.9
98.2
100.0
102.4
105.7

81.9
83.9
85.5
87.3
89.2
91.5
95.3
100.0
105.7
113.8

88.8
89.7
90.8
92.0
93.2
94.5
96.7
100.0
104.4
110.1

88.3 88.3
89.3 89.3
90.4 90.5
91.6 91.6
92.9 93.0
94.3 94.3
97.3 96.6
100.0 100.0
104.4 104.6
110.3 110.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

116.3
121.3
125.3
133.1
147.7
161.2
170.5
181.5
195.4
217.4

113.5
117.4
120.9
129.9
145.5
158.4
165.2
174.7
187.1
208.4

114.9
118.4
123.5
141.4
161.7
175.4
180.8
192.2
211.4
234.5

112.5
116.8
119.4
123.5
136.6
149.1
156.6
165.1
174.7
195.1

111.8
116.5
118.9
121.9
130.6
145.5
154.3
163.2
173.9
191.1

113.1
117.0
119.8
124.8
140.9
151.7
158.3
166.5
174.3
198.7

121.6
128.4
133.3
139.1
152.1
166.6
180.4
194.3
210.9
234.2

110.1
115.2
119.2
124.3
130.6
137.3
144.7
153.5
164.0
176.0

123.7
130.8
135.9
141.8
156.0
171.9
186.8
201.6
219.4
244.9

116.7
122.1
125.8
130.7
143.7
157.1
167.5
178.4
191.2
213.0

117.0
122.0
126.1
133.8
146.9
160.2
169.2
179.8
193.8
213.1

117.6
123.1
126.9
131.3
142.2
155.3
165.5
175.8
188.7
207.0

187.2
188.4
189.8
191.5
193.3
195.3

179.2
180.2
181.6
183.5
185.5
187.5

199.2
202.0
204.2
207.5
210.3
213.8

168.6
168.8
170.0
171.3
173.0
174.4

166.6
167.2
168.3
169.9
172.0
173.9

169.7
169.6
170.7
171.8
172.8
173.7

202.0
203.5
204.9
206.5
208.0
209.9

158.8
159.7
160.5
161.5
162.7
163.6

209.8
211.4
213.0
214.6
216.2
218.3

183.8
184.7
185.9
187.4
189.0
190.6

185.6
186.7
188.2
190.0
191.7
193.6

181.4
182.2
183.4
184.9
186.4
188.0

196.7
197.8
199.3
200.9
202.0
202.9

188.6
189.3
190.5
191.8
192.9
194.2

215.0
215.4
215.6
216.8
217.8
219.4

175.4
176.3
177.8
179.1
180.3
181.3

175.3
175.9
177.2
178.8
180.0
181.2

174.1
175.4
177.1
178.1
179.1
180.0

211.7
213.4
215.6
217.6
218.6
219.2

164.2
165.1
166.4
167.4
168.5
169.5

220.4
222.2
224.6
226.7
227.8
228.2

192.0
193.3
195.1
196.7
197.8
198.6

195.0
196.1
197.6
199.2
200.4
201.3

189.3
190.5
192.4
194.0
195.3
196.0

204.7
2071
209.1
2115
214.1
216.6

195.8
198 3
200.5
203 3
205.8
208.4

223.9
228 2
230.4
232 3
234.3
235.4

181.9
183 7
185^
188 9
191.6
194.7

182.0
183 6
184^
187 2
189.2
191.1

180.3
182 2
185J
189 6
193.2
197.6

221.1
223 3
225.1
227 0
229.5
232.1

170.3
1710
171.3
172 0
173.8
174.7

230.4
232 9
235.0
237 1
239^
242.6

199.8
2018
203^
206 3
208.9
211.8

202.9
205 2
206.9
208 8
210 7
212.2

197.0
198 8
200.4
202 3
204.1
205.8

218.9
221.1
223 4
225.4
227 5
229.9

210 5
212.2
2141
215.6
217 4
219.4

236 9
236.3
2371
238.2
2391
241.7

197 0
199 5
2018
203 4
205 4
207.2

192 6
193 6
194 5
196 0
198 4
199.8

2011
205 4
209 6
211.3
212 9
215.2

234 7
237 6
240 7
243 6
246 2
249.3

175 9
177 5
179 0
181.4
182 1
182.9

245 6
248 8
2521
2551
258 2
261.6

214 2
216 9
219 6
221.8
2241
266.4

213 8
215.4
217 3
219.2
2214
223.6

207 3
209 4
2115
213.6
2161
218.1

83.9
86.3
87.0

83.3
85.2
87.0

1978

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
May
June

'.

July

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e
1979:
Jan

Fb
e
Mar

Ar
p

May::.:.:::::::::::::::::
June
July*
.
Aug
Sept . .
.

Ot
c
Nov.. .
.
Dec

Note.—Data beginning January 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




262

TABLE B-52.—Changes in consumer price indexes, major groups, 1948-79
[Percent change]
Commodities

All items
Year or month

Total
Dec.
to
Dec 1

Year
to
year

1948
1949

27
-1.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

Commodities
less food

Food

All items less
food

Services

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.'

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

78
-1.0

17
-4.1

72
-2.6

08
-3.7

85
-4.0

53
-4.8

5.8
5.9
.9
.6
-.5

1.0
7.9
2.2
.8
.5

7.7
5.9
-.7
-.6
-1.4

.6
9.0
1.3
-.3
-.9

9.6
7.4
-1.1
-1.3
-1.6

1.4
11.1
1.8
-1.5
-.2

5.7
4.6
_5
.2
-1.4

77
-1.5
_ i

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

.4
2.9
3.0
1.8
1.5

-.4
1.5
3.6
2.7
.8

-.4
2.6
2.6
1.3
.6

-.9
.9
3.1
2.3
.1

-.9
3.1
2.8
2.2
-.8

-1.4
.7
3.3
4.2
-1.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

1.5
.7
1.2
1.6
1.2

1.6
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.1
0
1.0
1.4
.8

.9
.5
.9
.9
1.1

3.1
-.9
1.5
1.9
1.4

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1.9
3.4
3.0
4.7
6.1

1.7
2.9
2.9
4.2
5.4

1.6
2.5
2.5
3.8
5.5

1.2
2.6
1.8
3.7
4.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

5.5
3.4
3.4
8.8
12.2

5.9
4.3
3.3
6.2
11.0

4.0
2.9
3.4
10.4
12.7

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7.0
4.8
6.8
9.0
13.3

9.1
5.8
6.5
7.7
11.3

6.3
3.3
6.1
8.9
13.0

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

61
3.6

63
4.8

55
-.8

72
1.0

.2
-1.1

3.6
5.2
4.6
4.2
1.9

3.2
5.3
4.4
4.3
3.3

4.1
5.0
1.7
1.7
0

1.1
6.5
2.4
1.9
.6

0
2.5
2.2
.8
1.5

-.7
1.0
3.1
1.1
1.3

2.3
3.1
4.5
2.7
3.7

2.0
2.5
4.0
3.8
2.9

.9
2.6
3.2
1.6
2.3

.3
1.8
3.3
2.3
1.9

1.0
1.3
.9
1.4
1.3

-.3
.6
.7
1.2
.4

.4
.3
.7
.7
.8

2.7
1.9
1.7
2.3
1.8

3.3
2.0
1.9
2.0
1.9

1.0
1.1
1.2
1.6
1.0

1.7
1.0
1.2
1.3
1-3,

3.4
3.9
1.2
4.3
7.2

2.2
5.0
.9
3.6
5.1

.7
1.9
3.1
3.7
4.5

.6
1.4
2.6
3.7
4.2

2.6
4.9
4.0
6.1
7.4

2.2
3.9
4.4
5.2
6.9

1.6
3.3
3.5
4.9
5.7

1.4
2.3
3.4
4.4
5.5

4.7
3.4
3.0
7.4
12.0

2.2
4.3
4.7
20.1
12.2

5.5
3.0
4.3
14.5
14.4

4.8
2.3
2.5
5.0
13.2

4.1
3.8
2.2
3.4
10.6

8.2
4.1
3.6
6.2
11.3

8.1
5.6
3.8
4.4
9.3

6.5
3.1
3.0
5.6
12.2

6.0
4.6
3.0
3.9
9.9

8.9
4.3
5.8
7.1
11.4

6.5
.6
8.0
11.8
10.2

8.5
3.1
6.3
10.0
10.9

6.2
5.1
4.9
7.7
14.3

9.2
5.0
5.4
5.8
11.7

8.1
7.3
7.9
9.3
13.7

9.5
8.3
7.7
8.5
11.0

7.1
6.2
6.3
8.5
14.0

9.3
6.6
6.5
7.2
11.4

is
.9

Change from preceding month
SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally
adad- justed
ad- justed
ad- justed
ad- justed
ad- justed
justed
justed
justed
justed
justed
justed
justed
1978:
Jan

07
6
8
8
8
9

05
.6
8
10
11
11

08
.5
.8
.9
.8
.9

15
1.4
1.1
1.6
1.3
1.7

12
1.1
1.2
1.7
1.2
1.4

0.1

June

06
6
7
9
9
10

'.7
.8
1.0
.8

07
.2
.6
.5
.6
.6

07
.7
.7
.8
.7
.9

06
.8
.8
.9
.9
.9

04
.5
.6
.8
.9
.8

07
.5
.7
.7
.7
.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

7
6
8
8
5
4

.6
6
9
8
6
6

6
4
6
7
6
7

.4
.5
.8
.8
.7
8

.6
.2
.1
.6
.5
7

.1
.4
.7
.9
.6
10

.6
.5
.9
.7
.7
6

.6
.6
.9
.7
.7
8

.9
.8
1.0
.9
.5
3

.8
.8
.9
.9
.5
4

.7
.7
.9
.8
.6
4

.7
.7
.8
.8
.6
6

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mr
a
Apr
My
a
June

.9
12
10
11
12
12

.9
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.0

.8
1.3
1.1
1.4
1.2
1.3

1.1
1.2
1.1
1.2
.9
1.0

2.1
1.9
1.0
.8
.9
.5

1.4
1.6
1.1
1.0
.7
.2

.3
1.0
1.2
1.6
1.4
1.6

.9
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.1
1.3

.9
1.0
.8
.8
1.1
1.1

.5
1.1
.9
.9
1.3
1.0

.6
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.4

.8
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.2
1.1

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

11
10
10
9
9
1.1

1.0
1.1
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.2

1.0
.8
.9
.7
.8
.9

.9
.9
1.1
.8
.9
1.1

.6
-.3
.3
.5
.4
1.1

.1
.0
.9
.8
.5
1.3

1.2
1.3
1.2
.8
1.0
.9

1.2
1.3
1.2
.8
1.1
1.1

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.3

1.1
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.3

1.1
1.3
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.2
1.3
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.2

Feb
Mr
a

t

1
Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes.
Note.—Data beginning January 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




263

TABLE B—53.—Changes in special consumer price indexes, 1958-79
[Percent change]
All items less
food

All items

All items 1
less
energy

All items less
food and
energy1

Dec.
to
Dec.3

Dec.
to
Dec.3

Dec.
to
Dec.3

Voor nr mnnth

Tear or rnonin

Dec.
to
Dec.3

Year
to
Year

Year
to
Year

Year
to
Year

Year
to
Year

All items less
home purchase
and finance2
Dec.
to
Dec.3

Year
to
Year

1958
1959

18
1.5

2.7
.8

1.6
2.3

23
1.9

19
1*4

2.9

18
2.2

2.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

15
7
12
16
12

16
10
11
12
13

1.0
1.1
1.2
1.6
1.0

1.7
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.3

1.4
.8
1.2
1.8
1.3

1.5
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

.8
1.5
1.1
1.8
1.2

1.5
1.1
1.3
1.2
1.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

19
34
30
47
61

17
29
29
42
54

1.6
3.3
3.5
4.9
5.7

1.4
2.3
3.4
4.4
5.5

1.9
3.5
3.1
4.9
6.4

1.5
3.2
2.8
4.4
5.7

1.5
3.3
3.9
5.1
6.1

1.4
2.4
3.5
4.6
5.8

4.3
5.5

4.1
4.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

55
34
34
88
12 2

59
43
33
62
110

6.5
3.1
3.0
5.6
12.2

6.0
4.6
3.0
3.9
9.9

5.6
3.3
3.5
8.3
11.5

6.1
4.3
3.4
6.1
9.8

6.6
3.1
3.0
4.7
11.3

6.2
4.7
3.1
3.5
8.3

4.7
3.7
3.3
9.0
12.2

5.1
4.5
3.1
6.6
11.1

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

70
48
68
90
13.3

91
58
65
77
11.3

7.1
6.2
6.3
8.5
14.0

9.3
6.6
6.5
7.2
11.4

6.7
4.6
6.8
9.2
11.1

9.1
5.6
6.3
7.8
10.0

6.7
6.1
6.4
8.5
11.3

9.2
6.6
6.2
7.3
9.7

6.7
5.1
6.3
8.1
11.3

8.8
5.8
6.5
6.9
10.0

Change from preceding month
SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUn- sonally Un- sonally
Un- sonally
Un- sonally
Un- sonally
adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted adjusted
1978:
jan
Feb
Mr
a

.9

0.8
.4
.6
.7
.8
.8

0.5
.6
.8
.9
.9
1.0

0.6
.4
.8
.7
.7
.9

.7
.6
1.0
.8
.7
.4

.7
.7
.8
.7
.7
.6

.5
.5
.5
.7
.5
.5

.4
.6
.6
.8
.6
.7

.8
1.0
.8
.8
.7
.7

.5
9
.8
.9
.9
.8

.8
9
.7
.8
.8
.8

.9
1.0
.9
1.1
1.2
1.1

1.0
.8
.9
.9
1.1
1.0

.6
.8
1.0
.9
1.1
1.3

.7
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.2
.9

.7
1.0
.8
1.0
1.1
1.2

.9
.8
.8
.6
.6
.9

.8
.9
.9
.6
.7
1.0

0.7
.6
.8
1.0
.9
1.0

0.7
.5
.9
.8
.8
1.0

0.4
.4
.7

.6
.6
.9
.8
.6
.6

.7
.7
.9
.8
.6
.4

.7
.7
.8
.8
.6
.6

.7
.6
.8
.8
.6
.4

.5
.7
.8
.8
.8
.7

My
a
June

.9
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.2

.9
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.1
1.0

.6
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.4

.8
1.0
1.0
1.2
1.2
1.1

.8
1.1
.8
.9
.9
.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1.1
1.0
1.0
.9
.9
1.1

1.0
1.1
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.2

1.1
1.3
1.2
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.2
1.3
1.2
1.0
1.1
1.2

.8
.7
.9
.9
1.0
1.0

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1979
Jan
Feb
Mr
a

'.

1.0
.7
.6
.8
.8
.5
.4

coco

May
June

0.4

1

0.7

bo bo

'.e
.8
.9
.8

.7
.7
.7
.7

0.7
.6
.8
.8
.8
.9

0.6
.6
.7

Seasonally adjusted data are estimates.
All items less home purchase and financing, taxes, and insurance. All data are estimates.
Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes.
Note.—Data beginning January 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2
3




264

TABLE B-54.—Producer price indexes by stage of processing, 1947-79
[1967=100]
Finished goods
Consumer foods
Year or month

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
19791
1978:
Jan ..
..
Fb
e

Mr
a

t
June
July
Aug
Sept
Ot
c

Nv
o

Dec
1979: *
Jn
a
Fb
e

Mr
a
May
June
July
Aug
Sept

Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e

Total
finished
goods

Finished goods excluding consumer foods

Crude

Processed

Total

Total
consumer
finished
goods

Total

NonDurable durable

105.4
109.1
113.1
115.4
120.1
139.3
156.2
165.5
176.2
188.9
210.6

79 0
84.0
82.2
83.5
89.5
88.3
89.1
89.4
90.1
92.3
94.6
94.7
95.9
96.3
96.2
96.0
96.0
95.9
96.6
98.1
100.0
102.1
104.6
107.7
111.4
113.4
118.5
138.6
153.1
161.8
172.1
183.7
208.1

74 6
79.7
81.8
82.7
88.2
88.9
89.6
90.3
91.2
94.3
97.1
98.4
99.6
99.2
98.8
98.3
97.8
98.2
97.9
98.5
100.0
102.2
104.0
106.9
110.8
113.2
115.8
126.3
138.2
144.4
152.2
165.8
181.5

80 7
85.8
82.3
83.6
90.0
87.8
88.6
88.9
89.4
91.1
93.2
92.6
94.0
94.7
94.7
94.8
95.1
94.8
95.9
97.8
100.0
102.2
105.0
108.3
111.7
113.6
120.5
146.8
163.0
173.3
185.4
195.4
225.8

55 4
60.4
63.4
64.9
71.2
72.4
73.6
74.5
76.7
82.4
87.5
89.8
91.5
91.7
91.8
92.2
92.4
93.3
94.4
96.8
100.0
103.5
106.9
112.0
116.6
119.5
123.5
141.0
162.5
173.2
184.5
199.1
216.6

80 5
86.5
82.5
83.9
91.8
90.7
89.2
89.1
88.5
89.8
92.4
94.4
93.6
94.5
94.3
94.6
94.1
94.3
96.1
99.4
100.0
102.7
106.6
109.9
112.9
116.6
129.2
149.3
163.6
169.0
178.9
192.6
215.5

192.9
196.9
197.8
201.4
204.4
207.3
206.6
203.4
207.1
209.9
209.0
212.5

182.7
183.2
183.8
185.6
186.9
188.0
189.6
190.4
191.4
193.7
194.8
196.4

177.4
177.8
178.3
180.5
181.9
182.9
184.8
185.7
186.5
188.3
189.0
191.0

158 5
158.3
159.0
163.2
165.0
165.3
167.7
168.4
169.1
170.9
170.7
173.0

189 9
190.7
191.1
191.8
192.9
194.4
195.9
196.9
197.8
199.7
201.1
202.7

193 0
193.7
194.6
195.6
196.9
198.1
199.2
200.0
201.1
204.4
206.1
207.0

184 4
186.2
186.8
189.7
191.4
193.0
194.6
193.6
195.4
197.5
197.9
200.5

216 9
220.5
222.8
224.6
224.4
221.3
222.8
220.7
226.8
225.4
228.6
230.1

198 8
200.2
201.7
204.2
206.3
208.5
211.4
213.2
215.9
220.6
222.2
224.3

193 4
194.9
196.7
199.3
202.1
205.2
208.9
212.3
215.9
220.6
222.4
225.0

175 2
176.2
176.8
178.4
179.5
180.4
181.6
181.1
182.0
187.4
188.5
191.2

205 4
207.2
209.8
213.1
217.1
221.7
227.1
233.4
238.9
243.0
245.2
247.8

209 3
210.8
211.7
214.0
215.1
215.8
217.2
216.5
217.7
222.5
223.8
225.1

203 7
206.3
207.9
210.2
211.6
212.7
215.6
217.5
221.3
224.1
226.6
228.8

74 0
79.9
77.6
79.0
86.5
86.0
85.1
85.3
85.5
87.9
91.1
93.2
93.0
93.7
93.7
94.0
93.7
94.1
95.7
98.8
100.0
102.9
106.6
110.3
113.7
117.2
127.9
147.5
163.4
170.3
180.6
194.6
215.9

82 8
90.4
83.1
84.7
95.2
94.3
89.4
88.7
86.5
86.3
89.3
94.5
90.1
92.1
91.7
92.5
91.4
91.9
95.4
101.6
100.0
103.7
110.0
113.5
115.3
121.7
146.4
166.9
181.0
180.2
189.1
206.7
226.3

99 4
107.1
101.3
92.2
105.9
112.8
105.2
94.7
98.8
98.7
97.4
103.5
94.3
100.6
96.1
97.0
95.5
98.2
98.6
104.8
100.0
107.5
116.0
116.3
115.8
121.2
160.7
180.8
181.2
194.8
201.8
215.5
231.3

80 2
87.6
80.1
83.4
93.2
91.3
86.7
87.6
84.4
84.3
87.9
93.1
89.5
90.7
90.9
91.7
90.7
90.8
94.9
101.0
100.0
103.0
108.9
113.1
115.1
121.7
143.9
164.6
181.3
177.4
186.4
204.1
223.7

187 0
188.5
189.1
191.5
193.1
194.5
196.0
195.6
197.1
199.6
200.3
202.5

195.0
199.6
200.2
204.5
206.8
209.5
210.4
205.9
209.4
212.0
211.7
215.8

197.9
210.2
207.5
220.2
212.0
211.7
234.1
212.8
213.7
212.9
220.8
232.1

205 4
207.7
209.1
211.4
212.7
213.7
216.2
217.3
220.4
223.7
225.9
227.8

220 2
225.1
226.3
227.8
226.6
223.6
224.9
223.5
227.8
226.7
230.5
232.0

236 7
257.2
244.6
241.8
226.7
227.1
224.9
231.7
213.9
215.4
228.0
227.8

See next page for continuation of table.




Capital
equipment

Consumer goods
Total

265

160F
102.6

TABLE B-54.—Producer price indexes by stage of processing,

1947-79—Continued

[1967=100]
Intermediate materials, supplies, and components

Year or month
Total

Foods
and
feeds2

Materials and
components
Other

For
manufacturing

Crude materials for further processing

For
construction

Processed
fuels
and
lubricants

Containers

Supplies

Total

Foodstuffs
and
feedstuffs

Other

Total

Fuel

Other

1947
1948
1949

72.4
78.3
75.2

70.0
76.1
74.2

72.1
77.8
74.5

66.0
73.1
73.2

85.5
96.9
88.2

66.8
69.8
70.1

77.5
81.0
76.3

101.2
110.9
96.0

111.7
120.8
100.3

66.6
78.7
78.3

90.6
100.7
91.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

78.6
88.1
85.5
86.0
86.5

77.7
87.0
84.3
85.3
85.7

78.1
88.5
84.8
86.2
86.3

77.0
84.3
83.7
85.1
85.5

89.9
93.9
92.8
93.4
93.3

72.0
84.5
79.9
80.0
81.5

78.9
88.8
88.8
84.3
86.3

104.6
120.1
110.3
101.9
101.0

107.6
124.5
117.2
104.9
104.9

77.9
79.4
79.9
82.7
79.0

104.7
120.7
104.6
100.1
98.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

88.1
92.0
94.1
94.3
95.6

88.3
92.6
95.0
94.8
96.4

88.4
92.6
94.8
95.2
96.5

88.9
93.5
94.0
94.0
96.6

93.3
96.3
101.9
96.0
95.6

82.6
88.6
92.5
94.7
94.2

84.8
87.1
88.0
90.0
91.2

97.1
97.6
99.8
102.0
99.4

95.1
93.1
97.2
103.0
96.2

78.8
84.4
89.2
90.3
91.9

103.8
107.6
106.2
102.2
105.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

95.6
95.0
94.9
95.2
95.5

96.8
95.5
95.3
95.0
95.6

96.5
95.3
94.7
94.9
95.9

95.9
94.6
94.2
94.5
95.4

98.2
99.4
99.0
98.1
96.0

95.5
94.7
95.9
94.7
94.0

90.7
91.8
93.8
95.2
94.3

97.0
96.5
97.5
95.4
94.5

95.1
93.8
95.7
92.9
90.8

92.8
92.6
92.1
93.2
92.8

101.4
102.5
102.0
100.7
102.4

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

96.8
99.2
100.0
102.3
105.8

100.0
99.4
102.7

96.9
98.9
100.0
102.6
106.1

97.4
99.3
100.0
102.2
105.8

96.2
98.8
100.0
104.9
110.8

97.4
99.2
100.0
97.7
98.7

95.8
98.4
100.0
102.4
106.3

95.2
99.4
100.0
101.2
102.8

99.3
105.7
100.0
101.6
108.4

97.1
105.9
100.0
101.3
109.3

100.0
102.2
106.8

93.5
96.3
100.0
102.3
106.6

104.5
106.7
100.0
102.1
106.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

109.9
114.1
118.7
131.6
162.9

109.1
111.7
118.5
168.4
200.2

109.9
114.3
118.9
128.1
159.5

110.0
112.8
117.0
127.7
162.2

112.6
119.7
126.2
136.7
161.6

105.0
115.2
118.9
131.5
199.1

111.4
116.6
121.9
129.2
152.2

108.0
111.0
115.6
140.6
154.5

112.3
115.1
127.6
174.0
196.1

112.0
114.2
127.5
180.0
189.4

112.7
117.0
128.0
162.5
208.9

122.6
139.0
148.7
164.5
219.4

109.8
110.7
121.9
161.5
205.4

1975
1976
1977
1978
19791

180.0
189.3
201.7
215.5
242.7

195.3
186.6
191.0
201.0
223.2

178.6
189.5
202.4
216.4
243.8

178.7
185.6
195.5
208.3
234.0

176.4
188.0
202.9
224.4
246.8

233.0
250.8
283.8
296.4
360.9

171.4
181.5
193.1
212.5
234.9

168.1
179.1
188.0
196.9
217.5

196.9
205.1
214.3
240.1
282.2

191.8
190.1
190.9
215.3
247.1

206.9
233.6
258.4
286.7
348.3

271.5
314.7
400.4
463.7
568.2

188.3
210.2
217.3
235.4
284.6

June

207.2
208.9
210.7
212.5
213.9
215.1

189.6
189.9
197.9
200.6
200.8
201.9

208.2
210.1
211.5
213.3
214.7
215.9

200.0
202.2
203.5
205.5
206.5
207.4

212.7
216.3
218.3
220.8
222.5
224.3

291.2
291.7
294.3
294.8
297.3
299.9

202.2
204.3
205.7
206.6
209.3
211.7

190.5
189.8
192.7
194.0
195.1
195.8

219.6
225.0
230.5
239.0
241.2
245.4

194.0
201.3
206.3
216.3
219.1
223.7

267.8
269.7
276.2
281.6
282.6
286.1

430.3
431.7
441.9
454.7
458.3
465.8

220.7
222.7
228.1
231.4
231.7
234.0

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

216.0
217.3
218.7
220.8
222.0
223.0

201.5
198.8
203.4
207.6
207.7
212.2

216.8
218.4
219.6
221.7
222.9
223.7

208.2
210.1
211.7
213.9
215.0
215.6

226.2
228.3
229.1
230.2
232.1
232.5

298.1
296.8
296.8
297.6
297.6
300.4

213.5
214.6
216.4
221.2
221.7
222.6

197.1
196.9
199.0
202.2
204.0
206.1

245.4
240.2
244.8
249.2
248.4
252.5

222.0
213.2
218.4
224.0
220.9
224.8

289.3
291.2
294.5
296.7
300.2
304.8

471.8
470.8
478.4
480.1
485.0
495.1

236.4
239.1
241.1
243.5
246.6
249.6

June

225.7
228.5
231.5
235.8
238.2
240.3

214.3
218.2
218.9
220.7
219.3
223.0

226.5
229.1
232.3
236.7
239.3
241.3

218.6
221.6
224.5
229.0
230.9
232.1

236.1
239.0
241.3
244.5
245.2
245.6

302.0
304.8
312.9
323.9
336.8
349.5

223.9
224.3
229.3
231.8
234.5
234.9

207.4
209.6
211.1
212.8
213.7
216.1

260.2
270.4
276.6
279.9
282.3
283.0

233.0
243.7
247.4
251.5
251.9
248.2

311.5
320.7
331.6
333.3
339.6
348.7

504.3
513.9
525.2
529.2
556.8
563.1

255.6
264.7
275.5
276.5
276.6
286.6

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

244.6
247.5
250.7
254.6
256.1
258.4

231.0
223.1
226.6
226.0
227.0
230.0

245.4
249.0
252.1
256.4
257.8
260.1

236.0
238.0
240.5
243.9
245.2
247.5

247.4
249.2
251.6
254.4
253.8
253.6

364.8
384.6
399.4
410.5
416.5
424.6

235.4
237.6
237.1
240.8
243.5
246.1

219.6
219.6
220.8
224.4
226.0
228.4

287.1
281.7
287.9
289.2
290.8
296.7

254.1
243.7
248.7
247.1
246.4
249.7

349.3
353.6
362.1
368.9
374.8
385.8

570.7
586.2
599.4
611.4
616.8
641.8

285.2
286.1
293.3
298.6
304.6
311.5

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar

fKyZZZZZZZZ

1979:1
Jan
Feb
Mar

fc::::=

1
Data have been revised through August 1979 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are
subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
2
Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds.

Source.- Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




266

TABLE B-55.—Producer price indexes by stage of processing, special groups, 1974-79
[1967=100]
Intermediate materials,
supplies, and components

Finished goods

Crude materials for further
processing

Excluding food and
energy

Total

Consumer
Capi- goods
tal
excludequiping
ment
food
and
energy

Year or month
Total

Food

Energy

Total

Foods
and
feeds1

Energy

Other

Total

Crude
materials
Foodexcluding
stuffs
agriculand Energy
tural
feedproducts
stuffs
and
energy

1974

147.5

166.9

215.2

133.5

141.0

129.1

162.9

200.2

188.7

156.7

196.1

189.4

223.0

213.7

1975
1976
1977
1978
19792

163.4
170.3
180.6
194.6
215.9

181.0
180.2
189.2
206.7
226.3

252.4
274.5
305.0
318.1
438.1

148.5
156.7
166.1
178.6
194.2

162.5
173.2
184.5
199.1
216.6

141.0
148.0
156.1
167.4
182.1

180.0
189.3
201.7
215.5
242.7

195.3
186.6
191.0
201.0
223.2

220.8
237.3
268.3
281.2
344.6

174.7
184.9
196.0
210.1
233.9

196.9 191.8
205.1 190.1
214.3 190.9
240.1 215.3
282.2 247.1

266.9
291.0
344.9
390.7
479.4

167.8
192.5
193.0
216.4
270.0

187.0
188.5
189.1
191.5
193.1
194.5

195.0
199.6
200.2
204.5
206.8
209.5

311.3
309.7
308.2
308.3
310.2
313.6

172.5
173.1
173.9
175.7
177.0
177.9

193.0
193.7
194.6
195.6
196.9
198.1

161.2
161.8
162.5
164.9
166.2
167.0

207.2
208.9
210.7
212.5
213.9
215.1

189.6
189.9
197.9
200.6
200.8
201.9

275.8
276.3
278.7
279.3
281.8
284.3

201.7
203.7
205.0
206.9
208.2
209.2

219.6
225.0
230.5
239.0
241.2
245.4

194.0
201.3
206.3
216.3
219.1
223.7

367.4
368.6
375.6
383.3
386.0
391.4

200.3
205.1
208.6
213.8
210.9
214.4

196.0
195.6
197.1
199.6
200.3
202.5

210.4
205.9
209.4
212.0
211.7
215.8

317.7
321.4
324.0
327.6
329.3
336.0

179.3
180.0
180.8
183.1
184.1
185.3

199.2
200.0
201.1
204.4
206.1
207.0

168.6
169.2
169.9
171.5
172.1
173.6

216.0
217.3
218.7
220.8
222.0
223.0

201.5
198.8
203.4
207.6
207.7
212.2

283.0
281.9
282.0
282.8
282.8
285.6

210.4
212.2
213.6
215.7
217.1
217.7

245.4
240.2
244.8
249.2
248.4
252.5

222.0
213.2
218.4
224.0
220.9
224.8

396.0
396.1
401.3
403.1
406.8
413.0

217.6
220.8
221.3
223.7
228.2
231.5

t

June

205.4
207.7
209.1
211.4
212.7
213.7

220.2
225.1
226.3
227.8
226.6
223.6

340.8
346.1
356.7
372.1
392.4
415.7

187.5
188.8
189.7
191.4
192.4
193.3

209.3
210.8
211.7
214.0
215.1
215.8

175.8
176.9
177.8
179.1
180.2
181.2

225.7
228.5
231.5
235.8
238.2
240.3

214.3
218.2
218.9
220.7
219.3
223.0

287.6
290.2
297.7
308.3
320.7
333.7

220.5
223.2
225.9
229.7
231.4
232.3

260.2
270.4
276.6
279.9
282.3
283.0

233.0
243.7
247.4
251.5
251.9
248.2

419.4
427.0
433.7
436.7
455.3
467.8

241.9
259.6
282.7
282.9
275.9
282.2

July
Aug
Sept..
Oct
Nov
Dec

216.2
217.3
220.4
223.7
225.9
227.8

224.9
223.5
227.8
226.7
230.5
232.0

445.8
474.1
505.1
525.8
535.7
546.7

194.5
194.8
195.8
199.5
200.6
202.1

217.2
216.5
217.7
222.5
223.8
225.1

182.3
183.2
184.1
187.2
188.1
189.8

244.6
247.5
250.7
254.6
256.1
258.4

231.0
223.1
226.6
226.0
227.0
230.0

348.1
366.9
382.2
392.6
399.6
407.5

235.3
237.4
239.3
242.9
243.8
245.6

287.1
281.7
287.9
289.2
290.8
296.7

254.1
243.7
248.7
247.1
246.4
249.7

478.1
492.9
516.0
528.8
537.7
559.8

274.1
267.4
262.4
266.2
271.4
273.3

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar
June
July
Aug

8fc=
Nov
Dec
1979: 2
Jan
Feb
Mar

1
Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds.
2
Data have been revised through August 1979 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are
subject to revision 4 months after original publication.

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




267

TABLE B-56.—Producer price indexes by major commodity groups, 1929-79
[1967=100]
Farm products and processed
foods and feeds
Year or month
Total

94 3
101.5
89 6
93 9
106 9
102 7
96 0
95.7
912
90 6
93.7
981
93 5
93 7
93 7
94 7
93 8
93 2
971
103 5
100 0
102 4
108 0
1117
113 9
122 4
159.1
177 4
184 2
1831
188 8
206 6
229 8

1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
19782
1979
1978
Jn
a
Fb
e

Mr
a

Nfay
June
July

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e

Farm
products

'.

64.1
31.4
40.0
41.4
50.3
64.8
75.0
75.5
78.5
90.9
109.4
117.5
101.6
106.7
124.2
117.2
106.2
104.7
98.2
96.9
99.5
103.9
97.5
97.2
96.3
98.0
96.0
94.6
98.7
105.9
100.0
102.5
109.1
111.0
112.9
125.0
176.3
187.7
186.7
191.0
192.5
212.5
241.4

192 2
196 8
200 0
205 5
207 6
210 4
210 3
205 3
209 4
213 2
212.3
216 2
2211
227 2
229 0
2312
230 8
229 0
232 2
227 5
2317
230 6
232 3
234.5

Processed
foods and
feeds

Industrial commodities

Total

Textile
products
and
apparel

Hides,
skins,
leather,
and
related
products

Fuels and
related
products,
and
power l

Chemicals
and allied
productsl

59.4
47.6
52.3
51.4
54.6
56.2
57.8
59.5
60.1
64.4
76.9
90.5
86.2
87.1
90.3
90.1
92.6
91.3
91.2
94.0
99.1
95.3
95.3
96.1
97.2
96.7
96.3
93.7
95.5
97.8
100.0
98.9
100.9
106.2
115.2
118.6
134.3
208.3
245.1
265.6
302.2
322.5
408.1

47.'4
51.5
52.4
57.0
63.3
64.1
64.8
65.2
70.5
93.7
95.9
87.6
88.9
101.7
96.5
97.7
98.9
98.5
99.1
101.2
102.0
101.6
101.8
100.7
99.1
97.9
98.3
99.0
99.4
100.0
99.8
99.9
102.2
104.1
104.2
110.0
146.8
181.3
187.2
192.8
198.8
222.1

82.9
88.7
80.6
83.4
92.7
91.6
87.4
88.9
85.0
84.9
87.4
91.8
89.4
89.5
91.0
91.9
92.5
92.3
95.5
101.2
100.0
102.2
107.3
112.1
114.5
120.8
148.1
170.9
182.6
178.0
186.1
202.6
222.5

48.6
37.8
43.3
44.0
47.3
50.7
51.5
52.3
53.0
58.0
70.8
76.9
75.3
78.0
86.1
84.1
84.8
85.0
86.9
90.8
93.3
93.6
95.3
95.3
94.8
94.8
94.7
95.2
96.4
98.5
100.0
102.5
106.0
110.0
114.1
117.9
125.9
153.8
171.5
182.4
195.1
209.4
236.3

103.6
108.1
98.9
102.7
114.6
103.4
100.8
98.6
98.7
98.7
98.8
97.0
98.4
99.5
97.7
98.6
98.5
99.2
99.8
100.1
100.0
103.7
106.0
107.1
109.0
113.6
123.8
139.1
137.9
148.2
154.0
159.8
168.6

48.9
36.3
42.8
45.2
48.4
52.8
52.7
52.2
52.9
61.1
83.3
84.2
79.9
86.3
99.1
80.1
81.3
77.6
77.3
81.9
82.0
82.9
94.2
90.8
91.7
92.7
90.0
90.3
94.3
103.4
100.0
103.2
108.9
110.3
114.1
131.3
143.1
145.1
148.5
167.8
179.3
200.0
252.2

192.2
198.9
204.2
213.7
215.8
219.5
219.9
210.3
215.1
219.4
218.2
222.7

191.5
194.9
196.9
200.2
202.4
204.6
204.2
201.8
205.5
209.0
208.2
211.8

201.6
202.9
204.1
206.1
207.4
208.7
210.1
211.4
212.5
214.7
216.0
217.2

156.5
157.0
157.4
157.9
158.6
159.2
160.0
160.5
161.3
162.3
163.2
163.6

185.8
187.2
187.9
191.9
193.6
195.3
197.3
205.1
210.7
213.0
215.8
216.2

312.8
312.9
315.3
317.3
319.7
323.2
324.5
324.9
326.7
328.5
329.7
334.3

194.1
195.2
196.1
196.9
198.6
198.9
199.8
199.5
200.3
201.6
202.3
202.3

230.4
240.9
242.8
246.0
245.4
242.8
246.8
238.5
241.0
239.5
240.2
242.5

215.2
218.9
220.5
222.3
222.0
220.6
223.3
220.5
225.7
224.8
227.1
229.2

220.0
222.5
225.4
229.0
231.6
234.0
237.5
240.6
243.8
248.5
250.2
252.8

164.1
164.2
165.2
166.4
167.2
168.4
169.3
170.5
171.3
171.9
172.4
172.8

223.4
232.2
253.3
258.9
269.6
268.0
261.9
257.9
250.7
253.6
248.5
248.9

338.1
342.5
350.9
361.5
377.6
393.7
411.8
432.8
454.4
468.3
476.7
488.7

205.0
207.3
209.9
215.1
218.0
219.2
225.0
228.5
230.3
233.5
235.6
238.1

1979 2

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
June
July

Ag
u

Sept
Ot
c

Nv
o
Dc
e

See next page for continuation of table.




268

TABLE B-56. —Producer price indexes by major commodity groups,

1929-79—Continued

[1967 = 100]

Industrial commodities—Continued

Year or month

Pulp,
NonRubber Lumber paper,
Metals Machinery Furniture
metallic
and
and
and
and
and
and
plastic
metal equipment household mineral
wood
allied
durables products
products products products products

Transportation
equipment:
Motor
vehicles
and
equipment3

72.5
75.7
72.4
74.3
88.0
85.7
85.5
85.5
87.8
93.6
95.4
96.4
97.3
98.1
95.2
96.3
95.6
95.4
96.2
98.8
100.0
101.1
104.0
108.2
110.1
113.4
122.1
151.7
170.4
179.4
186.4
195.6
218.9

40 2
30.7
37.6
37.8
38 5
39.1
39 0
39.0
39.6
44 3
54.9
62.5
63.0
66.3
73.8
73.9
76.3
76.9
82.1
89.2
91.0
90.4
92.3
92.4
91.9
91.2
91.3
93.8
96.4
98.8
100.0
102.6
108.5
116.6
118.7
123.5
132.8
171.9
185.6
195.9
209.0
227.1
259.3

41.3
41.4
421
42.8
42.4
42.1
42.2
46 4
53.7
58.2
61.0
63.1
70.5
70.6
72.2
73.4
75.7
81.8
87.6
89.4
91.3
92.0
91.9
92.0
92.2
92.8
93.9
96.8
100.0
103.2
106.5
111.4
115.5
117.9
121.7
139.4
161.4
171.0
181.7
196.1
213.8

55.8
44.6
52.6
53.8
57.2
61V8
61.4
63.1
63.2
671
77.0
81.6
82.9
84.7
91.8
90.1
91.9
92.9
93.3
95.8
98.3
99.1
99.3
99.0
98.4
97.7
97.0
97.4
96.9
98.0
100.0
102.8
104.9
107.5
110.0
111.4
115.2
127.9
139.7
145.6
151.5
160.4
171.0

512
47.2
49.1
49.1
50 2
52.3
52.4
53.5
55.7
59 3
66.3
71.6
73.5
75.4
80.1
80.1
83.3
85.1
87.5
91.3
94.8
95.8
97.0
97.2
97.6
97.6
97.1
97.3
97.5
98.4
100.0
103.7
107.7
112.9
122.4
126.1
130.2
153.2
174.0
186.3
200.5
222.8
248.3

41.9
34.8
39.1
40.4
43.2
47.2
47.2
47.5
48.3
56 0
64.1
70.8
75.7
75.3
79.4
84.0
83.6
83.8
86.3
91.2
95.1
98.1
100.3
98.8
98.6
98.6
97.8
98.3
98.5
98.6
100.0
102.8
104.8
108.7
114.9
118.0
119.2
129.2
144.6
153.8
163.7
176.0
190.3

73.5
76.5
78.0
79.2
83.9
83.4
85.6
86.4
86.5
87.6
90.2
92.0
92.2
93.0
93.3
93.7
94.5
95.2
95.9
97.7
100.0
102.2
105.2
109.9
112.9
114.6
119.7
133.1
147.7
153.7
164.3
184.3
208.3

256.4
263.7
266.2
269.6
273.4
278.5
277.5
281.6
282.8
284.2
290.0
288.6

188.0
188.6
189.7
191.9
193.2
193.5
195.5
195.8
199.0
202.4
203.9
205.2

215.2
219.1
221.1
223.9
224.6
225.9
227.3
231.0
231.4
234.1
235.5
236.6

189.3
190.3
191.6
192.7
193.9
195.3
196.5
197.5
198.8
200.5
202.7
203.8

156.5
156.7
157.7
158.4
159.2
159.5
161.4
161.8
162.0
162.9
163.5
164.6

212.9
215.1
215.9
218.4
219.3
222.0
224.7
227.2
228.2
229.1
230.0
231.1

171.3
171.8
171.9
172.9
174.6
175.0
175.5
175.8
175.9
181.8
182.5
182.8

171.6
171.3
172.6
181.4
182.6
184.3
189.7
191.3
192.9
190.8
189.2
193.6

290.2
293.9
300.5
304.9
302.8
299.8
300.1
304.7
309.7
308.8
299.0
289.8

207.0
208.8
212.3
215.0
216.2
216.6
218.3
222.2
222.8
227.2
229.3
231.0

241.9
247.3
251.7
256.0
256.2
258.2
260.8
261.8
263.6
269.4
270.9
273.5

205.1
206.5
207.9
209.8
211.4
212.4
214.8
216.0
217.6
219.6
221.0
222.9

166.6
167.9
168.3
168.7
169.6
170.2
170.7
171.5
171.7
174.1
175.6
177.0

238.3
240.5
240.8
243.4
245.6
246.9
249.5
249.9
252.2
255.6
257.1
259.2

185.0
185.9
186.1
189.4
189.8
190.1
190.8
187.8
188.1
196.3
197.0
197.6

197.7
199.8
200.6
201.4
203.3
205.2
207.0
208.9
212.3
216.8
219.0
227.2

59 4
40.2
61.2
57 1
615
71.6
73 6
72.7
70.5
70 8
70.5
72.8
70.5
85.9
105.4
95.5
89.1
90.4
102.4
103.8
103.4
103.3
102.9
103.1
99.2
96.3
96.8
95.5
95.9
97.8
100.0
103.4
105.3
108.3
109.1
109.3
112.4
136.2
150.2
159.2
167.6
174 8
194.1

180.8
183.2
185.9
188.8
190.8
193.1
195.5
198.8
200.3
202.4
204.3
205.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 2

25 0
19.0
24.8
27.4
32 7
35.6
37 7
40.6
41.2
47 2
73.4
84.0
77.7
89.3
97.2
94.4
94.3
92.6
97.1
98.5
93.5
92.4
98.8
95.3
91.0
91.6
93.5
95.4
95.9
100.2
100.0
113.3
125.3
113.6
127.3
144.3
177.2
183.6
176.9
205.6
236.3
276.0
300.3

170.2
170.2
171.4
172.8
173.8
174.5
174.9
175.7
176.7
178.1
179.4
179.7

1929
1933
1939

Miscellaneous
products

1978:

Jan

Fb
e
Mr
a

June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov

Dec.

1979:2
Jan
Feu

Mr
a

a;

June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1
2

Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to 1 month earlier than the index month.
Data have been revised through August 1979 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are
subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
3
Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December 1968.
Source.- Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.


http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/ 29U-289
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

269
0 - 8 0 - 1 8

TABLE B-57.—Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods, 1948-79
[Percent change]
Total finished
goods

Consumer
finished foods

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Capital
equipment

Consumer
goods

Total
Year or month

Finished
energy goods

Finished goods excluding consumer foods

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Dec.
to
Dec 1

Year
to
year

Finished goods
excluding food
and energy
Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

1948
1949

3.0
-4.6

8.0
-2.9

-2.4
-7.4

9.2
-8.1

4.0
-4.5

6.3
-2.1

10.4
-.6

9.0
50

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

10.4
2.9
-2.2
.5
-.1

1.8
9.5
-.6
-1.0
.2

13.3
5.3
-5.9
-2.2
-1.9

1.9
12.4
-.9
-5.2
-.8

8.2
.9
-1.1
1.6
.3

1.6
7.2
-1.3
.9
.3

10.3
3.4
.8
2.3
1.1

24
97
17
17
12

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1.2
4.2
32
.5
_ 4

.2
2.8
36
2.3
_ 2

-2.9
3.6
53
.4
-3 7

-2.5
-.2
35
5.8
47

1.7
2.5
1.7
.2
.8

.8
2.4
2.5
.1
1.3

5.6
8.3
4.3
1.3
1.0

30
74
62
26
19

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

1.8
-.5
.1
-.2
.5

.8
0
.3

2.2
-.4
.9
-1.2
.5

.4
-.3
-.1
.1
.1

.4
-.1
-.2
0
-.1

.1
.2
.3

A

5.2
-1.8
.5
-1.3
.4

.9

2
1
4
2
10

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

3.3
2.2
1.6
3.1
4.8

1.7
3.2
1.2
2.9
3.6

9.1
1.4
-.4
4.8
8.2

3.8
6.5
-1.6
3.7
6.1

2.4
3.4

2.6
2.7

.9
1.7
2.1
2.0
2.9

.7
1.6
1.9
2.1
2.4

1.5
3.9
3.1
3.0
4.6

12
25
33
35
33

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

2.2
3.2
3.8
11.8
18.3

3.5
3.1
3.1
9.1
15.3

-2.5
5.9
8.0
22.5
13.0

3.2
1.6
5.6
20.3
14.0

4.3
2.1
2.0
6.7
21.2

3.5
3.7
2.0
4.1
16.0

3.9
2.0
2.0
7.4
20.5

3.0
3.4
1.8
4.5
17.0

4.9
2.4
2.0
5.3
22.6

48
41
25
3.3
14.2

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 2

6.6
3.3
6.6
9.2
12.5

10.8
4.2
6.0
7.8
10.9

5.5
-2.5
6.6
11.9
7.5

8.4
-.4
4.9
9.3
9.5

7.2
5.5
6.6
8.3
14.2

12.1
6.0
6.5
7.2
11.5

6.7
4.9
6.1
8.4
17.8

10.5
5.7
6.4
6.7
13.3

8.2
6.4
7.2
8.0
8.7

15.2
6.6
6.5
7.9
8.8

16.4
5.4
9.1
8.0
62.7

17.3
8.8
11.1
4.3
37.7

6.1
5.4
6.3
8.2
9.1

11.2
5.5
6.0
7.5
8.7

Unadjusted

Seasonally
adjusted

Unadjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonally
adjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonally
adjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonally
adjusted

Percent change from preceding month

Unadjusted

Seasonjusted

Seasonally
adjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonjusted

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

0.8
.8
.3
1.3
.8
.7

0.7
.8
.6
1.1
.7
.7

1.1
2.4
.3
2.1
1.1
1.3

1.0
1.9
1.0
1.0
3
1.4

0.7
.3
.3
1.0
7
.6

0.6
.4
.5
1.0
8
.5

0.7
.2
.3
1.2
8
.5

0.5
.3
.5
1.3
8
.4

0.7
.4
.5
.5
7
.6

0.6
.6
.5
.7
8
.8

0.0
-.5
-.5
.0
6
1.1

0.6
-.6
-.3
.3
1
.4

0.8
.3
.5
1.0
7
.5

0.5
.6
.6
1.1
9
.6

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

.8
-.2
.8
1.3
.4
1.1

.7
.3
.8
.8
.7
1.0

.4
-2.1
1.7
1.2

.1
-.4
15
1.6
.8
1.2

.9
.4
.5
1.2
.6
.8

.9
.5
.6
.5
.7
1.0

1.0
.5
.4
1.0
.4
1.1

1.0
.5
.5
.4
.6
1.2

.6
.4
.6
1.6
.8
.4

.7
.4
.5
.6
.8
.6

1.3
1.2
.8
1.1
.5
2.0

.3
.7
.9
1.7
1.1
2.4

.8
.4
.4
1.3
.5
.7

.9
.5
.5
.3
.7
.8

1979:2
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

1.4
1.1
.7
1.1
.6
.5

1.3
1.1
1.0
.9
.4
.5

2.0
2.2
.5
.7
-.5
-1.3

1.8
1.8
1.2
-.4
-1.5
-1.2

1.2
.7
.7
1.2
1.0
1.1

1.1
.9
.9
1.3
1.1
1.1

1.3
.8
.9
1.3
1.4
1.5

1.2
.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.4

1.1
.7
.4
1.1
.5
.3

1.0
.9
.6
1.2
.6
.6

1.4
1.6
3.1
4.3
5.5
5.9

2.1
1.5
3.3
4.5
4.9
5.3

1.2
.7
.5
.9
.5
.5

1.0
.9
.6
.9
.7
.6

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1.2
.5
1.4
1.5
1.0
.8

1.1
1.0
1.4
1.0
1.3
.8

.6
-.6
1.9
-.5
1.7
.7

.2
1.2
1.7
-.1
2.6
-.1

1.4
.9
1.3
2.2
.7
.9

1.4
.9
1.3
1.4
.8
1.2

1.8
1.6
1.7
2.2
.8
1.2

1.8
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.0
1.3

.6
-.3
.6
2.2
.6
.6

.8
-.3
.6
1.2
.5
.9

7.2
6.3
6.5
4.1
1.9
2.1

6.2
5.8
6.7
4.7
2.5
2.4

.6
.2
.5
1.9
.6
.7

.8
.3
.6
1.0
.6
1.0

_

j

L9

1

Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes.
Data have been revised through August 1979 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All data are
subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2




270

MONEY STOCK, CREDIT, AND FINANCE
TABLE B-58.—Money stock measures, 1953-79

[Averages of daily figures; billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Overall measures1

Components and related items
Deposits at commercial banks
Time and savings

Year and month

Ml

M1 +

M2

M3

Currency Demand

Time
Savings!
Total Large
CDs2 Other

Checkable
Depos- deposits U.S.
its at
at
Governnonment
bank nonbank deposits
thrift
thrift
(unadinstitu- institu- justed) 6
tions
tions 4 (unadjusted) 5

210.9

303.8

27.7
27.4
27.8
28.2
28.3
28.6
28.9

I960: Dec
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec
1965: Dec
1966: Dec
1967: Dec
1968: Dec
1969: Dec

217.1
144.2
228.6
148.7
242.9
150.9
258.9
156.5
277.1
163.7
301.4
171.4
318.2
175.8
187.4 280.7 350.0
202.5 297.7 383.3
209.0 301.8 392.4

319.3
342.1
369.2
400.3
434.4
471.8
495.5
544.0
589.9
607.4

29.0
29.6
30.6
32.5
34.3
36.3
38.3
40.4
43.4
46.0

1970:
1971:
1972:
1973:
1974:
1975:
1976:
1977:
1978:
1979:

219.7
233.9
255.3
270.5
283.2
295.4
313.8
338.7
361.5
382.1

317.2
345.7
378.9
397.9
419.5
456.8
517.2
560.6
586.1
592.7

423.6
471.8
525.3
571.3
612.2
664.8
740.6
809.4
879.0
952.6

656.3 49.0
52.5
745.1
844.5 56.9
61.6
919.0
67.8
981.0
1,092.4 73.8
1,235.6 80.8
1,374.3 88.6
1,503.3 97.7
1,623.5 106.3

170.7
181.5
198.4
209.0
215.3
221.7
233.0
250.1
263.8
275.8

229.2
271.1
313.5
363.7
418.1
450.3
489.2
544.4
614.1
664.8

25.3
33.3
43.5
63.0
89.0
81.0
62.4
73.7
96.6
94.3

106.5
126.2
146.5
173.6
193.2
208.6
224.7
251.0
295.9
363.2

97.4
111.6
123.5
127.1
135.9
160.7
202.1
219.7
221.6
207.3

232.6
273.3
319.1
347.7
368.7
427.7
495.0
564.9
624.4
670.9

341.9
342.4
343.2
347.9
350.7
352.5

564.6
565.3
566.4
572.1
576.1
578.6

816.0
819.4
822.6
830.3
836.7
842.6

1,385.5
1,392.9
1,400.3
1,411.9
1,422.0
1,433.1

89.4
90.2
90.7
91.3
92.0
92.5

252.5
252.3
252.5
256.6
258.8
260.0

550.0
555.9
560.8
565.9
572.2
576.8

75.9
78.9
81.5
83.4
86.2
86.7

253.7
256.4
258.5
260.8
263.2
266.6

220.4
220.6
220.9
221.7
222.8
223.5

569.5
573.5
577.7
581.5
585.3
590.5

2.2
2.3
2.3
2.5
2.6
2.6

4.3
4.3
4.8
5.0
4.0
6.2

354.4
356.7
360.7
361.2
360.7
361.5

580.0
583.4
589.2
589.4
587.0
586.1

848.5
856.5
865.8
870.8
875.6
879.0

1,444.4
1,458.0
1,474.0
1,485.4
1,495.0
1,503.3

93.2
93.9
95.2
95.9
96.7
97.7

261.2
262.8
265.5
265.3
264.0
263.8

582.1
587.4
593.5
598.2
610.2
614.1

88.0
87.6
88.5
88.6
95.4
96.6

271.2
275.8
279.1
284.2
291.5
295.9

222.9
224.0
225.8
225.4
223.4
221.6

595.9
601.5
608.5
614.6
619.5
624.4

2.7
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.9
3.0

4.4
3.5
6.2
4.3
8.1
10.3

360.2
359.4
360.0
365.5
365.7
370.3

581.9
578.8
578.3
584.0
583.1
589.2

879.0
880.9
883.9
894.4
898.4
909.0

1,507.7 98.4
1,513.9 99.0
1,521.9 99.5
1,535.4 100.2
1,541.6 100.7
1,556.9 101.5

261.8
260.4
260.5
265.3
265.0
268.7

619.3
623.6
622.9
623.9
623.2
623.6

100.5
102.1
99.0
95.0
90.6
84.9

300.1
305.0
308.5
313.6
318.6
323.2

218.8
216.5
215.3
215.3
214.1
215.6

628.7
633.0
638.0
641.0
643.2
647.9

2.9
2.9
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.3

12.0
8.4
6.5
5.3
8.4
10.8

373.5
375.6
379.2
380.0
380.5
382.1

594.3
597.6
601.2
598.8
592.9
592.7

918.7
927.1
936.6
943.3
948.3
952.6

1,571.6
1,584.6
1,599.0
1,608.6
1,616.0
1,623.5

102.4
103.6
104.9
105.4
105.8
106.3

271.1
272.1
274.4
274.6
274.6
275.8

629.8
637.3
645.4
654.4
662.8
664.8

84.7
85.9
88.1
91.1
95.0
94.3

327.8
332.9
338.8
347.9
358.8
363.2

217.4
218.5
218.5
215.4
209.1
207.3

652.9
657.5
662.4
665.3
667.7
670.9

3.4
3.4
3.5
3.4
3.4
3.4

13.2
9.8
12.5
11.7
5.5
9.5

1953:
1954:
1955:
1956:
1957:
1958:
1959:

Dec.
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec.

1978:
Jan...
Feb
Mar

t

June.
July
Nov
Dec
1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar

t
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec...

128.8
132.3
135.2
136.9
135.9
141.1
143.4

101.1
104.9
107.4
108.7
107.6
112.6
114.5

44.5
48.3
50.0
51.9
57.4
65.4
67.4

67.4

92.9

3.8
5.0
3.4
3.4
3.5
3.9
4.9

72.9
115.2
119.1 82.7
120.3 97.6
124.1 112.0
129.5 126.2
135.1 146.4
137.5 157.9
147.0 183.3
159.0 204.3
162.9 194.4

2.8
5.7
9.6
12.8
16.4
15.5
20.6
23.5
10.9

72.9
79.9
92.0
102.3
113.4
130.0
142.4
69.4
85.6
90.7

93.3
95.2
92.8

102.3
113.4
126.4
141.4
157.3
170.4
177.3
194.0
206.7
214.9

4.7
4.9
5.6
5.1
5.5
4.6
3.4
5.0
5.0
5.6
7.3
6.9
7.4
6.3
4.9
4.1
4.4
5.1
10.3
9.5

1
M l is currency plus demand deposits; M 1 + is M l plus savings deposits at commercial banks and checkable deposits at nonbank
thrift institutions; M2 is Ml plus time and savings deposits at commercial banks other than large certificates of deposit (CDs); and M3
is 2 plus deposits at nonbank thrift institutions.
M2
Negotiable time certificates of deposit (CDs) issued in denominations of $100,000 or more by large weekly reporting commercial
banks.
3
Includes negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts at commercial banks.
4
Average of the beginning and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks, savings capital at savings and loan associations, and
credit union shares.
5
Includes negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts at thrift institutions, credit union share draft accounts, and demand
deposits at mutual savings banks.
6
Deposits at all commercial banks. Includes Treasury note balances beginning November 1978.
Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




271

TABLE B-59.-—Commercial bank loans and investments, 1939-79
[Billions of dollars]
Loans
Total loans
and
investments

415
42.0
51.1
56.5
62.8
66.2
69.1
80.6
88.1
91.5
95.6
110.5
116.7
123.6
137.3
153.7
172.9
198.2
213.9
231.3
258.2
279.4
292.0
320.9
378.9

566.1
647.8
713.6
744.6
804.3
891.1
1,014.3
1,131.5
1,030.9
1,042.0
1,048.9
1,061.0
1,068.8
1,080.0
1,092.2
1,102.8
1,122.8
1,128.9
1,128.4
1,131.5

Investments

17.2
18.8
217
19.2
19.1
216
26.1
311
38.1
42.4

113 0
118.7
124.7
130.2
139.1
143.1
153.1
157.6
161.6
166.4
181.2
188.7
197.4
212.8
231.2
250.2
272.3
300.1
316.1
352.0
390.2
401.7
435.5
485.7
558.0

End of month*
1939- Dec
1940: Dec
1941- Dec
1942: Dec
1943: Dec
1944- Dec
1945- Dec
1946- Dec
1947: Dec
1948: Dec

Total

40.7
43.9
50 7
67.4
85.1
105.5
124.0
114 0
116.3
114.2

Period

Commercial and
industrial

Loans plus
loans sold
to bank
affiliates

U.S.
Treasury
securities

Other
securities

16.3
17.8
21.8
41.4
59.8
77.6
90.6
74.8
69.2
62.6

7.1
7.4
72
6.8
6.1
63
7.3
8.1
9.0
9.2

39.4
42.1
43.9
47.6
52.1
58.4
69.5
78.6
86.2
95.9
105.7
110.0
116.2
130.4

62 3
66.4
61.1
60.4
62.2
62.2
67.6
60.3
57.2
56.9
65.1
57.7
59.9
65.3
64.7
61.5
60.7
57.1
53.5
59.4
60.7
51.2
57.8
60.6
62.6

92
10.3
12.4
13.4
14.2
14.7
16.4
16.8
16.3
17.9
20.5
20.5
20.8
23.9
29.2
35.0
38.7
44.8
48.7
61.3
71.3
71.1
85.7
104.2
116.5

110.5
116.7
123.6
137.3
153.7
172.9
198.2
213.9
231.3
258.2
283.3
294.7
323.7
381.5

386.2
460.3
519.9
516.9
554.8
632.1
747.8
846.2

136.3
165.6
197.3
189.8
191.2
211.2
246.5
288.9

64.1
58.7
53.7
82.1
100.6
99.5
93.4
93.7

115.8
128.8
140.0
145.7
149.0
159.6
173.1
191.6

388.8
464.6
524.7
521.3
558.5
636.9
751.6
3
849.0

759.9
770.0
775.7
786.6
793.3
803.1
813.4
823.3
840.0
844.8
843.6
846.2

252.6
256.9
259.8
263.3
266.8
270.4
275.5
279.9
285.9
288.6
288.3
288.9

93.0
93.2
93.9
94.0
94.1
94.8
95.3
94.1
95.2
95.3
94.3
93.7

178.0
178.8
179.3
180.4
181.4
182.1
183.5
185.4
187.6
188.8
190.5
191.6

763.5
773.5
779.2
790.3
797.0
806.9
817.2
827.0
843.7
848.4
847.2
849.0

Seasonally adjusted
1948- Dec
1949: Dec
1950: Dec
1951- Dec
1952: Dec
1953: Dec
1954- Dec
1955: Dec
1956- Dec
1957: Dec
1958- Dec
1959: Dec
I960: Dec
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec
1965: Dec
1966: Dec
1967: Dec
1968: Dec
1969: Dec
1970: Dec
1971: Dec
1972: Dec
Average for month2
1972 Dec
1973 Dec
1974 Dec
1975 Dec
1976 Dec
1977 Dec
1978 Dec
1979 Dec"
1979
Jan
Feb
Mar
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

'.

1
2

3

Data are for last Wednesday of month (except June 30 and December 31 call dates).
Data are averages of Wednesday figures and are for domestically chartered banks and foreign-related institutions. Lease financing
receivables are included in the total loans and investments, total loans, and loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates.
3
As of December 1979, loans sold to affiliates were reduced $0.8 billion as a result of data corrections. In addition, comparability of
the data may also be affected by bank mergers, liquidations, loan reclassifications, etc.
Note.—Data adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning 1948 and domestic interbank loans only beginning January 1959.
Beginning January 1959, loans and investments are reported gross, without valuation reserves deducted, rather than net of valuation
reserves, as in earlier periods. Effective June 1966, balances accumulated for payment of personal loans (then about $1.1 billion) are
excluded from loans at all commercial banks, and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank (then about $1 billion) are
included in other securities rather than in loans. Beginning June 1969, data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant
majority-owned domestic subsidiaries; earlier data include commercial banks only. Beginning June 1971, Farmers Home Administration
insured notes (then about $0.7 billion) are classified as other securities rather than as loans.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




272

TABLE B-60.—Liquid asset holdings ofprivate domestic nonfinancial investors, 1952-79
[Average outstanding; billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted]
Currency and deposits
Time deposits
Year and month

Total
liquid
assets

Total

Demand
Currency1 deposits l

Commercial
banks l

Nonbank
thrift
institutions 2

U.S. Treasury
securities

"»?•

Short- certificates
term
of
Savings market3
deposbonds
able
it 5
securities 4

Other
private
money
market
instruments 6

1952: Dec
1953: Dec .
1954: Dec

269.1
284.6
295.3

200.7
210.9
223.9

27.3
27.7
27.4

91.5
92.8
96.2

39.1
41.9
45.1

42.8
48.6
55.2

49.2
49.3
49.9

18.4
23.1
20.1

0.8
1.2
1.3

1955:
1956:
1957:
1958:
1959:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

314.8
325.4
338.0
354.4
373.3

235.4
246 2
257.2
277.5
290.7

27.8
28 2
28.3
28.6
28.9

98.4
99 5
97.9
102.3
104.2

46.8
49 0
54.6
61.8
64.7

62.3
69 5
76.4
84.8
92.9

50.2
501
48.3
47.8
46.1

27.7
27 4
30.6
27.6
35.5

1.5
17
1.9
1.6
1.1

I960:
1961:
1962:
1963:
1964:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

386.8
4107
442.1
479.3
515.5

305.7
326.3
352.2
382.2
414.6

29.0
29.6
30.6
32.5
34.3

104.5
106.3
106.5
109.7
114.3

69.9
77.0
88.8
98.6
108.8

102.3
113.4
126.4
141.4
157.3

457
46.5
46.9
48.1
49.0

32.4
32.0
33.4
35.0
33.0

1965:
1966:
1967:
1968:
1969:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

559.6
587.3
638.3
696.8
722.7

451.1
474.3
521.0
565.6
582.8

36.3
38.3
40.4
43.4
46.1

119.4
121.9
130.5
141.2
145.2

125.0
136.8
156.1
174.2
176.7

170.4
177.3
194.0
206.7
214.9

49.6
50.2
51.2
51.8
51.7

35.8
37.8
34.8
40.9
53.2

1970:
1971:
1972:
1973:
1974:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

769.8
854.9
966.8
1,086.1
1,174.2

632.4
721.1
815.9
886.5
942.4

49.0
52.5
56.9
61.6
67.8

152.1
162.1
176.3
183.9
187.5

198.7
233.2
263.6
293.2
318.4

232.6
273.3
319.1
347.7
3687

52.0
54.3
57.5
60.4
63.3

1975:
1976:
1977:
1978:
1979:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec*

1,295.6
1,428.4
1,598.7
1,775.3
1,957.7

1,053.2
1,191.8
1,327.1
1,451.4
1,565.3

73.8
80.8
88.6
97.7
106.3

193.6
201.2
214.6
224.9
229.8

358.2
414.8
459.0
504.4
558.3

427.7
495.0
564.9
624.4
670.9

1978:
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
My
a
June

1,614.8
1,626.5
1,636.7
1,653.6
1,668,6
1,681.2

1,337.5
1,344.6
1,351.8
1,363.3
1,373.2
1,384.3

89.4
90.2
90.7
91.3
92.0
92.5

216.2
216.0
216.1
219.9
221.9
223.1

462.4
464.9
467.3
470.6
474.0
478.2

July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.

1,694.5
1,707.2
1,726.2
1,737.2
1,757.1
1,775.3

1,395.1
1,408.2
1,423.8
1,434,2
1,443.2
1,451.4

93.2
93.9
95.2
95.9
96.7
97.7

224.0
225.6
227.9
226.8
225.1
224.9

1979:
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
My
a
June

1,791.0
1,804.1
1,815.9
1,832.2
1,845.3
1,865.9

1,455.5
1,461.4
1,469.0
1,481.7
1,487.7
1,502.3

98.4
99.0
99.5
100.2
100.7
101.5

1,881.9
1,895.5
1,915.0
1,933.1
1,947.9
1,957.7

1,516.6
1,529.3
1,542.6
1,553.2
1,559.6
1,565.3

102.4
103.6
104.9
105.4
105.8
106.3

July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct.
Nov.
Dec".

11.6

2.9
3.3
4.2
5.1
7.2

15.1
14.4

10.6

27"

5.3
9.0

7.8

187

127

8.3

267

41.9
31.5
34.3
43.3
47.8

21.8
27.5
35.9
53.2
69.4

21.7
20.6
23.0
42.8
51.3

67.2
71.9
76.6
80.6
79.9

67.3
667
78.2
85.9
112.4

57.0
42.7
50.7
62.1
47.0

50.9
55.3
66.1
95.2
153.1

569.5
573.5
577.7
581.5
585.3
590.5

77.0
77.4
77.8
78.2
78.6
78.9

80.1
80.9
79.6
80.1
80.8
80.8

51.6
52.8
54.4
56.7
59.3
59.1

68.4

482.0
487.2
492.2
496.9
501.9
504.4

595.9
601.5
608.5
614.6
619.5
624.4

79.2
79.5
79.8
80.1
80.3
80.6

81.0
31.6
83.8
82.0
82.1
85.9

59.4
57.5
57.3
56.1

79.6
80.3
81.7
84.7

617

897

222.5
221.0
221.0
225.0
224.2
227.2

505.8
508.4
510.5
515.5
519.5
525.7

628.7
633.0
638.0
641.0
643.2
647.9

80.7
80.6
80.6
80.6
80.6
80.6

89.3
91.5
95.7
100.3
108.4
116.2

65.1
65.5
61.4
56.4
45.7

100.4
105.1
109.1
113.1
117.0
121.0

229.2
229.9
231.3
232.1
230.6
229.8

532.1
538.3
544.0
550.4
555.5
558.3

652.9
657.5
662.4
665.3
667.7
670.9

80.6
80.6
80.6
80.5
80.2
79.9

114.2
110.3
111.3
111.7
1117
112.4

44.3
43.6
44.3
45.9
48.8
47.0

126.2
131.7
136.4
141.8
147.6
153.1

21.7

62.1

517

16.8

707

72.9
74.9
76.7
78.4

95.2

1
Money stock components (see Table B-58) after deducting foreign holdings and holdings by domestic financial institutions. The
three columns add to M2 held by domestic nonfinancial sectors.
2
As published in money stock statistics.
3
Series E and H savings bonds, other savings bonds, and savings notes held by individuals.
4
Short-term marketable U.S. Treasury securities excluding official, foreign, and financial institution holdings.
5
Certificates over $100,000 at weekly reporting banks, except foreign holdings.
6
Commercial paper, bankers' acceptances, Federal funds, security repurchase agreements, and money market mutual fund shares
held outside banks and other financial institutions.
Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




273

TABLE B-61.—Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors, 1971-79
[Billions of dollars]

U.S. Government
Foreign
Private domestic nonfinancial sectors
Corporate equities
Debt instruments
Debt capital instruments
State and local government obligations...
Corporate bonds
Mortgages
Home
Multi-family residential..
Commercial
Farm

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

153.9

176.8

203.1

191.6

210.8

271.9

338.5

400.3

15.1

8.3

11.8

85.4

69.0

56.8

53.7

5.1

Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors

1971

24.9

Item

4.0

6.1

15.4

13.3

20.8

13.9

32.3

124.0

157.7

188.8

164.4

112.1

182.0

267.9

314.4

11.4
112.5

10.9
146.8

7.9
180.9

4.1
160.3

9.9
102.1

10.5
171.5

2.7
265.1

2.6
311.8

86.7

102.1

105.1

98.0

98.4

123.5

175.6

196.6

17.4
18.8
50.5

14.7
12.2
75.2

14.7
9.2
81.2

16.5
19.7
61.9

16.1
27.2
55.0

15.7
22.8
85.0

23.7
21.0
131.0

28.3
20.1
148.2

28.0
9.9
10.2
2.4

42.5
12.7
16.4
3.6

46.4
10.4
18.9
5.5

34.8
6.9
15.1
5.0

39.5
11.0
4.6

63.7
1.8
13.4
6.1

96.4
7.4
18.4
8.8

104.5
10.2
23.3
10.2

25.8

44.7

75.8

62.3

3.8

48.0

89.5

115.2

Consumer credit
Bank loans n.e.c
Open-market paper
Other

14.7
7.1
_ 4
AA

19.8
17.1
.8
6.9

26.0
37.1
2.5
10.3

9.9
32.0
6.6
13.7

9.7
-12.3
-2.6
9.0

25.6
4.0
4.0
14.4

40.6
27.0
2.9
19.0

50.6
37.3
5.2
22.2

By borrowing sector: Total...

124.0

157.7

188.8

164.4

112.1

182.0

267.9

314.4

17.7
44.9
61.4

14.5
65.1
78.1

13.2
80.1
95.5

15.5
51.3
97.6

13.7
49.7
48.6

15.2
90.5
76.3

20.4
139.9
107.6

23.6
162.6
128.2

Farm
Nonfarm noncorporate
Corporate

4.5
11.7
45.2

5.8
14.1
58.2

9.6
12.9
73.0

8.0
7.4
82.1

8.8
2.0
37.9

10.9
4.7
60.7

14.7
12.9
79.9

18.1
15.4
94.7

Debt instruments
Equities

33.8
11.4

47.2
10.9

65.2
7.9

78.0
4.1

28.0
9.9

50.2
10.5

77.2
2.7

92.2
2.6

153.9

176.8

203.1

191.6

210.8

271.9

338.5

400.3

88.6

122.7

140.3

118.9

140.4

168.5

189.7

217.0

93.7

106.7

101.2

73.8

98.1

131.9

149.5

151.8

13.7
79.1

21.5
83.6

14.5
75.7

8.2
65.4

12.6
84.0

16.1
113.5

26.1
121.0

22.2
115.2

Other debt instruments..

State and local governments....
Households....
Nonfinancial business

Total funds suppled to nonfinancial sectors
Financed directly or indirectly by.Private domestic nonfinancial sectors..
Deposits
Demand deposits and currency
Time and savings deposits
Money market funds and repurchase agreements

.8

1.6

11.0

.2

1.6

2.3

2.4

14.4

*

21.6

45.7

47.3

45.8

39.8

46.4

71.4

-5.1

-5.6

-6.7

-2.2

-3.5

-3.2

-6.1

-6.2

22.8

14.6

6.4

22.1

2.1

13.4

43.2

46.5

At banks
Credit and equity instruments

-4.5
27.3

3.8
10.8

3.0
3.4

10.3
11.7

-8.7
10.8

-4.6
17.9

1.2
42.0

6.3
40.1

U.S. Government—related loans, net.
U.S. Government cash balances
Private insurance and pension reserves.
Other sources

11.6
3.1
24.5
3.3

2.6
-.4
26.3
11.0

11.2
-1.5
30.7
16.1

19.5
-4.6
33.4
2.4

24.9
2.8
39.7
.9

20.5
3.0
47.9
18.6

19.5
.9
58.7
26.5

30.5
3.7
70.6
32.0

Credit market instruments
Corporate equities
Foreign funds

See next page for continuation of table.




274

TABLE B-61.—Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors, 1971-79—Continued
[Billions of dollars]
1979 unadjusted quarterly
flows

Item

I

1979 seasonally adjusted
annual rates

I

II

75.3

101.7

112.9

371.6

401.4

433.9

10.7

-4.6

12.4

25.2

29.05

34.0

-1.6

6.6

14.9

4.4

26.3

60.2

66.2

99.7

85.6

342.0

346.1

339.7

.7
65.5

.7
99.1

.7
84.9

2.9
339.1

2.8
343.4

2.9
336.9

40.V

57.9

54.1

202.0

207.6

194.0

2.3
5.0
33.4

6.4
6.3
45.2

7.7
3.6
42.8

22.3
21.5
158.3

12.7
25.8
169.1

23.5
12.4
158.1

22.5
2.0
4.8
4.1

31.4
2.0
7.0
4.9

28.4
3.2
7.4
3.8

109.7
9.2
23.2
16.2

115.7
7.2
28.3
17.9

101.6
12.5
28.8
15.1

Other debt instruments

24.8

41.1

30.8

137.1

135.8

142.9

Consumer credit
Bank loans n.e.c
Open-market paper
Other

4.5
9.8
2.9
7.5

15.0
14.9
2.7
8.5

13.1
14.5
3.7

50.7
45.8
12.9
27.7

44.7
51.9
8.6
30.5

42.4
67.6
23.1
9.8

66.2

99.7

85.6

342.0

346.1

339.7

1.5
31.2
33.5

5.8
46.3
47.7

6.9
42.7
36.1

18.9
165.3
157.8

10.3
171.7
164.2

20.1
159.9
159.7

Farm
Nonfarm noncorporate
Corporate

5.7
1.5
26.4

7.6
4.6
35.5

4.7
4.5
26.8

24.0
15.2
118.6

22.3
14.9
126.9

18.4
18.9
122.4

Debt instruments

25.7
.7

34.8
.7

26.1
.7

115.8
2.9

124.1
2.8

119.6
2.9

75.3

101.7

112.9

371.6

401.4

433.9

34.2

57.0

49.9

196.0

226.4

226.9

13.7

33.5

39.4

112.2

131.4

186.2

-25.2
28.4
10.4

12.7
10.9
9.9

.7
28.0
10.8

-13.9
84.4
41.7

21.6
70.1
39.7

29.0
114.2
43.0

Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors
U.S. Government
Foreign
Private domestic nonfinancial sectors
Corporate equities
Debt instruments
Debt capital instruments
State and local government obligations
Corporate bonds
Mortgages
Home mortgages
Multi-family residential
Commercial
Farm

By borrowing sector: Total
State and local governments
Households
Nonfinancial business

Equities
Total funds supplied to nonfinancial sectors
Financed directly or indirectly by:
Private domestic nonfinancial sectors
Deposits
Demand deposits and currency
Time and savings deposits
Money market funds and repurchase agreements

Corporate equities

11.7

93.3

108.1

44.4

-1.3

-9.5

-13.1

-3.7

12.7

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

275

19.4

49.5

.1

59.1

5.7
-11.4

10.8
8.7

79.9
-30.4

24.4
-24.4

20.4
38.7

3.4
-8.2
17.8
15.5

At banks
Credit and equity instruments
U.S. Government-related loans, net
U.S. Government cash balances
Private insurance and pension reserves
Other sources

-5.7

-17.3
-4.6

Foreign funds




27.5
-4.0

21.3

Credit market instruments

11.1
9.7
19.1
10.5

12.7
6.1
18.9
5.9

31.4
-14.1
68.1
40.8

26.1
8.2
79.3
61.4

43.3
11.9
73.8
19.0

TABLE B-62.—Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves, 1929-79

[Averages of daily figures; millions of dollars]
Member bank reserves2

Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Year and month
Total

1929- Dec
1933: Dec
1939: Dec

U.S.
Government
and Federal
agency
securities

Member bank
borrowings
Othar1

umer *
Total

Tntal
10131

PomiiroH

Cvrocc

Required

excess

2,347
1,822
6,462

48
3
766
5,011

Seasonal

1643
2,669
2,612

446
2,432
2,510

801
95
3

396
142
99

2 395
2,588
11,473

3

1940:
1941:
1942:
1943:
1944:
1945:
1946:
1947:
1948:
1949:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

2,305
2,404
6,035
11,914
19,612
24,744
24,746
22,858
23,978
19,012

2,188
2,219
5,549
11,166
18,693
23,708
23,767
21,905
23,002
18,287

3
5
4
90
265
334
157
224
134
118

114
180
482
658
654
702
822
729
842
607

14,049
12,812
13,152
12,749
14,168
16,027
16,517
17,261
19,990
16,291

7,403
9,422
10,776
11,701
12,884
14,536
15,617
16,275
19,193
15,488

6,646
3,390
2,376
1,048
1,284
1,491
900
986
797
803

1950:
1951:
1952:
1953:
1954:
1955:
1956:
1957:
1958:
1959:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

21,606
25,446
27,299
27,107
26,317
26,853
27,156
26,186
28,412
29,435

20,345
23,409
24,400
25,639
24,917
24,602
24,765
23,982
26,312
27,036

142
657
1,593
441
246
839
688
710
557
906

1,119
1,380
1,306
1,027
1,154
1,412
1,703
1,494
1,543
1,493

17,391
20,310
21,180
19,920
19,279
19,240
19,535
19,420
18,899
18,932

16,364
19,484
20,457
19,227
18,576
18,646
18,883
18,843
18,383
18,450

1,027
826
723
693
703
594
652
577
516
482

I960: Dec
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec
1965: Dec
1966: Dec
1967: Dec
1968: Dec
1969: Dec

29,060
31,217
33,218
36,610
39,873
43,853
46,864
51,268
56,610
64,100

27,248
29,098
30,546
33,729
37,126
40,885
43,760
48,891
52,529
57,500

87
149
304
327
243
454
557
238
765
1,086

1,725
1,970
2,368
2,554
2,504
2,514
2,547
2,139
3,316
5,514

19,283
20,118
20,040
20,746
21,609
22,719
23,830
25,260
27,221
28,031

18,514
19,550
19,468
20,210
21,198
22,267
23,438
24,915
26,766
27,774

769
568
572
536
411
452
392
345
455
257

1970: Dec
1971: Dec
1972: Dec
1973: Dec
1974: Dec
1975: Dec
1976: Dec
1977: Dec
1978: Dec
1979: Dec"

66,708
74,255
76 851
85,642
93,967
99,651
107,632
116,382
129,330
140,008

61,688
69,158
71,094
79,701
86,679
92,108
100,328
107,948
117,344
126,276

321
107
1,049
1,298
703
127
62
558
874
1,454

41
32
13
12
54
134
81

4,699
4,990
4 708
4,643
6,585
7,416
7,242
7,876
11,112
12,278

29,265
31,329
31353
35,068
36,941
34,989
35,136
36,471
41,572
44,063

28,993
31,164
31134
34,806
36,602
34,727
34,964
36,297
41,447
43,560

272
165
219
262
339
262
172
174
125
503

128,749
125 953
126 356
127,462
128 597
129,035

113,192
110 863
112 992
113,133
113 575
114,653

994
973
999
897
1 777
1,396

112
114
121
134
173
188

14,563
14,117
12 365
13,432
13 245
12',986

43,167
40,703
40 316
40,546
40,382
4O'lO5

42,865
40,494
40 059
40'548
40 095
39^884

302
209
257
_2
287
221

131,585
131 441
133,505
134 049
136'696
140,008

118,298
120 158

1,179
1097
l'344
2 022
1*908
1,454

168
177
169
161
141
81

12,108
10,186
10,670
9,838
11185
12,278

40,900
40,687
40,868
42,423
42979
44,063

40,710
40,494
40,863
42,002
42770
43,560

190
193
95
421
209
503

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr

My
a
June
July

Ag
u
sept"::":: ..:::.::: :
Ot
c
Nov p
Dec

121J491

122 189
123'603
126,276

1
2

Mainly float.
Beginning December 1959, part of currency and cash held by member banks allowed as reserves; beginning November 1960 all
such currency and cash allowed.
Beginning November 1972, includes reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a
transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November 9, 1972. Transition period ended
after second quarter 1974.
Effective November 1975, includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember
bank merges into an existing member bank, or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System.
3
Data are for licensed banks only.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




276

TABLE B-63.—Aggregate reserves and deposits of member banks,

1959-79

[Averages of daily figures; billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted]
Member bank deposits subject to
reserve requirements3

Member bank reserves *
Year and month
Total

NonReborrowed quired

Monetary
base 2

Total

Demand
Time
U.S.
and
savings Private Government

Adjusted for changes in reserve
requirements4
Member bank reserves
Total

ReNonborrowed quired

Monetary
base

1959: Dec

18.63

17.68

18.12

48.3

158.2

54.3

99.0

4.8

16.30

15.35

15.79

46.01

I960: Dec
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec

18.92
19.75
19.66
20.31
21.19

18.84
19.61
19.40
19.98
20.92

18.17
19.16
19.08
19.82
20.78

48.7
50.2
51.1
53.7
56.5

162.5
175.5
189.0
203.2
218.7

58.8
67.7
79.9
92.1
103.7

99.1
102.9
103.3
105.9
109.1

4.6
4.9
5.7
5.2
5.9

16.56
17.25
17.84
18.48
19.34

16.49
17.12
17.58
18.15
19.08

15.82
16.66
17.27
17.99
18.94

46.34
47.65
49.31
51.90
54.62

1965:
1966:
1967:
1968:
1969:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

22.18
23.28
24.76
27.06
27.99

21.74
22.75
24.54
26.31
26.87

21.76
22.94
24.39
26.63
27.70

59.6
62.8
66.4
71.8
75.4

238.3
246.3
275.7
299.8
287.8

120.7
128.7
148.9
164.5
150.5

112.8
113.9
121.3
130.5
132.1

4.9
3.7
5.5
4.9
5.2

20.32
20.64
22.79
24.52
24.46

19.88
20.11
22.57
23.78
23.35

19.90
20.30
22.42
24.10
24.18

57.75
60.11
64.40
69.29
71.92

1970: Dec
1971: Dec
1972: Dec
1973: Dec
1974: Dec

29.11
31.16
31.34
34.90
36.55

28.78
31.03
30.29
33.60
35.83

28.86
30.98
31.05
34.60
36.30

79.6
85.3
90.1
98.6
106.7

321.1
360.2
402.0
442.2
486.0

178.8
210.5
241.6
279.2
322.1

136.1
144.0
154.4
158.1
160.6

6.2
5.8
6.1
4.8
3.3

26.17
28.35
31.86
34.37
37.10

25.83
28.22
30.81
33.07
36.38

25.92
28.17
31.58
34.07
36.85

76.69
82.52
90.66
98.02
107.25

1975: Dec
1976: Dec
1977: Dec
1978: Dec
1979: Dec"

34.67
34.89
36.10
41.27
43.

34.54
34.83
35.53
40.40
42.06

34.40
34.61
35.91
41.04
43.13

111.0
118.4
127.8
142.4
153.8

504.2
528.6
568.6
616.7
645.7

336.8
354.1
386.7
429.4
452.0

164.5
171.5
178.5
185.1
192.0

2.9
3.0
3.5
2.3
1.8

36.83
37.24
39.18
41.57
43.20

36.70
37.19
38.61
40.70
41.73

36.57
36.97
38.99
41.34
42.81

113.16
120.80
130.90
142.69
153.48

36.67
36.88
36.67
36.93
37.27
37.63

36.18
36.48
36.34
36.38
36.06
36.53

36.40
36.64
36.47
36.79
37.05
37.45

129.3
130.3
130.6
131.4
132.6
133.5

575.4
577.3
581.3
585.8
591.5
595.8

390.1
394.6
398.3
400.7
405.1
407.4

182.1
179.7
179.7
181.8
183.6
184.6

3.2
3.0
3.4
3.3
2.7
3.8

39.77
40.00
39.83
40.11
40.47
40.87

39.28
39.60
39.50
39.55
39.26
39.77

39.50
39.76
39.63
39.96
40.26
40.69

132.40
133.40
133.74
134.61
135.79
136.76

July...
Aug...
Sept..
Oct....
Nov...
Dec...

38.11
37.93
38.21
38.38
39.75
41.27

36.80
36.79
37.15
37.10
39.05
40.40

37.92
37.77
38.02
38.22
39.53
41.04

134.7
135.3
136.8
137.8
139.9
142.4

600.5
602.7
607.0
608.9
616.9
616.7

410.8
413.0
416.8
418.3
427.5
429.4

186.1
186.5
186.2
187.2
187.0
185.1

3.6
3.3
4.0
3.5
2.3
2.3

41.37
41.20
41.50
41.67
41.57
41.57

40.05
40.06
40.44
40.40
40.87
40.70

41.17
41.03
41.31
41.51
41.35
41.34

137.97
138.56
140.12
141.05
141.75
142.69

1979:
Jan....
Feb....
Mar...
Apr....
May...
June..

41.48
40.75
40.81
40.65
40.48
40.42

40.48
39.78
39.82
39.73
38.72
39.00

41.26
40.54
40.66
40.47
40.34
40.20

143.4
143.3
143.9
144.5
144.9
145.6

621.1
619.7
616.4
618.6
613.9
613.1

433.5
436.1
434.1
432.0
428.7
425.9

185.6
181.9
180.5
184.7
183.5
184.8

1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.7
2.4

41.77
41.03
41.10
40.91
40.75
40.70

40.76
40.06
40.11
39.99
38.98
39.28

41.55
40.82
40.94
40.73
40.61
40.48

143.70
143.62
144.18
144.75
145.13
145.88

July...
Aug...
Sept..
Oct....
Nov
Dec"

40.82
41.07
41.46
42.30
43.13
43.53

39.65
39.98
40.12
40.28
41.22
42.06

40.61
40.85
41.27
42.04
42.88
43.13

146.9
148.4
150.1
151.6
152 8
153.8

618.7
623.7
630.5
638.2
644 2
645.7

429.4
434.4
439.8
445.6
4518
452.0

187.5
187.1
189.0
190.8
190 4
192.0

1.8
2.2
1.8
1.8
20
1.8

41.13
41.38
41.77
42.48
42 66
43.20

39.96
40.29
40.43
40.46
40 75
41.73

40.92
41.15
41.58
42.22
42.42
42.81

147.24
148.73
150.45
151.77
152 38
153.48

1978:
Jan....
Feb
Mar...

t:

June..

.

1
Series reflects actual reserve requirement percentages with no adjustment to eliminate the effect of changes in Regulations D and
M. In addition to earlier breaks in the series effective November 2, 1978, a supplementary reserve requirement of 2 percentage points
was imposed on time deposits of $100,000, or more. This action increased required reserves approximately $3.0 billion in the week
beginning November 16, 1978. Effective October 11, 1979, an 8 percentage point marginal reserve requirement was imposed on
"managed liabilities." On October 25. 1979. reserves of Edge Act Corporations were included in member bank reserves. In the week
beginning October 25,1979, these last two actions raised required reserves $320 million and $318 million, respectively.
2
{ncludes total reserves (member bank reserve balances in the current week DIUS vault cash held two weeks earlier); currency
outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve Banks, and the vaults of commercial banks; and vault cash of nonmember banks.
3
Includes total time and savings deposits and net demand deposits as defined by Regulation D. Private demand deposits include all
demand deposits except those due to the U.S. Government, less cash items in process of collection and demand balances due from
domestic commercial banks.
4
Reserve aggregates series have been adjusted to remove discontinuities associated with marginal reserve requirements, the
inclusions of Edge Act Corporation Reserves, and other changes in Regulations D, K and M.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




277

TABLE B-64.—Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-79
[Percent per annum]
Corporate
bonds
(Moody's)

U.S. Treasury securities

Year or month

Bills
(new
issues)x
3month

month

Constant
maturities2
Aaa
years

Baa

Highgrade
municipal
bonds
(Standard &
Poor's)

Newhome
mortgage
yields
(FHLBBP

Prime
commercial
paper,

Prime rate
charged by
banks4

months

Discount
rate,
Federal

Reserve

Bank of
New
York 4

years

1929.

4.73

1933

Federal
funds
rate 5

5.90

4.27

5.85

5.16

4.49

0.515

7.76

4.71

1.73

2.56
1.00

1939

023

3.01

4.96

2.76

.59

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

014
103
326
373
375

2.84
2.77
2.83
2.73
2.72

4.75
4.33
4.28
3.91
3.61

2.50
2.10
2.36
2 06
1.86

.56
.53
66
.69
.73

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

375
375
594
1040
1.102

2.62
2.53
2.61
2.82
2.66

3.29
3.05
3.24
3.47
3.42

1.67
1.64
2.01
2.40
2.21

.75
.81
1.03
1.44
1.49

2.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.34
1.50

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

1.218
1.552
1766
1.931
953

2.47
163

2.85
2.40

2.62
2.86
2.96
3.20
2.90

3.24
3.41
3.52
3.74
3.51

1.98
2.00
2.19
2.72
2.37

1.45
2.16
2.33
2.52
1.58

2.07
2.56
3.00
3.17
3.05

1.59
1.75
1.75
1.99
1.60

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1.753
2 658
3.267
1.839
3.405

3.832

2.47
3.19
3.98
2.84
4.46

2.82
3.18
3.65
3.32
4.33

3.06
3.36
3.89
3.79
4.38

3.53
3.88
4.71
4.73
5.05

2.53
2.93
3.60
3.56
3.95

2.18
3.31
3.81
2.46
3.97

3.16
3.77
4.20
3.83
4.48

1.89
2.77
3.12
2.15
3.36

1.78
2.73
3.11
1.57
3.30

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

2 928
2.378
2 778
3157
3 549

3.247
2.605
2.908
3.253
3.686

3.98
3.54
3.47
3.67
4.03

4.12
3.88
3.95
4.00
4.19

4.41
4.35
4.33
4.26
4.40

5.19
5.08
5.02
4.86
4.83

3.73
3.46
3.18
3.23
3.22

5.89
5.82

3.85
2.97
3.26
3.55
3.97

4.82
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50

3.53
3.00
3.00
3.23
3.55

322
1.96
2.68
3.18
3.50

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

3.954
4.881
4.321
5.339
6.677

4.055
5.082
4.630
5.470
6.853

4.22
5.23
5.03
5.68
7.02

4.28
4.92
5.07
5.65
6.67

4.49
5.13
5.51
6.18
7.03

4.87
5.67
6.23
6.94
7.81

3.27
3.82
3.98
4.51
5.81

5.81
6.25
6.46
6.97
7.80

4.38
5.55
5.10
5.90
7.83

4.54
5.63
5.61
6.30
7.96

4.04
4.50
4.19
5.17
5.87

4.07
5.11
4.22
5.66
8.22

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

6.458
4 348
4.071
7.041
7.886

6.562
4.511
4.466
7.178
7.926

7.29
5.65
5.72
6.95
7.82

7.35
6.16
6.21
6.84
7.56

8.04
7.39
7.21
7.44
8.57

9.11
8.56
8.16
8.24
9.50

6.51
5.70
5.27
5.18
6.09

8.45
7.74
7.60
7.95
8.92

7.72
5.11
4.69
8.15
9.87

7.91
5.72
5.25
8.03
10.81

5.95
4.88
4.50
6.45
7.83

7.17
4.67
4.44
8.74
10.51

5.838 6.122
5.266
4.989
5.265 5.510
7.572
7.221
10.041 10.017

7.49
6.77
6.69
8.29
9.71

7.99
7.61
7.42
8.41
9.44

8.83
8.43
8.02
8.73
9.63

10.61
9.75
8.97
9.49
10.69

6.89
6.49
5.56
5.90
6.39

9.01
8.99
9.01
9.54
10.77

6.33
5.35
5.60
7.99
7
10.91

7.86
6.84
6.83
9.06
12.67

6.25
5.50
5.46
7.46
10.28

5.82
5.05
5.54
7.94
11.20

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

See next page for continuation of table.




278

1.00
1.00
1.00
6
1.00
6
1.00

6

6
6

TABLE B-64.—Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-79—Continued
[Percent per annum]
Corporate
bonds
(Moody's)

U.S. Treasury securities

Bills
(new
issues)1

Year or month

Constant
maturities2
Aaa
3
years

10
years

Highgrade
municipal
bonds
(Standard &
Poor's)

Newhome
mortgage
yields
(FHLBB)3

Prime
commercial
paper,

Prime rate
charged by
banks4

months

3month

6month

June

4.597
4.662
4.613
4.540
4.942
5.004

4.783
4.896
4.883
4.790
5.193
5.198

6.22
6.44
6.47
6.31
6.55
6.39

7.21
7.39
7.46
7.37
7.46
7.28

7.96
8.04
8.10
8.04
8.05
7.95

9.08
9.12
9.12
9.07
9.01
8.91

5.70
5.75
5.76
5.61
5.64
5.53

9.05
8.99
8.95
8.94
8.96
8.98

4.74
4.82
4.87
4.87
5.35
5.49

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

5.146
5.500
5.770
6.188
6.160
6.063

5.351
5.810
5.991
6.410
6.433
6.377

6.51
6.79
6.84
7.19
7.22
7.30

7.33
7.40
7.34
7.52
7.58
7.69

7.94
7.98
7.92
8.04
8.08
8.19

8.87
8.82
8.80
8.89
8.95
8.99

5.50
5.46
5.37
5.53
5.38
5.48

9.00
9.02
9.04
9.07
9.07
9.09

5.41
5.84
6.17
6.55
6.59
6.64

63/4-6%
6%-7
7 -7y4
7

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

6.448
6.457
6.319
6.306
6.430
6.707

6.685
6.740
6.644
6.700
7.019
7.200

7.61
7.67
7.70
7.85
8.07
8.30

7.96
8.03
8.04
8.15
8.35
8.46

8.41
8.47
8.47
8.56
8.69
8.76

9.17
9.20
9.22
9.32
9.49
9.60

5.60
5.51
5.49
5.71
5.97
6.13

9.15
9.18
9.26
9.30
9.37
9.46

6.79
6.80
6.80
6.86
7.11
7.63

7 3 / 4 -8

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

7.074
7.036
7.836
8.132
8.787
9.122

7.471
7.363
7.948
8.493
9.204
9.397

8.54
8.33
8.41
8.62
9.04
9.33

8.64
8.41
8.42
8.64
8.81
9.01

8.60
8.69
8.89
9.03
9.16

9.60
9.48
9.42
9.59
9.83
9.94

6.18
5.98
5.93
5.95
6.03
6.33

9.57
9.70
9.73
9.83
9.87
10.02

7.91
7.90
8.44
9.03
10.23
10.43

1979:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

9.351
9.265
9.457
9.493
9.579
9.045

9.501
9.349
9.458
9.498
9.531
9.062

9.50
9.29
9.38
9.43
9.42
8.95

9.10
9.10
9.12
9.18
9.25
8.91

9.25
9.26
9.37
9.38
9.50
9.29

10.13
10.08
10.26
10.33
10.47
10.38

6.25
6.19
6.16
6.14
6.10
5.99

10.18
10.20
10.30
10.36
10.47
10.66

10.32
10.01
9.96
9.87
9.98
9.71

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

9.262
9.450
10.182
11.472
11.868
12.071

9.190
9.450
10.125
11.339
11.856
11.847

8.94
9.14
9.69
10.95
11.18
10.71

8.95
9.03
9.33
10.30
10.65
10.39

9.20
9.23
9.44
10.13
10.76
10.74

10.29
10.35
10.54
11.40
11.99
12.06

6.05
6.10
6.40
6.98
7.19
7.09

10.78
11.01
11.02
11.21
11.37
11.65

9.82
10.39
11.60
13.23
7
13.26
12.80

1977:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr

fay

Discount
rate,
Federal
Reserve
Bank of
New York 4

4.61
4.68
4.69
4.73
5.35
5.39

6V4-6V4
6V4-6V4

6

6y46%
6%-6%

73/4-73/4

8 -8y
8y2-9
9 -9
9 -9y
9%ioy4
ioy 2 -iiy 2
llV2-ll3/4

^lPA
H 3 /4-ll 3 /4
H 3 /4-ll 3 /4
ll%-H 3 /4

n
%i2y4
I2y4-i3y2
I3y2-i5
I 5y45y 2
5 i 5

I5y2-i5y4

Federal
funds
rate 5

5%
5%-5%
5%-6
6 -6
6 -6

5.42
5.90
6.14
6.47
6.51
6.56

6 -6y 2
6y2-6y2
6y2-6y2
6y2-6y2
6y2-7
7 -7

6.70
6.78
6.79
6.89
7.36
7.60

7 -7y 4
7y4-7%
7%-8
8 -8y 2
9y 2 -9y 2

99

7.81
8.04
8.45
8.96
9.76
10.03

9y 2 -9y 2
9y 2 -9y 2
9y 2 -9y 2
9y 2 -9y 2
9y 2 -9y 2
9y 2 -9y 2

10.07
10.06
10.09
10.01
10.24
10.29

9y2-io
10 - i o y 2
10V 2 -ll
11 -12
12 -12
12 -12

10.47
10.94
11.43
13.77
13.18
13.78

1

Rate on new issues within period.
2
Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Treasury Department.
3
Effective rate (in the primary market) on conventional mortgages, reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and
assumed, on the average, repayment at end of 10 years. Rates beginning January 1973 not strictly comparable with prior rates.
4
Average effective rate for the year; opening and closing rate for the month.
5
Since July 19, 1975, the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at
these rates. Prior to that date, the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day's transactions, usually
the one at which most transactions occurred.
6
From October 30, 1942, to April 24, 1946, a preferential rate of 0.50 percent was in effect for advances secured by Government
securities maturing in 1 year or less.
7
Beginning November 1979, data are for 6-months paper.
Sources: Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB),
Moody's Investors Service, and Standard & Poor's Corporation.




279

TABLE B-65—Consumer credit outstanding and net change, 1950-79

[Millions of dollars]
Net change from preceding period

Amount outstanding (end of month)
Installment credit 1
Year and month
Total
Total

1950: Dec
1951: Dec
1952: Dec
1953: Dec
1954: Dec
1955: Dec
1956: Dec
1957: Dec
1958: Dec
1959: Dec
I960: Dec
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec
1965: Dec
1966: Dec
1967: Dec
1968: Dec
1969: Dec
1970: Dec
1971: Dec
1972: Dec
1973: Dec
1974: Dec
1975: Dec
1976: Dec
1977: Dec
1978: Dec

Automobile

Revolving2

Mobile
home 3

Other

Noninstallment
credit 4

Installment
credit 1
Total
Total

25,641
27,268
32,551
36,736
38,192
45,348
49,268
52,191
52,702
60,741

15,503
16,220
20,470
24,254
24,891
30,269
33,171
35,443
35,339
41,123

6,015
5,958
7,635
9,685
9,747
13,471
14,484
15,472
14,258
16,632

9,488
10,262
12,835
14,569
15,144
16,798
18,687
19,971
21,081
24,491

10,138
11,048
12,081
12,482
13,301
15,079
16,097
16,748
17,363
19,618

4,789
1,627
5,283
4,185
1,456
7,156
3,920
2,923
511
8,039

65,104
67,635
73,917
82,805
92,591
103,207
109,749
115,430
126,949
137,742

45,051
46,027
50,994
57,829
65,572
73,881
79,339
83,148
91,681
101,161

18,083
17,599
19,924
22,842
25,817
29,355
30,992
31,131
34,348
36,946

26,968
28,428
31,070
34,987
39,755
44,526
48,347
52,017
55,228
60,495

20,053
21,608
22,923
24,976
27,019
29,326
30,410
32,282
35,268
36,581

4,363
2,531
6,282
8,888
9,786
10,616
6,542
5,681
11,519
10,793

143,113 105,528
157,795 118,255
177,639 133,173
203,077 155,108
213,427 164,594
223,497 172,353
249,383 193,992
289,398 230,829
340,317 275,629

36,325
40,519
47,862
53,772
54,266
57,242
67,707
82,911
102,468

61,614
61,982
66,085
76,047
82,005
85,658
94,523
93,503
110,068

37,585
39,540
44,466
47,969
48,833
51,144
55,391
58,569
64,688

5,371
14,682
19,844
25,438
10,350
10,070
25,886
40,015
50,919

2,105
3,720
5,128
8,528
9,700
11,709
13,681
15,019
17,189
39,274
47,051

2,461
7,226
9,526
13,580
14,642
14,434
14,573
15,141
16,042

Automobile

Noninstallment
credit 4

1,537
3,271
-57
717
1,677
4,250
3,784 2,050
62
637
5,378 3,724
2,902
1,013
2,272
988
- 1 0 4 -1,214
5,784 2,374
1,451
3,928
976 - 4 8 4
4,967 2,325
6,835 2,918
2,975
7,743
3,538
8,309
1,637
5,458
139
3,809
8,533 3,217
9,480 2,598

1,518
910
1,033
401
819
1,778
1,018
651
615
2,255

-621
4,194
7,343
5,910
494
2,976
10,465
15,204
19,557

1,004
1,955
4,926
3,503
864
2,311
4,247
3,178
6,119

4,367
12,727
14,918
21,935
49,486
7,759
21,639
36,837
44,800

435
1,555
1,315
2,053
2,043
2,307
1,084
1,872
2,986
1,313

Seasonally adjusteds
1978:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1979:
Jan
Feb....
Mar...
JuneJuly....
Aug....
Sept...
Oct
Nov....

288,194
289,170
292,691
297,708
303,527
310,589
314,400
320,978
325,209
328,895
333,151
340,317

230,126
230,547
233,842
237,855
243,371
249,865
253,897
259,614
263,387
265,814
269,436
275,629

83,075
83,826
85,757
87,747
90,359
93,261
95,289
97,687
99,062
100,159
101,565
102,468

38,795
38,143
38,034
38,426
38,967
40,001
40,553
41,629
42,420
42,579
43,523
47,051

15,092
15,070
15,149
15,287
15,396
15,532
15,663
15,799
15,910
15,925
16,017
16,042

93,164
93,508
94,902
96,395
98,649
101,071
102,392
104,499
105,995
107,151
108,331
110,068

58,068
58,623
58,849
59,853
60,156
60,724
60,503
61,364
61,822
63,081
63,715
64,688

2,755
3,620
4,231
4,922
4,745
4,430

2,437
2,863
4,076
4,106
4,280
4,207

1,326
1,333
1,634
1,812
1,877
1,642

318
757
155
816
465
223

3,576
4,397
4,127
4,714
4,407
4,499

3,466
3,632
3,680
3,376
3,832
4,399

1,711
1,604
1,532
1,375
1,755
1,780

110
765
447
1,338
575
100

340,432
341,579
344,523
349,779
354,807
359,515
362,801
368,088
372,641
375,178

275,337
276,019
278,453
282,575
287,315
291,856
295,052
299,813
303,902
305,217
307,641

102,890
103,780
105,426
107,186
109,211
110,930
111,952
113,351
114,765
114,876
115,121

46,516
45,586
45,240
45,781
46,489
47,458

16,004
16,008
16,092
16,198
16,453
16,607

65,095
65,560
66,070
67,204
67,492
67,659

4,394
3,863
4,423
4,997
3,761
2,421

3,067
3,563
3,625
4,105
3,306
2,558

1,681
1,565
1,486
1,387
1,225

1,327
300
798
892
455
-137

47,894
49,270
50,422
50,883
52,060

16,719
16,972
17,105
17,244
17,349

109,927
110,645
111,695
113,410
115,162
116,861
118,487
120,220
121,610
122,214
123,111

67,749
68,275
68,739
69,961

2,887
2,792
4,922
3,586

2,443
2,446
4,446
2,186
2,407

1,823

690
616
594
487
533

444
346
476
1,400

1
Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels,
usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes, and scheduled to be
repaid (or with the option of repayment) in two or more installments.
2
Consists of credit cards at retailers, gasoline companies, and commercial banks, and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to
1968, included in "other," except gasoline companies, included in noninstallment credit prior to 1971. Beginning 1977, includes openend credit at retailers, previously included in "other." Also beginning 1977, some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into
consumer credit. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded.
3
Not reported separately prior to July 1970.
4
Noninstallment credit is credit scheduled to be repaid in a lump sum, including single-payment loans, charge accounts, and service
credit. Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking, series is no longer published by the Federal Reserve Board on a
regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends.
5
For installment credit, computed as the difference between extensions and liquidations (both seasonally adjusted); see also Table
B-66. For noninstallment credit, computed as the change from one month to another in the seasonally adjusted amount outstanding.

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




280

TABLE B-66—Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated, 1950-79
[Millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Total
Year or month

Ex

Automobile

Ex

11,955
14,859
16,423
18,105
19,946
21,874
23,340
25,192
25,789
27,757

18,112
16,477
20,164
22,617
24,792
27,913
27,844
27,623
32,228
33,686

16,661
16,960
17,840
19,699
21,815
24,386
26,206
27,482
29,013
31.090

3,481
6,182

2,726
4,567

32,715
34,121
37,398
42,043
47,653
52,005
55,977
61,435
65,717
69,554

30,361
32,775
34,761
38,123
42,801
47,230
52,159
57,712
60,336
64,288

110,352
127,789
136,787
152,817
163,276
172,676
189,381
218 793
253,541

30,857
36,706
43,702
49,606
46,514
52,420
63,743
75 641
88,987

31,414 8,689
32,512 21,862
38,081 24,659
43,696 28,702
46,019 33,213
49,444 36,956
53,278 43,934
60,437 86,756
69,430 104,587

7,278
20,818
23,485
26,699
31,243
35,616
41,764
80,508
96,811

612
2,521
5,121
7,061
5,788
4,328
4,859
5425
6,067

478
1,754
2,975
4,184
4,720
4,536
4,719
4 860
5,170

74,980
76,957
78,267
87,666
87,250
86,737
98,492
86 249
98,710

71,188
72,705
72,246
78,238
81,294
83,080
89,620
72 988
82,130

21,983
22,758
23,925
24,682
25,104
25,565

19,546
19,895
19,849
20,576
20,824
21,358

6,541
6,730
7,043
7,434
7,592
7,595

5,215
5,397
5,409
5,622
5,715
5,953

7,960
8,147
8,398
8,523
8,563
9,062

7,545
7,698
7,566
7,840
7,919
8,107

447
405
493
529
527
510

398
389
398
417
426
440

7,035
7,476
7,991
8,196
8,422
8,398

6,388
6,411
6,476
6,697
6,764
6,858

25,022
25,669
25,537
25,766
25,956
26,516

21,556
22,037
21,857
22,390
22,124
22,117

7,652
7,744
7,542
7,501
7,788
7,833

5,941
6,140
6,010
6,126
6,033
6,053

8,700
9,028
9,006
8,846
9,176
9,424

8,100
8,291
8,384
8,500
8,511
8,555

509
531
494
604
486
502

426
452
422
579
411
431

8,161
8,366
8,495
8,815
8,506
8,757

7,089
7,154
7,041
7,185
7,169
7,078

25,548
26,452
26,533
27,009
27,901
26,139

22,481
22,889
22,908
22,904
24,595
23,581

7,549
7,756
7,794
7,999
8,260
7,178

5,868
6,191
6,308
6,612
7,035
6,488

9,417
9,357
9,714
9,722
10,039
10,136

8,984
9,040
8,972
8,804
9,290
9,340

369
454
518
510
668
547

329
398
410
428
434
445

8,213
8,885
8,507
8,778
8,934
8,278

7,300
7,260
7,218
7,060
7,836
7,308

26,848
27,583
28,634
27,695
26,464

24,405
25,137
24,188
25,509
24,057

7,447
7,667
8,430
7,676
7,066

6,831
7,073
6,607
7,189
6,533

9,856
10,371
10,699
10,424
10,613

9,427
9,584
9,642
9,760
9,814

519
655
531
582
515

447
473
442
432
412

9,026
8,890
8,974
9,013
8,270

7,700
8,007
7,497
8,128
7,298

18,861
23,867
26,355
28,794
31,625
34,882
37,899
40,759
41,290
43,395

8,445
8,951
11,610
12,740
11,741
16,732
15,572
16,554
14,287
18,008

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

50,827
50,598
57,562
64,660
72,445
79,918
83,821
89,058
101,426
109,422

47,022
49,735
52,601
57,822
64,616
71,616
78,365
85,194
92,075
99,945

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

115,132
138,046
151,749
, . 173,035
172,765
180,441
211.028
254 071
298,351

June
July

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e
1979
Jan

Fb
e
Mr
a
Ar
p
My
a
June
July

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o

:

Other

Ex

13,685
15,632
19,006
19,839
20,524
23,531
25,314
26,547
26,026
31,126

22,130
24 583
30,616
32,579
32,265
40,263
40,886
43,101
41,138
49,134

X

Ex

6,906
9,008
9,932
10,689
11,679
13,008
14,559
15,567
15,501
15,638

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

Fb
e
Mr
a

Mobile home 2

Liquidated

tended

Liquidated

1978:
Jan

Revolving1

Ex

tended

tended

Liquidated

tended

Liquidated

tended

Liquidated

1
Consists of credit cards at retailers, gasoline companies, and commercial banks, and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to
1968, included in "other," except gasoline companies, included in noninstallment credit prior to 1971. Beginning 1977, includes openend credit at retailers, previously included in other." Also beginning 1977, some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into
consumer credit. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded.
2
Not reported separately prior to July 1970.
Note.—Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels,
usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes, and scheduled to be
repaid (or with the option of repayment) in two or more installments.
Liquidated credit includes repayments, chargeoffs, and other credit.
See also Table B-65.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




281

outstanding by type of property and of financing, 1939-79

TABLE B-67.— Morti

[Billions of dollars]
Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage

Nonfarm properties

Conventional3

Government underwritten
End of year
or quarter

All
properties

Farm
properties

Total

Multi- Com1- to 4- family mercial
family prop- properhouses erties ties 1

1- to 4-family houses
Total2
Total

VA
FA
H
guarinsured anteed

Total

1- to 4family
houses

1939

35.5

6.6

28.9

16.3

5.6

7.0

1.8

1.8

1.8

27.1

14.5

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

36 5
37.6
36 7
35.3
34.7

65
6.4
60
5.4
4.9

30 0
31.2
30.8
29.9
29.7

17 4
18.4
18 2
17.8
17.9

57
5.9
58
5.8
5.6

69
7.0
67
6.3
6.2

23
3.0
37
4.1
4.2

23
3.0
37
4.1
4.2

23
3.0
37
4.1
4.2

27 7
28.2
271
25.8
25.5

151
15.4
14 5
13.7
13.7

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

35.5
41.8
48.9
56.2
62.7

4.8
4.9
5.1
5.3
5.6

30.8
36.9
43.9
50.9
57.1

18.6
23.0
28.2
33.3
37.6

5.7
6.1
6.6
7.5
8.6

6.4
7.7
9.1
10.2
10.8

4.3
6.3
9.8
13.6
17.1

4.3
6.1
9.3
12.5
15.0

4.1
3.7
3.8
5.3
6.9

0.2
2.4
5.5
7.2
8.1

26.5
30.6
34.1
37.3
40.0

14.3
16.9
18.9
20.8
22.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

72.8
82.3
91.4
101.3
113.7

6.1
6.7
7.2
7.7
8.2

66.7
75.6
84.2
93.6
105.4

45.2
51.7
58.5
66.1
75.7

10.1
11.5
12.3
12.9
13.5

11.5
12.5
13.4
14.5
16.3

22.1
26.6
29.3
32.1
36.2

18.9
22.9
25.4
28.1
32.1

8.6
9.7
10.8
12.0
12.8

10.3
13.2
14.6
16.1
19.3

44.6
49.0
54.9
61.5
69.2

26.3
28.8
33.1
38.0
43.6

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

129.9
144.5
156.5
171.8
190.8

9.0
9.8
10.4
11.1
12.1

120.9
134.6
146.1
160.7
178.7

88.2
99.0
107.6
117.7
130.9

14.3
14.9
15.3
16.8
18.7

18.3
20.7
23.2
26.1
29.2

42.9
47.8
51.6
55.1
59.3

38.9
43.9
47.2
50.1
53.8

14.3
15.5
16.5
19.7
23.8

24.6
28.4
30.7
30.4
30.0

78.0
86.8
94.6
105.5
119.4

49.3
55.1
60.4
67.6
77.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

207.5
228.0
251.4
278.5
305.9

12.8
13.9
15.2
16.8
18.9

194.7
214.1
236.2
261.7
287.0

141.9
154.7
169.3
186.4
203.4

20.3
23.0
25.8
29.0
33.6

32.4
36.4
41.1
46.2
50.0

62.3
65.6
69.4
73.4
77.2

56.4
59.1
62.2
65.9
69.2

26.7
29.5
32.3
35.0
38.3

29.7
29.6
29.9
30.9
30.9

132.3
148.5
166.9
188.2
209.8

85.5
95.6
107.1
120.5
134.1

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

333.3
356.5
381.2
410.9
441.4

21.2
23.1
25.1
27.4
29.2

312.1
333.4
356.1
383.5
412.2

220.5
232.9
247.3
264.8
282.8

37.2
40.3
43.9
47.3
52.3

54.5
60.1
64.8
71.4
77.1

81.2
84.1
88.2
93.4
100.2

73.1
76.1
79.9
84.4
90.2

42.0
44.8
47.4
50.6
54.5

31.1
31.3
32.5
33.8
35.7

231.0
249.3
267.9
290.1
312.0

147.4
156.9
167.4
180.4
192.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

474.2
526.5
603.4
682.3
742.5

30.3
32.2
35.8
41.3
46.3

443.8
494.3
567.7
641.1
696.2

298.1
328.3
372.2
416.2
449.4

60.1
70.1
82.8
93.1
100.0

85.6
95.9
112.7
131.7
146.9

109.2
120.7
131.1
135.0
140.2

97.3
105.2
113.0
116.2
121.3

59.9
65.7
68.2
66.2
65.1

37.3
39.5
44.7
50.0
56.2

334.6
373.5
436.5
506.0
556.0

200.8
223.1
259.2
300.0
328.1

1975
1976
1977
1978

801.5
889.2
1,023.5
1,172.7

50.9
57.0
65.8
76.1

750.7
832.2
957.7
1,096.6

490.8
556.5
656.6
761.9

100.6
104.5
111.8
122.0

159.3
171.2
189.3
212.7

147.0
154.1
161.7
176.4

127.7
133.5
141.6
153.4

66.1
66.5
68.0
71.4

61.6
67.0
73.6
82.0

603.7
678.0
795.9
920.2

363.0
422.9
515.0
608.5

1977
1
II
III
I
V

911.7
949.0
986.5
1,023.5

59.2
61.9
64.0
65.8

852.5
887.1
922.5
957.7

573.2
601.7
630.5
656.6

105.3
107.6
109.7
111.8

174.0
177.8
182.3
189.3

155.7
158.7
161.6
161.7

134.9
137.4
139.9
141.6

66.9
67.8
67.9
68.0

68.0
69.6
71.9
73.6

696.8
728.5
761.0
795.9

438.2
464.4
490.6
515.0

1978.
1
II
III
I
V

1,051.7
1,092.3
1,133.5
1,172.7

68.1
70.9
73.8
76.1

983.7
1,021.4
1,059.7
1,096.6

676.4
706.3
734.7
761.9

113.7
116.4
119.4
122.0

193.6
198.7
205.6
212.7

165.3
167.4
174.7
176.4

144.7
146.7
150.7
153.4

68.6
69.2
69.9
71.4

76.1
77.6
80.8
82.0

818.4
853.9
885.1
920.2

531.7
559.6
584.0
608.5

1,206.3
1,252.5
1,295.4

80.2
85.1
89.0

1,126.1
1,167.4
1,206.4

784.6
817.0
845.3

124.0
125.9
129.1

217.5
224.5
232.1

183.0
187.1
194.4

158.4
162.2
168.3

73.9
76.4
79.1

84.5
85.8
89.2

943.1
980.4
1,012.0

626.2
654.8
677.0

1979
II
III
1
2
3

Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations.
Includes FHA insured multifamily properties, not shown separately.
Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties, not shown separately.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, based on data from various Government and private organizations.




282

TABLE B-68.—Mortgage debt outstanding by holder, 1939-79
[Billions of dollars]
Major financial institutions
End of year or quarter

Total
Total

Savings
and
loan
associations

Mutual
savings
banks

Other holders

Commercial
banks*

Life
insurance
companies

Federal
and
related
agencies 2

Individuals
others

1939

35.5

18.6

3.8

4.8

4.3

5.7

5.0

11.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

36.5
37.6
36.7
35.3
34.7

19.5
20.7
20.7
20.2
20.2

4.1
4.6
4.6
4.6
4.8

4.9
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.3

4.6
4.9
4.7
4.5
4.4

6.0
6.4
6.7
6.7
6.7

4.9
4.7
4.3
3.6
3.0

12.0
12.2
11.7
11.5
11.5

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

35.5
41.8
48.9
56.2
62.7

21.0
26.0
31.8
37.8
42.9

5.4
7.1
8.9
10.3
11.6

4.2
4.4
4.9
5.8
6.7

4.8
7.2
9.4

10.9
11.6

6.6
7.2
8.7

10.8
12.9

2.4
2.0
1.8
1.8
2.3

12.1
13.8
15.3
16.6
17.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

72.8
82.3
91.4
101.3
113.7

51.7
59.5
66.9
75.1
85.7

13.7
15.6
18.4
22.0
26.1

11.4
12.9
15.0

8.3
9.9

13.7
14.7
15.9
16.9
18.6

16.1
19.3
21.3
23.3
26.0

2.8
3.5
4.1
4.6
4.8

18.4
19.3
20.4
21.7
23.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

129.9
144.5
156.5
171.8
190.8

99.3
111.2
119.7
131.5
145.5

31.4
35.7
40.0
45.6
53.1

17.5
19.7
21.2
23.3
25.0

21.0
22.7
23.3
25.5
28.1

29.4
33.0
35.2
37.1
39.2

5.3
6.2
7.7
8.0

10.2

25.3
27.1
29.1
32.3
35.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

207.5
228.0
251.4
278.5
305.9

157.6
172.6
192.5
217.1
241.0

60.1
68.8
78.8
90.9
101.3

26.9
29.1
32.3
36.2
40.6

28.8
30.4
34.5
39.4
44.0

41.8
44.2
46.9
50.5
55.2

11.5
12.2
12.6
11.8
12.2

38.4
43.1
46.3
49.5
52.7

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

333.3
356.5
381.2
410.9
441.4

264.6
280.8
298.8
319.9
339.1

110.3
114.4
121.8
130.8
140.2

44.6
47.3
50.5
53.5
56.1

49.7
54.4
59.0
65.7
70.7

60.0
64.6
67.5
70.0
72.0

13.5
17.5
20.9
25.1
31.1

55.2
58.2
61.4
65.9
71.2

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

474.2
526.5
603.4
682.3
742.5

355.9
394.2
450.0
505.4
542.6

150.3
174.3
206.2
231.7
249.3

57.9
62.0
67.6
73.2
74.9

73.3
82.5
99.3
119.1
132.1

74.4
75.5
76.9
81.4
86.2

38.3
46.4
54.6
64.8
82.1

79.9
85.9
98.9
112.2
117.8

1975
1976
1977
1978

801.5
889.2
1,023.5
1,172.7

581.2
647.5
745.0
848.1

278.6
323.0
381.2
432.9

77.2
81.6
88.1
95.2

136.2
151.3
179.0
214.0

89.2
91.6
96.8
106.2

101.0
116.6
140.3
170.5

119.3
125.1
138.2
154.1

1977
1
II
III
I
V

911.7
949.0
986.5
1,023.5

662.8
690.5
718.1
745.0

333.6
350.6
366.8
381.2

82.3
84.1
86.1
88.1

155.2
163.0
171.2
179.0

91.8
92.9
94.1
96.8

121.5
127.1
133.7
140.3

127.4
131.4
134.7
138.2

19781
II
III
IV

1,051.7
1.092.3
1,133.5
1,172.7

764.6
793.8
822.0
848.1

392.4
408.0
421.0
432.9

89.8
91.5
93.4
95.2

184.4
194.5
205.4
214.0

97.9
99.9
102.2
106.2

146.0
152.6
161.4
170.5

141.2
145.8
150.1
154.1

1979:
I
II
Ill

1206 3
1252 5
1,295.4

866 0
894 5
920.0

4414
4566
468.3

961
972

2201
2296
239.4

108 4
1111
114.4

1812
1924
203.7

159 0
165 7
171.7

97.9

1
Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies, but not by bank trust departments.
2
Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) and new Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), as
well as Federal Housing Administration, Veterans Administration, Public Housing Administration, Farmers Home Administration, and in
earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation, Homeowners Loan Corporation, and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation. Also includes
GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA, Federal Land Banks, and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Other
U.S. agencies (amounts small or current separate data not readily available) included with "individuals and others.
Source-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, based on data from various Government and private organizations.




283

GOVERNMENT FINANCE
TABLE B-69.—Federal budget receipts, outlays, and debt, fiscal years 1970-81
[Millions of dollars; fiscal years]
Actual
Description

1970

1971

1972

1973

1974

1975

BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS:

193,743

188,392

208,649

232,225

264,932

280,997

143,158
59,362
-8,778

133,785
66,193
-11,586

148,846
72,959
-13,156

161,357
92,193
-21,325

181,219
104,846
-21,133

187,505
118,590
-25,098

196,588

211,425

232,021

247,074

269,620

326,185

156,300
49,066
-8,778

163,651
59,360
-11,586

178,110
67,067
-13,156

186,951
81,448
-21,325

199,918
90,835
-21,133

240,115
111,168
-25,098

Interfund transactions

-2,845

-23,033

-23,373

-14,849

-4,688

-45,188

Total surplus or deficit ( - )

-13,142
10,296

-29,866
6,833

-29,264
5,892

-25,594
10,745

-18,699
14,011

-52,609
7,422

382,603

409,467

437,329

468,426

486,247

544,131

97,723
284,880

105,140
304,328

113,559
323,770

125,381
343,045

140,194
346,053

147,225
396,906

57,714
227,166

65,518
238,810

71,426
252,344

75,182
267,863

80,648
265,405

84,993
311,913

193,743

188,392

208,649

232,225

264,932

280,997

90,412
32,829

86,230
26,785

94,737
32,166

45,298

53,914

15,705
3,644
2,430

48,578
16,614
3,735
2,591

15,477
5,436
3,287

103,246
36,153
64,542
16,260
4,917
3,188

118,952
38,620
76,780
16,844
5,035
3,334

122,386
40,621
86,441
16,551
4,611
3,676

3,266
158

3,533
325

3,252
381

3,495
426

4,845
524

5,777
934

196,588

211,425

232,021

247,074

269,620

326,185

78,553
4,297
4,507
990
3,061
5,161
2,108
7,006
2,391
8,625
13,051
43,073
8,677
1,857
536
18,309

75,808
4,097
4,180
1,031
3,909
4,288
2,358
8,050
2,916
9,839
14,716
55,426
9,776
1,299
2,020
535
19,602

76,550
4,693
4,173
1,270
4,235
5,280
2,216
8,388
3,422
12,519
17,467
63,913
10,730
1,650
2,415
673
20,563

74,541
4,066
4,030
1,179
4,763
4,852
924
9,065
4,595
12,735
18,832
72,965
12,013
2,131
2,568
7,351
22,782

77,781
5,681
3,977
837
5,670
2,227
3,925
9,172
4,134
12,344
22,073
84,437
13,386
2,462
3,243
6,890
28,032

85,552
6,922
3,989
2,169
7,336
1,659
5,607
10,388
3,737
15,870
27,648
108,610
16,597
2,942
3,135
7,187
30,911

-6,567

-8,427

-8,137

-12,318

-16,651

-14,075

-2,444
-3,936

-2,611
-4,765

-2,768
-5,089

-2,927
-5,436

-3,319
-6,583

-3,980
-7,667

-187

-1,051

-279

-3,956

-6,748

-2,428

Total receipts
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interfund transactions
Total outlays
Federal funds
Trust funds

Federal funds
Trust funds
OUTSTANDING DEBT, END OF PERIOD:
Gross Federal debt
Held by Government agencies
Held by the public
Federal Reserve System..
Other
BUDGET RECEIPTS
Individual income taxes.
Corporation income taxes.
Social insurance taxes and contributions.
Excise taxes
Estate and gift taxes.
Customs duties
Miscellaneous receiptsDeposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System..
All other
BUDGET OUTLAYS
National defense..
International affairs.
General science, space, and technology.
Energy
Natural resources and environment.
Agriculture
Commerce and housing credit.
Transportation
Community and regional development.
Education, training, employment, and social services.
Health
Income security
Veterans benefits and services.
Administration of justice.
General government
General purpose fiscal assistance.
Interest
Allowances
Undistributed offsetting receipts.
Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts:
Employer share, employee retirement.
Interest received by trust funds.
Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental
Shelf

952

See next page for continuation of table.




284

TABLE B-69.—Federal budget receipts, outlays, and debt, fiscal years

1970-81—Continued

[Millions of dollars; fiscal years]
Actual
Description

1976

Transition
quarter

1977

Estimate

1978

1979

1980

1981

BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS:
300,005

Total receipts
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interfund transactions-

81,773

357,762

401,997

465,940

523,829

599,988

201,099
133,695
-34,789

54,085
32,071
-4,383

241,312
152,763
-36,313

270,484
168,012
-36,498

316,351
189,641
-40,052

347,813
222,196
-46,179

383,151
265,107
-48,270

Total outlays
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interfund transactions.

366,439

94,729

402,725

450,836

493,673

563,583

615,761

269,943
131,286
-34,789

65,089
34,023
-4,383

295,772
143,267
-36,313

332,016
155,318
-36,498

362,420
171,305
-40,052

405,653
204,110
-46,179

429,700
234,331
-48,270

Total surplus or deficit ( - ) . . . .

-66,434

-12,956

-44,963

-48,839

-27,733

-39,754

-15,773

-68,843
2,410

-11,004
-1,952

-54,459
9,496

-61,533
12,694

-46,069
18,335

-57,840
18,086

-46,549
30,776

631,866

646,379

709,138

780,425

833,751

892,812

939,357

151,566
480,300

148,052
498,327

157,295
551,843

169,477
610,948

189,162
644,589

203,923
688,889

217,368
721,989

94,714
385,586

96,702
401,625

105,004
446,839

115,480
495,468

115,594
528,996

300,005

81,773

357,762

401,997

465,940

523,829

599,988

131,603
41,409
92,714
16,963
5,216
4,074

38,801
8,460
25,760
4,473
1,455
1,212

157,626
54,892
108,688
17,548
7,327
5,150

180,988
59,952
123,410
18,376
5,285
6,573

217,841
65,677
141,591
18,745
5,411
7,439

238,717
72,303
162,181
26,333
5,777
7,600

274,367
71,574
187,397
40,209
5,938
8,403

5,451
2,575

1,500
112

5,908
622

6,641
772

8,327
910

10,058
861

10,876
1,224

366,439

94,729

402,725

450,836

493,673

563,583

615,761

89,430
5,552
4,370
3,127
8,124
2,504
3,792
13,435
4,767

22,307
2,193
1,161
794
2,532
581
1,392
3,304
1,340

97,501
4,813
4,677
4,172
10,000
5,532
-44
14,636
6,348

105,186
5,922
4,742
5,861
10,925
7,731
3,324
15,445
11,039

117,681
6,091
5,041
6,856
12,091
6,238
2,565
17,459
9,482

130,368
10,401
5,889
7,751
12,776
4,636
5,476
19,631
8,467

146,241
9,612
6,442
8,107
12,819
2,802
712
20,159
8,820

18,737
33,448
127,412
18,432
3,320
2,948
7,235
34,511

5,162
8,721
32,797
3,962
859
883
2,092
7,216

20,985
38,785
137,915
18,038
3,600
3,312
9,499
38,009

26,463
43,676
146,212
18,974
3,802
3,737
9,601
43,966

29,685
49,614
160,198
19,928
4,153
4,153
8,372
52,556

-14,704

-2,567

-15,053

-15,772

-18,488

30,654
56,563
190,948
20,766
4,530
4,885
8,670
63,330
100
-22,258

31,989
62,449
219,982
21,731
4,699
4,931
9,617
67,197
2,570
-25,119

-4,242
-7,800

-985
-270

-4,548
-8,131

-4,983
-8,530

-5,271
-9,950

-5,919
-11,539

-6,161
-12,958

-2,662

-1,311

-2,374

-2,259

-3,267

-4,800

-6,000

Federal funds...
Trust funds
OUTSTANDING DEBT, END OF PERIOD:
Gross Federal debt
Held by Government agencies
Held by the public
Federal Reserve System
Other

BUDGET RECEIPTS....
Individual income taxes
Corporation income taxes
Social insurance taxes and contributions....
Excise taxes
Estate and gift taxes
Customs duties
Miscellaneous receipts:
Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System
All other
BUDGET OUTLAYS...
National defense
International affairs
General science, space, and technology
Energy
Natural resources and environment
Agriculture
Commerce and housing credit
Transportation
Community and regional development
Education, training, employment, and social services
Health
Income security
Veterans benefits and services....,
Administration of justice
General government
General purpose fiscal assistance
Interest
Allowances
Undistributed offsetting receipts
Composition of undistributed offsetting
receipts:
Employer share, employee retirement.
Interest received by trust funds
Rents and royalties on the Outer
Continental Shelf

Note.—Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1—June 30 basis. Beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977), the
fiscal year is on an October 1—September 30 basis. The period July 1, 1976 through September 30, 1976 is a separate fiscal period
known as the transition quarter.
See "Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1981" for additional information.
Sources: Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget.


http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/ 2 9 4 - 2 8 9
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

285
0 - 8 0 - 1 9

TABLE B-70.—Federal budget receipts and outlays, fiscal years 1929-81

[Millions of dollars]
Fiscal year

Receipts

Outlays

Surplus or
deficit (-)

3,862

3,127

734

1933

1,997

4,598

-2,602

1939

4,979

8,841

-3,862

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

6,361
8,621
14,350
23,649
44,276

9,456
13,634
35,114
78,533
91,280

-3,095
-5,013
-20,764
-54,884
-47,004

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

45,216
39,327
38,394
41,774
39,437

92,690
55,183
34,532
29,773
38,834

-47,474
-15,856
3,862
12,001
603

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

39,485
51,646
66,204
69,574
69,719

42,597
45,546
67,721
76,107
70,890

-3,112
6,100
-1,517
-6,533
-1,170

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

65,469
74,547
79,990
79,636
79,249

68,509
70,460
76,741
82,575
92,104

-3,041
4,087
3,249
-2,939
-12,855

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

92,492
94,389
99,676
106,560
112,662

92,223
97,795
106,813
111,311
118,584

269
-3,406
-7,137
-4,751
-5,922

1965
1966
1967 .
1968
1969

116,833
130,856
149,552
153,671
187,784

118,430
134,652
158,254
178,833
184,548

-1,596
-3,796
-8,702
-25,161
3,236

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

193,743
188,392
208,649
232,225
264,932

196,588
211,425
232,021
247,074
269,620

-2,845
-23,033
-23,373
-14,849
-4,688

1975
1976
Transition quarter
1977
1978
1979

280,997
300,005
81,773
357,762
401,997
465,940

326,185
366,439
94,729
402,725
450,836
493,673

-45,188
-66,434
-12,956
-44,963
-48,839
-27,733

1980 1
1981 *

523,829
599,988

563,583
615,761

-39,754
-15,773

1929

.
.

1
Estimates.
Note.—Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with
fiscal year 1977. Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1-June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977),
the fiscal year is on an October 1-September 30 basis. The 3-month period from July 1, 1976 through September 30, 1976 is a
separate fiscal period Known as the transition quarter.
Data for 1929-39 are according to the administrative budget and those beginning 1940 according to the unified budget.
Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays.
See "Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1981" for additional information.
Sources: Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget.




286

TABLE B-71.—Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and
product accounts to the unified budget, 1979-81
[Billions of dollars; fiscal years]

Estimate
Receipts and expenditures

1979
1980

1981

465.9

523.8

600.0

7.9
3.6
7.3
_ 9

8.8
3.8
-4.8
-10

9.4
4.3
-4.9
-12

483.7

530.6

607.7

493.7

563.6

615.8

-7.2
7.9
3.6
-1.3
1.9
4.9

-7.3
8.8
3.8
-2.7
3.0
-4.9

-.4
9.4
4.3
-2.2
3.9
-4.4

493.6

564.2

626.3

RECEIPTS
Total budget receipts
Government contribution for employee retirement (grossing)
Other netting and grossing
Adjustment to accruals
Other
Federal sector, national income and product accounts, receipts
EXPENDITURES
Total budget outlays
Lending and financial transactions
Government contribution for employee retirement (grossing)
Other netting and grossing
Defense timing adjustment
Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases
Other
Federal sector, national income and product accounts, expenditures

,

Note.—See Note, Table B-70.
See Special Analysis B, "Special Analyses, Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1981" for description of these
categories.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of the Treasury, and Office of Management and
Budget.




287

TABLE B-72.—Government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
State and local
government

Federal Government

Total government
Surplus or
deficit
Calendar year or quarter
Receipts

Expenditures

Surplus or
deficit

Surplus or
deficit

(-),

(-),

national
income
and
product
accounts

Receipts

Expenditures

national
income
and
product
accounts

Receipts

Expenditures

(-),

national
income
and
product
accounts

1929

11.3

10.3

1.0

3.8

2.6

1.2

7.6

7.8

1933

9.3

10.7

-1.4

2.7

4.0

-1.3

7.2

7.2

1

1939

15.4

17.6

-2.2

6.7

8.9

-2.2

9.6

9.6

.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

17.7
25.0
32.6
49.2
51.2
53.2
51.0
56.9
58.9
55.9

18.4
28.8
64.0
93.3
103.0
92.7
45.6
42.5
50.5
59.3

-.7
-3.8
-31.4
-44.1
-51.8
-39.5
5.4
14.4
8.4
-3.4

8.6
15.4
22.9
39.3
41.0
42.5
39.1
43.2
43.2
38.7

10.0
20.5
56.1
85.8
95.5
84.6
35.6
29.8
34.9
41.3

-1.3
-5.1
-33.1
-46.6
-54.5
-42.1
3.5
13.4
8.3
-2.6

10.0
10.4
10.6
10.9
11.1
11.6
13.0
15.4
17.7
19.5

9.3
9.1
8.8
8.4
8.5
9.0
11.1
14.4
17.6
20.2

.6
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.7
2.6
1.9
1.0
.1
-.7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

69.0
85.2
90.1
94.6
89.9
101.1
109.7
116.2
115.0
129.4

61.0
79.2
93.9
101.6
97.0
98.0
104.5
115.3
127.6
131.0

8.0
6.1
-3.8
-6.9
-7.1
3.1
5.2
.9
-12.6
-1.6

50.0
64.3
67.3
70.0
63.7
72.6
78.0
81.9
78.7
89.8

40.8
57.8
71.1
77.1
69.8
68.1
71.9
79.6
88.9
91.0

9.2
6.5
-3.7
-7.1
-6.0
4.4
6.1
2.3
-10.3
-1.1

21.3
23.4
25.4
27.4
29.0
31.7
35.0
38.5
42.0
46.4

22.5
23.9
25.5
27.3
30.2
32.9
35.9
39.8
44.3
46.9

-1.2
-.4
-.0
.1
-1.1
-1.3
-.9
-1.4
-2.4
-.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

139.5
144.8
156.7
168.5
174.0
188.3
212.3
228.2
263.4
296.3

136.4
149.1
160.5
167.8
176.3
187.8
213.6
242.4
268.9
285.6

3.1
-4.3
-3.8
.7
-2.3
.5
-1.3
-14.2
-5.5
10.7

96.1
98.1
106.2
114.4
114.9
124.3
141.8
150.5
174.7
197.0

93.1
101.9
110.4
114.2
118.2
123.8
143.6
163.7
180.6
188.4

3.0
-3.9
-4.2
.3
-3.3
.5
-1.8
-13.2
-5.8
8.5

49.9
54.0
58.5
63.2
69.5
75.1
84.8
93.6
107.2
119.7

49.8
54.4
58.0
62.8
68.5
75.1
84.3
94.7
106.9
117.6

.1
-.4
.5
.5
1.0
-.0
.5
-1.1
.3
2.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

302.6
322.2
367.4
411.2
455.1
468.5
538.3
606.6
685.7
771.9

311.9
340.5
370.9
404.9
458.2
532.8
574.0
626.1
686.0
757.9

-9.4
-18.3
-3.5
6.3
-3.2
-64.4
-35.7
-19.5
-.3
14.0

192.1
198.6
227.5
258.3
288.6
286.2
331.4
375.4
432.1
497.6

204.2
220.6
244.7
265.0
299.3
356.8
385.0
421.7
459.8
508.0

-12.1
-22.0
-17.3
-6.7
-10.7
-70.6
-53.6
-46.3
-111
-10.5

134.9
152.6
177.4
193.5
210.4
236.9
268.0
298.8
331.0
354.4

132.2
148.9
163.7
180.5
202.8
230.6
250.1
271.9
303.6
329.9

2.8
3.7
13.7
13.0
7.6
6.2
17.9
26.8
27.4
24.4

1977
1
II
III
I
V

589.5
599.0
609.6
628.5

602.6
615.6
633.1
653.3

-13.1
-16.6
-23.5
-24.8

366.8
370.8
375.8
388.2

404.0
411.6
429.4
441.8

-37.2
-40.9
-53.6
-53.6

285.4
293.7
305.2
310.7

261.3
269.5
275.1
281.9

24.2
24.2
30.1
28.8

1978
1
I
I
III
I
V

642.4
678.6
696.3
725.4

661.7
673.7
694.1
714.5

-19.2
5.0
2.3
10.8

397.8
424.8
442.1
463.5

447.3
449.4
462.6
479.7

-49.4
-24.6
-20.4
-16.3

319.0
330.5
331.8
342.6

288.8
301.0
309.1
315.5

30.2
29.6
111
27.1

1979:
1
II
III
IV

741.1
754.0
782.9

725.3
741.3
768.8
796.2

15.8
12.7
14.0

475.0
485.8
504.8

486.8
492.9
516.1
536.4

-11.7
-7.0
-11.3

343.9
345.9
359.8

316.3
326.1
334.5
342.8

27.6
19.7
25.3

-0.2

Note.—Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total
government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




288

TABLE B-73.—Federal

Government

receipts and expenditures,

national

income and product

accounts,

1953-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Expenditures

Receipts

Surplus
Subsior
dies
Grantsdeficit
Purless
in-aid
chases
Net current national
to
of
State inter- surplus income
goods
To
est
of
and
and
To
and
foreign- local
paid governproduct
serv- persons
ment
ers
governaccounts
ices
enterments
prises
Transfer
payments

Year or quarter
Total

Personal
tax and
nontax
receipts

Corporate
profits
tax
accruals

ContriIndirect
butions
business
for
tax and
social
nontax
insuraccruals
ance

Total 1

Fiscal year:
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 2
1981 2

69.4
65.8
67.4
76.3
81.0
78.1
85.4
94.8
95.0
104.0
110.0
115.6
120.0
132.7
146.0
160.0
190.1
194.9
192.5
213.5
240.5
271.8
283.5
313.9
366.0
414.7
483.7
530.6
607.7

31.4
30.3
29.7
33.6
36.7
36.3
38.2
42.5
43.6
47.3
49.6
50.7
51.4
57.5
64.4
71.4
90.0
93.6
87.5
100.3
107.3
122.6
127.1
137.0
166.0
186.3
223.5
245.1
279.7

19.7
17.3
18.9
21.5
20.8
17.9
21.4
22.3
20.0
22.7
23.3
25.7
27.1
30.8
30.3
33.2
37.0
33.0
32.0
34.2
41.0
43.7
42.1
51.7
59.1
67.7
78.4
76.5
77.1

10.7
10.4
10.0
10.8
11.7
11.6
12.0
13.2
13.3
14.2
15.0
15.6
16.9
15.5
15.8
17.1
18.6
19.2
20.0
19.9
20.7
21.4
22.2
24.3
24.5
27.2
29.4
38.5
53.0

7.6
7.8
8.7
10.3
11.7
12.3
13.9
16.7
18.1
19.9
22.1
23.6
24.5
28.9
35.5
38.4
44.5
49.2
52.9
59.1
71.5
84.2
92.1
100.9
116.4
133.5
152.4
170.5
197.9

75.9
74.3
67.2
70.0
76.0
82.8
91.2
91.3
98.1
106.2
111.7
117.2
118.5
132.7
154.9
172.2
184.7
195.6
212.7
232.9
256.2
278.8
328.7
371.1
411.4
450.1
493.6
564.2
626.3

56.4
53.9
44.3
45.5
48.1
51.1
54.8
52.9
55.8
61.0
63.7
65.9
64.6
72.4
86.0
95.0
98.0
97.0
94.8
100.9
101.7
104.6
118.0
125.7
140.3
150.7
162.4
185.6
202.9

9.2
10.5
12.1
12.8
14.4
17.8
19.9
20.6
23.6
25.1
26.5
27.4
28.4
31.8
37.2
42.7
48.7
55.0
67.7
76.1
87.1
101.7
131.2
153.5
166.4
178.5
197.7
230.9
263.2

2.1
1.7
2.1
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.8
1.8
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.0
2.3
2.8
2.7
3.0
3.1
3.0
3.2
3.5
4.0
4.2
4.4

2.8
2.9
3.0
3.2
3.7
4.7
6.2
6.9
6.9
7.6
8.3
9.8
10.9
12.7
14.8
17.8
19.2
22.6
26.8
32.6
40.4
41.6
48.4
57.6
66.3
74.7
79.3
84.3
90.7

4.5
4.6
4.6
4.8
5.3
5.4
5.6
6.8
6.4
6.4
7.1
7.7
8.2
8.7
9.6
10.5
12.1
13.6
14.2
14.1
15.9
19.8
21.9
25.2
28.4
33.1
40.4
49.2
52.2

.9
.8
1.2
1.7
2.6
2.4
2.5
2.4
3.3
4.1
4.0
4.1
4.3
4.8
5.2
4.1
4.6
5.4
6.8
6.4
9.1
8.0
5.7
6.2
6.9
9.6
9.8
10.0
12.9

-6.5
-8.5
.2
6.3
5.0
-4.7
-5.8
3.4
-3.1
-2.2
-1.7
-1.5
1.4
.0
-8.9
-12.2
5.4
-.6
-20.2
-19.5
-15.7
-7.0
-45.3
-57.3
-45.5
-35.4
-9.9
-33.6
-18.6

Calendar year:
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 ".

70.0
63.7
72.6
78.0
81.9
78.7
89.8
96.1
98.1
106.2
114.4
114.9
124.3
141.8
150.5
174.7
197.0
192.1
198.6
227.5
258.3
288.6
286.2
331.4
375.4
432.1
497.6

32.2
29.0
31.4
35.2
37.4
36.8
39.9
43.6
44.7
48.6
51.5
48.6
53.9
61.7
67.5
79.6
94.8
92.2
89.9
108.2
114.6
131.1
125.4
147.2
169.6
194.9
229.9

19.5
16.9
21.1
20.9
20.4
18.0
22.5
21.4
21.5
22.5
24.6
26.1
28.9
31.4
30.0
36.3
36.2
30.8
33.5
36.6
43.0
45.9
42.8
54.6
61.8
72.0
78.3

10.9
9.7
10.7
11.2
11.8
11.5
12.5
13.4
13.6
14.6
15.3
16.2
16.5
15.6
16.3
18.0
19.0
19.3
20.4
20.0
21.2
21.7
23.9
23.4
25.1
28.1
30.0

7.4
8.2
9.4
10.6
12.3
12.4
14.9
17.6
18.3
20.5
23.1
24.0
25.0
33.1
36.7
40.8
47.0
49.7
54.9
62.8
79.4
89.9
94.2
106.3
118.9
137.0
159.3

771
69.8
68.1
71.9
79.6
88.9
91.0
93.1
101.9
110.4
114.2
118.2
123.8
143.6
163.7
180.6
188.4
204.2
220.6
244.7
265.0
299.3
356.8
385.0
421.7
459.8
508.0

57.5
47.9
44.5
45.9
50.0
53.9
53.9
53.7
57.4
63.7
64.6
65.2
67.3
78.8
90.9
98.0
97.5
95.6
96.2
102.1
102.2
111.1
123.1
129.7
144.4
152.6
166.3

9.4
11.5
12.4
13.4
15.7
19.6
20.1
21.6
25.0
25.6
27.0
27.9
30.3
33.5
40.1
46.0
50.6
61.3
72.7
80.5
93.2
114.4
146.0
158.4
169.5
181.6
205.7

2.0
1.8
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.6
2.7
2.6
3.2
3.1
3.2
3.2
3.7
3.9

2.8
2.9
3.1
3.3
4.2
5.6
6.8
6.5
7.2
8.0
9.1
10.4
11.1
14.4
15.9
18.6
20.3
24.4
29.0
37.5
40.6
43.9
54.6
61.1
67.5
77.3
80.1

4.6
4.6
4.6
5.1
5.5
5.2
6.2
6.8
6.2
6.8
7.3
8.0
8.4
9.2
9.8
11.4
12.9
14.3
14.0
14.6
18.2
20.9
23.2
26.8
29.0
34.8
43.0

.7
1.0
1.5
2.4
2.4
2.8
2.1
2.6
4.0
4.2
3.9
4.5
4.6
5.5
4.7
4.5
5.2
6.3
6.2
7.8
8.2
5.3
6.8
5.8
8.1
9.7
9.0

-7.1
-6.0
4.4
6.1
2.3
-10.3
-1.1
3.0
-3.9
-4.2
.3
-3.3
.5
-1.8
-13.2
-5.8
8.5
-12.1
-22.0
-17.3
-6.7
-10.7
-70.6
-53.6
-46.3
-27.7
-10.5

1978:
I
I
I
Il
l
IV

397.8
424.8
442.1
463.5

178.9
188.8
200.9
211.0

60.2
72.2
74.6
81.2

26.6
28.0
28.4
29.3

132.2
135.8
138.2
142.0

447.3
449.4
462.6
479.7

150.9
148.2
152.3
159.0

176.4
176.8
185.3
187.9

3.4
3.9
3.5
4.2

74.4
76.7
77.6
80.7

32.5
34.0
35.6
37.1

9.7
9.8
8.4
10.9

-49.4
-24.6
-20.4
-16.3

1979:
|
|
|
II
I

475.0
485.8
504.8

213.0
223.4
235.2
248.1

77.2
74.9
79.4

29.4
29.9
30.0
30.7

155.5
157.5
160.2
164.2

486.8
492.9
516.1
536.4

163.6
161.7
162.9
177.0

192.7
198.0
213.9
217.9

4.0
3.9
3.7
4.0

77.8
77.7
81.8
83.0

40.0
42.6
43.5
46.0

8.3
9.0
10.2
8.4

-11.7
-7.0
-11.3

IV P
1
2

Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements, not shown separately.
Estimates.

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Office of Management and Budget.




289

TABLE B-74.—State and local government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts,
1946-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Expenditures

Receipts

Calendar year
or quarter
Total

Surplus
or
deficit
( —)
national
income
and
product
accounts

Purchases
of
goods
and
services

Transfer
payments
to
persons

11.1
14.4
17.6
20.2

9.9
12.8
15.3
18.0

1.7
2.3
3.0
3.0

0.2
.1
.1
.1

-0.7
-.8
-.8
-.9

1.9
1.0
.1
-.7

2.3
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.9

22.5
23.9
25.5
27.3
30.2

19.8
21.8
23.2
25.0
27.8

3.6
3.1
3.3
3.5
3.6

.1
.0
.0
.0
.1

-.9
-1.0
-1.1
-1.2
-1.3

-1.2
-.4
-.0
.1
-1.1

Personal
tax and
nontax
receipts

Corporate
profits
tax
accruals

Indirect
business
tax and
nontax
accruals

0.5
.6
.7
.6

9.3
10.7
12.2
13.3

0.6
.7

1.1
1.7
2.0
2.2

14.6
15.9
17.4
18.8
19.9

1.1
1.4
1.6
1.7
2.0

Contributions for
social
insurance

Subsidies
less
current
surplus
of
government
enterprises

Federal
grantsin-aid

Total 1

Net
interest
paid

1946
1947
1948
1949

13.0
15.4
17.7
19.5

1.5
1.7
2.1
2.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

213
23.4
25.4
27.4
29.0

2.5
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.5

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

31.7
35 0
38.5
42.0
46.4

3.9
4.5
5.0
5.4
6.1

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.2

21.6
23.8
25.7
27.2
29.3

2.1
2.3
2.6
2.8
3.1

3.1
3.3
4.2
5.6
6.8

32.9
35.9
39.8
44.3
46.9

30.6
33.5
37.1
41.1
43.7

3.8
3.9
4.3
4.8
5.1

.1
.1
.1
.1
.1

-1.5
-1.6
-1.7
-1.7
-2.0

-1.3
-.9
-1.4
-2.4
-.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

49.9
54.0
58.5
63.2
69.5

6.7
7.4
8.2
8.8
10.0

1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.8

32.0
34.4
37.0
39.4
42.6

3.4
3.7
3.9
4.2
4.7

6.5
7.2
8.0
9.1
10.4

49.8
54.4
58.0
62.8
68.5

46.5
50.8
54.3
59.0
64.6

5.4
5.8
6.0
6.4
6.9

.1
.1
.1
.1
-.1

-2.2
-2.3
-2.5
-2.8
-2.8

.1
-.4
.5
.5
1.0

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

75.1
84.8
93.6
107.2
119.7

10.9
12.8
14.6
17.4
20.6

2.0
2.2
2.5
3.1
3.4

46.1
49.7
54.0
60.8
67.4

5.0
5.7
6.7
7.2
7.9

11.1
14.4
15.9
18.6
20.3

75.1
84.3
94.7
106.9
117.6

71.1
79.8
89.3
100.7
110.4

7.3
8.1
9.4
10.6
12.1

-.3

-!9
-1.2
-1.6

-3.0
-3.0
-3.1
-3.2
-3.3

-.0
.5
-1.1
.3
2.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

134.9
152.6
177.4
193.5
210.4

23.1
26.4
33.0
36.1
39.2

3.7
4.2
5.0
5.7
6.5

74.7
83.1
91.0
99.0
106.9

9.0
9.9
10.8
12.1
13.9

24.4
29.0
37.5
40.6
43.9

132.2
148.9
163.7
180.5
202.8

123.2
137.5
151.0
167.3
191.5

14.6
17.2
18.9
20.3
20.5

-2.0
-1.8
-2.1
-2.9
-4.9

-3.6
-3.8
-4.2
-4.4
-4.3

2.8
3.7
13.7
13.0
7.6

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 ".

236.9
268.0
298 8
331.0
354.4

43.4
49.9
56.8
64.1
69.9

7.1
9.3
10.9
12.5
14.3

115.4
128.0
140.0
150.0
159.5

16.4
19.7
23.6
27.1
30.5

54.6
61.1
67.5
77.3
80.1

230.6
250.1
271.9
303.6
329.9

215.4
231.6
251.8
283.0
309.8

24.5
27.4
30.2
33.3
36.3

-4.8
-4.1
-5.0
-7.1
-9.5

-4.5
-4.8
-5.0
-5.5
-6.7

6.2
17.9
26.8
27.4
24.4

I
V

285.4
293.7
305.2
310.7

54.6
56.3
57.4
58.9

10.3
10.8
11.1
11.3

135.8
137.9
141.3
144.9

22.1
23.1
24.0
25.1

62.7
65.5
71.4
70.4

261.3
269.5
275.1
281.9

241.8
249.0
254.9
261.6

29.1
29.8
30.5
31.3

-4.3
-4.6
-5.2
-5.9

24.2
24.2
30.1
28.8

1978:
1
II
Ill .
IV

319.0
330.5
331.8
342.6

60.9
63.3
65.0
67.2

10.6
12.5
12.9
13.9

147.0
151.3
148.8
152.8

26.0
26.8
27.5
28.0

74.4
76.7
77.6
80.7

288.8
301.0
309.1
315.5

268.5
280.1
288.6
294.8

32.1
33.0
33.8
34.4

-6.4
-7.0
-7.3
-7.6

30.2
29.6
22.7
27.1

1979:
|
II
Il
l

343.9
345.9
359.8

67.3
67.3
71.4
73.7

14.1
13.7
14.7

155.5
157.0
161.1
164.5

29.1
30.2
30.9
31.8

77.8
77.7
81.8
83.0

316.3
326.1
334.5
342.8

296.5
304.9
314.9
322.8

35.0
35.7
36.5
37.9

-8.3
-9.0
-10.0
-10.8

1977:
|
II
Ill

IV
1

Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements, not shown separately.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




290

-6.5
-6.4
-7.0
-6.9

27.6
19.7
25.3

TABLE B-75.—State and local government revenues and expenditures, selected fiscal years,

1927-77

[Millions of dollars]

General revenues by source2

Property
taxes

Sales
and
gross
receipts
taxes

Individual
i.icome
taxes

Corporation
net
income
taxes

Fiscal year l
Total

General expenditures by function 2

Revenue
from
Federal
Government

All
other3

Total

Education

Highways

Public
welfare

All
other 4

1927

7,271

4,730

470

70

92

116

1,793

7,210

2,235

1,809

151

3,015

1932
1934
1936
1938

7,267
7,678
8,395
9,228

4,487
4,076
4,093
4,440

752
1,008
1,484
1,794

74
80
153
218

79
49
113
165

232
1,016
948
800

1,643
1,449
1,604
1,811

7,765
7,181
7,644
8,757

2,311
1,831
2,177
2,491

1,741
1,509
1,425
1,650

444
889
827
1,069

3,269
2,952
3,215
3,547

1940
1942
1944
1946
1948

9,609
10,418
10,908
12,356
17,250

4,430
4,537
4,604
4,986
6,126

1,982
2,351
2,289
2,986
4,442

224
276
342
422
543

156
272
451
447
592

945
858
954
855
1,861

1,872
2,123
2,269
2,661
3,685

9,229
9,190
8,863
11,028
17,684

2,638
2,586
2,793
3,356
5,379

1,573
1,490
1,200
1,672
3,036

1,156
1,225
1,133
1,409
2,099

3,862
3,889
3,737
4,591
7,170

1950
1952
1953
1954

20,911
25,181
27,307
29,012

7,349
8,652
9,375
9,967

5,154
6,357
6,927
7,276

788
998
1,065
1,127

593
846
817
778

2,486
2,566
2,870
2,966

4,541
5,763
6,252
6,897

22,787
26,098
27,910
30,701

7,177
8,318
9,390
10,557

3,803
4,650
4,987
5,527

2,940
2,788
2,914
3,060

8,867
10,342
10,619
11,557

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

31,073
34,667
38,164
41,219
45,306

10,735 7,643
11,749 8,691
12,864 9,467
14,047 9,829
14,983 10,437

1,237
1,538
1,754
1,759
1,994

744
890
984
1,018
1,001

3,131 7,584
3,335 8,465
3,843 9,250
4,865 9,699
6,377 10,516

33,724
36,711
40,375
44,851
48,887

11,907
13,220
14,134
15,919
17,283

6,452
6,953
7,816
8,567
9,592

3,168
3,139
3,485
3,818
4,136

12,197
13,399
14,940
16,547
17,876

1960
1961
1962
1963

50,505
54,037
58,252
62,890

16,405
18,002
19,054
20,089

11,849
12,463
13,494
14,456

2,463
2,613
3,037
3,269

1,180
1,266
1,308
1,505

6,974
7,131
7,871
8,722

11,634
12,563
13,489
14,850

51,876
56,201
60,206
64,816

18,719
20,574
22,216
23,776

9,428
9,844
10,357
11,136

4,404
4,720
5,084
5,481

19,325
21;063
22,549
24,423

1962-63 5
1963-645
1964-65 5

62,269
68,443
74,000

19,833 14,446
21,241 15,762
22,583 17,118

3,267
3,791
4,090

1,505
1,695
1,929

8,663 14,556
10,002 15,951
11,029 17,250

63,977
69,302
74,546

23,729
26,286
28,563

11,150
11,664
12,221

5,420
5,766
6,315

23,678
25,586
27,447

1965-66 5
1966-67 5
1967-68 5
1968-69 5
1969-70 5

83,036
91,197
101,264
114,550
130,756

24,670
26,047
27,747
30,673
34,054

19,085 4,760
20,530 5,826
22,911 7,308
26,519 8,908
30,322 10,812

2,038
2,227
2,518
3,180
3,738

13,214
15,370
17,181
19,153
21,857

19,269 82,843
21,197 93,350
23,598 102,411
26,118 116,728
29,971 131,332

33,287
37,919
41,158
47,238
52,718

12,770
13,932
14,481
15,417
16,427

6,757
8,218
9,857
12,110
14,679

30,029
33,281
36,915
41,963
47,508

1970-71 5
1971-72 5
1972-73 5
1973-74 5
1974-75 5

144,927
166,352
190,214
207,670
228,171

37,852
42,133
45,283
47,705
51,491

33,233
37,488
42,047
46,098
49,815

11,900
15,237
17,994
19,491
21,454

3,424
4,416
5,425
6,015
6,642

26,146
31,253
39,256
41,820
47,034

32,374
35,826
40,210
46,541
51,735

150,674
166,873
181,227
198,959
230,721

59,413 18,095
64,886 19,010
69,714 18,615
75,833 19,946
87,858 22,528

18,226
21,070
23,582
25,085
28,155

54,940
61,907
69,316
78,096
92,180

1975-76 5
1976-77 5

256,176
285,796

57,001 54,547 24,575
62,535 60,595 29,245

7,273
9,174

55,589 57,191 256,731
62,575 61,673 274,388

97,216 23,907
102,805 23,105

32,604
35,941

103,004
112,537

1

Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote 5.
Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores, and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental
receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded.
3
Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues.
4
Includes expenditures for health, hospitals, police, local fire protection, natural resources, sanitation, housing and urban renewal,
local parks and recreation, general control, financial administration, interest on general debt, and unallocable expenditures.
5
Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June 30. Data for 1963 and earlier years include local government
amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year.
2

Note.—Data are not available for intervening years.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




291

TABLE B-76.—Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation,

1967-79

[Millions of dollars]
Nonmarketable

Marketable

End of year or month

Total
interestbearing
public
debt
securities

Treasury
notes

Treasury
bonds»

Total

U.S.
savings
bonds

Foreign
government
and
public
series2

Government
account
series3

Other 4

Total

Bills

210,672
226,592
226,107

58,535
64,440
68,356

49,108
71,073
78,946

97,418
91,079
78,805

111,614
117,808
125,623

51,213
51,712
51,711

1,514
3,741
4,070

56,155
59,526
66,790

2,731
2,828
3,051

Fiscal year:
1967
1968
1969

322,286
344,401
351,729

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

369,026
396,289
425,360
456,353
473,238

232,599
245,473
257,202
262,971
266,575

76,154
86,677
94,648
100,061
105,019

93,489
104,807
113,419
117,840
128,419

62,956
53,989
49,135
45,071
33,137

136,426
150,816
168,158
193,382
206,663

51,281
53,003
55,921
59,418
61,921

4,755
9,270
18,985
28,524
25,011

76,323
82,784
89,598
101,738
115,442

4,068
5,759
3,654
3,701
4,289

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

532,122
619,254
697,629
766,971
819,007

315,606
392,581
443,508
485,155
506,693

128,569
161,198
156,091
160,936
161,378

150,257
191,758
241,692
267,865
274,242

36,779
39,626
45,724
56,355
71,073

216,516
226,673
254,121
281,816
312,314

65,482
69,733
75,411
79,798
80,440

23,216
21,500
21,799
21,680
28,115

124,173
130,557
140,113
153,271
176,360

3,644
4,883
16,797
27,067
27,400

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

720,563
728,474
736,929
733,074
740,579
748,002

466,780
470,766
478,252
472,193
473,684
477,699

161,221
161,817
165,652
159,640
159,391
159,757

257,077
258,472
262,179
262,180
261,612
265,310

48,483
50,477
50,420
50,373
52,681
52,632

253,783
257,707
258,677
260,881
266,895
270,303

76,987
77,415
77,804
78,220
78,645
78,965

22,787
22,597
23,649
23,433
22,419
21,460

136,364
139,422
137,956
138,833
144,394
146,448

17,644
18,273
19,267
20,395
21,436
23,430

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

749,462
763,404
766,971
775,452
782,048
782,371

481,041
485,557
485,155
491,651
493,337
487,546

160,092
160,615
160,936
161,227
161,548
161,747

266,586
268,531
267,865
272,610
271,663
265,791

54,363
56,410
56,355
57,814
60,125
60,007

268,420
277,847
281,816
283,801
288,711
294,825

79,281
79,543
79,798
80,091
80,331
80,546

20,813
22,224
21,680
24,042
26,624
29,593

144,665
149,047
153,271
152,685
154,812
157,522

23,660
27,032
27,067
26,983
26,944
27,164

Jan
Feb.
Mar
Apr.
May
June.

789,502
791,249
792,344
795,434
803,816
799,863

496,529
497,976
500,400
504,585
506,867
499,343

162,286
162,416
165,459
163,730
163,076
159,890

272,807
271,372
270,803
275,311
276,123
272,066

61,436
64,189
64,139
65,544
67,668
67,387

292,973
293,273
291,944
290,849
296,949
300,520

80,414
80,459
80,417
80,426
80,430
80,460

30,257
28,150
28,161
25,416
25,158
26,807

155,237
157,637
153,765
158,178
164,552
166,274

27,065
27,027
29,601
26,829
26,809
26,981

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

806,508
812,095
819,007
825,736
832,730
843,960

506,994
509,187
506,693
515,033
519,573
530,731

159,938
160,489
161,378
161,692
165,100
172,644

278,257
277,582
274,242
280,832
279,723
283,379

68,799
71,116
71,073
72,510
74,751
74,708

299,514
302,909
312,314
310,703
313,157
313,229

80,524
80,503
80,440
80,178
79,669
79,517

28,015
27,688
28,115
23,860
23,895
23,551

163,882
167,301
176,360
175,267
176,992
177,460

27,094
27,418
27,400
31,398
32,601
32,701

5

1978:

1979:

1
Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds.
2
Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness, notes, bonds, and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues.
3
Includes Treasury deposit funds and some special issues formerly included in "Other."
4
Includes depository bonds, retirement plan bonds, Rural Electrification Administration bonds, State and local bonds, and special
issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks.
5
Includes $5,610 million in certificates not shown separately.

Note.—Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1—June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977) the
fiscal year is on an October 1—September 30 basis.
Source: Department of the Treasury.




292

TABLE B-77.—Estimated ownership of public debt securities, 1967-79
[Par values;1 billions of dollars]
Total public debt securities
Held by private investors
End of year or month
Total2

Held by Held by
Govern- Federal
ment Reserve Total3
accounts Banks

Cornbanks4

Mutual
savings
Miscelbanks
State and
Indi- laneous
and Corporalocal
insur- tions 5
govern- viduals7 inves-8
tors 3 ance
ments 6
companies

Fiscal year:
1967
1968
1969

322.9
345.4
352.9

71.8
76.1
84.8

46.7
52.2
54.1

204.4
217.0
214.0

55.5
59.7
55.3

13.2
12.5
11.6

11.0
12.0
11.1

23.6
25.1
26.4

70.4
74.2
77.3

30.7
33.4
32.3

1970 '
1971
1972
1973
1974

370.1
397.3
426.4
457.3
474.2

95.2
102.9
111.5
123.4
138.2

57.7
65.5
71.4
75.0
80.5

217.2
228.9
243.6
258.9
255.6

52.6
61.0
60.9
58.8
53.2

10.4
10.3
10.2
9.6
8.5

8.5
7.4
9.3
9.8
10.8

29.0
25.9
26.9
28.8
28.3

81.8
75.4
73.2
75.9
80.7

35.0
49.1
63.2
76.0
74.2

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

533.2
620.4
698.8
771.5
826.5

145.3
149.6
155.5
168.0
187.7

84.7
94.4
104.7
115.3
115.5

303.2
376.4
438.6
488.3
523.4

69.0
92.5
99.8
96.3
92.3

10.6
16.0
20.5
20.3
19.3

13.2
24.3
23.3
21.3
23.7

31.7
39.3
53.0
69.0
68.9

87.1
96.4
103.9
109.4
113.2

91.5
107.9
138.1
172.1
205.9

My
a
June

721.6
729.8
738.0
736.6
741.6
749.0

1515
154.2
152.7
153.6
159.1
161.1

97.0
98.5
101.6
103.5
102.8
110.1

473.1
477.1
483.7
479.5
479.7
477.8

1001
101.7
100.7
100.3
98.4
99.1

213
21.8
21.1
20.4
20.6
19.9

23.4
22.3
20.8
19.5
18.9
18.2

55.3
57.7
60.6
60.1
59.7
63.7

106 3
107.0
107.1
107.3
108.1
108.2

166.6
166.6
173.5
171.9
173.9
168.6

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

750.5
764.4
771.5
776.4
783.0
789.2

159.3
163.7
168.0
166.3
167.4
170.0

108.9
111.7
115.3
115.3
113.3
110.6

482.3
489.0
488.3
494.7
502.3
508.6

97.9
96.8
96.3
95.3
94.5
94.7

20.3
20.3
20.3
20.5
20.2
19.9

19.1
22.4
21.3
20.4
20.8
20.5

62.9
70.7
69.0
68.3
70.4
70.1

108.6
109.2
109.4
110.0
110.3
110.8

173.6
169.7
172.1
180.2
186.1
192.7

My
a
June

790.5
792.2
796.8
796.4
804.8
804.9

167.7
170.1
166.3
170.7
177.1
178.6

101.3
103.5
110.9
108.6
106.2
109.7

521.4
518.6
519.6
517.1
521.5
516.6

93.3
94.4
95.6
96.2
97.6
94.0

20.1
20.2
20.1
19.7
19.8
19.1

21.2
22.5
111
22.6
24.9
22.8

69.2
69.8
71.4
71.7
71.7
70.5

111.2
111.6
111.9
112.3
112.6
112.5

206.2
200.1
197.9
194.7
195.0
197.6

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

807.5
813.1
826.5
826.8
833.8
845.1

176.3
178.6
187.7
185.7
187.1
187.1

111.4
113.0
115.5
114.6
118.1
117.5

519.8
521.5
523.4
526.5
528.6
540.5

93.4
92.7
92.3
93.5
95.0

19.2
19.2
19.3
19.3
18.8

21.2
20.7
23.7
24.1
24.0

69.9
70.1
68.9
69.7
68.2

112.7
112.9
113.2
113.4
113.7

203.4
205.9
205.9
206.4
208.9

1978:
Jan
Feb
Mr
a

1979
Jan
Feb
Mr
a

1
2

U.S savings bonds, series A-F and J, and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value.
As of July 31, 1974, public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform
with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the 1967-79 data in this table.
3
For comparability with 1975-79 published data, published data for 1967-74 have been adjusted to exclude notes of the
International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $3.3 billion in 1967, $2.2 billion in 1968, and $0.8 billion in each year
1969 through 1974. These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department
of 4 Treasury.
the
Includes commercial banks, trust companies, and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions;
figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include
holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions, they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-59, which are based on
book values and relate only to banks within the United States.
5
Exclusive of banks and insurance companies.
6
Includes trust, sinking, and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies, and of Territories and
possessions.
7
Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts.
8
Includes savings and loan associations, nonprofit institutions, corporate pension trust funds, dealers and brokers, certain
government deposit accounts and government-sponsored agencies, and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in
the United States.
Note.—Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1—June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977), the
fiscal year is on an October 1—September 30 basis.
Source: Department of the Treasury.




293

TABLE B-78.—Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities
held by private investors, 1967-79

End of year or month

Amount
outstanding,
privately
held

Maturity class
Average length
Within
lyear

Ito5
years

5 to 10
years

10 to 20
years

20 years
and over

Years

Millions of dollars

Months

Fiscal year:

1967
1968..
1969

150,321
159,671
156,008

56,561
66,746
69,311

53,584
52,295
50,182

21,057
21,850
18,078

6,153
6,110
6,097

12,968
12,670
12,337

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

157,910
161,863
165,978
167,869
164,862

76,443
74,803
79,509
84,041
87,150

57,035
58,557
57,157
54,139
50,103

8,286
14,503
16,033
16,385
14,197

7,876
6,357
6,358
8,741
9,930

8,272
7,645
6,922
4,564
3,481

6
3
1
11

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

210,382
279,782
326,674
356,501
380,530

115,677
151,723
161,329
163,819
181,883

65,852
89,151
113,319
132,993
127,574

15,385
24,169
33,067
33,500
32,279

8,857
8,087
8,428
11,383
18,489

4,611
6,652
10,531
14,805
20,304

7
11
3
7

Jan
Feb.
Mar
Apr
May
June-

355,374
358,320
362,693
355,144
356,892
353,660

177,642
175,195
178,474
170,272
166,094
162,533

123,692
130,715
132,501
130,884
135,524
137,543

32,712
29,853
29,414
31,816
31,758
30,458

9,733
9,719
9,635
9,571
9,847
9,766

11,595
12,838
12,669
12,601
13,668
13,360

11
0
11
0
1
1

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec...

358,255
359,919
356,501
362,443
367,256
365,239

163,619
163,512
163,819
165,337
170,492
174,231

139,017
136,462
132,993
136,064
133,876
128,293

30,573
33,603
33,500
33,476
33,695
33,604

11,512
11,407
11,383
12,746
13,879
13,833

13,533
14,936
14,805
14,820
15,314
15,278

1
3

MPay
June.

382,556
381,797
380,060
383,315
388,001
377,649

184,277
185,602
186,967
185,725
188,018
184,113

133,992
132,434
129,454
132,538
130,576
124,443

33,690
31,299
31,245
31,235
33,572
33,359

15,282
15,195
15,141
16,578
17,326
17,271

15,315
17,267
17,254
17,239
18,508
18,462

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec...

383,102
384,771
380,530
389,074
390,439
402,226

183,277
182,891
181,883
182,297
180,671
190,408

129,462
130,607
127,574
134,205
133,281
133,168

33,555
32,392
32,279
32,325
34,319
36,592

18,617
18,548
18,489
19,938
19,866
19,796

18,390
20,334
20,304
20,309
22,302
22,262

1978:

2
4
4

1979:
Jan
Feb.
Mar

10
9

Note.—All issues classified to final maturity.
Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1—June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977), the fiscal year
is on an October 1—September 30 basis.
Source: Department of the Treasury.




294

CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE
TABLE B-79.—Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, 1946-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Profits after tax with inventory valuation and
capital consumption adjustments

Corporate
profits with
inventory
valuation
and capital
consumption
adjustments

Corporate
profits tax
liability

1946
1947
1948
1949

16.6
22.2
29.1
26.9

9.1

7.5

11.3
12.4
10.2

10.9
16.7
16.7

5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2

2.0
4.6
9.7
9.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

33.7
38.1
35.4
35.5
34.6

17.9
22.6
19.4
20.3
17.6

15.7
15.5
16.0
15.2
17.0

8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1

6.9
7.0
7.5
6.4
7.9

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

44.6
42.9
42.1
37.5
48.2

22.0
22.0
21.4
19.0
23.6

22.6
20.9
20.6
18.5
24.6

10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

12.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

46.6
46.9
54.9
59.6
67.0

22.7
22.8
24.0
26.2
28.0

23.9
24.1
30.9
33.4
39.0

12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3

11.0
10.8
16.5
17.9
21.7

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

77.1
82.5
79.3
85.8
81.4

30.9
33.7
32.5
39.4
39.7

46.2
48.9
46.8
46.4
41.8

19.1
19.4
20.1
21.9
22.6

27.1
29.4
26.7
24.4
19.2

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

67.9
77.2
92.1
99.1
83.6

34.5
37.7
41.5
48.7
52.4

33.4
39.5
50.5
50.4
31.2

22.9
23.0
24.6
27.8
31.0

10.5
16.5
25.9
22.6

95.9
126.8
150.0
167.7
178.5

49.8
63.8
72.6
84.5
92.7

46.1
63.0
77.3
83.2
85.8

31.9
37.5
42.1
47.2
52.7

14.2
25.5
35.2
36.0
33.1

137.1
148.9
160 8
153.0

69.2
72 5
73 7
75.1

67 8
76 4
87 2
77.9

40.8
41.5
42 7
43.4

27.0
34.9
44 5
34.5

141.2
169.4
175.2
184.8

70.8
84.7
87.5
95.1

70.4
84.7
87.8
89.8

45.1
46.0
47.8
49.7

25.3
38.7
40.0
40.1

178.9
176 6
180.8

913

87.6
88 0

51.5
52 3

36.1
35 6
34.0

Year or quarter

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979".
1977:
I
II .

Ill

IV
1978:

1

II
III
I
V

Total

Dividends

Undistributed
profits with
inventory
valuation
and capital
consumption
adjustments,

9.8
9.1
7.2

12.4

.2

1979:
I

||

III

88 7
94.0

Source-. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




295

867

5Z8

TABLE B-80.—Corporate profits by industry, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment
Domestic industries
Nonfinancial

Financial'

Rest
of the
world

Year or quarter
Total

CpHpral
rcQcldl

Total
Total

Reserve
banks

Other

Total

Manufacturing2

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Utilities 3

Other

1929

10.5

10.2

1.3

0.0

1.3

8.9

5.2

1.0

1.8

0.9

0.2

1933

-1.2

-1.2

.3

.0

.3

-1.5

-.4

-.5

.0

-.7

.0

1939

6.3

6.1

.8

.0

.8

5.3

3.3

.7

1.0

.3

.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

9.8
15.2
20.3
24.4
23.8
19.2
19.3
25.6
33.0
30.8

9.6
15.0
20.1
24.1
23.5
18.9
18.9
24.9
32.2
29.9

1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.6
1.7
2.1
1.7
2.6
3.1

.0
.0
.0
.0
1
.1
.1
1
.2
.2

.9
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.6
1.6
2.0
1.6
2.3
2.9

8.6
14.0
18.9
22.8
21.9
17.3
16.8
23.2
29.6
26.8

5.5
9.5
11.8
13.8
13.2
9.7
9.0
13.6
17.6
16.2

1.2
1.4
2.2
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.8
4.6
5.5
4.5

1.3
2.0
3.4
4.4
3.9
2.7
1.8
2.2
3.0
3.0

.6
1.1
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.5
2.1
2.9
3.6
3.1

.2
.2
.2
.2
.3
.2
.4
.7
.8
.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

37.6
42.7
39.8
39.5
37.8
46.7
45.9
45.4
40.8
51.2

36.7
41.5
38.7
38.4
36.4
45.1
44.1
43.5
39.1
49.4

3.1
3.6
4.0
4.5
4.6
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.7
6.8

.2
.3
.4
.4
.3
.3
.5
.6
.6
.7

3.0
3.3
3.7
4.1
4.3
4.5
4.5
4.6
5.1
6.0

33.5
37.9
34.7
33.9
31.8
40.3
39.1
38.3
33.5
42.6

20.9
24.6
21.7
22.0
19.9
26.0
24.7
24.0
19.4
26.2

5.0
5.0
4.8
3.8
3.8
5.0
4.5
4.4
4.6
5.9

4.0
4.6
4.9
5.0
4.7
5.6
5.9
5.8
5.9
7.0

3.6
3.7
3.3
3.1
3.4
3.6
4.1
4.0
3.6
3.5

1.0
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

48.9
48.7
53.7
57.6
64.2
73.3
78.6
75.6
82.1
77.9

47.0
46.3
51.1
54.9
61.0
70.1
75.9
72.6
78.9
74.2

7.2
7.0
7.3
6.8
6.9
7.5
8.5
9.0
10.4
11.3

1.0
.8
.9
1.0
1.1
1.4
1.7
2.0
2.5
3.1

6.2
6.3
6.4
5.8
5.8
6.2
6.8
7.0
7.9
8.2

39.8
39.3
43.8
48.1
54.1
62.5
67.4
63.6
68.5
62.9

23.9
23.0
26.0
28.7
31.9
38.3
41.6
37.9
41.2
36.8

4.9
4.9
5.7
5.9
7.4
7.9
8.0
8.9
10.1
10.1

7.4
7.8
8.4
9.3
9.9
11,0
11.8
10.7
10.7
10.2

3.5
3.6
3.8
4.2
4.9
5.3
6.0
6.1
6.5
5.8

1.9
2.3
2.6
2.6
3.1
3.3
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

66.4
76.9
89.6
97.2
86.5
107.9
141.3
162.0
180.8
195.2

62.6
72.4
84.7
90.4
76.9
101.8
133.1
152.1
170.6
181.9

12.6
14.1
15.4
16.2
14.4
13.0
17.8
23.8
29.7
33.0

3.6
3.3
3.4
4.5
5.7
5.7
6.0
6.2
7.7
9.6

9.0
10.8
12.1
11.7
8.7
7.3
11.8
17.6
21.9
23.4

50.1
58.2
69.3
74.1
62.5
88.9
115.3
128.3
140.9
149.0

27.1
32.4
40.6
44.1
36.6
48.3
65.7
73.5
81.7
89.3

9.4
11.7
13.3
14.7
12.9
20.7
23.3
24.1
23.0

8.2
8.3
9.0
8.3
5.6
9.2
13.8
16.8
20.3

5.3
5.8
6.4
7.0
7.4
10.7
12.4
13.9
16.0

3.8
4.6
4.8
6.8
9.6
6.1
8.2
9.8
10.2
13.3

1977
1
I
I
II
I
I
V

149.7
160.3
172.0
166.0

139.9
150.5
161.2
156.9

21.3
22.9
24.8
26.4

6.0
6.2
6.2
6.4

15.2
16.7
18.6
20.0

118.7
127.6
136.4
130.5

68.3
75.1
72.5
78.1

21.5
23.4
31.0
20.5

16.3
15.3
18.1
17.5

12.6
13.8
14.8
14.4

9.8
9.8
10.7
9.1

1978
1
I
I
II
I
I
V

153.6
182.0
189.0
198.6

143.5
171.0
178.8
189.0

27.2
28.9
30.6
32.1

6.9
7.4
8.0
8.6

20.3
21.5
22.6
23.5

116.3
142.1
148.3
156.9

67.6
83.4
85.1
90.6

17.9
111
25.5
25.8

17.1
20.1
21.2
22.7

13.7
16.0
16.5
17.9

10.1
11.0
10.2
9.6

1979:
1
I
I
II
I

193.3
191.3
198.3

181.4
179.6
182.5

31.9
32.0
33.8

8.8
9.2
9.7

23.1
22.8
24.1

149.6
147.7
148.7

94.1
90.6
86.4

18.6
22.4
26.5

21.7
18.5
18.0

15.1
16.1
17.8

11.9
11.7
15.8

See next page for continuation of table.




296

TABLE B-80.—Corporate profits by industry, 1929-79—Continued
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances, with inventory valuation adjustment
Domestic industries
Financial1
year or quarter

Total

Nonfinancial

PoHoral

Total

reoerai
Reserve
banks

Other

Total

Total

Manufacturing2

Poet
Kesi

of the
world

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Utilities 3

Other

1.3

2.9

1.7

0.2

1.1

.0

.0

1929

14.7

14.4

1.4

0.0

1.4

13.0

7.1

1933

2.6

2.6

.4

.0

.4

2.2

1.3

1939

10.1

9.9

.9

.0

.9

9.0

4.9

1.0

2.0

1.1

.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

13.6
19.5
25.4
29.7
29.9
25.5
24.0
31.4
40.0
38.7

13.4
19.3
25.2
29.5
29.6
25.3
23.6
30.7
39.2
37.9

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.7
1.7
2.2
1.8
2.7
3.3

.0
.0
.0
.0
.1
.1
.1
.1
.2
.2

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.6
1.6
2.1
1.7
2.5
3.0

12.3
18.1
23.9
28.1
27.9
23.6
21.4
28.9
36.5
34.6

7.2
11.4
14.2
16.6
16.5
13.0
11.2
16.3
20.8
19.8

1.5
1.7
2.6
3.3
3.5
3.6
4.2
5.2
6.2
5.4

2.3
3.1
4.8
5.8
5.5
4.6
3.0
3.6
4.7
4.8

1.4
1.9
2.2
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.9
3.8
4.8
4.6

.2
.2
.2
.2
.3
.2
.4
.7
.8
.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

46.5
53.0
51.3
52.7
52.8
64.1
64.9
66.3
62.9
74.8

45.5
51.8
50.2
51.6
51.4
62.6
63.1
64.4
61.2
73.0

3.3
3.8
4.2
4.8
4.9
5.2
5.4
5.7
6.1
7.3

.2
.3
.4
.4
.3
.3
.5
.6
.6
.7

3.1
3.5
3.9
4.4
4.6
4.8
4.9
5.0
5.5
6.5

42.2
48.0
46.0
46.8
46.5
57.4
57.7
58.7
55.0
65.7

24.9
29.1
26.9
28.3
27.1
34.3
33.6
33.9
29.8
37.1

6.0
6.2
6.1
5.1
5.2
6.7
6.3
6.5
6.6
8.0

6.1
7.1
7.6
8.1
8.2
9.8

5.2
5.6
5.4
5.3
5.9
6.6
7.4
7.8
7.6
8.0

1.0
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

74.1
75.3
84.2
90.0
98.7
110.8
119.3
119.7
130.2
130.9

72.2
72.9
81.5
87.4
95.6
107.5
116.5
116.7
127.0
127.2

7.8
7.7
8.0
7.6
7.9
8.5
9.6

6.8
6.9
7.1
6.6
6.7
7.2
7.9
8.2
9.3
9.9

64.4
65.3
73.6
79.8
87.7
99.0
106.9
106.5
115.1
114.2

35.5
35.2
40.2
43.9
48.0
55.9
60.5
58.7
63.9
61.5

7.3
7.4
8.4
8.7

10.4
11.1
11.5
12.7
14.3
14.9

13.3
14.0
15.4
16.8
17.9
19.6
21.3
21.0
21.9
22.4

8.4
8.8
9.6

10.2
11.8
13.0

1.0
.8
.9
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.7
2.0
2.5
3.1

10.4
11.4
12.3
13.6
14.1
15.0
15.4

1.9
2.3
2.6
2.6
3.1
3.3
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 p

123.0
137.8
157.4
170.9
168.1
197.2
238.5
271.3
300.6
326.1

119.2
133.3
152.6
164.1
158.5
191.1
230.2
261.4
290.4
312.9

14.5
16.3
18.0
19.5
18.3
17.3
22.5
28.9
35.2
38.7

3.6
3.4
3.4
4.5
5.7
5.7
6.0
6.2
7.8
9.6

11.0
13.0
14.7
14.9
12.6
11.6
16.5
22.7
27.4
29.2

104.7
116.9
134.6
144.6
140.2
173.8
207.7
232.5
255.2
274.1

53.1
59.8
69.9
75.0
70.5
85.2
105.7
119.9
132.1
145.1

14.7
17.5
20.2
22.1
21.3
29.9
34.3
36.0
36.2

21.4
23.2
26.3
27.4
26.7
32.3
38.5
43.3
49.7

15.5
16.4
18.3
20.2
21.7
26.4
29.2
33.2
37.3

3.8
4.6
4.8
6.8
9.6
6.1
8.2
9.8

253.8
268.6
283.7
279.0

244.0
258.8
272.9
269.9

26.2
28.0
29.9
31.6

6.0
6.2
6.2
6.4

20.2
21.8
23.7
25.2

217.8
230.9
243.0
238.3

112.2
121.0
120.3
126.2

33.1
35.2
43.0
32.8

41.7
41.7
45.2
44.8

30.9
33.0
34.5
34.6

270.1
301.1
309.6
321.7

260.0
290.1
299.4
312.1

32.5
34.3
36.1
37.8

7.0
7.4
8.0
8.6

25.6
26.9
28.1
29.1

227.5
255.8
263.3
274.4

117.0
133.7
135.5
142.2

30.6
35.7
38.9
39.5

45.7
49.4
51.0
52.7

34.3
37.0
37.9
39.9

10.1
11.0
10.2

318.8
321.7
331.1

306.9
310 0
315.3

37.5
37 7
39.6

8.8
92
9.7

28.8
28 5
29.9

269.4
272 3
275.7

147.2
145 9
143.0

32.5
36 7
41.1

52.2
50 4
50.0

37.5
39 4
41.5

11.9

1977.
1

II
III
IV
1978
1

II
III
IV

-.2

10.3
10.5
10.9
12.5

10.2
13.3

9.8
9.8

10.7

9.1

9.6

1979

1

II
Ill

117

15.8

1

Consists of the following industries: Banking; credit agencies other than banks; security and commodity brokers, dealers, and
services; insurance carriers; regulated investment companies; small business investment companies; and real estate investment trusts.
2
See Table B-81 for industry detail.
3
Consists of transportation, communication, and electric, gas, and sanitary services.
Note.—The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) beginning
1948, and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




297

TABLE B-81.—Corporate profits of manufacturing industries, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment
Durable goods

Nondurable goods
Year or quarter

Food
and
kindred
products

Chemicals
and
allied
products

Petroleum
and
coal
products

, Total
manufacturing

Total

5.2

26

Fabricated
metal
products

1.5

16

08
.7

2.3

1.1

3.1

1.3
1.0
1.0
.9
1.0

Machin- Electric Motor
and
ery,
elec- vehicles
except tronic
and
electri- equip- equipcal
ment
ment

26

0

Primary
metal
industries

-4

1929
1933

-.4

Other

Total

1939

3.3

17

17

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

5.5

31

9.5
11.8
13.8
13.2
9.7
9.0
13.6
17.6
16.2

24
31
4.6

10 0
8.1

19
1.6

17
1.8

28
1.9

37
2.8

75
8.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

20.9
24.6
21.7
22.0
19.9
26.0
24.7
24.0
19.4
26.2

8.9
11.4
9.9
10.1
9.4
11.8
11.9
10.7
10.0
12.7

1.6
1.4
1.7

2.3

2.8

2.3
2.7
2.3
2.8

2.7
4.4

12.0
13.2
11.7
11.9
10.5
14.3
12.8
13.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

23.9
23.0
26.0
28.7
31.9
38.3
41.6
37.9
41.2
36.8

11.9
11.7
11.9
12.8
14.4
15.8
18.0
17.3
18.8
17.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

27.1
32.4
40.6
44.1
36.6
48.3
65.7
73.5
81.7
89.3

Other

19771

I
I
III
I
V
1978
1

I
I
III
I
V
1979
1

I
I

III

57
59
5.2
66
78

64
72
81
74
45
24

1.8
1.6
2.2
1.8
1.8
2.1
2.6
2.1
2.3
2.3
2.7
2.8
2.6
3.3

2.3
2.2

2.2
3.0
2.8
2.8
2.5
3.4

3.1
3.1
3.2
3.6
3.9
4.5

2.7
3.0

3.3
2.6
2.1

2.5
2.5
2.2
2.1
2.1
2.4

2.8

3.1
3.2
2.9

4.8

4.2
5.0
4.6

3.2
3.8
3.6
3.3

16.8
17.3
18.1
20.1
25.1
30.1
37.5
39.3
41.4
51.3

3.5
3.3
2.8
2.2
3.0
7.9
7.3
6.2
5.7

3.9
4.2

3.6
3.6

68.3
75.1
72.5
78.1

37.3
39.5
39.4
40.9

5.4
6.2
7.2
5.9

67.6
83.4
85.1
90.6

36.7
41.0
42.7
45.1

4.6
5.5
6.5
6.4

94.1
90.6
86.4

48.2
49.4
53.8

5.7
7.6
7.8

3.6

3.3
2.9
3.6

4.1
3.6

3.3
4.2
4.2

4.0

4.3
4.5

5.3
5.8
6.7
6.2
7.0
6.9

5.8
6.2

9.3

1.9

2.5
1.7

2.9
3.0
3.0
1.9

13.5

2.3

12.0
11.3
14.1
15.9
17.5
22.6
23.5
20.6
22.4
19.2

2.1
1.5
1.6
1.9

2.4
3.1

4.9
10.2
8.1
11.7
12.2
13.0

7.8
7.8
7.3

11.8
12.6
11.4
13.0

12.3
12.9
13.5
14.7

31.0
35.5
33.1
37.2

1.3
1.8
.6
1.6

7.4

7.6
7.8
8.9

10.0
13.3
14.1
14.8

14.8
14.7
14.4
15.1

30.9
42.3
42.4
45.5

.7
3.2
3.1
2.9

9.0
8.0
7.1

16.4
19.5
21.8

17.1
14.2
17.1

46.0
41.2
32.6

3.8

7.6
7.9

7.4

3.5

298

2.5

4.2
4.0

14

.8

2.1

1.6
2.3

1.2
1.3

3.1

2.3
1.9
1.7
1.7
2.1
2.0
1.4
2.1

2.0

3.8
4.4
4.0
4.1
3.6

1.2
1.3
2.1
2.6
1.2
2.9
3.9
4.3
4.6

1.6
2.0
4.9
2.9
2.0
1.3

07

1.8
1.8
2.3
2.4

.9
.5

2.7
2.0
1.4

12

1.3

.9
1.0
1.2
1.2
1.4
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.0

10.3
15.1
22.5
24.0
11.5
18.3
28.2
34.2
40.3
38 0

5.0
5.8
5.1
5.8
8.0

1.1
1.1
.9
1.1

3.6

6.8
7.2
6.8
8.2
10.6
13.4
14.7

See next page for continuation of table.




58

3.1

1.5
1.4

1.2
1.1
1.2

1.5
1.3
1.7

.1.3
1.3
1.5

1.5
1.6
2.5
3.0

2.4
2.4

2.6
2.1
4.1
2.2
2.6

18
1.7

2.6
2.8
2.6
2.6
2.9
3.5
3.2
3.1
2.9

.9
2.9

3.4

3.0

2.9

2.5

3.1
3.5
3.9
4.2
5.0
5.1

4.0
4.9

4.7
6.1
5.1

2.9
2.8
2.2

3.9
5.5
4.8

2.7

1.1

2.7

1.8
2.9

2.6

3.0
3.8
6.0
6.6
3.4
4.3
6.7

4.7
5.7
5.2

3.9
4.5
1.5
4.3
5.6
7.1
8.3

.3
2.1
2.7
4.2

1.4
4.9
5.9
5.8
.2
1.7
7.4
9.1

5.2

8.9

10.8

4.0
4.4
4.2

6.1
6.8

10.4

8.9

4.6

8.1

3.5
4.1
4.3

8.5
8.7

7.2
8.0
8.2
9.4

3.8

6.1
9.4

7.0
9.6
9.5
9.3

10.5
11.0
13.3

4.8
4.9

7.4

4.8

4.7

5.1

7.8
9.8

4.9
6.1
5.1

5.0
5.4
4.8

8.2
7.6
7.9

5.5
5.2
5.1

11.4

7.4
-.5

8.2

8.6

12.0
11.3
11.2

TABLE B-81.—Corporate profits of manufacturing industries, 1929-79—Continued
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Corporate profits before deduction of capital consumption allowances, with inventory valuation adjustment
Durable goods

Nondurable goods
Year or quarter

Food
and
kindred
products

Chemi- Petroleum
cals
and
and
coal
allied
prod- products
ucts

Fabri- Machin- Electric Motor
and
ery,
cated
elec- vehicles
and
metal except tronic
prod- electri- equip- equipment
cal
ucts
ment

Other

08
9

16
23

22
21

1.9
2.6
2.7
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.8
2.7
2.2
2.9

1.4
1.5
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.6
2.0
1.8
2.2

3.3
2.7
2.7
3.0
2.5
4.6
2.9
3.3
1.6
3.7

3.0
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.7
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.8

1.4
1.5
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.4
30

2.7
2.8
3.4
3.5
4.3
5.2
5.8
5.7
6.0
57

1.8
1.9
2.1
2.2
2.3
3.3
3.9
3.9
4.1
37

4.0
3.5
5.2
6.3
6.3
8.0
7.5
6.4
8.1
75

4.4
4.6
5.3
5.7
6.2
7.1
7.3
7.3
8.6
8.4

3.5
3.1
4.1
4.7
8.1
6.3
5.4
5.2
6.7

2.3
2.4
3.3
3.8
2.6
4.5
5.6
6.4
6.9

5.2
5.4
6.8
7.6
4.9
7.9
9.7
11.6
13.2

2.8
3.7
5.1
4.9
3.0
5.0
5.8
7.8
9.0

3.8
7.3
8.4
8.3
3.1
4.8
10.7
13.2
13.3

6.5
7.5
9.9
10.6
8.1
9.5
12.0
13.7
16.8

53.7
58.8
57.4
61.4

4.9
5.7
4.5
5.6

5.9
6.4
6.4
6.8

10.4
11.4
12.1
12.6

6.9
7.6
7.9
8.6

12.8
14.1
12.8
13.0

12.7
13.6
13.7
14.9

21.1
21.1
20.9
21.5

56.0
67.9
67.9
71.6

4.9
7.3
7.3
7.2

6.0
7.0
7.2
7.4

10.8
14.2
12.8
14.9

8.4
8.9
9.9
8.9

11.6
14.3
13.8
13.5

14.3
16.2
16.9
19.8

23.8
21.1
24.2

72.7
69.1
61.4

8.1
8.6
8.8

7.5
8.1
7.5

13.3
13.0
13.4

9.5
9.4
9.4

16.0
12.0
4.6

18.4
17.9
17.7

Primary
metal
industries

Total
manufacturing

Total

1929

7.1

36

1933

1.3

11

2

1939

4.9

26

23

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

7.2
11.4
14.2
16.6
16.5
13.0
11.2
16.3
20.8
19.8

34
41
59
71
75
70
79
93
118
101

22
20

20
21

34
26

42
34

38
72
84
9.5
90
60
33
69
90
97

19
19

10
9

15'
16

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

24.9
29.1
26.9
28.3
27.1
34.3
33.6
33.9
29.8
37.1

11.1
13.9
12.7
13.2
13.1
16.0
16.5
15.7
15.4
18.4

2.1
2.0
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.9
2.5
2.6
3.0
3.6

2.7
3.2
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.9
3.8
3.8
3.6
4.6

3.1
3.6
3.2
3.9
4.1
4.6
4.9
4.4
4.0
4.5

3.3
5.1
4.4
4.1
3.8
4.6
5.2
4.9
4.7
5.7

13.7
15.3
14.2
15.0
14.1
18.3
17.2
18.2
14.4
18.7

2.8
3.6
2.6
3.5
2.9
4.2
4.3
4.5
3.2
3.6

1.3
1.5
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

35.5
35.2
40.2
43.9
48.0
55.9
60.5
58.7
63.9
61.5

17.8
18.0
19.1
20.5
22.6
24.4
27.2
27.1
29.3
29.2

3.2
3.4
3.6
4.0
4.2
4.0
4.9
4.7
4.9
4.8

4.4
4.5
4.8
5.3
5.7
6.5
6.8
6.3
7.3
7.1

4.5
4.3
4.4
4.7
5.1
5.8
6.3
7.2
7.3
7.1

5.8
5.7
6.2
6.5
7.5
8.1
9.2
8.9
9.9
10.2

17.7
17.2
21.1
23.3
25.5
31.4
33.3
31.6
34.6
32.3

3.4
2.9
3.3
3.7
4.3
5.1
5.7
5.0
4.5
4.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

53.1
59.8
69.9
75.0
70.5
85.2
105.7
119.9
132.1
145.1

29.0
30.4
32.2
35.1
40.8
47.2
56.6
62.1
66.3
78.8

5.6
5.5
5.1
4.8
5.7
10.9
10.6
10.0
9.9

6.6
7.1
8.2
9.0
8.6
9.7
12.5
12.8
13.6

7.6
7.9
8.0
9.7
15.1
13.3
17.5
19.9
21.7

9.2
9.9
10.8
11.6
11.5
13.3
16.0
19.5
21.2

24.1
29.4
37.6
39.9
29.7
38.0
49.1
57.9
65.8
66 3

1977
1
II
III
I
V

112.2
121.0
120.3
126.2

58.5
62.2
62.9
64.7

9.0
9.9
11.1
9.8

12.8
13.0
12.5
12.8

18.6
20.0
19.7
21.2

18.1
19.3
19.6
21.0

1978
1
II
III
I
V

117.0
133.7
135.5
142.2

61.0
65.9
67.6
70.7

8.6
9.5
10.6
10.7

12.8
13.2
13.5
14.9

18.4
22.0
22.7
23.5

1979
1
II
III

147.2
145.9
143.0

74.4
76.9
81.6

10.1
12.2
12.5

15.2
14.5
13.5

25.4
29.0
31.4

Other

Total

34

Note.—The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) beginning
1948, and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




299

TABLE B-82.—Sales, profits, and stockholders' equity, all manufacturing

corporations,

1950-79

[Billions of dollars]

Sales
/ _x\

n
(net;

Profits

Profits

Profits
Year or quarter

Nondurable goods industries

Durable goods industries

All manufacturing corporations

Before
income
taxes'

After
income
taxes

Stockholders'
equity2

Sales
(net)

Before
income
taxes*

After
income
taxes

Stockholders'
equity2

Sales
(not\
(net;

Before
income
taxes l

After
income
taxes

Stockholders'
equity2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

181.9
245.0
250.2
265.9
248.5

23.2
27.4
22.9
24.4
20.9

12.9
11.9
10.7
11.3
11.2

83.3
98.3
103.7
108.2
113.1

86.8
116.8
122.0
137.9
122.8

12.9
15.4
12.9
14.0
11.4

6.7
6.1
5.5
5.8
5.6

39.9
47.2
49.8
52.4
54.9

95.1
128.1
128.0
128.0
125.7

10.3
12.1
10.0
10.4
9.6

6.1
5.7
5.2
5.5
5.6

43.5
51.1
53.9
55.7
58.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

278.4
307.3
320.0
305.3
338.0

28.6
29.8
28.2
12.1
29.7

15.1
16.2
15.4
12.7
16.3

120.1
131.6
141.1
147.4
157.1

142.1
159.5
166.0
148.6
169.4

16.5
16.5
15.8
11.4
15.8

8.1
8.3
7.9
5.8
8.1

58.8
65.2
70.5
72.8
77.9

136.3
147.8
154.1
156.7
168.5

12.1
13.2
12.4
11.3
13.9

7.0
7.8
7.5
6.9
8.3

61.3
66.4
70.6
74.6
79.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

345.7
356.4
389.9
412.7
443.1

27.5
27.5
31.9
34.9
39.6

15.2
15.3
17.7
19.5
23.2

165.4
172.6
181.4
189.7
199.8

173.9
175.2
195.5
209.0
226.3

14.0
13.6
16.7
18.5
21.2

7.0
6.9
8.6
9.5
11.6

82.3
84.9
89.1
93.3
98.5

171.8
181.2
194.4
203.6
216.8

13.5
13.9
15.1
16.4
18.3

8.2
8.5
9.2
10.0
11.6

83.1
87.7
92.3
96.3
101.3

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

492.2
554.2
575.4
631.9
694.6

46.5
51.8
47.8
55.4
58.1

27.5
30.9
29.0
32.1
33.2

211.7
230.3
247.6
265.9
289.9

257.0
291.7
300.6
335.5
366.5

26.2
29.2
25.7
30.6
31.5

14.5
16.4
14.6
16.5
16.9

105.4
115.2
125.0
135.6
147.6

235.2
262.4
274.8
296.4
328.1

20.3
22.6
22.0
24.8
26.6

13.0
14.6
14.4
15.5
16.4

106.3
115.1
122.6
130.3
142.3

1970
1971
1972
1973

708.8
751.4
849.5
1,017.2

48.1
53.2
63.2
81.4

28.6
31.3
36.5
48.1

306.8
320.9
343.4
374.1

363.1
382.5
435.8
527.3

23.0
26.5
33.6
43.6

12.9
14.5
18.4
24.8

155.1
160.6
171.4
188.7

345.7
368.9
413.7
489.9

25.2
26.7
29.6
37.8

15.7
16.7
18.0
23.3

151.7
160.3
172.0
185.4

275.1

21.4

13.0

386.4

140.1

10.8

6.3

194.7

135.0

10.6

6.7

191.7

1,060.6
1,065.2
1,203.2
1,328.1
1,496.4

92.1
79.9
104.9
115.1
132.5

58.7
49.1
64.5
70.4
81.1

395.0
423.4
462.7
496.7
539.4

529.0
521.1
589.6
657.3
760.7

41.1
35.3
50.7
57.9
69.6

24.7
21.4
30.8
34.8
41.8

196.0
208.1
224.3
239.9
261.5

531.6
544.1
613.7
670.8
735.7

51.0
44.6
54.3
57.2
62.9

34.1
27.7
33.7
35.5
39.3

199.0
215.3
238.4
256.8
277.9

236.6

20.6

13.2

368.0

122.7

10.1

6.2

185.8

113.9

10.5

7.0

182.1

242.0
269.4
272.1
277.0

21.2
25.9
25.0
20.1

13.5
16.3
15.5
13.4

379.0
389.9
402.7
408.4

120.3
136.8
134.8
137.1

9.5
12.6
10.5
8.6

5.7
7.6
6.2
5.2

189.4
194.1
199.9
200.8

121.7
132.6
137.3
140.0

11.7
13.3
14.5
11.5

7.8
8.7
9.4
8.2

189.6
195.8
202.8
207.6

247.1
265.8
271.0
281.3

15.4
20.2
21.7
22.6

9.3
12.4
13.2
14.2

410.7
420.2
427.4
435.5

121.3
132.4
131.0
136.3

7.0
9.3
9.1
10.0

4.1
5.7
5.5
6.2

201.7
207.3
209.7
213.7

125.8
133.3
14C.0
145.0

8.4
10.9
12.7
12.6

5.2
6.8
7.7
8.1

209.0
212.9
217.6
221.8

284.2
307.6
301.6
309.8

24.5
29.3
26.2
24.9

14.8
18.1
16.0
15.6

446.5
460.1
468.9
475.3

137.8
153.7
146.2
151.8

11.3
14.8
12.2
12.4

6.7
9.0
7.4
7.7

216.7
223.4
227.1
229.9

146.3
153.9
155.4
158.1

13.2
14.5
14.0
12.6

8.1
9.1
8.6
7.9

229.8
236.7
241.7
245.5

II
III
I
V

311.5
338.6
331.7
346.2

25.6
32.4
27.3
29.9

15.6
19.7
16.7
18.4

479.8
492.9
502.4
511.7

151.2
169.5
163.8
172.7

12.5
16.9
13.0
15.5

7.5
10.2
7.8
9.4

230.8
238.4
243.1
247.5

160.3
169.1
167.9
173.5

13.0
15.5
14.3
14.3

8.1
9.5
8.9
9.0

249.1
254.5
259.3
264.2

1978
1
II
III
I
V

340.3
377.5
376.9
401.8

26.9
36.0
33.4
36.3

16.0
22.1
20.4
22.6

518.7
531.8
546.3
560.8

170.1
195.0
189.7
205.9

13.6
19.8
17.0
19.1

7.9
12.0
10.3
11.6

250.3
257.6
265.2
272.9

170.3
182.4
187.2
195.9

13.3
16.2
16.4
17.1

8.1
10.1
10.1
11.0

268.4
274.2
281.1
287.8

1979
1
II
III

406.2
436.4
437.5

36.5
42.6
38.3

22.6
26.8
24.8

574.2
592.0
609.2

208.1
223.3
214.6

18.8
21.7
16.4

11.5
13.3
10.4

281.1
290.1
297.8

198.1
213.0
223.0

17.7
21.0
21.8

11.2
13.4
14.4

293.1
301.9
311.4

1973 I
V
New series
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1973 IV
1974
1
II
III
I
V
1975
1
II
III
I
V
1976
II
Ill
I
V

'.

1977

1
In the old series, "income taxes" refers to Federal income taxes only, as State and local income taxes had already been deducted.
In the new series, no income taxes have been deducted.
2
Annual data are average equity for the year (using four end-of-quarter figures).
Note.—Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures, industry
classifications, sampling procedures, etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see "Quarterly Financial Report for
Manufacturing, Mining, and Trade Corporations, Federal Trade Commission.
Source: Federal Trade Commission.




300

TABLE B-83.—Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales, all
corporations, 1947-79
Ratio of profits after income taxes (annual
rate) to stockholders' equity—percent1
Year or quarter

manufacturing

Profits after income taxes per dollar of
sales—cents

All
manufacturing
corporations

Durable
goods
industries

Nondurable
Roods
industries

All
manufacturing
corporations

industries

Nondurable
goods
industries

15.6
16.0
11.6

14.4
15.7
12.1

16.6
16.2
11.2

6.7
7.0
5.8

6.7
7.1
6.4

6.7
6.8
5.4

15.4
12.1
10.3
10.5
9.9

16.9
13.0
11.1
11.1
10.3

14.1
U.2
9.7
9.9
9.6

7.1
4.8
4.3
4.3
4.5

7.7
5.3
4.5
4.2
4.6

6.5
4.5
4.1
4.3
4.4

12.6
12.3
10.9
8.6
10.4

13.8
12.8
11.3
8.0
10.4

11.4
11.8
10.6
9.2
10.4

5.4
5.3
4.8
4.2
4.8

5.7
5.2
4.8
3.9
4.8

5.1
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.9

9.2
8.9
9.8
10.3
11.6

8.5
8.1
9.6
10.1
11.7

9.8
9.6
9.9
10.4
11.5

4.4
4.3
4.5
4.7
5.2

4.0
3.9
4.4
4.5
5.1

4.8
4.7
4.7
4.9
5.4

Durable

goods

1947.
1948.
1949.
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973

13.0
13.4
11.7
12.1
11.5

13.8
14.2
11.7
12.2
11.4

12.2
12.7
11.8
11.9
11.5

5.6
5.6
5.0
5.1
4.8

5.7
5.6
4.8
4.9
4.6

5.5
5.6
5.3
5.2
5.0

9.3
9.7
10.6
12.8

8.3
9.0
10.8
13.1

10.3
10.3
10.5
12.6

4.0
4.1
4.3
4.7

3.5
3.8
4.2
4.7

4.5
4.5
4.4
4.8

1973: IV

13.4

12.9

14.0

4.7

4.5

5.0

1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

14.9
11.6
13.9
14.2
15.0

12.6
10.3
13.7
14.5
16.0

17.1
12.9
14.2
13.8
14.2

5.5
4.6
5.4
5.3
5.4

4.7
4.1
5.2
5.3
5.5

6.4
5.1
5.5
5.3
5.3

1973:IV

14.3

13.3

15.3

5.6

5.0

6.1

1974:
I
II
Ill
IV

14.3
16.7
15.4
13.2

12.1
15.6
12.3
10.4

16.4
17.8
18.5
15.8

5.6
6.0
5.7
4.8

4.8
5.5
4.6
3.8

6.4
6.6
6.8
5.9

1975:
I
II
Ill
IV

9.0
11.8
12.4
13.1

8.1
10.9
10.5
11.6

10.0
12.8
14.1
14.5

3.7
4.7
4.9
5.1

3.4
4.3
4.2
4.5

4.1
5.1
5.5
5.6

13.3
15.7
13.7
13.1

12.4
16.1
13.0
13.4

14.2
15.4
14.3
12.9

5.2
5.9
5.3
5.0

4.9
5.8
5.1
5.1

5.6
5.9
5.6
5.0

13.0
16.0
13.3
14.4

13.0
17.1
12.9
15.1

13.0
15.0
13.7
13.7

5.0
5.8
5.0
5.3

5.0
6.0
4.8
5.4

5.0
5.6
5.3
5.2

12.4
16.7
14.9
16.1

12.7
18.7
15.5
17.0

12.1
14.8
14.4
15.3

4.7
5.9
5.4
5.6

4.7
6.2
5.4
5.6

4.8
5.6
5.4
5.6

15.8
18.1
16.3

16.3
18.4
13.9

15.3
17.8
18.5

5.6
6.1
5.7

5.5
6.0
4.8

5.6
6.3
6.5

New series:

1976:
|
||
III
IV
1977:
|
II...
Ill
IV
1978:
|
II
Ill
IV
1979:
I
II

1
Annual ratios based on average equity for the year (using four end-of-quarter figures). Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of
quarter only.

Note.—Based on data in millions of dollars.
See Note, Table B-82.
Source: Federal Trade Commission.


http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/2 8 9 0 - 8 0 - 2 0
294Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

301

TABLE B-84.—Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales, all
corporations, by industry group, 1978-79

Ratio of profits after income taxes (annual
rate) to stockholders' equity—percent*

Industry

Durable goods industries
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary metal industries
Iron and steel
Nonferrous metals
Fabricated metal products
Machinery, except electrical
Electrical and electronic equipment
Transportation equipment2
Motor vehicles and equipment
Aircraft, guided missiles, and parts
Instruments and related products
Other durable manufacturing products
Nondurable goods industries
Food and kindred products
Tobacco manufacturesTextile mill products
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing
Chemicals and allied products2
Industrial chemicals and synthetics
Drugs
Petroleum and coal products
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
Other nondurable manufacturing products
1
2

1

II

III

III

IV

1

II

14.9

16.1

15.8

18.1

16.3

5.4

5.6

5.6

6.1

5.7

15.5

17.0

16.3

18.4

13.9

5.4

5.6

5.5

6.0

4.8

21.3
9.9

17.8
11.1

7.7
12.7

19.4
17.2

19.3
13.2

7.5
3.6

6.6
3.9

3.3
4.2

6.9
5.4

6.7
4.4

10.3
9.0

9.8
13.4

10.2
16.9

15.6
19.9

11.7
15.7

3.5
3.8

3.2
5.5

3.2
6.2

4.6
7.2

3.7
6.0

16.4
16.1
18.3
12.8

15.4
19.1
17.9
17.8

15.8
16.3
17.8
20.1

18.9
17.8
18.7
19.1

15.8
15.9
16.3
5.1

4.7
7.1
6.1
4.0

4.4
8.0
5.8
4.8

4.5
7.0
5.8
5.5

5.2
7.2
5.8
5.3

4.5
6.7
5.3
1.7

10.9
17.9

17.8
19.0

21.8
17.6

18.7
20.6

18.1

3.6
5.1

4.9
5.1

6.1
4.7

5.5
5.5

-.2
5.2

18.4
18.4

18.3
18.2

16.7
16.4

17.4
19.6

16.2
19.7

9.4
4.8

9.4
4.7

8.8
4.6

9.0
5.0

8.4
5.2

14.3

15.3

15.3

17.8

18.5

5.4

5.6

5.6

6.3

6.5

13.5
18.7
12.0
12.2
18.3
15.2

15.3
18.3
11.7
14.1
21.1
16.3

12.2
18.5
9.0
16.3
16.0
17.6

15.6
18.4
12.8
16.8
19.0
18.3

17.3
21.6
13.4
20.5
20.1
16.1

3.1
10.5
3.2
5.0
6.2
7.2

3.5
9.6
3.1
5.7
7.0
7.7

2.8
11.0
2.6
6.7
5.6
7.9

3.5
10.9
3.3
6.6
6.4
8.1

3.9
13.1
3.7
8.2
6.8
7.3

13.2
18.9

17.2
17.0

16.9
20.7

17.1
20.5

13.5
18.6

6.3
12.7

8.1
11.3

7.4
13.9

7.3
14.2

6.0
12.7

14.0
10.7
16.9

14.8
8.3
14.3

15.7
14.1
12.6

20.1
13.4
12.7

21.2
8.8
19.1

7.4
3.4
3.5

7.6
2.5
3.0

7.8
4.1
2.9

9.5
3.8
2.7

9.0
2.7
3.7

Ratios based on equity at end of quarter.
Includes other industries not shown separately.

Source: Federal Trade Commission.




1979

1978

IV

ill

All manufacturing corporations....

Profits after income taxes per
dollar of sales—cents

1979

1978

manufacturing

302

III

TABLE B-85.—Determinants of business fixed investment, 1955-79
[Percent, except as noted]
Nonfinancial corporations

GNP2

Year

Ratio of
real
investment to
real GNP

Capacity
utilization
rate in
manufacturing1

Rate
of
return
on
depreciable
assets 3

Rate of
return
on
stockholders'
equity4

Ratio of
market
value to
replacement
cost of
net
assets 5

Cash
flow
as
percent
nf
OI

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

9.3
9.7
9.7
8.7
8.7

87.1
86.4
83.7
75.2
81.9

9.3
8.9
8.9
8.6
9.2

14.4
12.4
11.2
9.5
12.1

6.2
5.5
5.0
3.9
4.9

0.922
.918
.849
.869
1.041

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

9.0
8.7
8.9
8.8
9.3

80.2
77.4
81.6
83.5
85.6

9.0
8.8
9.4
9.6
10.0

11.2
11.0
12.7
13.6
14.6

5.0
4.5
5.9
6.4
7.6

1.017
1.141
1.088
1.197
1.287

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

10 3
10.8
10.3
10.3
10.6

89 6
91.1
86.9
87.1
86.2

10.4
10.3
9.9
9.4
8.6

15 8
15.7
13.8
13.6
11.9

93
9.1
8.0
7.8
7.1

1352
1.198
1.212
1.252
1.116

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

10.2
9.8
10.0
10.6
10.7

79.3
78.4
83.5
87.6
83.8

7.9
8.2
8.6
8.0
6.9

9.4
9.7
10.7
10.3
7.8

4.6
5.4
6.6
9.2
8.8

.906
.996
1.068
1.008
.750

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979: First 3 quarters6

9.4
9.3
9.6
10.0
10.4

72.9
79.5
81.9
84.4
86.0

8.7
9.1
9.1
8.8
8.5

8.3
9.3
9.7
9.7
-9.2

5.4
4.8
6.3
7.1
7.7

.712
.801
.729
.678
.654

1
Federal Reserve Board index.
2
Cash flow calculated as after-tax
3

profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment.
Profits before taxes plus capital consumption adjustment and inventory valuation adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the
stock of depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost.
4
After-tax profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth (physical capital component valued at current replacement
cost).
5
Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets.
6
Seasonally adjusted.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Council of
Economic Advisers.




303

TABLE B-86.—Sources and uses of funds, nonfarm nonfinanciaI corporate business, 1946-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Uses

Sources
External
Year or quarter

Total

Internal'

Credit market funds 2
Total

Total

Longterm

Shortterm

Other

Total

DiscrepPurchase Increase
ancy
of
in
(sources
physical financial less uses)
assets 3 assets

1946
1947
1948
1949

18.4
26.7
28.5
19.7

7.8
12.6
18.8
19.3

10.6
14.1
9.8
.4

6.9
8.3
6.5
3.1

4.6
6.4
6.4
4.2

2.3
2.0
.1
-1.1

3.7
5.8
3.3
-2.7

17.1
25.3
24.9
17.9

18.5
17.0
19.9
14.4

-1.4
8.4
5.0
3.5

1.3
1.4
3.6
1.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

41.8
35.9
29.2
27.3
29.1

17.8
19.7
21.2
21.1
23.5

24.0
16.2
8.0
6.1
5.6

8.1
10.5
9.5
5.6
6.5

5.3
8.0
8.2
5.8
6.1

2.8
2.5
1.3
-.2
.3

15.9
5.7
-1.5
.5
-.8

39.9
37.2
29.1
27.7
27.7

23.6
29.8
24.5
25.4
22.8

16.4
7.4
4.6
2.3
4.9

1.9
-1.3
.1
-.5
1.4

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

52.0
44.0
42.2
41.3
55.2

28.8
28.7
30.4
29.6
35.0

23.2
15.3
11.8
11.7
20.1

10.2
12.8
12.2
10.5
12.2

7.8
9.8
11.0
10.2
9.4

2.4
3.1
1.3
2^8

13.1
2.5
-.4
1.2
7.9

49.2
41.1
39.4
38.7
51.7

32.7
37.1
35.2
27.9
37.5

16.5
4.0
4.2
10.8
14.2

2.8
2.9
2.9
2.5
3.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

47.6
54.5
58.8
66.0
72.6

34.7
35.3
41.6
44.5
50.1

12.9
19.2
17.2
21.5
22.5

11.9
12.5
12.8
12.2
14.8

8.6
11.0
10.7
9.7
10.9

3.3
1.5
2.1
2.6
3.9

1.0
6.7
4.3
9.3
7.7

40.6
50.4
54.9
59.1
64.1

38.0
37.2
43.8
44.9
50.7

2.7
13.2
11.1
14.2
13.4

7.0
4.1
3.9
6.9
8.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

91.1
96.8
93.9
114.6
118.6

56.1
60.5
61.3
62.3
61.7

35.1
36.3
32.7
52.2
57.0

20.6
25.4
29.8
31.8
38.6

13.5
19.6
23.8
22.6
25.7

7.2
5.8
5.9
9.2
12.9

14.4
10.9
2.9
20.4
18.4

82.2
90.5
87.5
105.3
113.1

62.0
75.7
73.0
77.2
84.3

20.2
14.8
14.5
28.2
28.8

9.0
6.3
6.4
9.2
5.6

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

104.4
127.8
161.6
200.0
191.3

58.9
68.6
80.8
83.8
75.7

45.5
59.3
80.8
116.2
115.6

40.7
45.2
58.2
73.0
82.1

34.2
41.9
45.3
49.2
51.6

6.5
3.3
12.9
23.8
30.6

4.9
14.1
22.6
43.1
33.4

95.9
119.6
145.8
185.6
179.0

80.3
86.0
100.3
123.3
134.7

15.6
33.5
45.6
62.3
44.4

8.5
8.2
15.8
14.4
12.2

1975
1976
1977
1978

150.0
209.7
242.3
295.7

106.8
125.3
139.9
148.8

43.2
84.4
102.3
146.9

37.9
60.7
79.9
94.7

44.1
49.1
53.0
61.5

-6.3
11.6
26.9
33.2

5.3
23.8
22.4
52.2

133.0
183.3
216.8
274.3

99.9
139.0
169.9
195.9

33.2
44.3
46.9
78.3

16.9
26.4
25.5
214

II
III.
I
V

223.4
221.3
268.0
256 4

129.1
138.5
150.0
1421

94.3
82.7
118.0
114 3

63.2
71.5
83.8
101 1

41.0
42.0
56.5
72 5

22.2
29.5
27.3
28 6

31.1
11.3
34.3
13 2

205.5
191.7
237.0
233 1

158.8
168.5
180.2
172 0

46.7
23.1
56.8
611

17.9
29.6
31.0
23 3

1978
1
II
III
IV

259.6
297.7
303.5
322.1

135.0
150.5
153.8
155.9

124.5
147.2
149.7
166.2

94.7
92.7
90.4
101.1

51.2
65.2
63.1
66.5

43.5
27.5
27.3
34.6

29.8
54.5
59.3
65.1

232.5
281.3
284.4
298.9

177.0
203.2
199.9
203.6

55.5
78.1
84.4
95.2

27.0
16.4
19.1
23.2

1979:
I
||
III

345.5
324.1
335.3

154.4
159.0
167.8

191.1
165.1
167.5

118.6
126.9
122.4

69.3
76.9
68.9

49.3
50.0
53.6

72.5
38.2
45.1

321.4
296.5
310.2

213.0
229.1
228.6

108.4
67.4
81.6

24.2
27.6
25.1

1977:

1
Undistributed profits (after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments), capital consumption allowances, and foreign
branch profits.
2
Maturity split is aproximate: Long-term consists of stocks, bonds, multi-family and commercial mortgages, and 40 percent of bank
loans. Short-term consists of home mortgages, 60 percent of bank loans, commercial paper, finance company loans, bankers'
acceptances, and U.S. Government loans.
3
Plant and equipment, residential structures, inventory investment, and mineral rights from U.S. Government.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




304

TABLE B-87.—Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations, 1939-79
[Billions of dollars]

Current
End of year
or quarter

Total

Cash1

U.S.
Government 2
securities

assets

Current liabilities

Notes
and
accounts
receivable

Other
Inven- current
tories assets

Total

Net
Other
Notes
Current
current working ratio 3
and
capital
accounts liabilities
payable

All corporations i
SEC series:
1939

5

54.5

10.8

2.2

22.1

18.0

1.4

30.0

21.9

8.1

24.5

1.817

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

60.3
72.9
83.6
93.8
97.2
97.4
108.1
123.6
133.0
133.1

13.1
13.9
17.6
21.6
21.6
21.7
22.8
25.0
25.3
26.5

2.0
4.0

19.8
25.6
27.3
27.6
26.8
26.3
37.6
44.6
48.9
45.3

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.4
2.4
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.4

32.8
40.7
47.3
51.6
51.7
45.8
51.9
61.5
64.4
60.7

23.2
26.4
26.0
26.3
26.8
25.7
31.6
37.6
39.3
37.5

9.6

10.1
16.4
20.9
21.1
15.3
14.1
14.8
16.8

24.0
28.0
27.3
26.9
26.5
25.9
30.7
38.3
42.4
43.0

14.3
21.3
25.3
24.9
20.1
20.3
23.9
25.0
23.3

27.5
32.3
36.3
42.1
45.6
51.6
56.2
62.1
68.6
72.4

1.838
1.791
1.767
1.818
1.880
2.127
2.083
2.010
2.065
2.193

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

161.5
179.1
186.2
190.6
194.6
224.0
237.9
244.7
255.3
277.3

28.1
30.0
30.8
31.1
33.4
34.6
34.8
34.9
37.4
36.3

19.7
20.7
19.9
21.5
19.2
23.5
19.1
18.6
18.8
22.8

56.8
61.5
67.4
68.5
73.6
88.9
97.7
102.2
109.7
120.6

55.1
64.9
65.8
67.2
65.3
72.8
80.4
82.2
81.9
88.4

1.7
2.1
2.4
2.4
3.1
4.2
5.9
6.7
7.5
9.1

79.8
92.6
96.1
98.9
99.7
121.0
130.5
133.1
136.6
153.1

48.3
54.9
59.3
59.5
61.7
76.1
83.9
86.6
90.4
101.0

31.6
37.8
36.8
39.4
38.0
45.0
46.6
46.5
46.2
52.0

81.6
86.5
90.1
91.8
94.9
103.0
107.4
111.6
118.7
124.2

2.024
1.934
1.938
1.927
1.952
1.851
1.823
1.838
1.869
1.811

1960
1961

289 0
306.8

37 2
41.1

201

129 2
139.2

918
95.2

10 6
11.4

160 4
171.2

106 8
114.6

53 6
56.6

128 6
135.6

1802
1.792

.

. .

20.0

Nonfinancial corporations6
SEC series:
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
FTC-FRB series:7
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1978
1

II
III
I
V
1979:
I
II

254.7
269.7
288.2
305.6
336.0
364.0
386.2
426.5
473.6

34.8
37.1
39.8
40.5
42.8
41.9
45.5
48.2
47.9

16.5
16.8
16.7
15.8
14.4
13.0
10.3
11.5
10.6

97.9
103.2
110.5
119.9
134.1
146.6
155.3
173.9
197.0

95.0
100.5
106.8
113.1
126.6
142.8
153.1
166.0
186.4

10.5
12.1
14.4
16.3
18.1
19.7
22.0
26.9
31.6

123.7
132.4
145.5
156.6
178.8
199.4
211.3
244.1
287.8

84.4
88.7
97.0
104.9
121.5
137.5
147.1
168.8
199.2

39.3
43.7
48.5
51.7
57.3
61.9
64.2
75.3
88.6

131.0
137.3
142.7
149.0
157.2
164.6
174.9
182.4
185.7

2.059
2.037
1.981
1.951
1.879
1.825
1.828
1.747
1.646

492.3
529.6
599.3
697.8
790.7

50.2
53.3
59.0
66.3
71.1

7.7
11.0
10.6
12.8
12.3

206.1
221.1
248.2
288.5
322.1

193.3
200.4
225.7
263.9
313.6

35.0
43.8
55.8
66.4
71.7

304.9
326.0
375.6
450.9
530.4

211.3
220.5
282.9
340.3
402.3

93.6
105.5
92.7
110.7
128.1

187.4
203.6
223.7
246.9
260.3

1.615
1.625
1.595
1.548
1.491

735.4
759.0
826.3
900.9
1,028.1

73.2
82.1
87.3
94.3
103.5

11.1
19.0
23.6
18.7
17.8

265.8
272.1
293.3
325.0
381.9

319.5
315.9
342.9
375.6
428.3

65.9
69.9
79.2
87.3
96.5

453.4
451.6
492.7
546.8
662.2

269.8
264.2
282.0
313.7
375.1

183.6
187.4
210.6
233.1
287.1

282.0
307.4
333.6
354.1
365.9

1.622
1.681
1.677
1.648
1.552

925.0
954.2
992.6
1,028.1

88.8
91.3
91.6
103.5

18.6
17.3
16.1
17.8

337.4
356.0
376.4
381.9

390.5
399.3
415.5
428.3

89.6
90.3
92.9
96.5

574.2
593.5
626.3
662.2

325.2
337.9
356.2
375.1

249.0
255.6
270.0
287.1

350.7
360.7
366.3
365.9

1.611
1.608
1.585
1.552

1,078.6
1,110.2

102 4
100.1

19.2
20.8

405 3
418.8

452 6
468.9

101.4

991

7019
723.7

392 6
410.5

309 2
313.1

376.7
386.5

1537
1.534

1
2
3
4
5
6

Includes time certificates of deposit.
Includes Federal agency issues.
Total current assets divided by total current liabilities.
Excludes banks, savings and loan associations, and insurance companies.
Based on data from "Statistics of Income," Department of the Treasury.
Excludes banks, savings and loan associations, insurance companies, investment companies, finance companies (personal and
commercial), real estate companies, and security and commodity brokers, dealers, and exchanges.
7
Based on data from "Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing, Mining, and Trade Corporations," Federal Trade Commission. See
"Federal Reserve Bulletin," July 1978, for details regarding the series.
Note.—SEC series not available after 1974.
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Trade Commission, and Securities and Exchange Commission.




305

TABLE B-88.—State and municipal and corporate securities offered, 1934-79
[Millions of dollars]

Year or quarter

State
Corporate securities offered for cash
and
Industry of corporate issuer
municipal
Type of corporate security
securities
offered
Total
for cash corporate Common Preferred Bonds Manufac- Electric, Transpor- Communi(princi- offerings
and
cation
turing * gas, and tation 3
stock
stock
pal
water 2
notes
amounts)
372

Other

176

1934...

939

397

1939...

1,128

2,164

87

98

1,979

604

1,271

186

103

1940.
1941
1942
1943
1944

1,238
956
524
435
661

2,677
2,667
1,062
1,170
3,202

108
110
34
56
163

183
167
112
124
369

2,386
2,389
917
990
2,670

992
848
539
510
1,061

1,203
1,357
472
477
1,422

324
366
48
161
609

159
96

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

795
1,157
2,324
2,690
2,907

6,011
6,900
6,577
7,078
6,052

397
891
779
614
736

758
1,127
762
492
425

4,855
4,882
5,036
5,973
4,890

2,026
3,701
2,742
2,226
1,414

2,319
2,158
3,257
2,187
2,320

1,454
711
286
755
800

902
571

211
329
293
1,008
946

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

3,532
3,189
4,401
5,558
6,969

6,362
7,741
9,534
8,898
9,516

811
1,212
1,369
1,326
1,213

631
838
564
489
816

4,920
5,691
7,601
7,083
7,488

1,200
3,122
4,039
2,254
2,268

2,649
2,455
2,675
3,029
3,713

813
494
992
595
778

399
612
760
882
720

1,300
1,058
1,068
2,138
2,037

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

5,977
5,446
6,958
7,449
7,681

10,240
10,939
12,884
11,558
9,748

2,185
2,301
2,516
1,334
2,027

635
636
411
571
531

7,420
8,002
9,957
9,653
7,190

2,994
3,647
4,234
3,515
2,073

2,464
2,529
3,938
3,804
3,258

893
724
824
824
967

1,132
1,419
1,462
1,424
717

2,757
2,619
2,426
1,991
2,733

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

7,230
8,360
8,558
10,107
10,544

10,154
13,165
10,705
12,211
13,957

1,664
3,294
1,314
1,011
2,679

409 8,081
450 9,420
422 8,969
343 10,856
412 10,865

2,152
4,077
3,249
3,514
3,046

2,851
3,032
2,825
2,677
2,760

718
694
567
957
982

1,050
1,834
1,303
1,105
2,189

3,383
3,527
2,761
3,957
4,980

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

11,148
11,089
14,288
16,374
11,460

14,782
17,385
24,014
21,261
25,997

1,473
1,901
1,927
3,885
7,640

724
580
881
636
691

12,585
14,904
21,206
16,740
17,666

5,414
7,056
11,069
6,958
6,346

2,934
3,666
4,935
5,293
6,715

702
1,494
1,639
1,564
1,779

945
2,003
1,975
1,775
2,172

4,787
3,167
4,396
5,671
8,985

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

17,762
24,370
22,941
22,953
22,824

37,451
43,229
39,705
31,680
37,729

7,037
9,485
10,707
7,642
3,979

1,390
3,683
3,371
3,341
2,253

29,023
30,061
25,628
20,700
31,494

10,647
11,651
6,398
4,832
10,408

11,009
11,721
11,314
10,269
12,837

1,253
1,148
860
811
1,005

5,291 9,252
5,840 12,867
4,836 16,298
4,872 10,897
3,930 9,551

1975
1976
1977...
1978...

29,326
33,845
45,060
46,215

52,539
52,290
51,836
46,749

7,414
8,304
8,047
7,941

3,459
2,803
3,916
2,832

41,666
41,182
39,879
35,976

18,651
15,496
13,754
11,070

15,894
14,414
13,704
12,336

2,635
3,626
1,801
1,763

4,464
3,562
4,442
3,640

10,895
15,190
18,139
17,944

10,316
12,757
11,992
11,152

10,544
12,717
11,550
11,938

1,521
1,707
1,888
2,825

507
1,234
456
635

8,516
9,776
9,206
8,478

2,562
3,148
2,699
2,661

2,433
3,803
3,049
3,051

230
689
489
354

854
424
1,143
1,219

4,467
4,651
4,173
4,652

9,722
10,546
10,097

11,949
14,604
12,459

1,916
1,455
2,250

603 9,430
607 12,542
1,491 8,718

2,096
3,308
3,668

3,334
3,373
3,007

577
803
717

1,569
779
1,103

4,371
6,342
3,966

133

21
109

1978:
II.
Ill
IV
1979:
I
II...
1
2
3

Prior to 1948, also includes extractive, radio broadcasting, airline companies, commercial, and miscellaneous company issues.
Prior to 1948, also includes telephone, street railway, and bus company issues.
Prior to 1948, includes railroad issues only.
Note.—Covers substantially all new issues of State, municipal, and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in
amounts over $100,000 and with terms to maturity of more than 1 year; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks,
intercorporate transactions, and issues to be sold over an extended period, such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment
company issues are included beginning 1973.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission, "The Commercial and Financial Chronicle" and "The Bond Buyer."




306

TABLE B-89.—Common stock prices and yields, 1949-79
Common stock 5yields
(percent)

Common stock prices1
Year or quarter

New York Stock Exchange indexes (Dec. 31,
1965=50) 2
Composite

Industrial

Transportation

Utility

Finance

DowJones
industrial
average3

Standard
& Poor's
composiie
index
(194143 = 10) 4

Dividendprice
ratio6

Earningsprice
ratio7

1949

9.02

179.48

15.23

6.59

15.48

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

10.87
13.08
13.81
13.67
16.19
21.54
24.40
23.67
24.56
30.73

216.31
257.64
270.76
275.97
333.94
442.72
493.01
475.71
491.66
632.12

18.40
22.34
24.50
24.73
29.69
40.49
46.62
44.38
46.24
57.38

6.57
6.13
5.80
5.80
4.95
4.08
4.09
4.35
3.97
3.23

13.99
11.82
9.47
10.26
8.57
7.95
7.55
7.89
6.23
5.78

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

30.01
35.37
33.49
37.51
43.76
47 39
46.15
50.77
55.37
54.67

46.18
51.97
58.00
57.44

50.26
53.51
50.58
46.96

45.41
45.43
44.19
42.80

44.45
49.82
65.85
70.49

618.04
691.55
639.76
714.81
834.05
910.88
873.60
879.12
906.00
876.72

55.85
66.27
62.38
69.87
81.37
8817
85.26
91.93
98.70
97.84

3.47
2.98
3.37
3.17
3.01
3.00
3.40
3.20
3.07
3.24

5.90
4.62
5.82
5.50
5.32
5.59
6.63
5.73
5.67
6.08

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

45.72
54.22
60.29
57.42
43.84
45.73
54.46
53.69
53.70
58.32

48.03
57.92
65.73
63.08
48.08
50.52
60.44
57.86
58.23
64.76

32.14
44.35
50.17
37.74
31.89
31.10
39.57
41.09
43.50
47.34

37.24
39.53
38.48
37.69
29.79
31.50
36.97
40.92
39.22
38.21

60.00
70.38
78.35
70.12
49.67
47.14
52.94
55.25
56.65
61.42

753.19
884.76
950.71
923.88
759.37
802.49
974.92
894.63
820.23
844.40

83.22
98.29
109.20
107.43
82.85
86.16
102.01
98.20
96.02
103.01

3.83
3.14
2.84
3.06
4.47
4.31
3.77
4.62
5.28
5.45

6.45
5.41
5.50
7.12
11.59
9.15
8.90
10.79
12.03

53 45
52 80
52.77
55 48
59.14
59.63

3915
38 90
38.95
4119
44.21
44.19

39 09
39 02
39.26
39 69
39.47
39.41

50.91
50 60
51.44
55 04
57.96
58.31

781.09
763 57
756.37
794 66
838.56
840.26

90.25
88 98
88.82
92 71
97 41
97.66

5.32
5 49
5.62
5 42
5.20
5.19

12.24

May
June

49.89
49 41
49.50
5175
54 49
54.83

July
Aug
Sept
Ot
c
Nov
Dec

54.61
58 53
58.58
56.40
52.74
53.69

59.35
64 07
64.23
61.60
57.50
58.72

44.74
49 45
50.19
46.70
41.80
42.49

39.28
40 20
39.82
39.44
37.88
38.09

57.97
63 28
63.22
60.42
54.95
55.68

831.71
887 93
878.64
857.69
804.29
807.94

97.19
103 92
103.86
100.58
94.71
96.11

5 25
4 93
4.97
5.11
5.45
5.39

11.28

55 77
55 08
56.19
57.50
56 21
57.61

61.31
60 37
61.89
63.63
62 21
63.57

43 69
42 27
43.22
45.92
45 60
47.54

38.83
39 21
38.94
38.63
37 48
38.44

57.59
56 09
57.65
59.50
58 80
61.87

837.39
825 18
847.84
864.96
837 41
838.65

99 71
98 23
100.11
102.07
99 73
101.73

5 28
5 43
5.36
5.35
5 58
5.53

13.09

58 38
61.19
61.89
59 27
59.02
61.75

64 24
67.71
69.17
66.68
66.45
69.83

48 85
52.48
52.21
48 09
47.61
50.59

38 88
39.26
38.39
36 58
36.55
37.29

64 43
68.40
67.21
6164
60.64
63.21

836 95
873.55
878.50
840 39
815.78
836.14

102 71
107.36
108.60
104 47
103 66
107.78

5 50
5.30
5.31
5.56
5.71
5.53

13.27

1978:
Jan
Fb
e

Mr
a

JUIJ

1979
Jan
Fb
e

Mr
a

May
June
July
Aug
Sept
JUIJ

Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e

1
Averages of daily closing prices, except New York Stock Exchange data through May
2
Includes all the stocks (more than 1,500) listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
3
Includes 30 stocks.
4
Includes 500 stocks.
5
Standard & Poor's series, based on 500 stocks in the composite index.
6

11.76

12.83

13.58

1964 are averages of weekly closing prices.

Aggregate cash dividends (based on latest known annual rate) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing
prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures; annual data are averages of monthly figures.
7
Ratio of quarterly earnings after taxes (seasonally adjusted annual rate) to price index for last day of quarter. Annual ratios are
averages of quarterly ratios.
Note.—All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Sources: New York Stock Exchange, Dow-Jones & Co., Inc., and Standard & Poor's Corporation.




307

TABLE B-90.—Business formation and business failures, 1929-79
Business failures1
Index
of net
business
formation
(1967 —
100)

Year or montn

1929 3
19333
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

104 8
86.4
90 8
90.1
94 5
92 4
90 8
98.2
95.4
91.4
91.1
98.1
94.5
91.1
92.8
94.7
98.0
99.5
98.9
100.0
107.6
113.5
107.1
109.5
115.5
115.5
111.2
108.9
117.2
126.5
132.9

New
business
incorporations
(number)

Business
failure
rate2

132,916
112,897
96,346
85,640
93,092
83,778
92,946
102,706
117 411
139,915
141,163
137,112
150,781
193,067
182,713
181,535
182,057
186,404
197,724
203,897
200,010
206,569
233,635
274,267
264,209
287,577
316,601
329,358
319,149
326,345
375,766
432,172
477,827

103 9
100.3
69.6
63.0
54.4
44.6
16.4
65
.
4.2
52
.
14.3
20.4
34.4
34.3
30.7
28.7
33.2
42 0
41.6
48.0
51.7
55.9
51.8
57.0
64.4
60.8
56.3
53.2
53.3
51.6
49.0
38.6
37.3
43.8
41.7
38.3
36.4
38.4
42.6
34.8
28.4
23.9

Amount of current liabilities
(millions of dollars)

Number of failures
Liability size class
Total

Under
$100,000

$100,000
and over

22,909
19,859
14,768
13,619
11,848
9,405
3,221
1,222
809
1,129
3,474
5,250
9,246
9,162
8,058
7,611
8,862
11,086
10,969
12,686
13,739
14,964
14,053
15,445
17,075
15,782
14,374
13,501
13,514
13,061
12,364
9,636
9,154
10,748
10,326
9,566
9,345
9,915
11,432
9,628
7,919
6,619

22165
18,880
14,541
13,400
11,685
9,282
3,155
1,176
759
1,003
3,103
4,853
8,708
8,746
7,626
7,081
8,075
10 226
10,113
11,615
12,547
13,499
12,707
13,650
15,006
13,772
12,192
11,346
11,340
10,833
10,144
7,829
7,192
8,019
7,611
7,040
6,627
6,733
7,504
6,176
4,861
3,712

744
979
111
219
163
123
66
46
50
126
371
397
538
416
432
530
787
860
856
1,071
1,192
1,465
1,346
1,795
2,069
2,010
2,182
2,155
2,174
2,228
2,220
1,807
1,962
2,729
2,715
2,526
2,718
3,182
3,928
3,452
3,058
2,907

Liability size class
Total

Under
$100,000

$100,000
and over

483 3
457.5
182.5
166.7
136.1
100.8
45.3
31.7
30.2
67.3
204.6
234.6
308.1
248.3
259.5
283.3
394.2
462 6
449.4
562.7
615.3
728.3
692.8
938.6
1,090.1
1,213.6
1,352.6
1,329.2
1,321.7
1,385.7
1,265.2
941.0
1,142.1
1,887.8
1,916.9
2,000.2
2,298.6
3,053.1
4,380.2
3,011.3
3,095.3
2,656.0

2615
215.5
132.9
119.9
100.7
80.3
30.2
14.5
11.4
15.7
63.7
93.9
161.4
151.2
131.6
131.9
167.5
2114
206.4
239.8
267.1
297.6
278.9
327.2
370.1
346.5
321.0
313.6
321.7
321.5
297.9
241.1
231.3
269.3
271.3
258.8
235.6
256.9
298.6
257.8
208.3
164.7

2218
242.0
49.7
46.8
35.4
20.5
15.1
17.1
18.8
51.6
140.9
140.7
146.7
97.1
128.0
151.4
226.6
2512
243.0
322.9
348.2
430.7
413.9
611.4
720.0
867.1
1,031.6
1,015.6
1,000.0
1,064.1
967.3
699.9
910.8
1,618.4
1,645.6
1,741.5
2,063.0
2,796.3
4,081.6
2,753.4
2,887.0
2,491.3

Seasonally adjusted
1978:

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mar
May
June
July

'.

Aug
Sept
Ot
c
Nov
Dec

133.6
133.7
130.5
130.7
131.0
132.9
133.4
133.0
133.0
135.5
133.6
133.5

36,547
39,253
37,602
38,498
38,320
39,796
39,403
42,605
41,827
41,945
41,568
42,461

21.6
24.0
24.6
24.1
23.4
21.9
22.0
29.8
22.6
22.5
25.2
26.4

504
559
666
594
583
519
459
675
458
511
556
535

316
319
388
335
337
301
244
347
266
283
296
280

188
240
278
259
246
218
215
328
192
228
260
255

168.3
205.0
324.4
203.0
160.4
178.8
231.8
206.4
127.0
475.3
178.9
196.5

14.3
14.1
18.2
15.5
14.7
12.3
10.7
15.9
11.4
12.4
12.8
12.6

154.0
190.9
306.2
187.5
145.7
166.5
221.2
190.5
115.6
463.0
166.1
183.9

131.4
132.4
132.2
130.4
130.1
131.0
132.3
131.3
133.1
134.0

42,847
42,061
42,206
42,763
43,741
42,634
45,049
43,213
44,961
46,346

27.4
24.4
27.9
30.8
29.1
26.2
27.5

642
545
732
734
708
602
565

355
291
379
397
380
307
285

287
254
353
337
328
295
280

182.2
177.1
187.8
242.8
200.4
273.2
212.2

15.1
12.8
18.0
16,8
16.8
13.8
13.9

167.1
164.3
169.8
226.0
183.7
259.4
198.3

1979:

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mar
June
July

Aug
Sept
Ot
c

1
Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and, beginning 1933, of real estate, insurance,
holding, and financial companies, steamship lines, travel agencies, etc.
2
Failure rate per 10,000 listed enterprises.
3
Series revised; not strictly comparable with earlier data.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Dun & Bradstreet, Inc.




308

AGRICULTURE
TABLE B-91.—Income of farm people and farmers, 1929-79
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Income received from farming3

Personal income received by
total farm population

Not tr
nei TO i at in

GrOSS inhume UCIUIC iiiveuiuiy

adjustment

Year or QUdrier

From
farm
all
sources sources *
From

From
nonfarm
sources 2

Cash receipts from
1
idincuug:>

Production

stock
and
products

penses

.

Total4
Total

1929
1933
1939

13.9

74
76
101

48
48
68

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

14.1
16.5
16.6
17.2
20.0
21.1
23.8
19.5

10.1
12.1
12.2
12.8
15.5
15.8
18.0
13.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

20.3
22.7
22.0
19.7
18.3
17.5
17.6
17.5
19.2
17.5

14.1
16.1
15.3
13.3
12.4
11.3
11.1
10.8
12.5
10.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

18.4
19.0
19.7
20.0
19.8
22.6
23.8
22.9
24.1
26.9

11.1
11.4
11.4
11.0
10.0
12.0
12.6
11.1
11.3
12.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

27.5
28.8
34.6
48.9
45.2
44.5
40.3
42.9
54.0

13.0
13.5
16.9
29.2
23.4
21.9
16.8
18.0
25.2

26
28
33
3.9
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.6
5.3
5.8
6.2
6.3
6.5
6.7
6.4
5.9
6.2
6.6
6.6
6.7
7.1
7.2
7.6
8.3
9.0
9.7

11.3

7.1

5.3
7.9
8.4

10.6

6.2
2.8
4.5
4.9
6.5
9.0

operators after
inventory
adjustment5

ex-

Crops

5.1
2.5
3.3
3.5
4.6
6.5
8.1
9.2
9.7

7.7
4.4
6.3
6.9
7.8

1967
Current
dollars dollars6

6.2
2.6
4.4
4.5
6.5
9.9

12.0

6.6

10.6

23.5
24.9
28.8

12.4
13.2
14.3
14.1
13.6
13.5
14.0
12.3
14.2
14.7

19.5
22.3
22.8
21.5
21.8
22.2
22.7
23.7
25.8
27.2

13.6
15.9
15.0
13.0
12.4
11.3
11.3
11.1
13.2
10.7

18.9
20.5
18.8
16.2
15.4
14.1
13.8
13.1
15.2
12.3

34.2
35.2
36.5
37.5
37.3
39.4
43.4
42.8
44.2
48.2

19.0
19.5
20.2
20.0
19.9
21.9
25.0
24.4
25.5
28.6

15.3
15.7
16.3
17.4
17.2
17.5
18.4
18.4
18.7
19.6

27.4
28.6
30.3
31.6
31.8
33.7
36.5
38.2
39.5
42.1

11.5
12.0
12.1
11.8
10.5
12.9
14.0
12.3
12.3
14.3

13.0
12.3
13.3
12.8
11.3
13.7
14.4
12.3
11.8
13.4

58.6
60.6
70.1
95.5
100.0
96.9
104.2
107.5
124.9

50.5
52.9
61.2
87.1
92.4
88.2
94.8
95.7
111.0

29.6
30.6
35.7
45.9
41.4
43.0
46.1
47.4
59.0

21.0
22.3
25.5
41.1
51.1
45.1
48.7
48.2
52.1

44.4
47.4
52.3
65.6
72.2
75.9
83.1
88.8
98.1

14.2
14.6
18.7
33.3
26.1
24.5
18.7
19.8
27.9

12.2
12.1
14.9
25.1
17.7
15.2
11.0
10.9
14.3

96.8
93.8
92.1
99.9

46.4
45.7
47.1
50.6

50.4
48.1
44.9
49.4

86.7
87.5
88.5
92.4

19.3
18.0
16.9
24.8

10.9
10.0

106.2
111.0
109.0
118.0

53.9
58.3
60.4
63.4

52.4
52.7
48.6
54.6

95.0
97.0
97.4
103.0

25.8
27.8
26.3
31.6

13.7
14.4
13.3
15.6

141.9
144 3
143.2

111

16.1
19.6
18.2
16.9
16.3
16.0
16.4
17.4
19.2
18.9

119.8
124.3
122.2
133.4

14.5
15.3
17.8
19.7
21.8

11.7
11.7
12.3
15.1
15.4
17.7
12.8

10.7
14.7
20.2
22.7
22.2
22.8
25.8
23.0
24.5
17.9

107.0
104.5
103.4
115.0

10.6
11.2
11.7
12.8
13.9

11.0
13.1
13.1
12.4

10.0
11.6
12.3
13.1
14.5
17.0
18.8
18.0

128.9
130 7
129.9

70.0
68 2
65.0

58.9
62 5
64.9

109.0
112 0
116.0

34.9
34 8
30.7

16.8
16 3
13.9

11.1
13.9
18.8
23.4
24.4
25.8
29.5
34.1
34.7
31.6

11.1
15.6
19.6
20.5
21.7
24.8
29.6
30.2
27.8

11.5
11.4
12.0
13.8
16.5
17.1
15.4

32.3
37.1
36.8
35.1
33.7
33.3
34.4
34.2
38.1
37.9

28.5
32.9
32.5
31.0
29.8
29.5
30.4
29.7
33.5
33.6

38.5
40.2
41.7
42.7
43.1
45.5
50.6
49.9
51.7
56.3

1977

1
II
III
I
V

9.2

13.4

1978

1
II
III
I
V
1979

1

II
Ill

1
Net income to farm operators after inventory adjustment, less net income of nonresident operators, plus wages and salaries and
other labor income of farm resident workers, less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance.
2
Estimated income of farm residents from nonfarm sources; based on survey benchmarks with extrapolations to current year.
3
Includes government payments.
4
Also includes government payments and nonmoney income and other farm income furnished by farms, not shown separately.
5
Includes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year.
6
Income in current dollars divided by the consumer price index (Department of Labor).
Sources: Department of Agriculture and Department of Labor.




309

TABLE B-92.— Farm output and productivity indexes, 1929-79
[1967=100]
Productivity indicators

Farm output
Crops 2
Year

1929

Total1

53

Feed
Food
Total 3 grains grains

Oil
crops

Livestock
and
products 2

Farm
output Crop
propr
e
unit duction
of
per
total acre 4
input

Farm output per hour
1 iwo

Total

Crops

Livestock
and
products

62

48

52

11

53

52

56

16

16

26

36

8

57

53

50

16

15

25

1933

51

55

44

1939

58

64

51

48

25

59

59

60

19

20

27

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

60
62
70
69
71

67
68
76
71
75

52
56
64
59
62

52
60
63
54
67

29
29
40
41
36

60
64
71
77
73

60
62
68
66
67

62
63
70
64
68

20
21
24
24
24

21
23
25
24
25

27
28
30
31
30

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

70
71
69
76
74

73
77
73
83
79

60
65
50
72
63

70
72
85
81
70

36
34
39
47
45

73
71
70
68
72

68
71
68
74
71

67
71
67
75
70

26
27
28
31
32

27
29
29
33
33

31
32
33
34
35

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

74
76
79
79
80

76
78
81
81
79

64
59
63
61
64

65
64
83
76
67

46
47
46
47
49

75
78
78
79
82

71
71
74
75
76

69
70
73
72
71

34
35
38
39
42

36
35
39
40
42

37
39
40
41
43

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

82
82
81
87
88

82
82
80
89
89

68
68
74
80
84

63
66
62
91
73

53
60
58
69
64

84
84
83
84
88

78
80
80
87
87

74
76
77
86
85

44
47
51
57
59

45
48
53
61
61

46
48
50
54
58

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

91
91
92
96
95

93
91
92
96
93

87
78
79
86
75

87
80
74
77
86

68
77
78
81
81

87
91
92
95
97

90
91
92
96
95

89
92
95
97
95

65
67
71
77
81

66
68
72
77
79

62
66
71
77
82

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

98
95
100
102
102

99
95
100
103
104

88
89
100
95
99

88
88
100
106
98

95
97
100
114
116

95
97
100
100
101

100
97
100
102
103

100
97
100
105
106

89
92
100
106
110

90
94
100
106
108

86
93
100
105
112

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

101
110
110
112
106

100
112
113
119
110

89
116
112
115
93

91
107
102
114
120

117
121
131
155
127

105
106
107
105
106

102
110
110
111
106

104
112
115
116
104

115
128
136
130
136

111
126
135
138
128

121
128
137
144
156

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979 P

114
117
121
121
129

121
121
130
131
144

114
120
126
135
145

142
141
132
123
143

153
132
175
183
219

101
105
106
106
107

115
115
117
117
124

112
111
117
121
130

152
162
173
183
184

142
146
158
166
171

160
178
189
204
195

1
Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or
consumption in farm households.
2
Gross production.
3
Includes items not included in groups shown.
4
Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




310

TABLE B-93.—Farm input use, selected inputs, 1929-79
Farm population
/ A n r ;i I
(April l \)i1

Year

As
percent
hor
Del
of total
(thou- populasands) tion2

Selected indexes o input use (1967 = LOO)

Farm employment
(tnousanas

Num-

Total

Crops
harFam- Hired vested
(millions of
work- work- acres)4
ers
ers

Feed,

MeTntal
10131

Farm
labor

Farm
real
estate

chanical Agripower cultural
and
chemimachin- cals5
ery

cooH
Seed,

and
liveliwo

stock
purchases6

1929

30,580

25.1 12,763 9,360 3,403

365

102

329

103

38

10

1933

32,393

25.8 12,739 9,874 2,865

340

96

321

97

32

6

31
28

1939

30,840

23.5 11,338 8,611 2,727

331

98

294

102

40

11

41

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

30,547
30,118
28,914
26,186
24,815

23.1
22.6
21.4
19.2
17.9

10,979
10,669
10,504
10,446
10,219

8,300
8.017
7,949
8,010
7,988

2,679
2,652
2,555
2,436
2,231

341
344
348
357
362

100
100
103
104
105

293
288
296
292
289

103
102
100
98
98

42
44
51
55
57

13
14
15
17
20

42
45
48
52
52

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

24,420
25,403
25,829
24,383
24,194

17.5
18.0
17.9
16.6
16.2

10,000
10,295
10,382
10,363
9,964

7,881
8,106
8,115
8,026
7,712

2,119
2,189
2,267
2,337
2,252

354
352
355
356
360

103
101
101
103
105

271
260
246
240
231

98
102
103
103
104

58
57
64
72
80

20
21
23
25
27

54
53
55
56
61

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

23,048
21,890
21,748
19,874
19,019

15.2
14.2
13.9
12.5
11.7

9,926
9,546
9,149
8,864
8,651

7,597
7,310
7,005
6,775
6,570

2,329
2,236
2,144
2,089
2,081

345
344
349
348
346

104
107
107
106
105

217
218
208
200
192

105
105
105
105
105

84
90
94
96
96

29
32
35
36
37

63
67
69
69
71

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

19,078
18,712
17,656
17,128
16,592

11.5
11.1
10.3
98
.
94
.

8,381
7,852
7,600
7,503
7,342

6,345
5,900
5,660
5,521
5,390

2,036
1,952
1,940
1,982
1,952

340
324
324
324
324

105
103
101
100
102

185
174
162
156
151

105
102
102
100
101

97
98
97
97
98

39
41
41
43
49

72
75
74
79
84

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

15,635
14,803
14,313
13,367
12,954

87
.
81
.
77
.
71
.
68
.

7,057
6,919
6,700
6,518
6,110

5,172
5,029
4,873
4,738
4,506

1,885
1,890
1,827
1,780
1,604

324
302
295
298
298

101
100
100
100
100

145
139
133
129
122

100
100
100
100
100

97
94
94
93
93

49
53
58
65
71

84
88
90
90
92

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

12,363
11,595
10,875
10,454
10,307

64
.
59
.
55
.
52
.
51
.

5,610
5,214
4,903
4,749
4,596

4,128
3,854
3,650
3,535
3,419

1,482
1,360
1,253
1,213
1,176

298
294
306
300
290

98
98
100
100
99

110
103
100
97
93

99
99
100
99
98

94
96
100
101
101

75
85
100
105
111

93
97
100
97
101

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

9,712
9,425
9,610
9,472
9,264

47
.
46
.
46
.
45
.
44
.

4,523
4,436
4,373
4,337
4,389

3,348
3,275
3,228
3,169
3,075

1,175
1,161
1,146
1,168
1,314

293
305
294
321
328

100
100
100
101
100

89
86
82
80
78

101
99
98
97
95

100
102
101
105
109

115
124
131
136
140

104
111
113
116
107

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979"

8,864
8,253
7,806
7
8,005

4 2 4,342 3,026
.
3 8 4,374 2,997
.
3 6 4,155 2,859
.
3 7 3,937 2,681
.
3,944 2,525

1,317
1,377
1,296
1,256
1,418

336
337
344
336
348

100
103
104
103
103

76
73
71
67
66

96
97
99
98
98

113
117
118
120
121

127
145
151
145
151

101
110
111
116
116

x
Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce, i.e., civilian population living on farms,
regardless of occupation. See also footnote 7.
2
Total population of United States as of July 1, including Armed Forces overseas.
3
Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data, published by the Department of Agriculture, differ from those on
agricultural employment by the Department of Labor (see Table B-29) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of
employment, and in time of month for which the data are collected. See monthly report on "Farm Labor."
4
Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits, tree nuts, and farm gardens.
5
Fertilizer, lime, and pesticides.
6
Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed, seed, and livestock purchases.
7
Based on new definition of a farm, farm population is 6,501,000 in 1978 and 6,200,000 (preliminary) in 1979.
Sources: Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census).




311

TABLE B-94.—Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers,

1940-79

[1967 = 100]

Prices paid by farmers

Prices received by
farmers

Year or month

Al
l
farm
products

Crops

136
183
165
172
111
175
217
257

98
98
100
101
102
104
107
108
116
159
111
187
202
212
276

188
190
197
208
212
216
213
204
205
202
202
205

186
197
204
209
219
219
218
218
111
232
230
239

209
211
214
216
219
220
220
221
223
224
225
226

203
206
211
214
217
218
218
217
220
222
222
225

245
245
251
251
251
260
260
260
111
111
111
111

179
179
181
181
181
181
181
181
181
179
179
179

209
209
209
209
209
211
213
214
215
215
217
220

244
244
244
246
246
246
243
243
243
237
237
237

209
216
214
212
220
233

252
264
274
111
269
255

234
238
243
246
248
249

230
235
243
246
247
248

111
111
280
280
280
293

179
179
187
187
194
194

227
231
237
248
258
271

257
257
257
269
269
269

240
235
225
224
223
220

250
239
255
248
251
256

251

250
249
253
255
255
258

293
293
302
302
302
302

194
194
194

287
298
308
314
318
324

266
266
266
268
268
268

June

24
4
24
4
27
3
21
4
26
3
238
29
3

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dec
1979:

. ..
.

July

Ag
u
Sept
Ot
c
Nv
o
Dc
e

Wage
rates3

103
102
100
94
87
88
91
94
102
167
217
185
181
180
196

232
241
246
244
246

'.

rucIS

and
energy

92
96
100
104
111
116
122
128
137
161
195
217
238
259
289

Jn
a
Fb
e
Mr
a
My
a

May
June
July

Ciialc

Fertilizer

15
18
23
31
38
42
46
49
52
51
50
55
59
61
60
61
63
66
68
72
74
76
78
80
82
86
93
100
108
119
128
134
142
155
178
192
210
226
242
265

187
193
200
208
215
217
216
211
217
218
216
222

Fb
e
Mr
a

Total2

Tractors
ad
n
selfpropelled
machiney
r

43
45
52
57
60
61
67
78
87
83
86
95
95
89
89
87
87
90
92
93
92
93
94
95
94
96
100
100
100
104
108
113
121
146
166
182
193
200
216
247

40
48
64
83
88
90
102
117
113
100
103
118
119
107
108
103
104
100
99
98
99
101
103
107
106
103
106
100
100
97
100
108
114
175
224
201
197
192
204
223

1978:
Jan

Production items

36
39
44
50
53
56
61
70
76
73
75
82
84
81
81
81
81
84
86
87
88
88
90
91
92
94
99
100
103
108
112
118
125
144
164
180
192
202
219
249

40
49
64
77
79
83
94
110
115
100
103
121
115
102
98
93
92
94
100
96
95
96
98
97
95
98
106
100
102
107
110
113
125
179
192
185
186
183
210
241

1940 ..
..
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

.
Liveand
products

STOCK
ctnrb

Al
l
commodities,
services,
interest,
taxes,
and
wage
ratesl

40
50
62
72
71
77
88
105
115
99
102
122
111
97
90
85
82
89
99
93
92
91
93
89
86
94
106
100
104
117
118

18
1

21
5
24
5
26
5
26
5
29
5

1
Includes items used for family living, not shown separately.
2
Includes other items not shown separately.
3
Seasonally adjusted; annual data are averages of seasonally
4

21
1
21
1
111

Addendum:
Average
farm
real
estate
value
per
acre 4
19
19
21
23
26
29
32
36
39
41
40
46
51
52
51
53
55
58
61
66
68
69
73
77
82
86
93
100
107
113
117
122
132
150
187
213
242
283
308
351

308

32
3

351

34
8

adjusted data.
Average for 48 States. Annual data are for March 1 of each year through 1975 and for February 1 beginning 1976. Monthly data
are for first of month.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




312

TABLE B-95.—U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities, 1940-79
[Billions of dollars]
Imports

Exports

Year

1

Total

Feed
Food
grains grains2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

0.5
.7
1.2
2.1
2.1

4

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

2.3
3.1
4.0
3.5
3.6

4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

(4)
0.1
(4)

4
4
4

.1

Oilseeds
and
products

PI
£j
PI

Cotton

Tobacco

Animals
and Total*
products

Crops,
fruits,
and
vegetables3

Animals
and
products

Coffee

AgriCocoa cultural
beans trade
and
prod- balance
ucts

0.2
.1
.1
.2
.1

(4)
0.1
.1
.2
.1

0.1
.3
.8
1.2
1.3

1.3
1.7
1.3
1.5
1.8

ft
(

0.2
.3
.5
.4
.3

0.1
.2
.2
.3
.3

(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)

-0.8
-1.0
-.1
.6

.3
.5
4
.5
.9

.2
.4
3

.9
.9
7
.5
.4

1.7
2.3
28
3.1
2.9

.1
.2
1
.2
.2

.4
.4
4
.6
.4

.3
.5
6
.7
.8

(4)
0.1
.2
.1

.6
.8
1.2
.4
.7

1

/1
I
3

A
.1
14
1.5
1.1

2.9
4.0
3.4
2.8
3.1

.2
.3
.3
.3
.2

.6
1.1
1.1
.7
.5

.2
.3
.2
.2
.3

1.0
1.1
.9
.5
.8

.3
.3
.2
.3

.3
.5
.3
.4
.5

4.0
5.2
4.5
4.2
4.0

.2
.2
.2
.2
.2

.7
1.1
.7
.6
.5

1.1
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5

.2
.2
.2
.2
.3

-1.1
-1.2
-1.1
-1.4
-.9

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

3.2
4.2
4.5
3.9
4.0

.3
.4
.3
.5
.6

.6
1.0
1.0
.8
.9

.4
.5
.5
.4
.6

.5
.7
1.0
.7
.4

.4
.3
.4
.4
.3

.6
.7
.7
.5
.6

4.0
4.0
4.0
3.9
4.1

.2
.2
.2
.2
.2

.5
.4
.5
.7
.8

1.4
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.1

.2
.2
.2
.2
.2

-.8
.2
.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

4.8
5.0
5.0
5.6
6.3

.5
.5
.8
.8
.9

1.2
1.4
1.3
1.5
1.7

.6
.6
.7
.8
1.0

1.0
.9
.5
.6
.7

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4

.6
.6
.6
.7
.8

3.8
3.7
3.9
4.0
4.1

.2
.2
.2
.3
.3

.6
.7
.9
.9
.8

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.2

.2
.2
.2
.2
.2

1.0
1.3
1.1
1.6
2.2

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

6.2
6.9
6.4
6.3
6.0

1.1
1.3
1.1
.9
.9

1.4
1.8
1.5
1.4
1.2

1.2
1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3

.5
.4
.5
.5
.3

.4
.5
.5
.5
.6

.8
.7
.7
.7
.8

4.1
4.5
4.5
5.0
5.0

.3
.4
.4
.5
.5

.9
1.2
1.1
1.3
1.4

1.1
1.1
1.0
1.2
.9

.1

2.1
2.4
1.9
1.2
.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

7.3
7.7
9.4
17.7
22.0

1.1
1.0
1.5
3.5

1.4
1.3
1.8
4.7

1.9
2.2
2.4
4.3

.4
.6
.5
.9

.5
.5
.7
.7

.9
1.0
1.1
1.6

5.8
5.8
6.5
8.4

.5
.6
.7
.8

1.6
1.5
1.8
2.6

1.2
1.2
1.3
1.7

.3
.2
.2
.3

4.6

5.4

5.7

1.3

.9

1.8

1.2

.8

2.2

1.6

.5

1.5
1.9
2.9
9.3
11.8

1975
1976
1977
1978

21.9
23.0
23.6
29.4

5.2
6.0
4.9
5.9

6.2
4.7
3.6
5.5

4.5
5.1
6.6
8.2

1.0
1.0
1.5
1.7

.9
.9
1.1
1.4

1.7
2.4
2.7
3.0

9.3
11.0
13.4
14.8

.8
.9
1.2
1.5

1.8
2.3
2.3
3.1

1.7
2.9
4.2
4.0

.5
.6
1.0
1.4

12.6
12.0
1.2
14.8

Jan-Sept:
1978
1979

21.2
23.8

4.5
5.4

4.1
4.3

5.5
6.0

1.4
1.6

.8
.7

1.8
2.4

1.9
12.3

1.5
1.6

2.2
2.8

3.0
2.9

1.0
.9

1.3
11.5

(3..

.2

1
Total includes items not shown separately.
2
Rice, wheat, and wheat flour.
3
Includes nuts, fruits, and vegetable preparations.
4

.2

.2
.2
.2

-"i

Less than $50 million.
Note.—Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce. Agricultural

duties, ocean freight, and marine insurance.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




313

TABLE B-96.—Balance sheet of the farming sector, 1929-80

[Billions of dollars]
Claims

Assets
Financial assets

Other physical assets
Beginning of
year

Household
equipment
and
furnishings

Deposits
and
currency

Real
estate

Livestock »

Machinery and
motor
vehicles

1929

48.0

6.6

3.2

1933

30.8

3.0

2.5

5.1

3.2

Other
debt

Proprietors'
equities

8.5

• 34.1

6.8

Total

1939...

Crops2

U.S.
savings
bonds

Investments in
cooperatives

Total

estate
debt

9.8

1940...
1941..
1942...
1943...
1944...

53.0
54.8
62.9
73.6
84.0

33.6
34.4
37.5
41.6
48.2

5.1
5.3
7.1
9.6
9.7

3.1
3.3
4.0
4.9
5.4

2.7
3.0
3.9
5.1
6.1

4.2
4.1
4.8
4.8
4.7

3.2
3.5
4.2
5.5
6.6

0.3
.3
.5
1.1
2.2

0.8
.9
.9
1.0
1.1

53.0
54.8
62.9
73.6
84.0

6.6
6.5
6.4
5.9
5.4

3.4
3.9
4.1
4.0
3.5

43.0
44.4
52.4
63.7
75.1

1945...
1946...
1947...
1948...
1949...

93.8
102.9
115.9
127.4
134.6

53.9
61.0
68.5
73.7
76.6

9.0
9.7
11.9
13.2
14.4

6.5
5.4
5.3
7.4
10.1

6.7
6.3
7.1
9.0
8.5

5.2
5.5
7.2
8.1
8.9

7.9
9.4
10.2
9.9
9.6

3.4
4.2
4.2
4.4
4.6

1.2
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.9

93.8
102.9
115.9
127.4
134.6

4.9
4.7
4.9
5.1
5.3

3.4
3.2
3.6
4.2
6.1

85.5
95.0
107.4
118.1
123.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

134.5
154.3
170.1
167.6
164.6

77.6
89.5
98.4
100.1
98.7

12.9
17.1
19.5
14.8
11.8

12.2
14.1
16.7
17.4
18.4

7.6
7.9
8.8
9.0
9.2

8.4
9.6
10.1
9.6
9.5

9.1
9.1
9.4
9.4
9.4

4.7
4.7
4.7
4.6
4.7

2.0
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9

134.5
154.3
170.1
167.6
164.6

5.6
6.1
6.7
7.2
7.7

6.8
6.9
8.0
8.9
9.2

122.1
141.3
155.4
151.5
147.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

168.8
173.6
182.8
191.3
208.4

102.2
107.5
115.7
121.8
131.1

11.2
10.6
11.0
13.9
17.7

18.6
19.3
20.2
20.1
21.8

9.6
8.3
8.3
7.6
9.3

9.7
10.0
9.6
9.6
9.4

9.4
9.5
9.4
9.5
10.0

5.0
5.2
5.1
5.1
5.2

3.1
3.2
3.5
3.7
3.9

168.8
173.6
182.8
191.3
208.4

8.2
9.0
9.8
10.4
11.1

9.4
9.8
9.5
10.0
12.5

151.2
154.8
163.5
170.9
184.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

210.2
210.8
219.3
227.7
235.8

137.2
138.5
144.5
150.2
158.6

15.3
15.6
16.4
17.3
15.9

22.7
22.2
22.5
23.5
23.9

7.7
8.0
8.8
9.3
9.8

9.2
8.7
8.9

9.2
8.7
8.8
9.2
9.2

4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.2

4.2
4.5
4.9
5.0
5.4

210.2
210.8
219.3
227.7
235.8

12.0
12.8
13.8
15.1
16.8

12.8
13.4
14.7
16.3
17.6

185.4
184.6
190.8
196.3
201.4

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

243.8
260.8
274.2
288.0
302.8

167.5
179.2
189.1
199.7
209.2

14.5
17.6
19.0
18.9
20.2

24.8
26.0
27.4
29.8
31.3

9.2
9.7
10.0
9.6
10.6

8.4
8.4
8.3
8.8
9.4

9.6
10.0
10.3
10.9
11.5

4.2
4.0
3.9
3.8
3.8

5.6
5.9
6.2
6.5
6.8

243.8
260.8
274.2
288.0
302.8

18.9
21.2
23.1
25.1
27.4

17.9
19.5
21.0
22.3
23.1

207.0
220.1
230.1
240.6
252.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

314.9
326.0
351.8
394.8
478.5

215.8
223.2
239.6
267.3
327.7

23.5
23.7
27.3
34.1
42.4

32.3
34.4
36.6
39.3
44.2

10.9
10.7
11.8
14.5
22.1

9.6
10.0
10.8
11.9
12.3

11.9
12.4
13.2
14.0
14.9

3.7
3.6
3.7
4.0
4.1

7.2
8.0
8.8
9.7
10.8

314.9
326.0
351.8
394.8
478.5

29.2
30.3
32.2
35.7
41.3

23.8
24.2
26.9
29.6
32.8

261.9
271.5
292.7
329.5
404.4

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

517.6
580.2
655.8
713.0
820.2

368.5
416.9
483.8
525.8
599.5

24.6
29.5
29.1
32.0
51.3

55.7
65.0
71.9
77.7
84.3

23.3
21.3
22.0
24.9
27.4

14.0
14.2
14.4
16.4
19.2

15.1
15.6
16.0
16.3
16.8

4.3
4.4
4.4
4.4
4.8

12.1
13.3
14.2
15.5
16.9

517.6
580.2
655.8
713.0
820.2

46.3
51.1
56.6
63.7
72.3

35.5
39.7
46.1
55.6
65.2

435.8
489.4
553.1
593.7
682.7

1980

950.0

696.0

64.0

97.0

30.5

22.0

17.2

5.0

18.3

950.0

83.1

74.7

792.2

1

Beginning with 1961, horses and mules are excluded.
2
Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter
on January 1, 1980 totaled approximately $1.0 billion.
Note.—Beginning 1960, data include Alaska and Hawaii.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




314

INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS
TABLE B-97.— Exchange rates, 1973-79

[Cents per unit of foreign currency, except as noted]
Year and month

Belgian franc

Canadian
dollar

French franc

German mark

Italian lira

Japanese yen

1973:
2.5377
2.6643
2.7089
2.4726

100.333
100.160
99.181
100.058

22.191
23.472
23.466
21.757

35.548
38.786
41.246
37.629

0.17600
.16792
.17691
.15458

0.38190
.37808
.37668
.35692

Dec

2.5040
2.6366
2.5364
2.7158

102.877
103.481
101.384
101.192

20.742
20.408
20.831
22.109

38.211
39.603
37.580
40.816

.15687
.15379
.15103
.15179

.35454
.35340
.33439
.33288

1975:
Mar
June
Sept
Dec

2.9083
2.8603
2.5485
2.5311

99.954
97.426
97.437
98.627

23.804
24.971
22.367
22.428

43.120
42.726
38.191
38.144

.15842
.15982
.14740
.14645

.34731
.34077
.33345
.32715

2.5480
2.5220
2.6046
2.7483

101.431
102,712
102.557
98.204

21.657
21.109
20.334
20.055

39.064
38.797
40.169
41.965

.12113
.11780
.11837
.11521

.33276
.33424
.34800
.33933

Mar

2.7258
2.7713
2.7910
2.9608

95.125
94.549
93.168
91.132

20.075
20.240
20.314
20.844

41.812
42.453
43.034
46.499

.11276
.11295
.11318
.11416

.35687
.36652
.37486
.41491

Mar

3.1589
3.0590
3.2207
3.3637

88.823
89.143
85.739
84.763

21.256
21.841
22.909
23.178

49.181
47.984
50.778
53.217

.11692
.11634
.12050
.11863

.43148
.46744
.52656
.51038

3.3971
3.3048
3.4684
3.5423

85.187
85.296
85.814
85.471

23.328
22.914
23.826
24.614

53.754
53.084
55.758
57.671

.11888
.11828
.12326
.12329

.48470
.45750
.44963
.41613

Mar

June
Sept
Dec
1Q74
ly/'j

Mar
June
Sept

1Q7C
iy/o

Mar
June
Sept

Dec
1977
June
Sept
Dec
1978:
June
Sept

Dec

1979

Mar

June
Sept

Dec

Netherlands
guilder

1973:
Mar
June
Sept

Swedish krona

Swiss franc

United
Kingdom
pound

United States dollar
(March 1973 = 100)
Multilateral
trade-weighted
average

Bilateral tradeweighted
average

34.834
36.582
38.542
35.615

22.582
23.746
23.769
22.026

31.084
32.757
33.146
31.252

247.24
257.62
241.83
231.74

100.0
96.5
95.1
101.5

100.0
98.5
98.3
102.2

36.354
37.757
36.870
39.331

21.915
22.885
22.333
23.897

32.490
33.449
33.371
38.442

234.06
239.02
231.65
232.94

101.6
100.0
102.9
98.6

100.9
99.9
103.0
101.0

42.124
41.502
37.229
37.234

25.481
25.532
22.501
22.685

40.273
40.086
36.905
37.970

241.80
228.03
208.35
202.21

93.9
94.8
103.0
103.5

98.5
100.0
104.9
105.0

Mar

37.149
36.524
38.390
40.240

22.702
22.475
22.998
24.051

38.980
40.484
40.431
40.823

194.28
176.40
172.72
167.84

105.1
107.1
105.7
105.3

104.6
105.2
104.0
105.8

Mar

40 079
40.326
40.604
42.955

23 726
22.625
20.602
21.044

39 209
40.170
42.115
48.168

17174
171.91
174.31
185.46

105 2
104.4
103.8
98.4

106.2
105.6
105.4
101.9

45.994
44.716
46.733
49.120

21.693
21.690
22.592
22.808

52.693
53.046
63.765
59.703

190.55
183.72
195.95
198.61

94.8
94.7
89.5
88.5

100.3
99.2
96.0
96.3

49.801
48.374
50.635
52.092

22.901
23.028
23.860
23.935

59.473
58.884
62.087
62.542

203.78
211.19
219.66
220.07

88.4
89.6
86.7
86.3

96.7
98.0
96.5
97.5

Dec
Mar
June
Sept

Dec
1975

Mar

June
Sept

Dec

1976

June
Sept
Dec
1977:
June
Sept

Dec
Mar
June
Sept

Dec

1979:

Mar

June
Sept
Dec

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




315

TABLE B-98.— U.S. international transactions, 1946-79
[Millions of dollars; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Merchandise12

Investment income3

Year or
quarter
Exports

Imports

Net
balance

ceipts

Payments

Net

Net
Net
travel
and
military
transac- transportions
tation
receipts

Other
services,
net 3

Remittances,
Balance
on goods pensions,
and other
and
unilateral
servtransices 1 4
fers 1

Balance
on
current
account

1946
1947
1948
1949

11,764
16,097
13,265
12,213

-5,067
-5,973
-7,557
-6,874

6,697
10,124
5,708
5,339

772
1,102
1,921
1,831

-212
-245
-437
-476

560
857
1,484
1,355

-493
-455
-799
-621

733
946
374
230

310
145
175
208

7,807
11,617
6,942
6,511

-2,922
-2,625
-4,525
-5,638

4,885
8,992
2,417
873

1950....
1951....
1952...
1953...
1954....

10,203
14,243
13,449
12,412
12,929

-9,081
-11,176
-10,838
-10,975
-10,353

1,122
3,067
2,611
1,437
2,576

2,068
2,633
2,751
2,736
2,929

-559
-583
-555
-624
-582

1,509
2,050
2,196
2,112
2,347

-576
-1,270
-2,054
-2,423
-2,460

-120
298
83
-238
-269

242
254
309
307
305

2,177
4,399
3,145
1,195
2,499

-4,017
-3,515
-2,531
-2,481
-2,280

-1,840
884
614
-1,286
219

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

14,424
17,556
19,562
16,414
16,458

-11,527
-12,803
-13,291
-12,952
-15,310

2,897
4,753
6,271
3,462
1,148

3,406
3,837
4,180
3,790
4,132

-676
-735
-796
-825
-1,061

2,730
3,102
3,384
2,965
3,071

-2,701
-2,788
-2,841
-3,135
-2,805

-297
-361
-189
-633
-821

299
447
482
486
573

2,928
5,153
7,107
3,145
1,166

-2,498
-2,423
-2,345
-2,361
-2,448

430
2,730
4,762
784
-1,282

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

19,650
20,108
20,781
22,272
25,501

-14,758
-14,537
-16,260
-17,048
-18,700

4,892
5,571
4,521
5,224
6,801

4,616
4,998
5,619
6,157
6,823

-1,237
-1,245
-1,324
-1,561
-1,784

3,379
3,753
4,295
4,596
5,039

-2,752
-2,596
-2,449
-2,304
-2,133

-964
-978
-1,152
-1,309
-1,146

579
594
809
960
1,041

5,132
6,345
6,026
7,167
9,603

-2,308
-2,524
-2,638
-2,754
-2,781

2,824
3,821
3,388
4,414
6,822

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

26,461
29,310
30,666
33,626
36,414

-21,510
-25,493
-26,866
-32,991
-35,807

4,951 7,436
3,817 7,526
3,800 8,021
635 9,368
607 10,912

-2,088
-2,481
-2,747
-3,378
-4,869

5,348
5,045
5,274
5,990
6,043

-2,122
-2,935
-3,226
-3,143
-3,328

-1,280
-1,331
-1,750
-1,548
-1,763

1,387
1,365
1,612
1,630
1,833

8,284
5,961
5,709
3,563
3,393

-2,854
-2,932
-3,125
-2,952
-2,994

5,431
3,029
2,584
611
399

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

42,469 -39,866
43,319 -45,579
49,381 -55,797
71,410 -70,499
98,306 -103,649

2,603
-2,260
-6,416
911
-5,343

11,746 -5,516
12,706 -5,436
14,764 -6,544
21,808 -9,655
27,587 -12,084

6,230
7,270
8,220
12,153
15,503

-3,354
-2,893
-3,420
-2,070
-1,653

-2,038
-2,345
-3,063
-3,158
-3,184

2,190
2,509
2,789
3,185
3,975

5,634
2,282
-1,889
11,022
9,298

-3,294
-3,701
-3,854
-3,881
5
—7,186

2,340
-1,419
-5,744
7,141
2,113

1975
1976
1977
1978

107,088 -98,041
114,745 -124,051
120,816 -151,689
142,052 -175,822

9,047
-9,306
-30,873
-33,770

25,351
29,286
32,587
43,465

-12,564 12,787
-13,311 15,975
-14,598 17,989
-21,820 21,645

-746
674
1,679
492

-2,725
-2,465
-3,200
-2,985

4,590
4,725
4,983
6,226

22,952
-8,392

-4,613
-4,998
-4,670
-5,086

18,339
4,605
-14,092
-13,478

29,518
31,075
30,558
29,665

-37,185
-37,639
-37,996
-38,869

-7,667
-6,564
-7,438
-9,204

7,775
8,080
8,420
8,312

-3,192
-3,519
-3,686
-4,201

4,583
4,561
4,734
4,111

509
407
407
357

-912
-808
-693
-787

1,167
1,231
1,331
1,251

-2,320
-1,173
-1,659
-4,272

-1,116
-1,283
-1,249
-1,023

-3,436
-2,456
-2,908
-5,295

30,712
35,396
36,532
39,412

-42,629
-43,329
-44,481
-45,383

-11,917
-7,933
-7,949
-5,971

9,776
10,256
10,526
12,907

-4,537
-5,402
-5,574
-6,308

5,239
4,854
4,952
6,599

244
237
247
-239

-731
-798
-784
-672

1,439
1,501
1,603
1,682

-5,725
-2,139
-1,931
1,399

-1,228
-1,313
-1,233
-1,314

-6,953
-3,452
-3,164
85

41,348
42,792
47,337

-47,463
-50,508
-54,619

-6,115
-7,716
-7,282

14,115
15,404
17,506

-7,251
-7,939
-8,712

6,864
7,465
8,794

34
-217
-384

-566
-840
-615

1,520
1,615
1,623

1,737
307
2,136

-1,322
-1,363
-1,374

415
-1,056
762

1977:
I
II
Ill
IV
1978:
I
II
IV
1979:
I
Ill"
1

9,603

-9,423

Excludes military grants.
Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation, coverage, and timing.
Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from
investment income and included in other services, net.
4
In concept, the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in
the national income and product accounts, although the two may differ because of revisions, special handling of certain items, etc.
2
3

(See next page for continuation of table.)




316

TABLE B-98.—U.S. international transactions, 1946-79—Continued
[Millions of dollars; quarterly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
U.S. assets abroad, net
[increase/capital outflow ( - ) ]

Statistical
discrepancy

Foreign assets in the U.S., net
[increase/capital inflow ( + ) ]
Foreign official
assets

Year or quarter
Total

U.S.
official
reserve
assets6

1946
1947.
1948
1949

Total
Total

Assets
of
foreign
official
reserve
agencies

Other
foreign
assets

Total
(sum of
the
items
with sign
reversed)

Of
which:
Seasonal
adjustment
discrepancy

1,758
-33
-415
1,256
480

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

U.S.
private
assets

Allocations of
special
drawing
rights
(SDRs)

-623
-3,315
-1,736
-266

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

Other
U.S.
Government
assets

182
-869
-1,165
2,292
1,035

1960
1961.
1962
1963
1964

-4,099
-5,537
-4,175
-7,270
-9,559

2,145
607
1,535
378
171

-1,100
-910
-1,085
-1,662
-1,680

-5,144
-5,234
-4,624
-5,986
-8,049

2,294
2,705
1,911
3,217
3,643

1,473
765
1,270
1,986
1,660

1,258
741
1,118
1,558
1,362

821
1,939
641
1,231
1,983

-1,019
-989
-1,124
-360
-907

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

-5,715
-7,319
-9,758
-10,977
-11,585

1,225
570
53
-870
-1,179

-1,605
-1,543
-2,423
-2,274
-2,200

-5,335
-6,345
-7,387
-7,833
-8,206

742
3,661
7,379
9,928
12,702

134
-672
3,451
-774
-1,301

69
-785
3,368
-759
-1,552

607
4,333
3,928
10,703
14,002

-458
629
-205
438

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974.

-9,336
-12,474
-14,497
-22,874
-34,745

2,481
2,349
-4
158
-1,467

-1,589
-1,884
-1,568
-2,644
5
366

-10,228
-12,939
-12,925
-20,388
-33,643

6,359
22,970
21,461
18,388
34,241

6,908
26,879
10,475
6,026
10,546

7,364
27,389
10,293
5,090
10,244

-550
-3,909
10,986
12,362
23,696

1975
1976
1977.
1978

-39,703
-51,269
-35,793
-60,957

-849
-2,558
-375
732

-3,474
-4,214
-3,693
-4,656

-35,380
-44,498
-31,725
-57,033

15,420
36,399
50,823
63,713

6,777
17,573
36,656
33,758

5,259
13,066
35,416
31,004

8,643
18,826
14,167
29,956

5,944
10,265
-937
10,722

1977:
I
II.
Ill
IV

-1,683
-12,272
-6,625
-15,213

-420
-24
112
-43

-1,062
-885
-1,001
-746

-201
-11,363
-5,736
-14,424

2,596
14,002
14,236
19,991

5,491
7,720
8,266
15,179

4,928
7,497
7,890
15,101

-2,895
6,282
5,970
4,812

2,523
726
-4,703
517

714
240
-2,275
1,321

1978
I
II
III.
IV.

-15,188
-5,466
-10,049
-30,254

187
248
115
182

-1,009
-1,263
-1,390
-994

-14,366
-4,451
-8,774
-29,442

18,175
941
15,358
29,239

15,618
-5,265
4,641
18,764

14,895
-5,129
4,519
16,719

2,557
6,206
10,717
10,475

3,965
-2,145
930

901
517
-2,716
1,301

1979I
II.
Il ".
l .

-7,637
-16,165
-23,325

-3,585
343
2,779

-1,094
-1,001
-756

-2,958
-15,507
-25,348

-9,391 - 9 , 2 2 7
1,476
6,057 -10,043 -10,299
23,059
5,371
5,562

10,868
16,100
17,497

4,606
11,163
-495

985
737
-3,756

-1,516
867
717
710

-230
-9,794
-1,930
-2,655
-1,609

7,976

1,139

5

Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India.
6
Consists of gold, special drawing rights, convertible currencies, and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund
(IMF).
Note.—Quarterly data for changes in U.S. official reserve assets, U.S. private assets abroad, and foreign assets in the United States
are not seasonally adjusted.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.


http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/ - 2 8 9 0 294
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

317
8 0 - 2 1

TABLE B-99.—U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category, 1965-79

[Millions of dollars; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Imports

Exports

Nonpetroleum

Nonagricultural

Year or quarter
Total

Agricultural

Total
Total

Capital
goods

Other
goods

Petroleum
and
products

Total

Industrial
supplies

Other
goods

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

26,461
29,310
30,666
33,626
36,414

6,305
6,949
6,453
6,297
6,096

20,156
22,361
24,213
27,329
30,318

8,052
8,907
9,934
11,111
12,369

12,104
13,454
14,279
16,218
17,949

21,510
25,493
26,866
32,991
35,807

2,034
2,078
2,091
2,384
2,649

19,476
23,415
24,775
30,607
33,158

9,123
10,235
9,956
12,027
11,798

10,353
13,180
14,819
18,580
21,360

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

42,469
43,319
49,381
71,410
98,306

7,374
7,831
9,513
17,978
22,412

35,095
35,488
39,868
53,432
75,894

14,659
15,372
16,914
21,999
30,878

20,436
20,116
22,954
31,433
45,016

39,866
45,579
55,797
70,499
103,649

2,927
3,650
4,650
8,415
26,609

36,939
41,929
51,147
62,084
77,040

12,390
13,762
16,263
19,588
27,766

24,549
28,167
34,884
42,496
49,274

1975
1976
1977
1978

107,088
114,745
120,816
142,052

22,242
23,381
24,331
29,904

84,846
91,364
96,485
112,148

36,639
39,112
39,767
46,474

48,207
52,252
56,718
65,674

98,041
124,051
151,689
175,822

27,017
34,573
44,983
42,317

71,024
89,478
106,706
133,505

23,966
29,700
35,670
42,547

47,058
59,778
71,036
90,958

1977:
1
II
III
IV

29,518
31,075
30,558
29,665

6,245
6,254
6,023
5,809

23,273
24,821
24,535
23,856

9,773
9,854
10,264
9,876

13,500
14,967
14,271
13,980

37,185
37,639
37,996
38,869

12,396
10,699
11,342
10,546

24,789
26,940
26,654
28,323

7,949
8,946
9,220
9,555

16,840
17,994
17,434
18,768

1978:
1
II
III
IV

30,712
35,396
36,532
39,412

6,496
7,680
7,930
7,798

24,216
27,716
28,602
31,614

10,153
11,080
12,425
12,816

14,063
16,636
16,177
18,798

42,629
43,329
44,481
45,383

10,635
9,972
10,871
10,839

31,994
33,357
33,610
34,544

10,248
10,996
10,680
10,623

21,746
22,361
22,930
23,921

1979:
I
II
Ill"

41,348
42,792
47,337

7,640
7,733
9,609

33,708
35,059
37,728

13,811
13,695
15,557

19,897
21,364
22,171

47,463
50,508
54,619

11,638
12,905
16,619

35,825
37,603
38,000

11,057
12,284
12,726

24,768
25,319
25,274

Note.—Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




318

TABLE B-100.—U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area, 1973-79
[Millions of dollars]
1973

Item

1974

1976

1975

1977

1978

1979»

71,410

Canada
Japan
Western Europe
Australia, New
Africa

Zealand,

and

107,088

114,745

120,816

142,052

175,303

64,487

66,496

72,335

76,970

87,762

110,463

16,710
8,356
21,216

Developed countries

98,306

48,529

Exports

21,842
10,724
28,164

23,537
9,567
29,884

26,336
10,196
31,883

28,533
10,566
34,094

31,228
12,960
39,364

36,008
17,365
52,052

South
2,247

3,508

3,920

3,777

4,210

5,037

32,082

37,343

38,287

40,951

50,208

60,133

3,414
17,420

OPEC2
Other3....

3,757

20,834

Developing countries...

6,219
25,863

9,956
27,387

11,561
26,726

12,877
28,074

14,846
35,362

14,264
45,869
5,347

2,047

1,737

3,249

70,499

103,649

98,041

Developed countries.

48,985

61,092

55,973

67,488

79,227

99,154

109,527

Canada.
Japan
Western Europe.
Australia, New
Africa

17,694
9,665
19,774

22,392
12,414
24,267

21,710
11,257
20,764

26,475
15,531
23,003

29,644
18,565
28,226

33,552
24,542
36,620

37,869
25,851
40,260

Eastern Europe
Imports

Developing countries...
OPEC^
Other3
Eastern Europe

Zealand,

and

4,123
4

124,051

4,082

2,895
4

151,689

4

175,822

4

203,453

South

1,852

2,019

2,242

2,479

2,792

4,440

5,547

20,913

41,580

41,334

55,379

70,681

74,407

90,570

5,097
15,816

17,234
24,346

18,897
22,437

27,409
27,970

35,778
34,903

33,289
41,118

41,483
49,087

601

977

734

875

1,127

1,509

1,687

1

First 3 quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate; preliminary. Detail will not add to totals because of seasonal adjustment
discrepancy and rounding.
2
Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
3
Latin American Republics, other Western Hemisphere, and other countries in Asia and Africa, less petroleum exporting countries and
the International Monetary Fund.
4
Includes imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund, not in area detail.
Note.—Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




319

TABLE B-101.—U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups, 1958-79
[Millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Merchandise exports1

Merchandise imports

Year of
month

Total
domestic and
foreign Total 2
exports2

Food
beverages,
and
tobacco

Crude
Manumaterifactured
als and
goods5
4
fuels

Total

16,375
16,426
19,659
20,226
20,986
22,467
25,832

1965...
1966...
1967...
1968...
1969...
1970...
1971...
1972...
1973...
1974...

26,742
29,490
31,030
34,063
37,332
42,659
43,549
49,199
70,823
97,998

Food
beverages,

3

and
tobac-

Crude
Manumaterifactured
als and
goods5
4
fuels

Total,
c.i.f.
value7

Exports
less
imports,
customs
value

Exports
less
imports,
f.a.s.

Exports
less
imports,
c.i.f.

co

F.a.s. value 8

1958...
1959...
1960...
1961...
1962...
1963...
1964...

Merchandise trade balance

General imports6

Domestic exports

Customs value

16,211 2,688 3,052
16,243 2,852 2,996
19,459 3,167 3,942
19,982 3,466 3,864
20,717 3,743 3,356
22,182 4,188 3,775
25,479 4,637 4,337
26,399 4,519 4,273
29,054 5,186 4,404
30,646 4,710 4,726
33,626 4,592 4,865
36,788 4,446 5,006
42,025 5,058 6,692
42,911 5,076 6,441
48,399 6,569 7,091
69,730 12,938 10,735
96,634 15,233 15,802

11,547 13,392 3,550 4,164
11,179 15,690 3,580 4,615
12,583 15.073 3.392 4,418
12,784 14,761 3,455 4,334
13,668 16,464 3,674 4,691
14.297 17,207 3,863 4,755
16,529 18,749 4,022 5,029
17,433 21,427 4,013 5,440
19,218 25,618 4,590 5,718
20,844 26,889 4,701 5,367
23,818 33,226 5,365 6,031
26,785 36,043 5,308 6,391
29,344 39,951 6,230 6,542
30,443 45,563 6,404 7,268
33,740 55,583 7,379 8,838
44,731 69,476 9,235 13,446
63,523 101,394 10,701 31,842

5,311
7,117
6,863
6,537
7,649
8,070
9,106
11,244
14,446
15,756 28,745
20,624 35,320
23,011 38,241
25,907 42,429
30,414 48,342
37,767 58,862
45,001 73,573
56,202 108,392

2,983
736
4,586
5,465
4,522
5,260
7,083

5,315
3,872
4,141
837
1,289
2,708
-2,014
-6,384
1,348
-3,396

2,283
-1,257
-909
230
-4,793
-9,663
2,752
-10,395

F.a.s. value 8
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1978:
Jan....
Feb....
Mar...
Apr....
May...
June..
July...
Aug...
Sept..
Oct....
Nov....
Dec...

32,064 55,223
32,596 51,080
41,474 64,775
53,554 76,554
51,913 100,352

97,998
107,589
115,150
121,150
143,575

96,634
106,100
113,476
118,944
141,069

15,233
16,793
17,234
15,963
20,626

15,802
15,197
16,095
18,579
20,952

63,523
70,951
77,241
80,151
94,484

100,648
96,570
121,009
147,685
172,026

10,709
9,923
11,891
14,227
15,742

9,864
9,945
11,147
11,630
11,786
12,268
11,662
12,294
13,274
12,901
13,451
13,283

9,713
9,768
10,903
11,420
11,541
12,053
11,497
12,101
13,066
12,670
13,212
13,054

1,262
1,510
1,643
1,641
1,864
1,964
1,799
1,960
1,877
1,786
1,634
1,692

1,414
1,302
1,531
1,677
1,754
1,905
1,620
1,718
1,901
1,934
2,040
2,047

6,606
6,721
7,339
7,594
7,614
7,791
7,728
8,094
8,586
8,626
8,913
8,907

13,103
14,260
14,004
14,492
14,009
13,970
14,545
14,133
14,820
14,852
14,825
15,032

1,270
1,276
1,408
1,374
1,326
1,240
1,313
1,123
1,235
1,358
1,369
1,452

4,120
4,333
4,251
4,308
4,105
4,234
4,173
4,515
4,511
4,351
4,436
4,577

7,384
8,394
7,972
8,471
8,257
8,158
8,729
8,167
8,767
8,755
8,691
8,617

13,927
15,193
14,893
15,434
14,913
14,869
15,495
15,074
15,821
15,764
15,770
16,006

-3,239
-4,315
-2,858
-2,861
-2,223
-1,702
-2,883
-1,839
-1,546
-1,951
-1,374
-1,749

-4,063
-5,248
-3,747
-3,804
-3,127
-2,601
-3,834
-2,780
-2,547
-2,863
-2,319
-2,724

13,132
13,507
14,452
13,883
13,862
15,038

12,923
13,283
14,165
13,636
13,578
14,774
15,433
15,560
15,579
16,554
16,650

1,437
1,557
1,765
1,758
1,807
2,182
2,352
2,262
2,266
2,497
2,278

2,143
2,009
2,313
2,134
1,939
2,286
2,441
2,450
2,586
2,506
2,759

8,759
9,078
9,403
9,056
9,068
9,639

16,231
14,806
15,273
16,036
16,342
16,937
16,777
18,177
18,666
18,856
18,422

1,486
1,261
1,437
1,540
1,456
1,552
1,386
1,411
1,415
1,393
1,689

5,145
4,438
4,890
5,186
5,206
5,504
5,966
6,460
7,046
7,467
6,364

9,291
8,824
8,596
9,023
9,232
9,475

17,282
15,720
16,228
17,053
17,350
17,977

-3,099
-1,300
-821
-2,153
-2,480
-1,900

-4,150
-2,213
-1,776
-3,171
-3,488
-2,940

9,065
9,873
9,749
9,504
9,839

17,823
19,275
19,777
19,957
19,524

-1,108
-2,357
-2,833
-2,018
-1,418

-2,154
-3,455
-3,945
-3,119
-2,521

108,392 -3,396 -2,650 -10,395
103,843
11,020
3,747
129,896
-5,859 -14,746
157,560
-26,535 -36,410
183,137
-28,451 -39,563

1979:
Jan....

Feb
Mar...
Apr....
May...
June..
July...
Aug...

§5!:
Nov

15,669
15,821
15,832
16,838
17,004

9,819
10,071
10,092
10,507
10,441

1

Beginning 1960, data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in 1965.
Total excludes Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance
Program.
3
Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind.
4
Includes fats and oils.
5
Includes machinery, transportation equipment, chemicals, metals, and other manufactures. Export data for these items include
military grant-aid shipments through 1975. They are excluded in 1978-79.
6
Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments.
7
C.i.f. (costs, insurance, and freight) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for 1967-73 are estimates.
2

8

F.a.s. (free alongside ship) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports.

Note.—Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and and bullion reported separately prior to
1969. Trade in gold is included beginning 1974. Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area, except
supplies for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs
as well as other private relief shipments.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration).




320

TABLE B-102.—International investment position of the United States at year-end, selected years,

1970-78

[Billions of dollars]

1970

Type of investment

1976

1977

1978

58.6

Foreign assets in the United States..
Foreign official assets
U.S. Government securities*
Other U.S. Government liabilities
Liabilities reported by U.S. banks, not included elsewhere
Other official assets
Other foreign assets..
Direct investments in the United States (book value)
Liabilities reported by U.S. banks, not included elsewhere
U.S. Treasury securities
Other U.S. securities2
Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks.,

15.9

18.7

19.3

18.7

10.5
2.0
.5
.2

11.7
2.4
1.9
.0

11.6
2.4
4.4
.3

11.7
2.6
4.9
.0

11.7
1.6
1.0
4.4

36.1

38.4

46.0

49.6

54.2

34.1
2.0

36.3
2.1

44.1
1.9

47.8
1.8

52.3
1.9

149.7

201.5

282.4

314.1

377.2

75.5
21.0

89.9
27.6

110.1
28.2

136.8
44.2

149.8
49.4

168.1
53.4

13.8
8.5

20.7
11.4

46.2
17.0

81.1
20.3

92.6
22.3

129.6
26.1

161.8

196.9

264.6

310.6

373.3

63.2

79.8

105.5

141.9

175.1

17.7
1.7
6.7
.0

52.9
1.6
8.5
.2

58.1
2.6
18.4
.6

74.0
8.7
17.2
5.6

106.8
9.9
18.0
7.2

130.8
12.7
23.1
8.5

80.7

Direct investments abroad (book value)
Foreign securities
Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks, not included
elsewhere
Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanks

13.2

11.1
.9
1.9
.6

26.1

U.S. private assets

76.7
450.1

106.8

U.S. loans and other long-term assets
U.S. short-term assets other than reserves

72.4
383.0

118.8

Other U.S. Government assets

82.6
347.2

29.7
2.5

Gold
Special drawing rights (SDRs)
Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
Foreign currency reserves

58.8
255.7

32.1

U.S. official reserve assets

37.1
199.0

14.5

U.S. assets abroad

1

1974

165.5

Net international investment position of the United States..

2

1972

98.7

117.1

159.1

168.7

198.2

13.3
22.7
1.2
34.7
8.8

14.9
21.2
1.2
50.7
10.7

25.1
41.8
1.7
34.9
13.6

30.8
53.5
7.0
54.8
13.0

34.6
60.2
7.6
52.9
13.4

40.8
77.0
9.9
55.4
15.1

Includes Treasury and agency issues of securities.
Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks.

Note.—Gold is valued at SDR35 per ounce, throughout. The SDR value is converted to dollars at $1/SDR before December 1971, at
$1.08571/SDR from December 1971 through January 1973, at $1.20635/SDR from February 1973 through June 1974, and as measured
by the basket valuation of the SDR beginning July 1974.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




321

TABLE B-103.— World trade: Exports and imports, 1965, 1970, and 1975-79
[Billions of U.S. dollars]
Area and country

1965

1970

1975

1976

1977

1978

19791

Exports, f.a.s. 2
3

225.9

583.3

647.3

735.3

881.0

1,032.2

United States
Canada
Japan

27.5
8.5
8.5

43.2
16.7
19.3

107.6
34.1
55.8

115.0
40.5
67.3

121.2
43.4
81.1

143.7
47.9
98.4

183.1
55.5
102.5

European Community4

Developed countries ..

129.7

64.8

113.0

298.4

328.8

382.3

462.2

555.8

France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom

10.2
17.9
7.2
13.8

18.1
34.2
13.2
19.6

53.1
90.2
34.8
44.5

57.2
102.2
37.3
46.7

65.0
118.1
45.3
58.2

79.4
142.5
56.1
71.7

98.8
173.2
72.0
90.7

Other developed countries

20.4

33.6

87.4

95.7

107.1

128.8

135.3

35.2

54.3

203.5

248.3

282.5

294.8

383.9

10.7
24.5

17.6
36.7

111.5
92.0

135.2
113.1

148.0
134.5

142.8
152.0

201.9
182.0

23.2

34.7

90.4

99.1

115.4

133.2

145.6

8.2
11.8
2.0

12.8
18.2
2.1

33.4
45.3
7.2

37.3
49.5
7.3

45.2
56.4
8.0

52.4
64.2
9.9

64.0
73.1
1.2

994.7

1,133.2

1,309.0

1,561.7

Developing countries
OPEC 5...
Other
Communist countries6
U.S.S.R
Eastern Europe..
China

188.1

TOTAL..

314.9

877.2

Imports, c.i.f.7
Developed countries3

136.7

235.3

611.0

701.5

793.8

915.4

1,080.0

United States.
Canada
Japan

23.2
8.7
8.2

42.4
14.3
18.9

103.4
36.3
57.9

129.6
40.3
64.9

157.6
42.1
71.3

183.1
46.2
79.9

219.5
55.1
108.9

European Community4

69.3

116.9

301.9

345.6

390.2

462.8

577.2

10.4
17.6
7.4
16.1

19.1
29.9
15.0
22.0

54.0
74.9
38.4
54.2

64.4
88.4
43.4
56.6

70.5
101.5
48.1
64.6

81.8
121.8
56.5
78.6

105.7
161.2
75.4
103.1

France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom
Other developed countries..
Developing countries
OPEC5
Other
Communist countries 6 ..
U.S.S.R
Eastern Europe
China
TOTAL....

27.3

43.0

111.5

121.2

132.7

143.4

119.3

37.0

56.6

189.8

208.0

248.0

296.4

339.2

6.5
30.5

10.0
46.6

52.7
137.1

64.6
143.4

84.8
163.2

104.0
192.4

106.1
233.1

22.6

34.2

100.8

105.1

115.3

139.7

161.4

8.1
11.6
1.8

11.7
18.5
2.2

50.8
71.7
10.9

60.0
78.9
14.4

196.3

326.1

37.1
51.3
7.4
901.6

38.2
55.6
6.0

40.9
62.3
7.1

1,014.6

1,157.1

1,351.5

1,580.6

1

Preliminary estimates.
Free-alongside-ship value.
Includes the OECD countries, South Africa, and non-OECD Europe.
4
Includes Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Ireland, and the Netherlands, not shown separately.
5
Includes Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and
Venezuela.
6
Includes North Korea, Vietnam, Albania, Cuba, Mongolia, and Yugoslavia, not shown separately.
7
Cost, insurance, and freight value, except Eastern Europe (except Albania) and U.S.S.R., which are f.o.b (free on board).
2
3

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and Council of Economic Advisers.




322

TABLE B-104.— World trade balance and current account balances, 1965, 1970, and 1975-79
[Billions of U.S. dollars]

Area and country

1965

1970

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979 l

World trade balance2
3

-6.9

-9.6

-27.7

-54.2

-58.5

-34.4

-47.8

4.3
-.2
.3

.8
2.5
.4

4.2
-2.1
-2.1

-14.6
.2
2.4

-36.3
1.3
9.8

-39.4
1.7
18.5

-36.4
.4
-6.4

European Community4

-4.5

-3.9

-3.5

-16.8

-7.9

-.6

-21.4

France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom-

-.2
.3
-.2
-2.3

-1.0
4.3
-1.8
-2.4

-.8
15.2
-3.6
-9.6

-7.2
13.7
-6.2
-9.9

-5.5
16.6
-2.8
-6.4

-2.4
20.7
-.4
-6.9

-6.9
12.1
-3.4

Other developed countries-

-6.8

-9.4

-24.1

-25.5

-25.7

-14.6

-1.8

-2.3

13.7

40.3

34.5

-1.6

4.2
-6.0

7.6
-9.9

58.8
-45.1

70.6
-30.3

63.2
-28.7

38.8
-40.4

44.7
95.8
-51.1

.5

-10.4

-6.0

.1

-6.5

-15.8

.1
.2
.2

1.1
-.4
-.2

-3.7
-6.0
-.2

-.9
-6.1
1.3

4.3
-5.9
.9

1.6
-7.5
-1.0

4.0
-5.8
-13.2

-8.2

-11.4

-24.4

-19.9

-23.9

-42.5

-18.9

Developed countries
United States..
Canada
Japan

Developing countries
OPEC5...
Other
Communist countries6...
U.S.S.R
Eastern Europe
China
TOTAL7

-12.4
16.0

Current account balances8
3.8

6.7

-0.4

-18.2

-24.8

9.1

-30.0

5.4
-1.1
.9

2.3
1.1
2.0

18.3
-4.7
-.7

4.6
-3.9
3.7

-14.1
-4.0
10.9

-13.9
-4.6
16.5

.0
-6.0
-7.5

.9

3.2

-6.2

1.5

17.2

-5.9

.4
-1.6
2.2
-.1

.1
.9
1.1
1.8

-4.1

-6.1
3.4
-2.8
-1.5

-3.3
4.2
2.5
.5

3.9
8.8
6.4
2.0

1.5
-3.5
6.3
-5.5

-8.5

-10.2

11.0

5.0

-29.0

18.0

-.5
-8.0

27.3
-37.5

36.5
-25.5

29.0
-24.0

7.0
-36.0

65.0
-47.0

Other 10 ..

-2.9

-18.5

-13.0

-8.7

-9.5

-8.2

TOTAL

-4.7

-29.1

-20.2

-28.5

-29.4

-20.2

OECD...
United States....
Canada
Japan
European Community4
France
West Germany.
Italy
United Kingdom.
Developing countries.
OPEC9.
Other

-.1
3.5

1

Preliminary estimates.
Exports f.a.s. (free alongside ship) less imports c.i.f. (cost, insurance, and freight).
Includes the OECD countries, South Africa, and non-OECD Europe.
4
Includes Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Ireland, and the Netherlands, not shown separately.
5
Includes Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and
N i i
O
Sdi
Venezuela.
l
6
Includes North Korea, Vietnam, Albania, Cuba, Mongolia, and Yugoslavia, not shown separately.
7
Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage, classification, timing, and valuation in the
recording of transactions by the countries involved.
• OECD basis.
9
Consists of countries in footnote 4 plus Bahrain and Qatar.
10
Includes Communist countries and non-OECD developed countries.
2
3

Sources: International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and Council of Economic Advisers.




323

TABLE B-105.—International reserves, selected years, 1952-79
[Millions of dollars; end of period]

1979
1952

Area and country

1962

1972

1976

1977

1978
November

1

49,187

All countries
2

Industrialized countries ....
United States
Canada.
Japan
Austria
Belgium.
France.
Germany.
Italy
Netherlands..
Scandinavian countries (Denmark, Norway, and Sweden).
Switzerland.
United Kingdom.

62,660

159,118 257,415 317,886 364,035

383,966

36,773

49,254

105,814

131,848 169,397 209,062

211,353

24,714
1,944
1,101

17,220
2,561
2,021

13,150
6,050
18,366

18,319
5,843
16,605

19,392
4,608
23,261

19,582
4,569
33,500

20,196
3,971
20,475

116
1,133
686
960
722
950

1,081
1,753
4,049
6,957
4,068
1,944

2,720
3,869
10,015
23,785
6,085
4,785

4,410
5,206
9,728
34,801
6,654
7,387

4,244
5,761
10,194
39,737
11,629
8,065

6,007
5,908
13,929
53,883
14,899
7,585

4,598
7,818
20,395
53,621
21,353
9,512

817
1,667
1,956

1,362
2,919
3,308

3,757
7,557
5,647

5,635
12,993
4,230

7,580
13,830
21,057

10,530
21,561
17,067

11,381
17,775
20,208
24,327

Other Europe.

1,559

2,966

12,749

13,734

15,668

22,324

Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa

1,509

2,066

8,264

4,602

3,657

3,742

3,445

Oil exporting countries

1,699

2,030

10,901

65,233

75,499

60,214

67,869

177
500
443'
579

211
289
268
583
680

960
376
2,500
1,732

8,833
5,203
27,025
8,578
15,597

12,266
4,259
30,034
8,214
20,727

12,152
1,916
19,407
6,555
20,184

4,981
18,710
6,243

7,187

6,343

41,997

53,664

68,692

76,971

2,086

1,700

15,222

20,280

28,938

33,584

826

992

5,778

7,472

9,391

9,642

3,479

2,663

17,912

22,138

26,323

29,383

796

989

3,085

3,776

4,039

4,362

Iran.
Nigeria
Saudi Arabia 3 .
Venezuela.
Other 4
Other less developed areas
Other Western Hemisphere....
Other Middle East
Other Asia
Other Africa
1
2
3
4

5,330
21,388
8,145
2,927
8,248
2,067

Includes Cuba.
Includes Luxembourg.
Data beginning April 1978, exclude the foreign exchange coyer against the note issue.
Algeria, Indonesia, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Oman, Qatar, and United Arab Emirates.

Note.—International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities' holdings of gold, special drawing rights (SDRs), reserve positions
in the International Monetary Fund, and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R., other Eastern European countries, Mainland China, and
Cuba (after 1960).
Source.- International Monetary Fund, "International Financial Statistics."




324

TABLE B-106.—Growth rates in real gross national product, 1960-79
[Percent change]
Area and country

1960-73
annual
average

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979 *

U.S. dollar
value in
1978
(billions) 2

4.8

0.5

0.4

5.2

3.7

3.9

3.3

5,960.0

39
54
10 5

-1.3
3.5
-1.0

-1.0
1.1
2.4

5.5
5.7
6.0

4.8
2.7
5.4

4.4
3.4
5.6

2.0
2.8
6.0

2,107.6
203.5
968.8

47

1.7

-1.4

57
48
52
32

3.2
.5
4.2
-1.5

Other OECD4

54

Communist countries5

«53

OECD countries
United States
Canada
Japan
European Community3

5.1

2.3

3.1

3.0

1,950.0

-3.5
-1.0

4.9
5.6
5.7
3.7

2.8
2.8
1.7
1.3

3.3
3.5
2.6
3.3

3.0
4.3
4.0
.5

470.2
640.2
235.2
309.6

3.5

.2

38

1.9

2.3

3.0

4.3

3.6

3.0

4.4

4.7

«50
Ml
62

4.1
4.7
3.7

2.5
4.2
7.0

3.7
4.3
.1

3.1
3.3
8.1

4.0
2.9
117

7
90
7

8.0
5.3

-.3
4.1

12.8
5.0

6.2
5.1

26
52

France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom

U.SSR
Eastern Europe
China

6

-2il

Less developed countries
OPEC
Other

730.1
2,240.0

.8
65"

1,253.6
384.0
444 2
1,460 0

6.1

TOTAL

9,660 0

1
Preliminary
2

estimates.
Estimates based on conversion at average rates of exchange for 1977, except for those of the Communist countries, which were
converted at U.S. purchasing power equivalents.
3
Includes Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Ireland, and the Netherlands, not shown separately.
4
Growth rates are for OECD countries other than the Big Seven (United States, Canada, Japan, France, West Germany, Italy, and the
United Kingdom).
5
Includes North Korea, Vietnam, Albania, Cuba, Mongolia, and Yugoslavia, not shown separately.
6
1961-73 annual average.
7
1967-73 annual average.
Note.—For Italy and United Kingdom, data relate to real gross domestic product. For France, data relate to real gross domestic
product excluding nommarket activity such as compensation of employees in the government sector.
Sources: Department of Commerce, International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
and Council of Economic Advisers.




325

TABLE B-107.—Industrial production and unemployment rate, major industrial countries, 1960-79
[Quarterly data seasonally adjusted]

Year or quarter

United
States

Canada

Japan

European
Community 1

France

West
Germany

Italy

United
Kingdom

Industrial production (1967=100) 2
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

66.2
66.7
72.2
76.5
81.7

63.1
65.6
71.2
75.7
82.6

43.0
51.2
55.4
61.7
71.4

74.7
78.1
81.3
84.8
91.0

70
73
78
86
90

78.4
82.8
86.1
88.9
96.6

59.2
65.5
71.9
78.4
79.2

84.4
84.3
85.1
88.4
95.0

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

89.8
97.8
100.0
106.3
111.1

89.7
96.2
100.0
106.4
113.7

74.2
83.8
100.0
115.2
133.4

94.7
98.4
100.0
107.4
117.6

93
98
100
104
114

102.1
103.0
100.0
109.2
123.2

82.8
93.3
100.0
106.4
110.5

97.7
99.2
100.0
106.7
110.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

107.8
109.6
119.7
129.8
129.3

115.3
121.5
130.7
143.0
147.5

151.8
155.7
167.0
190.5
183.1

123.3
126.1
131.7
141.4
142.3

120
128
135
145
148

131.1
133.6
138.7
147.7
145.1

117.6
117.5
122.7
134.6
140.6

110.9
110.6
113.2
123.0
120.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

117.8
130.5
138.2
146.1
152 2

139.6
147.4
152.1
160.9

163.9
182.0
189.7
201.1

132.8
142.5
145.7
149.1

139
148
152
156

137.1
149.1
152.5
155.8

127.6
143.7
145.1
148.4

114.3
117.4
122.8
126.5

1978:
1
II
(II
IV

140.8
145.1
147.9
150.7

156.3
158.8
162.0
166.2

196.0
199.6
202.4
206.5

146.6
147.7
148.6
152.2

154
157
156
159

153
153
157
159

146.1
147.8
145.6
153.9

123.7
127.4
128.2
127.3

1979:
1
II
III
IV

152.2
151.9
152.3
152.1

167.8
165.8
169.9

210.2
215.4
219.4

152.3
155.2
155.6

159
160
165

159
163
165

157.0
151.9
153.6

128.5
135.3
130.6

Unemployment rate (percent) 3
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7
5.2

7.0
7.1
5.9
5.5
4.7

1.7
1.5
1.3
1.3
1.2

1.8
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.5

1.1
.6
.6
.5
.4

3.8
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.6

2.2
2.0
2.8
3.4
2.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

3.9
3.4
3.8
4.5
4.4

1.2
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1

1.6
1.9
2.0
2.6
2.4

.3
.3
1.3
1.4
.9

3.5
3.8
3.4
3.4
3.3

2.2
2.3
3.4
3.3
3.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6

5.7
6.2
6.2
5.5
5.3

1.2
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.4

2.6
2.8
2.9
2.8
3.0

.8
.8
.8
.8
1.7

3.1
3.1
3.6
3.4
2.8

3.1
3.7
4.1
2.9
2.9

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

8.5
7.7
7.0
6.0
5.8

6.9
7.1
8.1
8.4
7.5

1.9
2.0
2.0
2.3
5
2.2

4.3
4.7
5.0
5.5
6.1

3.6
3.6
3.6
3.4
3.0

3.2
3.6
3.4
3.7
3.9

4.1
5.5
6.2
6.1
5.8

1978.
1
II
III
IV

6.2
6.0
6.0
5.8

8.4
8.5
8.4
8.2

2.2
2.3
2.3
2.3

4.9
5.4
5.8
5.8

3.5
3.5
3.4
3.3

3.7
3.6
3.6
3.7

6.3
6.2
6.1
5.8

1979.
1
II
III
IV

5.8
5.8
5.8
5.9

7.9
7.6
7.1
7.3

2.0
2.1
2.2

5.9
6.2
6.3
6.1

3.2
3.0
2.9
2.8

3.9
3.8
3.9
3.9

6.0
5.7
5.6
5.9

4

1
2
3

Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, United Kingdom, and West Germany.
All data exclude construction.
Unemployment rates adjusted to U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern Ireland.
4
Data are preliminary except for United States and Canada.
5
Ten-month average, seasonally adjusted.
Sources: Department of Commerce (International Trade Administration) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).




326

TABLE B-108.—Consumer prices and hourly compensation, major industrial countries, 1960-79
[1967 = 100]

Year or quarter

United
States

Canada

Japan

France

West
Germany

Italy

United
Kingdom

Consumer prices
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

88.7
89.6
90.6
91.7
92.9

85.9
86.7
87.7
89.2
90.9

68.3
71.8
76.7
82.5
85.8

^s.o
^o.e

85.4
89.5
92.5

82.9
84.8
87.4
89.9
92.0

74.1
75.7
79.2
85.1
90.1

79.0
81.6
85.1
86.8
89.6

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

94.5
97.2
100.0
104.2
109.8

93.1
96.5
100.0
104.0
108.8

91.6
96.3
100.0
105.3
110.9

94.8
97.4
100.0
104.5
111.3

95.0
98.4
100.0
101.6
103.5

94.2
96.4
100.0
101.4
104.1

93.9
97.6
100.0
104.8
110.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

116.3
121.3
125.3
133.1
147.7

112.4
115.6
121.2
130.3
144.5

119.3
126.5
132.3
147.9
184.0

117.1
123.5
131.1
140.7
160.0

107.1
112.7
119.0
127.2
136.1

109.2
114.4
121.0
134.0
159.7

117.4
128.5
137.7
150.2
174.3

1975
1976
1977
1978

161.2
170.5
181.5
195.4

160.1
172.1
185.9
202.5

205.8
224.9
243.0
252.3

178.9
196.1
214.5
233.9

144.2
150.7
156.6
160.7

186.8
218.1
255.2
286.2

216.5
252.4
292.4
316.6

1978
1
II
III
IV

188.5
193.4
197.9
201.9

195.6
200.3
205.4
208.6

247.5
252.6
254.3
254.9

224.5
230.9
237.1
242.0

159.6
161.1
161.0
161.2

274.1
282.6
289.3
298.1

306.2
314.6
320.0
325.5

1979
1
II
Il
l

207.0
214.1
221.1

213.4
218.9
223.3

254.0
260.5
263.1

247.3
254.3
262.5

164.5
167.1
169.0

309.5
321.0
331.8

335.6
347.9
371.2

Hourly compensation 2
I960
1961
1962
1963
1964

771
79.4
82.6
85.2
88.9

80 3
78.9
77.0
79.0
82.0

43.4
50.3
57.5
64.1
72.0

56.0
61.7
67.9
75.0
80.7

51.8
60.5
68.8
73.6
79.5

46 8
51.8
61.1
72.3
80.4

65 9
70.8
74.6
77.9
83.2

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

91.0
95.2
100.0
107.0
113.9

86.2
93.0
100.0
107.4
115.5

81.1
89.2
100.0
116.9
139.3

86.9
92.5
100.0
112.6
111.6

85.7
94.3
100.0
105.9
117.3

86.0
89.8
100.0
106.8
121.1

91.2
98.7
100.0
93.3
101.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

121.8
129.5
136.6
146.4
161.1

128.2
142.6
156.6
170.5
200.6

165.9
197.3
259.2
353.7
431.2

117.2
131.3
159.9
208.5
231.3

145.9
173.4
211.4
289.3
342.4

145.0
169.7
206.0
261.7
291.6

115.3
134.3
154.4
167.8
197.8

1975
1976
1977
1978

180.2
195.1
212.0
229.5

222.4
260.8
270.3
270.1

497.2
538.3
644.5
870.2

310.7
319.1
355.5
437.1

406.3
425.4
506.1
628.5

374.7
352.7
394.2
466.9

247.3
235.6
250.4
316.1

1
Data
2

for 1960 and 1961 are for Paris only.
Hourly compensation in manufacturing, U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons (wage and salary earners and the selfemployed) in the United States and Canada and to all employees (wage and salary earners) in the other countries. For France and
United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees, but are labor
costs to employers.
Sources: Department of Commerce (International Trade Administration) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).




327

TABLE B-109.—Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance, July 1, 1945 to December 31,
1978
[Millions of dollars] 1

Yearly average or calendar year
Type and geographic distribution
1945-49 2

5,540

Total net
Investment in 6 international financial institutions 3

1950-54

5,059

1955-59

1960-64

1965-69

4,772

4,664

7

141

124

81

5,899

5,399

Net new military grants
Gross new grants
Less: Reverse grants and returns
Other grants, credits, and other assistance (through net accumulation
of foreign currency claims), net

5,059

4,764

4,540

5,818

325
340
15

Under assistance programs, net

2,462
2,494
32

2,438
2,451
14

1,594
1,629
35

2,190
2,196
5

5,074

2,597

2,327

2,946

3,628

Net new economic and technical aid grants 4
Gross new grants
Less* Reverse grants and returns

3,312
3,486
174

2,406
2,512
106

1,710
1,759
48

1,850
1,872
22

1,776
1,780
4

Net new c r e d i t s 4 5
New credits
Less* Principal collections

1,762
1,986
224

148
544
396

210
827
617

871
1,843
972

1,950
3,082
1132

42

407

225

-98

51
51

965
963
2

1,230
1,186
44

814
691
122

9
7
2

558
413
145

1,005
807
198

912
716
196

904

1,032

2,211

3,316

3,611

752
152

772
240

1,470
386

1,817
1,310

1,765
1,926

20

355

189

-80

4170

1564

116

371

17

2,560
1610

1,634
92

240
176

32
439

11
24

22

52

36

-18

Other assistance (through net accumulation of foreign currency
claims) 6
Currency claims acquired
Sales of farm products
Second-stage operations 7
Less: Currencies disbursed
Economic grants and credits to purchasing country
Other uses
Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance
Developing countries, 8 net total
Net new economic and technical aid grants
Net new credits
Other assistance (through net accumulation
claims)

of

foreign

currency

Developed countries 8 net total
Net new economic and technical aid grants
Net new credits
Other assistance (through net accumulation
claims)

of

foreign

currency

1

Negative figures ( - ) occur when the total of grant returns, principal repayments, and/or foreign currencies disbursed by the
Government exceeds new grants and new credits utilized and/or acquisitions of foreign currencies through new sales of farm products.
2
July 1, 1945, through December 3 1 , 1949. Yearly average is for 4V 2 years.
3
Includes paid-in capital subscriptions and contributions to the special funds of the African Development Fund, Asian Development
Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Development Association,
and Internationa! Finance Corporation.
4
Net new grants are not adjusted for settlements of postwar relief and other grants under agreements, and net new credits exclude
prior grants converted into credits. Repayments on these settlements are included in net new credits.
5
Outstanding credits on December 3 1 , 1978, totaled $45,287 million, representing net credits extended since organization of ExportImport Bank, February 12, 1934, less chargeoffs and net adjustments due to exchange rates ($1,560 million), and excluding World War
I debts. The amount repayable in dollars at U.S. Government option was $42,849 million; the remainder was repayable in foreign
currencies, commodities, or services, at the option of the borrowers.
(See next page for continuation of table.)




328

TABLE B-109.—Summary of major U.S. Government net foreign assistance, July 1, 1945 to December 31,
1978—Continued
[Millions of dollars]1
Yearly average or calendar year
Type and geographic distribution
1970-74

Total.net

1975

1976

1977

1978"

7,146

8,676

7,931

6,732

332

654

1,102

870

867

6,814

8,022

6,829

5,862

7,134

Net new military grants
Gross new grants
Less: Reverse grants and returns

3,310
3,314
5

2,891
2,895

1,339
1,342
3

767
770
3

840
853
13

Other grants, credits, and other assistance (through net accumulation
of foreign currency claims), net

Investment in 6 international financial institutions3
Under assistance programs, net

8,000

3,504

5,130

5,490

5,096

6,294

Net new economic and technical aid grants 4
Gross new grants
Less: Reverse grants and returns

2,486
2,534
48

2,247
2,250
2

2,268
2,274
6

2,274
2,274

2,652
2,652

Net new credits4 5
New credits
Less: Principal collections

1,190
3,836
2,646

2,853
5,297
2,444

3,275
5,837
2,562

2,861
5,546
2,685

3,695
6,599
2,904

Other assistance (through net accumulation of foreign currency
claims) 6

-171

30

-53

-39

-53

Currency claims acquired
Sales of farm products 7
Second-stage operations

742
106
635

189

129

124

184

Less: Currencies disbursed
Economic grants and credits to purchasing country....
Other uses

a

175

913
709
204

159
21
138

182
42
140

214
16
198

177
17
160

3,614

5,021

5,330

5,283

6,215

2,529
1,234

2,248
2,715

2,268
3,094

2,271
3,018

2,639
3,606

-149

58

-30

-6

-30

-110

109

158

-188

78

-44
-44

-1
138

(*)
181

2
-157

12
89

-22

-28

-23

-33

-23

Geographic distribution of net nonmilitary assistance
Developing countries,8 net total
Net new economic and technical aid grants
Net new credits
Other assistance (through net accumulation of foreign currency
claims)
Developed countries,8 net total
Net new economic and technical aid grants
Net new credits
Other assistance (through net accumulation of foreign currency
claims)
6

Equivalent value of currencies still available to be used, including some funds advanced from foreign governments and after loss by
exchange rate fluctuations ($1,404 million), was $504 million on December 31, 1978.
7
Includes foreign currencies acquired from triangular trade operations and principal and interest collections on credits, originally
extended under Public Law 83-480, which—since enactment of Public Law 87-128—are available for the same purposes as Public Law
83-480 currencies.
8
Developed countries include Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Republic of South Africa, and all countries in Europe except
Cyprus, Gibraltar, Greece, Malta, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, and Yugoslavia. Developing countries include all other countries. This
classification is on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Hess than plus or minus $500,000.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, based on information made available by operating agencies.




329
U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1980 0 - 29H-289
















