


Economic Report
of the President

Transmitted to the Congress
February 1982
TOGETHER WITH

THE ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 1982

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Washington, D.C 20402






CONTENTS
Page

ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT

1

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS*

11

CHAPTER 1. ECONOMIC POLICY FOR THE 1980s

21

CHAPTER 2. GOVERNMENT AND THE ECONOMY

27

CHAPTER 3. MONETARY POLICY, INFLATION, AND EMPLOYMENT

47

CHAPTER 4. FEDERAL BUDGET ISSUES

78

CHAPTER 5. TAX POLICY AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

109

CHAPTER 6. REFORMING GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

134

CHAPTER 7. THE UNITED STATES IN THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC SYSTEM
167
CHAPTER 8. REVIEW AND OUTLOOK

192

APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF
THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING 1981

217

APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME, EMPLOYMENT, AND PRODUCTION

227

*For a detailed table of contents of the Council's Report, see page 15.




(Ill)







ECONOMIC REPORT
OF THE PRESIDENT




ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
To the Congress of the United States:

In the year just ended, the first decisive steps were taken toward a
fundamental reorientation of the role of the Federal Government in
our economy—a reorientation that will mean more jobs, more opportunity, and more freedom for all Americans. This long overdue redirection is designed to foster the energy, creativity, and ambition of
the American people so that they can create better lives for themselves, their families, and the communities in which they live. Equally
important, this redirection puts the economy on the path of less inflationary but more rapid economic growth.
My economic program is based on the fundamental precept that
government must respect, protect, and enhance the freedom and integrity of the individual. Economic policy must seek to create a climate that encourages the development of private institutions conducive to individual responsibility and initiative. People should be encouraged to go about their daily lives with the right and the responsibility for determining their own activities, status, and achievements.
This Report reviews the condition of the American economy as it
was inherited by this Administration. It describes the policies which
have been adopted to reverse the debilitating trends of the past, and
which will lead to recovery in 1982 and sustained, noninflationary
growth in the years to follow. And, finally, this Report explains the
impact these policies will have on the economic well-being of all
Americans in the years to come.
The Legacy of the Past

For several decades, an ever-larger role for the Federal Government and, more recently, inflation have sapped the economic vitality
of the Nation.
In the 1960s Federal spending averaged 19.5 percent of the Nation's output. In the 1970s it rose to 20.9 percent, and in 1980 it
reached 22.5 percent. The burden of tax revenues showed a similar
pattern, with increasingly high tax rates stifling individual initiative
and distorting the flow of saving and investment.
The substantially expanded role of the Federal Government has
been far deeper and broader than even the growing burden of
spending, and taxing would suggest. Over the past decade the government has spun a vast web of regulations that intrude into almost




every aspect of every American's working day. This regulatory web
adversely affects the productivity of our Nation's businesses, farms,
educational institutions, State and local governments, and the operations of the Federal Government itself. That lessened productivity
growth, in turn, increases the costs of the goods and services we buy
from each other. And those regulations raise the cost of government
at all levels and the taxes we pay to support it.
Consider also the tragic record of inflation—that unlegislated tax
on everyone's income—which causes high interest rates and discourages saving and investment. During the 1960s, the average yearly increase in the consumer price index was 2.3 percent. In the 1970s the
rate more than doubled to 7.1 percent; and in the first year of the
1980s it soared to 13.5 percent. We simply cannot blame crop failures and oil price increases for our basic inflation problem. The continuous, underlying cause was poor government policy.
The combination of these two factors—ever higher rates of inflation and ever greater intrusion by the Federal Government into the
Nation's economic life—have played a major part in a fundamental
deterioration in the performance of our economy. In the 1960s productivity in the American economy grew at an annual rate of 2.9 percent; in the 1970s productivity growth slowed by nearly one-half, to
1.5 percent. Real gross national product per capita grew at an annual
rate of 2.8 percent in the 1960s compared to 2.1 percent in the
1970s. This deterioration in our economic performance has been
accompanied by inadequate growth in employment opportunities for
our Nation's growing work force.
Reversing the trends of the past is not an easy task. I never
thought or stated it would be. The damage that has been inflicted on
our economy was done by imprudent and inappropriate policies over
a period of many years; we cannot realistically expect to undo it all in
a few short months. But during the past year we have made a substantial beginning.
Policies for the 1980s

Upon coming into office, my Administration set out to design and
carry out a long-run economic program that would decisively reverse
the trends of the past, and make growth and prosperity the norm,
rather than the exception for the American economy. To that end,
my first and foremost objective has been to improve the performance
of the economy by reducing the role of the Federal Government in
all its many dimensions. This involves a commitment to reduce Federal spending and taxing as a share of gross national product. It
means a commitment to reduce progressively the size of the Federal
deficit. It involves a substantial reform of Federal regulation,




eliminating it where possible and simplifying it where appropriate. It
means eschewing the stop-and-go economic policies of the past
which, with their short-term focus, only added to our long-run economic ills.
A reduced role for the Federal Government means an enhanced
role for State and local governments. A wide range of Federal activities can be more appropriately and efficiently carried out by the
States. I am proposing in my Budget Message a major shift in this direction. This shift will eliminate the "freight charge" imposed by the
Federal Government on the taxpayers' money when it is sent to
Washington and then doled out again. It will permit a substantial reduction in Federal employment involved in administering these programs. Transfers of programs will permit public sector activities to
be more closely tailored to the needs and desires of the electorate,
bringing taxing and spending decisions closer to the people. Furthermore, as a result of last year's Economic Recovery Tax Act, Federal
taxation as a share of national income will be substantially reduced,
providing States and localities with an expanded tax base so that they
can finance those transferred programs they wish to continue. That
tax base will be further increased later in this decade, as Federal
excise taxes are phased out.
These initiatives follow some common sense approaches to making
government more efficient and responsive:
• We should leave to private initiative all the functions that individuals can perform privately.
• We should use the level of government closest to the community
involved for all the public functions it can handle. This principle
includes encouraging intergovernmental arrangements among
the State and local communities.
• Federal Government action should be reserved for those needed
functions that only the national government can undertake.
The accompanying report from my Council of Economic Advisers
develops the basis for these guidelines more fully.
To carry out these policies for the 1980s, my Administration has
put into place a series of fundamental and far-reaching changes in
Federal Government spending, taxing, and regulatory policy, and we
have made clear our support for a monetary policy that will steadily
bring down inflation.
Slowing the Growth of Government Spending

Last February I promised to bring a halt to the rapid growth of
Federal spending. To that end, I made budget control the cutting
edge of my program for economic recovery. Thanks to the cooperation of the Congress and the American people, we have taken a




major step forward in accomplishing this objective, although much
more remains to be done.
The Congress approved rescissions in the fiscal 1981 budget of
$12.1 billion, by far the largest amount ever cut from the budget
through this procedure. Spending for fiscal 1982 was subsequently
reduced . by another $35 billion. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 also cut $95 billion from the next 2 fiscal
years, measured against previous spending trends. Many of these cuts
in so-called "uncontrollable" programs were carried out by substantive changes in authorizing legislation, demonstrating that we can
bring government spending under control—if only we have the will.
These spending cuts have been made without damaging the programs that many of our truly needy Americans depend upon. Indeed,
my program will continue to increase the funds, before and after allowing for inflation, that such programs receive in the future.
In this undertaking to bring spending under control, I have made a
conscious effort to ensure that the Federal Government fully discharges its duty to provide all Americans with the needed services
and protections that only a national government can provide. Chief
among these is a strong national defense, a vital function which had
been allowed to deteriorate dangerously in previous years.
As a result of my program, Federal Government spending growth
has been cut drastically—from nearly 14 percent annually in the 3
fiscal years ending last September to an estimated 7 percent over the
next 3 years—at the same time that we are rebuilding our national
defense capabilities.
We must redouble our efforts to control the growth in spending.
We face high, continuing, and troublesome deficits. Although these
deficits are undesirably high, they will not jeopardize the economic
recovery. We must understand the reasons behind the deficits now
facing us: recession, lower inflation, and higher interest rates than
anticipated. Although my original timetable for a balanced budget is
no longer achievable, the factors which have postponed it do not
mean we are abandoning the goal of living within our means. The
appropriate ways to reducing the deficit will be working in
our favor in 1982 and beyond: economic growth, lower interest rates,
and spending control.
Reducing Tax Burdens

We often hear it said that we work the first few months of the year
for the government and then we start to work for ourselves. But that
is backwards. In fact, the first part of the year we work for ourselves.
We begin working for the government only when our income reaches
taxable levels. After that, the more we earn, the more we work for




the government, until rising tax rates on each dollar of extra income
discourage many people from further work effort or from further
saving and investment.
As a result of passage of the historic Economic Recovery Tax Act
of 1981, we have set in place a fundamental reorientation of our tax
laws. Rather than using the tax system to redistribute existing
income, we have significantly restructured it to encourage people to
work, save, and invest more. Across-the-board cuts in individual
income tax rates phased-in over 3 years and the indexing of tax
brackets in subsequent years will help put an end to making inflation
profitable for the Federal Government. The reduction in marginal
rates for all taxpayers, making Individual Retirement Accounts available to all workers, cutting the top tax bracket from 70 percent to 50
percent, and reduction of the "marriage penalty" will have a powerful impact on the incentives for all Americans to work, save, and
invest.
These changes are moving us away from a tax system which has
encouraged individuals to borrow and spend to one in which saving
and investment will be more fully rewarded.
To spur further business investment and productivity growth, the
new tax law provides faster write-offs for capital investment and a restructured investment tax credit. Research and development expenditures are encouraged with a new tax credit. Small business tax rates
have been reduced.
Regulatory Reform

My commitment to regulatory reform was made clear in one of my
very first acts in office, when I accelerated the decontrol of crude oil
prices and eliminated the cumbersome crude oil entitlements system.
Only skeptics of the free market system are surprised by the results.
For the first time in 10 years, crude oil production in the continental
United States has begun to rise. Prices and availability are now determined by the forces of the market, not dictated by Washington. And,
helped by world supply and demand developments, oil and gasoline
prices have been falling, rather than rising.
I have established, by Executive order, a process whereby all executive agency regulatory activity is subject to close and sensitive
monitoring by the Executive Office of the President. During the first
year of my Administration, 2,893 regulations have been subjected to
Executive Office review. The number of pages in the Federal Register,
the daily publication that contains a record of the Federal Government's official regulatory actions, has fallen by over one-quarter after
increasing steadily for a decade.




But the full impact of this program cannot be found in easy-tomeasure actions by the Federal Government. It is taking place outside of Washington, in large and small businesses, in State and local
governments, and in our schools and hospitals where the full benefits
of regulatory reform are being felt. The redirection of work and
effort away from trying to cope with or anticipate Federal regulation
toward more productive pursuits is how regulatory reform will make
its greatest impact in raising productivity and reducing costs.
Controlling Money Growth

Monetary policy is carried out by the independent Federal Reserve
System. I have made clear my support for a policy of gradual and less
volatile reduction in the growth of the money supply. Such a policy
will ensure that inflationary pressures will continue to decline without
impairing the operation of our financial markets as they mobilize savings and direct them to their most productive uses. It will also ensure
that high interest rates, with their large inflation premiums, will no
longer pose a threat to the well-being of our housing and motor vehicle industries, to small business and farmers, and to all who rely
upon the use of credit in their daily activities. In addition, reduced
monetary volatility will strengthen confidence in monetary policy and
help lower interest rates.
The International Aspects of the Program

The poor performance of the American economy over the past
decade and more has had its impact on our position in the world
economy. Concern about the dollar was evidenced by a prolonged
period of decline in its value on foreign exchange markets. A decline
in our competitiveness in many world markets reflected, in part,
problems of productivity at home.
A strengthened domestic economy will mean a faster growing
market for our trading partners and greater competitiveness for
American exports abroad. At the same time it will mean that the
dollar should increase in its attractiveness as the primary international trading currency, and thus provide more stability to world trade
and finance.
I see an expansion of the international trading system as the chief
instrument for economic growth in many of the less developed
countries as well as an important factor in our own future and that of
the world's other major industrial nations. To this end, I reaffirm my
Administration's commitment to free trade. International cooperation
is particularly vital, however, in confronting the challenge of increased protectionism both at home and abroad. My Administration




will work closely with other nations toward reducing trade barriers
on an even-handed basis.
I am sensitive to the fact that American domestic economic policies
can have significant impacts on our trading partners and on the
entire system of world trade and finance. But it is important for all
concerned that the United States pursue economic policies that focus
on our long-run problems, and lead to sustained and vigorous
growth at home. In this way the United States will continue to be a
constructive force in the world economy.
1981: Building for the Future

In 1981 not only were the far-reaching policies needed for the remainder of the 1980s developed and put into place, their first positive results also began to be felt.
The most significant result was the contribution these policies
made to a substantial reduction in inflation, bringing badly needed
relief from inflationary pressures to every American. For example, in
1980 the consumer price index rose 13.5 percent for the year as a
whole; in 1981 that rate of increase was reduced substantially, to 10.4
percent. This moderation in the rate of price increases meant that inflation, "the cruelest tax/' was taking less away from individual savings and taking less out of every working American's paycheck.
There are other, more indirect but equally important benefits that
flow from a reduction in inflation. The historically high level of interest rates of recent years was a direct reflection of high rates of actual
and expected inflation. As the events of this past year suggested, only
a reduction in inflationary pressures will lead to substantial, lasting
reductions in interest rates.
In the 6 months preceding this Administration's taking office, interest rates had risen rapidly, reflecting excessively fast monetary
growth. Since late last summer, however, short- and long-term interest rates have, on average, moved down somewhat in response to
anti-inflationary economic policies.
Unfortunately, the high and volatile money growth of the past, and
the high inflation and high interest rates which accompanied it, were
instrumental in bringing about the poor and highly uneven economic
performance of 1980 and 1981, culminating in a sharp fall in output
and a rise in unemployment in the latter months of 1981.
This Administration views the current recession with concern. I am
convinced that our policies, now that they are in place, are the appropriate response to our current difficulties and will provide the basis
for a vigorous economic recovery this year. It is of the greatest importance that we avoid a return to the stop-and-go policies of the
past. The private sector works best when the Federal Government




9

intervenes least. The Federal Government's task is to construct a
sound, stable, long-term framework in which the private sector is the
key engine to growth, employment, and rising living standards.
The policies of the past have failed. They failed because they did
not provide the environment in which American energy, entrepreneurship, and talent can best be put to work. Instead of being a successful promoter of economic growth and individual freedom, government became the enemy of growth and an intruder on individual
initiative and freedom. My program—a careful combination of reducing incentive-stifling taxes, slowing the growth of Federal spending
and regulations, and a gradually slowing expansion of the money
supply—seeks to create a new environment in which the strengths of
America can be put to work for the benefit of us all. That environment will be an America in which honest work is no longer discouraged by ever-rising prices and tax rates, a country that looks forward
to the future not with uncertainty but with the confidence that infused our forefathers.

(\ x &^*&d^ \ CJL^KJXK^

February 10, 1982




10

THE ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS







LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,
Washington, D.C., February 6, 1982.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its 1982
Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment
Act of 1946 as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act of 1978.
Sincerely,

Murray L. Weidenbaum
CHAIRMAN

William A. Niskanen

13
358-691 0 - 82 - 2 : QL3







CONTENTS
Page

CHAPTER 1. ECONOMIC POLICY FOR THE 1980s
The Legacy of "Stagflation"
The President's Program for Economic Recovery
A Summary of Economic Conditions
Prospects for Recovery
Organization of this Report
CHAPTER 2, GOVERNMENT AND THE ECONOMY
The LimitecJ Case for Government Intervention
Externalities
Monopoly
Public Goods
Income Redistribution
,.'.
Macroeconomic Stability
The Division of Roles in a Federal System
Limits on the Exercise of the Federal Role
The Political Process
Supply by Government Agencies
Diversity of Conditions and Preferences
Limits on Information
Time Horizon
Principles Guiding the President's Economic Program
Emphasis on Personal Responsibility
Reform of Regulation
Federalism
Long-Run Focus
Increased Reliance on the Market
Emphasis on the General Welfare
CHAPTER 3. MONETARY POLICY, INFLATION, AND EMPLOYMENT
The Legacies
,
The Legacy of Economic Stabilization Policy
The Legacy of "Stagflation"
The Business Cycle and Rising Inflation Legacy
The Nature of the Inflation Process
The Costs of Inflation
The Costs of Reducing Inflation
Money and Monetary Policy




15

21
21
23
23
25
26
27
29
30
31
33
33
35
36
37
37
39
40
41
41
42
42
43
44
44
44
45
47
48
48
50
52
54
56
58
61

Page

Money Creation and Federal Finance
Money Versus Credit
Monetary Policy Objectives and Strategy
Institutionalization of a Noninflationary Monetary Policy....
Gold Standard
A Monetary Rule
The Future Challenge
CHAPTER 4. FEDERAL BUDGET ISSUES
The Overall Level of Federal Spending
Reallocation of Budget Priorities
Defense
Social Security
Strengthening the Federal System
Federal Credit Activity
Federal Deficits in Perspective
Why Deficits Matter
Measuring the Deficit
An Analysis of Deficits and Debt Financing
The Deficit and Politics of the Budget
Appendix to Chapter 4: A Broader Perspective on the
Federal Debt
CHAPTER 5. TAX POLICY AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Economic Growth; Past Performance and Future Potential.
Measuring Growth
Economic Growth—The Historical Record
Explaining the Productivity Slowdown
Prospects for Growth in the 1980s
Increasing Factor Supply
The Economic Effects of Tax Policy
The Structure of the Tax System
The Personal Income Tax
Taxation of Income from Business Investment
Tax Treatment of Depreciable Property
Leasing Provisions
Effects of Tax Act on Housing and Consumer Durables
Implicit Taxation of Labor Supply by the Social Security and Welfare Systems
Monetary Policy as a Fiscal Instrument
Structural Tax Policy and Economic Growth
CHAFFER 6. REFORMING GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
The Growth of Federal Regulation
Reasons for Regulation
An Overview of Regulation




16

61
62
63
68
69
74
75
78
80
83
85
88
90
92
95
95
96
97
101
102
109
Ill
Ill
112
114
115
115
117
118
119
122
122
125
126
127
129
182
134
134
135
137

Page

Benefit-Cost Analysis of Government Regulation
Quantification
The Evolution of Regulatory Review
The Clean Air Act and Economic Analysis
Long-Range Transport
Ambient Air Standards
Technology-Based Stationary Source Standards
Mobile Source Standards
Hazardous Emissions Standards
The Control of Health Care Costs: A Contrast of Approaches
The Industry
v
Proposals for Reform
Regulatory Reform in the Agencies
Financial Institutions
Agriculture
Energy
Transportation
Telecommunications
Antitrust
Guidelines for Regulatory Reform
CHAPTER 7. THE UNITED STATES IN THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC SYSTEM
International Financial Markets
The Dollar in the International Setting
Exchange-Rate Movements
Official Intervention in the Exchange Markets
Implications for U.S. Monetary Policy
Trade Issues and Policies

147
147
150
150
150
153
156
161
163
164
165
167
168
168
169
172
173
174

Trade in the U.S. Economy
The Stance of U.S. Trade Policy
Changing Attitudes Toward International Trade
The Significance of External Imbalances
Development, Adjustment, and International Institutions...
The Heritage and the Challenges
Meeting the Challenges
Evolving Role of International Institutions
Appendix to Chapter 7: U.S. Policies on Exchange-Rate
Intervention Since 1973....
CHAPTER 8. REVIEW AND OUTLOOK
Overview of 1981
Major Sectors of Aggregate Demand
Personal Consumption Expenditures
Residential Investment




137
139
140
143
143
144
144
145
146

17

174
176
177
179
181
181
183
184
189
192
192
196
197
198

Page

Business Fixed Investment
Inventory Accumulation
Net Export
The Farm Economy
Labor Market Developments
Wages, Prices, and Productivity
Credit Markets....
Interest Rates and Monetary Developments
International Capital Flows
Thrift Institutions
1
Prospects for 1982 and 1983
Prospects Beyond 1983
APPENDIXES
A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council
of Economic Advisers During 1981
B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income, Employment and
Production

198
199
199
199
201
203
205
206
208
209
209
213
217
227

List of Tables and Charts
Tables

1-1, Major Economic Conditions and the Federal Role, 196080
3-1. Wholesale Price Indexes, 1814-1913
3-2. Comparison of the Behavior of Price Level, Real Output,
and Money Growth in the United Kingdom and the
United States, Selected Periods, 1821-1979
3-3. Changes in Gold Output and the Price Level, 1800-1980.
4-1. Structure of Federal Government Expenditures, NIPA,
Calendar Years, 1951-83
4-2. Composition of Federal Unified Budget Outlays, Selected
Fiscal Years, 1960-87
4-3. Federal and Federally Assisted Credit Programs, Fiscal
Years 1970-81
4-4. Total Federal Budget and Off-Budget Surplus or Deficit
and Gross National Product, Fiscal Years 1958-87
4-5. Illustrative Measures of Federal Government's Net Liabilities, 1950-80
4-6. Comparisons of Total Measured Federal Government's
Indebtedness, Unfunded Social Security Retirement Liabilities, and Household Wealth, 1950-77
5-1. Average Annual Growth Rates of Real GNP, Total Factor
Productivity, and Factor Inputs, 1959-79
5-2. Average Annual Consumption and Saving Rates, 195180




18

22
71

71
72
82
83
94
98
104
107
113
116

List of Tables and Charts—Continued
Tables

Page

5-3. Comparison of Marginal Personal Income Tax Rates by
Real Income Level Under the Economic Recovery Tax
Act of 1981 and Old Law, 1979-86
119
5-4. Marginal Personal Income Tax Rates for Four-Person
Families, Selected Years, 1965-84
120
5-5. Real Before-Tax Rate of Return Required to Provide a 4
Percent Real After-Tax Return, 1955-86
123
5-6. Real Before-Tax Rate of Return Required to Provide a 4
Percent After-Tax Return in 1986 at Selected Rates of
Inflation
124
5-7. Effective Tax Rates on New Depreciable Assets, Selected
Industries, 1982 l
124
5-8. Sources of Changes in Federal Government's Real Net
Financial Liabilities, 1966-80
131
6-1. Regulatory Outlays of Federal Agencies, Fiscal Years
1974-81
136
6-2. Domestic Crude Oil Production and Drilling Activity,
1973-81
157
6-3. Domestic Crude Oil Production, 1980-81
157
6-4. Imports of Crude Oil and Refined Products, 1980-81
158
7-1. U.S. Merchandise Exports, Imports, and Balance, 197781
175
7-2. U.S. International Transactions, 1977-81
180
7-3. Real GNP Growth Rates, 1950 to 1980
182
8-1. Performance in 1981 Compared to January 15 Projections
195
8-2. Growth in Major Components of Real Gross National
Product, 1977-81
196
8-3. Labor Market Developments, 1977-81
201
8-4. Measures of Compensation, 1978-81
203
8-5. Changes in Productivity and Unit Labor Costs, 1977-81 .. 204
8-6. Measures of Price Change, 1977-81
204
8-7. Alternative Measures of Changes in Real Earnings Per
Hour, 1979-81
205
8-8. Economic Outlook for 1982
210
8-9. Economic Projections, 1982-87
214
Charts

3-1.
3-2.
3-3.
3-4.
4-1.
6-1.

Inflation and Unemployment Rate
The Inflation Ratchet (CPI)
Money and GNP Growth
Jevons-Sauerbeck Index of Wholesale Commodity Prices .
Defense Outlays as Percent of GNP
Growth of Federal Regulatory Agencies




19

51
54
64
70
85
135

List of Tables and Charts—Continued
Charts

Page

7-1. Nominal and Real Effective Foreign Exchange Value of
the Dollar
7-2. U.S. External Terms of Trade
8-1. Growth Rates of Money Stock, Real GNP, and GNP Deflator
8-2. Employment Ratio and Unemployment Rate
8-3. Interest Rates in 1981




20

170
171
193
203
207

CHAPTER 1

Economic Policy for the 1980s
THE YEAR JUST ENDED was an especially significant one for the
economy and for economic policymaking. When future Reports are
written, we hope that 1981 will be described as the watershed year in
which the more than decade-old rising trend of inflation was finally
arrested. This development should contribute to more rapidly rising
standards of living, more productive patterns of investment and
saving, and a strengthened U.S. position in the world economy.
At the same time that inflation was moderating, a far-reaching set
of economic policies was being developed to provide a framework for
growth and stability in the years ahead, reversing more than a decade
of declining productivity growth and wide swings in economic activityThe speed with which the economy adjusts to the Administration's
policies will be largely determined by the extent to which individuals,
at home and at work, believe the Administration will maintain, unchanged, its basic approach to personal and business taxation, Federal spending and regulation, and monetary policy. When public expectations fully adjust to this commitment, a necessary condition for
both reduced inflation and higher growth will be fully established. In
short, as this Report attempts to demonstrate, what some people have
referred to as "monetarism" and "supply-side economics" should be
seen as two sides of the same coin—compatible and necessary measures to both reduce inflation and increase economic growth.
THE LEGACY OF "STAGFLATION"
Over the last 15 years the U.S. economy has experienced progres-;
sively higher rates of inflation and unemployment, a combination of
conditions commonly called "stagflation." This development was associated with a substantial increase in the Federal Government's role
in the economy. Federal spending and tax revenues absorbed an increasing share of national output, Federal regulations were extended
to a much broader scope of economic activity, and the rate of money
growth increased substantially. Table 1-1 contrasts economic conditions during the 1960-65 period (the last business cycle prior to the




21

Vietnam war), the 1974-79 period (the most recent extended business cycle), and 1980.
TABLE 1-1.—Major economic conditions and the Federal role, 1960-80
[Percent; annual average, except as noted]
Item

1960-1965

1974-1979

1980

Economic conditions:
Productivity increase

26

07

Unemployment rate

5.5

68

7.1

Inflation

1.6

75

90

Interest rate

44

87

119

-02

The Federal role:
Spending shar^ of GNP

18.8

217

22.9

Revenue share of GNP

18.6

197

206

Regulation increase

76

139

123

Money supply increase

3.0

6.6

7.3

Note. For this table, the following are used:
Productivity—Output per hour, private nonfarm business, all employees.
Unemployment rate—unemployment as percent of civilian labor force, persons 16 years of age and over.
Inflation—Change in implicit price deflator for gross national product (GNP).
Interest rate—Corporate Aaa bond yield.
Spending share—Federal expenditures, national income and product accounts (NiPA), as percent of GNP.
Tax share—Federal receipts (NIPA) as percent of GNP. '
Regulation—Number of pages in the Federal Register.
Money supply—Ml (fourth quarter to fourth quarter).
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Federal Register, and Moody's Investors Service.

As this table illustrates, economic conditions worsened between the
early 1960s and the late 1970s, and deteriorated sharply during the
recession year 1980, Part of the decline in U.S, economic performance was clearly attributable to developments not affected by Federal
economic policy, such as the oil price increases of the 1970s. Such
developments, however, explain only a small part of the decline in
overall U.S. economic performance.
A full explanation of stagflation in the United States and other
countries has yet to be developed. An important lesson of this
period, however, is that there is no long-term tradeoff between unemployment and inflation. The increasing role of the Federal Government in the economy—whether that role was to aid the poor and
aged, to protect consumers and the environment, or to stabilize the
economy—contributed to our declining economic performance. Most
of the increase in Federal spending over the past 15 years has been
in the form of transfer payments, which tend to reduce employment
of the poor and of older workers. A combination of increases in
some tax rates and inflation raised marginal tax rates on real wages
and capital income. The rapid growth in regulatory activity—however
measured—has significantly increased production costs. The Federal
Government bears the most direct responsibility for the increases in




22

inflation and interest rates, which were due to excessive expansion of
the money supply. In short, Federal economic policies bear the major
responsibility for the legacy of stagflation.
THE PRESIDENT'S PROGRAM FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY
For the economy, the most important event of 1981 was the dramatic change in Federal policy. On February 18 the President announced a long-term program designed to increase economic growth
and to reduce inflation. The key elements of the proposed program
were:
• cutting the rate of growth in Federal spending;
• reducing personal income tax rates and creating jobs by accelerating depreciation for business investment in plant and equipment;
• instituting a far-reaching program of regulatory relief; and
• in cooperation with the Federal Reserve, making a new commitment to a monetary policy that will restore a stable currency and
healthy financial markets.
Over the year, with the support of the Congress and the Federal
Reserve System, most of this program was approved and implemented. The Federal Government's budget underwent its most significant
reorientation since the mid-1960s. The rate of increase in total Federal outlays declined from 17.5 percent in fiscal 1980 to 14.0 percent
in fiscal 1981 and to an anticipated 10.4 percent in fiscal 1982. The
composition of Federal spending was also substantially changed. Real
defense spending was accelerated, real spending for the major transfer programs for the poor and aged was maintained, and most of the
spending reductions were made in other domestic programs.
The Congress approved the major features of the President's tax
proposal while adding a number of other provisions. The long-term
increase in Federal regulation was significantly slowed, as suggested
by a 27 percent decline in the number of pages in the Federal Register,
and the Federal Reserve reduced the rate of money growth to 4.9
percent during 1981. As finally implemented, the change in Federal
economic policies was more substantial than during any recent Administration. The new policies comprise an innovative approach to
reducing the rate of inflation while providing incentives to achieve
sustained and vigorous economic growth. While such a development
would be somewhat unusual in light of historical experience, we believe that a consistent policy of monetary restraint, combined with
the Administration's spending and tax policies, and reinforced by




23

continuing regulatory relief, will provide the policy framework for
both reduced inflation and increased economic growth,
A SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
General economic conditions during 1981 reflected the transitory
effects of the necessary changes in Federal economic policies. The
major elements of the Administration's economic policy are designed
to increase long-term economic growth and to reduce inflation. Uniformly favorable near-term effects were not expected.
The primary redirection of economic policy that affected economic
conditions during the year was the reduction in the growth of the
money supply relative to the record high rate of growth in late 1980.
This monetary restraint reduced inflation and short-term interest
rates but also influenced the decline in economic activity in late
1981.
Beginning in late 1979, substantial variability in money growth
rates was associated with unusually large swings in interest rates. By
the end of 1980, as a result of an unprecedented degree of monetary
stimulus, interest rates had risen to new peaks. In December 1980
the Federal funds rate reached more than 20 percent, the prime rate
was 21V2 percent, and 3-month Treasury bills had doubled in yield
from their midyear lows. Long-term interest rates had risen by as
much as 3 full percentage points from their midyear lows.
The rise in interest rates that began in late 1979 gradually produced an ever-widening circle of weakness centering on the most interest-sensitive industries, notably homebuilding and motor vehicles.
Falling demand for housing and autos gradually affected an increasing number of other sectors, ranging from forest products to steel
and rubber to appliances and home furnishings. The high interest
rates also contributed to a squeeze on farm incomes—already under
pressure from weaker farm prices—and weakness in industries and
services closely tied to the farm sector.
Excessive monetary expansion in the latter half of 1980 helped to
drive interest rates to record highs. Rates were kept at those levels
for the next 6 months or so by a variety of factors, including the
transitory impact of the shift to monetary restraint. Rates then fell
because of the monetary restraint that characterized Federal Reserve
policy during most of 1981. The high interest rates were an important factor in precipitating the downturn in the final quarter of 1981,
when real output fell at an annual rate of 5.2 percent.
In short, the conflict between continued expectations of rising inflation, based on the history of the last 15 years, and the more recent
monetary restraint explains many recent problems. Continued mone-




24

tary restraint and a reduction of the within-year variability of money
growth, however, are necessary both to reduce inflation and provide
the basis for sustained economic growth.
PROSPECTS FOR RECOVERY
The series of tax cuts enacted in 1981 provides the foundation for
increased employment, spending, saving, and business investment.
Inflation and short-term interest rates are now substantially lower
than they were at the beginning of 1981. At the time this Report was
prepared, it appeared that the recession which started in August—as
determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research—will be
over by the second quarter of 1982. This would make it about average in length for a post-World War II downturn. Output and employment are expected to increase slightly in the second quarter and
at a brisk pace through the rest of the year, when growth in output is
expected to be in excess of a 5 percent annual rate. Inflation is likely
to continue to decline and to average about 7 percent for the year,
with further reductions in 1983 and beyond.
The outlook for 1983 and subsequent years is based on continuation of the Administration's spending, tax, and regulatory policies,
continued monetary restraint, and broader public recognition that
the Administration is committed to each of these key elements of its
program. Prospective budget deficits are a consequence of the difference in the timing of the spending and tax policy actions, and of the
impact on nominal gross national product growth of continued monetary restraint. Although the prospective deficits are undesirably
high, they are not expected to jeopardize the economic recovery
program.
Concerns have been expressed that the Federal Reserve's targets
for money growth are not compatible with the vigorous upturn in
economic activity envisioned later in 1982. Any such upturn, it is
feared, will lead to a renewed upswing in interest rates and thus
choke off recovery. We believe that such fears, while understandable
on the basis of recent history and policies, are unjustified in light of
current policies and the Administration's determination to carry them
through.
Interest rates, after more than a decade of rising inflation, contain
sizable premiums to compensate lenders for the anticipated loss in
value of future repayments of principal. It is our estimate, however,
that such premiums will decline over the course of 1982 and beyond.
Such a decline would occur while "real" (inflation-adjusted) interest
rates remain high as a result of private and public sector credit demands even as private saving flows increase. In other words, the




25

market rate of interest is likely to continue on a downward trend,
even though short-run fluctuations around the trend can be
expected.
A critical element in this outlook is the assumption that inflationary
expectations will, in fact, continue to recede. If they recede at a relatively fast rate, market rates of interest will decline significantly, wage
demands will continue to moderate, and the pro-inflationary biases
that have developed throughout the economy over the past decade
will quickly disappear. Thus, the greater the degree of cooperation
between the Administration, the Congress, and the Federal Reserve
in continuing to support a consistent, credible anti-inflation policy, as
embodied in the Administration's program, the more rapidly will real
growth and employment increase.
ORGANIZATION OF THIS REPORT
This Report presents the economic basis for the key elements of the
President's economic program. Chapter 2 develops a general framework for the economic role of the Federal Government consistent
with the principles of the President's program. Chapter 3 develops a
framework for a stable, noninflationary monetary policy. Chapters 4
and 5 analyze the major effects of Administration policies on Federal
spending, taxes, and deficits. Chapter 6 summarizes the major features of the program for regulatory reform, while Chapter 7 summarizes the international implications of the Administration's economic
policies for monetary conditions, trade, and international organizations. Finally, Chapter 8 reviews economic conditions in 1981 and
the outlook for the near future in somewhat more detail than in this
opening chapter.
We hope that this Report will help both the public and our fellow
economists to understand the basis, the importance, and the effects
of the dramatic changes in Federal economic policy initiated by the
President in 1981.




26

CHAPTER 2

Government and the Economy
POLITICAL FREEDOM AND ECONOMIC FREEDOM are closely
related. Any comparison among contemporary nations or examination of the historical record demonstrates two important relationships between the nature of the political system and the nature of the
economic system:
• All nations which have broad-based representative government
and civil liberties have most of their economic activity organized
by the market.
• Economic conditions in market economies are generally superior
to those in nations (with a comparable culture and a comparable
resource base) in which the government has the dominant economic role.
The evidence is striking. No nation in which the government has
the dominant economic role (as measured by the proportion of gross
national product originating in the government sector) has maintained broad political freedom; economic conditions in such countries are generally inferior to those in comparable nations with a
predominantly market economy. Voluntary migration, sometimes at high
personal cost, is uniformly to nations with both more political freedom and more economic freedom.
The reasons for these two relationships between political and economic systems are simple but not widely understood. Everyone
would prefer higher prices for goods sold and lower prices for goods
bought. Since the farmer's wheat is the consumer's bread, however,
both parties cannot achieve all they want. The most fundamental difference among economic systems is how these conflicting preferences
are resolved.
A market system resolves these conflicts by allowing the seller to
get the highest price at which others will buy and the buyer to get
the lowest price at which others will sell, by consensual exchanges
that are expected to benefit both parties. Any attempt by one party
to improve his outcome relative to the market outcome requires a
coercive activity at the expense of some other party. The politiciza-




27

tion of price decisions—whether of wages, commodities, or interest
rates—tends to reduce both the breadth of popular support for
the government and the efficiency of the economy. A rich nation can
tolerate a good bit of such mischief, but not an unlimited amount.
One should not be surprised that all nations in which the government has dominant control of the economy are run by a narrow oligarchy and in most economic conditions are relatively poor. In the
absence of limits on the economic role of government, the erosion of
economic freedom destroys both political freedom and economic
performance.
Only a few dozen nations now guarantee their citizens both political and economic freedom. The economic role of government in
these nations differs widely, without serious jeopardy to political freedom. Within the range of experience of the United States and the
other free nations, the relation between the political system and the
government's economic role is more subtle. Expansion of the economic role of the government tends to reduce both the level of
agreement on government policies and the inclination to engage in
political dissent. The link between political and economic freedom is
important. Increasing economic freedom will also provide greater assurance of our political freedom.
A major objective of this Administration's economic program is to
reduce the Federal Government's role in economic decisionmaking
while strengthening the economic role of individuals, private organizations, and State and local governments. This shift will entail substantial reductions in the size and number of Federal spending programs, significant reductions in both personal and business Federal
tax rates, major reforms of Federal regulatory activities, and a reduced rate of money growth. While an important element in this redefinition of the Federal Government's economic role is a political
judgment about the appropriate relationship among individuals, the
States, and the Federal Government, this redefinition also is supported by an extensive body of economic analysis.
This chapter discusses the extent to which government intervention in economic matters is appropriate, why concern over "too
much government" appears to have emerged so strongly in recent
decades, and why the Administration's program is an appropriate
response.
In probing the role of government in the economy, economists
usually start by analyzing the effects of a competitive economy on
economic efficiency. In a rough sense, economic efficiency refers to
the ability of an economy to satisfy each person as much as possible,
consistent with the preferences of others. For such a competitive
economy to be completely efficient, however, certain assumptions




28

would have to be satisfied that are never fully satisfied in the real
world. Therefore, it is often argued that government intervention is
justified in order to correct the inefficiencies which occur when the
desired conditions are not achieved.
However, failure to satisfy certain assumptions is not sufficient to
justify government intervention. To show that a perfectly functioning
government can correct some problem in a free economy is not
enough, for government itself does not function perfectly. Moreover,
many current interventions cannot be explained easily by arguments
based on the alleged failure of the operation of free markets. Many
current interventions, in other words, cannot be justified by any efficiency criterion.
The following section of this chapter discusses situations in which
some types of government intervention in the economy may be justified, The section on The Division of Roles in a Federal System discusses the considerations involved in determining the appropriate
level of government at which such intervention should take place.
The section on Limits on the Exercise of the Federal Role discusses
the political process and argues that government intervention will
not always be consistent with the principles developed in the prior
sections; that is, this section focuses on the possibility of "government failure" in intervening in the economy. The last section, Principles Guiding the President's Economic Program, discusses the Administration's economic program in light of the preceding analysis.
THE LIMITED CASE FOR GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION
Under certain assumptions discussed below, a competitive economy can be shown to lead to general economic efficiency. In standard
economics, an economy is said to be "efficient" if it is impossible to
make anyone better off without making someone else worse off. That
is, there is no possible rearrangement of resources, in either production or consumption, which could improve anyone's position without
simultaneously harming some other person. If there is a possibility of
such a rearrangement occurring, then this means that, someone could
be made better off without harming anyone else. If such a possibility
does exist, then the economy is not efficient.
Each person in such an economy is considered to be concerned
primarily with his or her own welfare. Since there is no central authority directing the course of this economy, whatever results occur
are the unintended consequences of millions of individual actions.
Nonetheless, the outcome of this undirected but self-interested behavior is efficient in the sense mentioned above. Despite the absence
of any central direction, it can be shown that an economic order is




29

generated which has the desirable characteristic of being economically efficient. Moreover, an efficient economic system is responsive to
individual wants; that is, efficiency is defined in terms of each person
achieving his or her own goals.
Such a system relies on the ability of people to trade freely with
each other, for a bargain entered into voluntarily by two individuals
is expected by both of them to make both of them better off. Two
conditions must be fulfilled for such trades to occur. First, individuals
must have the right to enter freely into whatever bargains they wish;
that is, there must be freedom of contract. Second, property rights
must be well defined in all cases except those where the cost of enforcing the right would be greater than the value of the right.
Certain additional characteristics must be present if the economy is
to be efficient. The most important of these characteristics are: the
absence of externalities, the absence of significant monopolies, and
the appropriate provision of public goods. Though such an economy
is efficient, "efficiency" says nothing about the distribution of income
which results from the process. By some criteria the market-generated distribution of income in an efficient economy may be unacceptable. Thus, government intervention may be justified to correct
market failures or to change the resulting distribution of income. It is
also possible that an efficient economy may be less stable than is
generally considered desirable.
EXTERNALITIES

An externality is said to exist where an economic agent (be it producer or consumer) either does not bear the full marginal costs of an
economic action or does not gain its full marginal benefits. Therefore, these agents may not undertake the activity at its optimal economic level. If there are external costs, the agent may undertake too
high a level of the activity. If there are external benefits, the agent
may not undertake enough of the activity.
An example of an activity with external benefits is education. Because some of the benefits of living in a nation of people with a
common language and culture are external, individuals considering
only their own benefit from education will most likely buy too little.
The standard example of an activity that imposes external costs is
manufacturing that results in pollution. Consider a factory which pollutes the air. Those who live near the factory will suffer the costs of
the pollution, but the factory owner will probably not consider these
costs in deciding how much to produce. Since the factory owner does
not bear these costs, the product made in the factory will be underpriced in relation to its true economic cost. Hence, too much of the
good, and too much pollution, will probably be produced. Govern-




30

ment intervention may therefore be justified where either marginal
costs or benefits are external.
Private transactions between parties may sometimes be adequate to
solve externality problems, but this requires that transaction costs be
low. This requirement will not in general be satisfied when many parties are involved.
Since externality problems occur because decisionmakers either do
not pay all the costs of their actions or do not reap all of the benefits,
the most efficient way to correct the problem is to change the marginal costs and benefits. With respect to education the conventional
solution has been to establish systems of public education paid for by
taxes and offered below cost to students. This solution itself creates
problems, since the creation of a tax-subsidized producer of education may lead to the producer having a monopoly over education.
But monopoly is inefficient, whether it is public or private. An alternative would be to grant a "voucher," with the amount of this voucher equal to the difference between private benefit (the benefit to the
student) and total benefit (the benefit which accrues to other members of society as well as to the student). This would avoid the problem of monopoly and might generate pressures for more efficient
schools.
To deal with the external costs of pollution, the conventional solution has been regulation of pollution control technology by government agencies. Since this form of regulation often does not take account of differences in abatement costs for different polluters, it is
often inefficient in that the public pays more than is necessary for a
given amount of pollution reduction (or a smaller reduction in pollution is achieved for a given expenditure than would be possible with a
more efficient scheme).
Two ways of reducing pollution more efficiently have been identified. One is to charge those who pollute a fee based on the cost imposed on others by the pollution. This method has been used in
West German waterways and has been quite effective. Another alternative is for the government to create property rights in air or water.
These rights would then be purchased by those who valued them
most—that is, by those who would pay the highest cost to reduce
their pollution. These two methods, if implemented correctly, would
probably lead to the same outcome.
MONOPOLY

One of the conditions of market efficiency is that there must be
enough buyers and sellers of a good so that each of them has little
influence on its price. This condition is not always satisfied, however.
Sometimes technical and cost conditions in an industry are such that




31

there will be room for only one or a few firms. Two approaches have
been taken in the United States to this problem. In cases of natural
monopoly, direct government regulation or ownership is common. In
industries where only a few firms exist, the antitrust laws are more
commonly used to avoid the costs of monopoly.
Most of the natural monopolies arise from the need to provide
public utility services, such as electricity and water. Regulation of
most of these natural monopolies occurs primarily at the State and
local level and is not covered in this Report, but there are some monopolies regulated at the Federal level. In some cases of natural monopoly, however, newer technology may so change technical and cost
considerations that additional firms would enter the market if permitted to do so by regulatory authorities.
In an industry with few firms it may be possible for the firms to act
in collusion and thus behave as a monopoly. When this occurs, the
profits of the firms are increased, but efficiency losses are imposed
on the economy. Even though such collusions are unstable, losses of
efficiency occur during their existence. The antitrust laws make such
behavior illegal.
The effects of mergers on economic efficiency are more difficult to
discern than the effects of illegal monopoly. Two firms in the same
industry may merge for any of at least three reasons. First, a merger
may be an attempt to obtain monopoly power. When this occurs the
merger will be inefficient and should be stopped. But, firms may also
decide to merge to take advantage of economies of scale or because
one is better managed and can therefore increase efficiency in resource use. In these latter two cases a merger is likely to improve efficiency and should be allowed. The difficulty, of course, is that it is
not always obvious whether monopoly or an increase in efficiency will
be the dominant effect of any given merger.
Though there are difficult cases, this Administration has already
made some changes in policy in the administration of Federal aridtrust laws, changes based on economic analysis. First, a merger between two firms which have a relatively small share of the market
should be allowed, for there is little danger of monopoly. Second, no
significant economic problems are likely to arise from a merger of
firms in unrelated industries (a conglomerate merger); such a merger
will not create any significant monopoly power. Third, there is little
danger of monopoly and therefore no reason for Federal intervention when a firm merges with another firm that is a customer or a
supplier of the first (a vertical merger). Finally, a firm that obtains a
large share of a market by being a more efficient competitor is acting
in a desirable fashion and should not be punished by antitrust action
on the part of the Federal Government. In recent years, those in




32

charge of administering Federal antitrust laws sometimes have behaved as if they viewed their function as protecting existing firms
from competition. From an economic viewpoint the purpose of the
antitrust laws is to maintain competition, even if competition leads to
the decline of firms which are less efficient.
PUBLIC GOODS

A public good has two distinctive characteristics. The first is that
consumption of the good by one party does not reduce consumption
of the good by others, and the second is that there is no effective
way to restrict the benefits of such goods to those who directly pay
for them. The standard example of a public good is national defense.
If national defense deters a foreign aggressor, everyone in the country benefits. This means that no individual will have sufficient incentive to spend his own resources on national defense, since he will
benefit from his neighbor's spending. Hence, such public goods as
national defense are usually provided by some action of the national
government. Government action is usually necessary for the optimal
provision of many public goods, and this point does not arouse controversy among economists. Sometimes there are debates, however,
about whether a particular good is sufficiently public in nature to justify its being provided by the government.
Another public good is information. If one person learns some valuable fact and tells someone else, the use of the information by one
does not reduce the use of the same information by the other. If a
consumer organization spends resources to find out which products
are best and sells a publication that provides this information to subscribers, these subscribers may then pass the information on to
others who did not pay for it. This can be shown as a market failure,
in the sense that the private market did not generate enough information; if the organization could capture all of the returns, it would
provide additional information. Patents and copyrights are designed
to reduce this problem by giving inventors and writers property
rights in their product, thus providing incentives for production, but
there are still cases where the private market does not generate sufficient information. This provides the rationale for government financing of certain kinds of research.
INCOME REDISTRIBUTION

In a market economy, individual income depends upon what one
has to sell and on the amount which others are willing to pay for it.
What most people sell on the market is their labor. About 75 percent
of national income is in the form of wages and salaries and other
forms of labor remuneration. Others have capital or land to rent, and




33

their return is interest and dividends, or rent income. Most people
earn income from both capital and labor over their lifetimes. But
some persons may have few or no valuable things to sell, and these
persons will have low incomes. A decision may then be made to
transfer income to such people directly through government. Two
justifications can be presented for such transfers of income, one
based on the social value of providing certain forms of income insurance, the other based on benevolence. We consider each.
Anyone may lose his ability to earn income. A worker may become
physically disabled or find that technological progress has made his
or her skills obsolete. Or an investor may find that changing market
conditions have eroded the return on capital. Since individuals generally do not like the risk of losing their ability to earn income, they
often seek to insure themselves against such a possibility.
But there are difficulties in providing insurance against falling incomes by way of private-market mechanisms. A major difficulty is
what is called "adverse selection/* Assume that some insurance company offered actuarily fair insurance against this risk and charged all
persons the same premium. (That is, the amount of the premium
equals the expected cost of having a low income.) Since most persons
are averse to risk, they might buy this insurance even though the premium would be somewhat greater than the expected cost because of
the expense of writing the insurance. Some persons would be better
risks than average, and new insurance companies would compete
with the first company for these better risks. This would leave the
original company insuring only the bad risks, which the company
would then find financially intolerable. Ultimately, one class of persons would be unable to obtain any insurance.
This would be an example of market failure and an argument for
government provision of insurance, since the government can force
everyone to join the same insurance pool. The appropriate form of
insurance to those who experience a temporary loss of income is a
cash grant. Welfare payments and unemployment compensation may
be viewed as just this sort of insurance.
The second argument for government transfers to the poor is an
argument based on benevolence. Many people prefer not to live in a
society where there is poverty and thus have an incentive to transfer
some of their resources to the poor voluntarily. When one individual
performs such a transfer, all individuals who dislike poverty benefit.
Thus, most people will have an incentive to reduce their contributions to the poor and rely on the contributions of others. In all likelihood, such voluntary transfers would be too low to keep people out
of poverty; it may become necessary for the government to do it.




34

In cases where transfers of income are desirable, economic theory
can indicate the most efficient form of transfer. One goal should be
to minimize interference in private markets. Price controls on gasoline and laws decreeing minimum wages, for example, are considered
by many economists to be inefficient ways of helping the poor.
The way in which resources should be transferred to the poor depends on the goal of the donors. If the goal is simply to improve the
welfare of the poor, the most efficient solution probably would be a
system of cash transfers, since it can be assumed that recipients are
best able to determine the pattern of spending that maximizes their
welfare. But if the donor is more concerned with the specific goods
which the recipient consumes, a direct transfer of goods may be preferable. In this case the argument can be made for using some form
of voucher. A voucher is essentially a coupon usable only for the purchase of a specific type of good. Food stamps are one example. Use
of vouchers instead of a direct transfer of goods allows recipients to
determine their own consumption but restricts the type of goods
which the recipient may purchase.
Regardless of the form of transfer, there is still an efficiency cost.
Transfers reduce the incentive of recipients to work, and the taxes
imposed on the rest of society to finance these transfers also cause
losses in efficiency. There are also costs of administering the program. Economists are able to give advice on ways of transferring
income which may serve to minimize these effects, but the decision
as to the amount of the transfers is a political decision, not an economic one.
MACROECONOMIC STABILITY

A market system may sometimes be subject to unacceptably large
fluctuations in income. When this occurs, it has implications for the
general welfare. First, average income levels may be smaller with
fluctuations than if the level of activity is more stable. Second, even if
the average level of incomes is unaffected by such fluctuations,
people are generally risk-averse. That is, most people prefer a steady
stream of income to a fluctuating stream, even if their total income is
the same over a period of time. For these reasons, government may
have a role in helping to provide stability.
An alternative view is that a market economy is inherently quite
stable. According to this view, government actions are the primary
destabilizing factors in the economy. That is, many fluctuations in
income which seem to be caused by private sector actions are actually
caused by attempts to outguess the government. (This issue is discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.)




35

Macroeconomic stability also involves the question of what to do
about money. Money performs several functions in an economy. Its
use economizes on transaction costs and on information costs, since
all persons accept the same money and are aware of its value. However, the government must be careful in its money creating function
not to exacerbate cyclical fluctuations. Excess creation of money
leads to inflation, which reduces money's value.
Although the Federal Government is the appropriate agent for stabilizing the economy, the limits of such action must be understood.
This Administration believes that "fine tuning" of the economy—attempting to offset every fluctuation—is not possible. The information
needed to do so is often simply not available, and when it becomes
available it is quite likely that underlying conditions will already have
changed. As a result, a policy of fine tuning the economy is as
likely to be counterproductive as it is to be helpful. Though it is necessary for the government to have macroeconomic policies, including
both monetary and fiscal policies designed to achieve some desired
growth of income, such policies are not suitable for correcting small
fluctuations in economic activity.
THE DIVISION OF ROLES IN A FEDERAL SYSTEM
The preceding sections have discussed situations where government intervention in private economic activities may be appropriate.
An equally important concern is determining the level of government
at which intervention, when desirable, should take place.
Our system of government is a Federal system, one in which certain powers have been granted to the Federal Government while
other powers have been granted to the States. In recent decades,
however, there has been a substantial centralization of power at the
national level.
One constraint on the power of any government to impose costs
on its citizens is the ability of those citizens to move elsewhere. Thus,
one argument for reliance on State government is essentially the argument that it restricts the power of government, since any State
which passed laws which were sufficiently inefficient would probably
find itself losing residents. The long-term increase in the power of
the Federal Government at the expense of the State governments has
probably weakened this constraint on governmental power.
Another argument for federalism is that State and local governments are more likely to choose the amount and quality of governmental services preferred by their voters, whose preferences and resources vary greatly. This argument has important implications for
both the types of services that should be provided at the different




36

levels of government and the structure of the tax system. Decisions
on government services that benefit people throughout the Nation,
such as national defense and the protection of basic constitutional
rights, are appropriately made by the Federal Government, and such
services should be financed by Federal taxes. But, government services that provide benefits only or predominantly to residents of a
specific region, such as urban transit and sewer systems, can probably be provided more efficiently by State or local governments and
financed by State and local taxes or user charges on those persons
directly benefited.
In this view, Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments
should be restricted to services provided by these governments that
have significant benefits for residents in other regions of the country.
Over the last several decades, however, Federal grants-in-aid have
not been directed at assisting such services. Instead, these grants
have in many cases reduced the State or local "tax price" of a wide
range of other services and therefore have increased their utilization
beyond that which most local residents would prefer. Consequently,
the relative growth of Federal financing of State and local services
has probably increased the total size of government in the United
States while reducing its efficiency and responsiveness. The case for
a return to a more balanced federalism is a case for both efficiency in
the provision of public services and for greater individual freedom
and choice in the Federal system.
LIMITS ON THE EXERCISE OF THE FEDERAL ROLE
So far, this chapter has summarized the theoretical reasons for a
limited role of the Federal Government in the economy. Even when
the government justifiably undertakes certain activities, however,
there are reasons for believing that it is unlikely to do a perfect job.
Just as there sometimes are reasons for expecting "market failure,"
sometimes there also are reasons for expecting "government failure."
In this section we discuss some of these reasons.
THE POLITICAL PROCESS

For several reasons the political process is overly responsive to
special interest groups. One cause of this is the high cost of information. Consider, for example, an import quota program that will give
rather large benefits to firms and workers in the industry to be protected by the quota. Although such a program will impose only small
costs on everyone else in the economy, it will be inefficient because
the sum of the losses will be greater than the sum of the gains.
However, each of the losers will lose so little that it will often not




37

pay to spend the resources necessary to learn about the losses.
The average voter would have to make a detailed study of law and
economics, for example, to determine how much government-induced cartelization of the trucking industry costs him. It is quite
rational for the average voter not to bother to learn about this cost,
for the resources spent in doing so would probably be greater than
the per capita cost of the government activity that led to cartelization. (Economists refer to this as "rational ignorance/') On the other
hand, the beneficiaries of government policies gain substantial
amounts, and it pays for them to spend resources in learning about
government activities. Thus, trade associations hire lobbyists whose
job includes informing members of an industry about political decisions which may affect their operations.
Moreover, even if the average voter had the information required
to make a rational decision on how to vote in the next election, it is
not clear what effect this would have. Assume that a citizen knows
that his or her legislative representative voted for an import quota
that will cost the voter $50 but also voted for some other bill which
will benefit the voter's own special interest group and give him or
her a benefit worth $500. The rational behavior of the voter will
therefore be to vote for the reelection of the representative. That is,
there are good reasons for expecting the political process to be responsive to special interests. It is possible for a representative to be
elected by favoring a set of special interest policies, each of which appeals only to a minority of the electorate. Moreover, achieving a victory with such a "coalition of minorities" would be possible even if
all the voters had all the information they needed to make a reasoned
choice. That is because the gains from such special interest policies
will be concentrated among the majority, while the costs will be
borne by members of both the majority and the minority. Therefore,
it is possible for a majority coalition made up of several special interest groups to gain benefits for themselves, even if the sum of the
costs to all affected parties is greater than the sum of the benefits.
The same arguments also apply to other political activities. It will
pay for concentrated special interests (including both business and
unions) to make campaign contributions to those who vote for benefits for people in the industry, but it will not, in general, pay for citizens to make contributions to representatives who vote against such
bills. This is because the losses suffered by each voter are small and
because overturning inefficient legislation is a public good. It does
not generally pay to contribute voluntarily to the provision of a
public good that affects a large number of people.




38

The fact that the political process is likely to be overly responsive
to interest groups constitutes an argument for limiting the power of
government to intervene in the economy. Each citizen would like to
use government to transfer resources to himself but is often skeptical
or hostile when the government transfers resources to others. Moreover, the net result of all such transfers is an efficiency loss. One of
the ways by which particular special interest programs can be constrained is to limit the power of government to provide any such programs.
For a long period the Federal Government behaved as if constraints on such legislation were binding. More recently, its power to
intervene in many areas has been greatly expanded, and the amount
of transfers, and of resources spent on obtaining transfers, has increased to a marked degree.
The essence of the problem is that each individual has an incentive
to take actions which, considered in their entirety, have a net negative impact on society, even though they are generally rationalized as
being in the public interest. Intervention begets intervention. Only
by changing the general principles which encourage intervention in
many areas can we resist the multiple appeals for special interest laws
which, taken as a whole, reduce the general welfare.
SUPPLY BY GOVERNMENT AGENCIES

When government directly provides some service, the service is ordinarily performed by government employees. Government employees are sometimes criticized for being inefficient and sometimes
praised, for being dedicated to the public interest. Most theories of
bureaucratic behavior make neither of these assumptions. Rather, it
is assumed that government employees behave like everyone else and
are concerned primarily with promoting their own interests. Thus, to
study the effects of government provision of goods and services, it is
important to study the incentives that motivate government employees.
There are several incentives for government managers to increase
the size and power of their agency. First, the salary and promotion
prospects of a manager depend in good measure on the size and influence of the agency, as does the manager's power. Second, even
when government employees are motivated by their perceptions of
the public interest, this often leads to the same desire to enlarge
their agency's size and influence. Once a person goes to work for
an agency which fulfills his vision of the public interest, he
will then be likely to want to expand the power of the agency, independent of his own self-interest, because he believes such expan-




39

sion will benefit the public. This is a partial explanation of the relatively long life of agencies and the difficulty in terminating them—
those who work for the agency become a special interest group. It is
also a partial explanation for overspending by government.
It can be argued that the risk structure arising from government
regulation also creates perverse incentives for agency managers. Two
errors can occur, for example, when a government official must
decide whether to approve a new drug. If the official approves a drug
which is unsafe, some persons who use it will suffer harmful side effects. Alternatively, the official may fail to approve some safe drug, in
which case some persons will suffer needlessly from a disease.
These types of errors will always be possible, no matter what decisionmaking process is used. Nonetheless, the official faces an asymmetric situation. If the drug is approved and someone dies from
having used it, the official will be blamed for approving an unsafe
drug. Conversely, if the drug is not approved, those who would
benefit from using it are not likely to know that the drug has been
disapproved. Thus, in circumstances like these, agency managers can
be expected to be overly risk-averse—not because of the nature of
the manager but because of the incentive structure in which the official must operate.
Since these types of responses by agency managers are predictable,
they must be considered in designing programs. We must begin with
the realization that government will not function perfectly and then
attempt to determine if a predictably imperfect government program
will achieve better results than those of an unregulated market.
DIVERSITY OF CONDITIONS AND PREFERENCES

One advantage of a market economy, mentioned earlier, is that
such an economy is responsive to varying consumer demands. Individuals have different preferences and desire different goods and
services. Tastes differ. If these desires are matched by a willingness
to pay for them, then firms will find satisfying them worthwhile. The
market will produce diverse products in response to diverse demands.
If a good is a public good, however, this diversity will probably not
be found. We are all provided the same amount of national defense,
whether we are pacifists or hawks. That is the nature of public goods,
and for true public goods there is no alternative. However, government sometimes treats goods which could be private as if they were
public goods only. Thus, students from families that are not willing
to pay the full cost of private school tuition have no choice but to
attend the same public school system. Voucher plans are attempts to




40

get around this problem, as are proposals for refundable tuition tax
credits.
Detailed government regulation of technology also works to reduce
the responsiveness of the economy to changed conditions. Such regulation, by not allowing entrepreneurs to take advantage of new technologies, retards economic progress.
LIMITS ON INFORMATION

If government policies are to achieve their goals, they must be
based on correct information, a condition which is not always satisfied. Examples of problems in obtaining the information needed to
formulate and implement macroeconomic policy were discussed
above.
Sometimes the problem is that policymakers cannot predict the
extent to which individuals will respond to changes in policy. The imposition of credit controls in 1980 had surprisingly rapid and perverse effects on the economy. Policymakers also underestimated the
extent to which the cost of medical care would rise as a result of the
medicare and medicaid programs. As a result, there were substantial
unanticipated budgetary consequences.
In general, it can be predicted that people will respond to new
rules or regulations by trying to minimize the adverse impact of such
regulations on themselves. However, it is generally difficult or impossible to predict the exact nature of this response, since there may be
millions of individuals affected by a given regulation and some of
them will think of alternatives which did not occur to the policymakers. The myriad of ways in which individuals subvert price controls is illustrative. One solution is to attempt to devise policies
which make use of incentives. Too often, regulation takes the form of
specific rules which ignore the possibility of unexpected responses.
One critical advantage of a market economy is that it is "informationally efficient." That is, a market will function well even if each
individual knows only his own preferences and opportunities. When
government controls an activity, on the other hand, much more information must be collected. This is an expensive process, and sometimes the necessary information is simply not available. This places
another restriction on the ability of the government to achieve its
goals.
TIME HORIZON

Elected officials are generally interested in reelection. Thus, it is
often argued that a program which imposes costs today in return for
future benefits will be overly discounted by elected representatives,
even if the program has a positive net present value. ("Net present




41

value" refers to the sum of benefits less costs, adjusted for the time
value of money.) Conversely, elected officials are likely to prefer programs with near-term benefits and deferred costs. In such cases,
costs may not be appropriately discounted and net benefits may be
overstated. In the private market, on the other hand, projects with a
positive value over an extended time period are more likely to be undertaken because the benefits of such projects can be capitalized and
the property rights sold. Although government does undertake some
such projects, it is more often preoccupied with short-term effects.
Recently, for example, some analysts have detected a "political
business cycle" in which government spending projects or programs
initiated just before an election lead to higher taxes or inflation
which do not occur until after the election. This is a predictable
result of the political process. Wage and price controls, which produce short-run moderation in the rate of inflation, lead to longer
term losses because they reduce the responsiveness and flexibility of
the economy. Since some of these ill effects occur long after controls
are imposed, there sometimes are incentives to impose such controls
just before an election. The short time horizon inherent in a political
process with nontransferable property rights is another obstacle to
the development of truly effective programs.
PRINCIPLES GUIDING THE PRESIDENT'S ECONOMIC
PROGRAM
The problems discussed in this chapter have prompted the new
economic policies of the Administration. In this section the Administration's Program for Economic Recovery is related to general principles concerning the proper role of government in the economy and
to the necessary constaints on government action discussed above.
EMPHASIS ON PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

Many government programs, such as detailed safety regulations or
the provision of specific goods (rather than money) to the poor, are
best described as paternalistic. Paternalism occurs when the government is reluctant to let individuals make decisions for themselves and
seeks to protect them from the possible bad effects of their own decisions by outlawing certain actions. Paternalism has the effect of disallowing certain preferences or actions. This Administration rejects paternalism as a basis for policy. There is no reason to think that commands from government can do a better job of increasing an individual's economic welfare than the individual can by making choices
himself. Moreover, the long-term cost of paternalism may be to destroy an individual's ability to make decisions for himself.




42

As discussed above, there are economic arguments for transferring
resources to the poor. However, if the primary concern is the welfare
of the poor, the most efficient form of transfer is probably cash
rather than benefits in kind. (Examples of benefits in kind are public
housing, food stamps, and medical care.) Poor people given money
can best determine for themselves what goods to buy. If they are
given goods or services instead, their ability to learn to make their
own choices is limited.
REFORM OF REGULATION

As discussed above, many current regulations cannot be based on
allegations of market failure, and many regulations which do have
such justification are administered inefficiently. Efforts are being
made by the Administration to cut back the scope of the first kind of
regulation and to improve the workings of the second. One area
where there has been a major effort at reducing the scale of government intervention is energy, which is discussed in Chapter 6.
The Administration is also involved in a careful review of Federal
enforcement of the antitrust laws. The purpose of these laws is to
maximize consumer satisfaction by reducing monopoly power. In the
past, however, the laws often have served both to protect smaller
businesses and to penalize larger ones, even when greater size was
due to increased efficiency. Efforts are being made at both the Federal Trade Commission and the Department of Justice to reform the
enforcement of the antitrust laws to make them more consistent with
the promotion of economic efficiency.
Because property rights in air and water have not been sufficiently
extensive there are .grounds for government intervention to alleviate
pollution. However, the form of much prior intervention was inefficient. Most of this regulation has been carried out by specifying the
allowable pollution control technology rather than by defining property rights or by charging fees for polluting.
This Administration is also making a major effort to emphasize the
use of benefit-cost analysis in regulation. Regulation which imposes
more costs than benefits is inefficient. For example, regulations that
limit entry to a potentially competitive industry, such as interstate
trucking, generate high transportation costs which are ultimately
borne by consumers. The most elementary benefit-cost analysis
would demonstrate the inefficiency of such regulation.
Even if used as well as possible, however, benefit-cost analysis is
only the second best solution. The best solution is to respect the
judgment of the private market whenever k is available. Jn many
areas of safety regulation, for example, the best solution would probably be to rely on market judgments about the value of safety. Where




43

this may not be possible, benefit-cost analysis can improve the information on which regulation is based.
In areas such as environmental regulation, where the market will
not work unaided, benefit-cost analysis may be necessary to identify
the optimal degree and form of pollution control. Even if a system of
effluent charges were used, for example, an analysis of costs and
benefits would be necessary to determine the optimal charge. If a
system of pollution rights were used, the amount of rights to be created would have to be determined in some similar way.
FEDERALISM

One important principle of this Administration is an increased reliance on State and local governments to carry out necessary governmental activities. The replacement of many categorical grant programs by large block grants is one example of this policy change. A
longer term policy of the Administration is to shift a substantial
number of programs—and a portion of the Federal tax base—to the
States.
As indicated earlier, there are economic reasons for this increased
reliance on State governments. States are generally more responsive
to voters in their jurisdiction than is the Federal Government and can
make better judgments about local conditions,
LONG-RUN FOCUS

As discussed above, the political process has placed its major emphasis on the achievement of short-term goals. This Administration
intends to place emphasis on long-run policies. For example, the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 cuts tax rates over a 3-year
period, after which the personal income tax structure will be indexed
so that inflation will not increase marginal tax rates on real income.
The Administration is also seeking a long-term solution to the financial problems facing the social security system.
However, there is a more fundamental sense in which emphasis is
being placed on long-term goals. Many of the Administration's policies have reduced government expenditures for various groups or
provided less of an increase in such outlays than has been expected.
The fundamental premise behind these reductions is that they ultimately will lead to substantial and sustainable economic growth. This
has particular relevance for the poor, most of whom probably have
historically benefited more from sustained economic growth than
from government transfer programs.
INCREASED RELIANCE ON THE MARKET

Another principle mentioned several times in this chapter is an
increased reliance on market-like devices when appropriate gov-




44

ernment interventions are undertaken. Since this is an important
principle, an indication of how such a principle will be translated into
action will demonstrate some relationships between seemingly disparate changes in the forms of intervention.
First, consider the reason for reliance on devices which simulate
market operations where intervention is the desired policy. The only
alternative is direct regulation, which puts the government in an adversarial position to the party being regulated. Such adversary relationships create ill will between the government and business or
other regulated parties. Ill will is also created when, for example,
government employees monitor and control the spending of welfare
recipients. Besides creating ill will, monitoring of behavior is expensive. Yet monitoring allows regulators to achieve their goals only imperfectly, since there are millions of regulated individuals, businesses, and other private institutions, and regulators will be able to monitor only a small fraction of these agents.
The advantage of market-like devices is that they can create incentives to behave in the desired way. That is, if we can simulate an effective market, we can rely on self-interest to achieve the desired
goals. This will reduce the cost of achieving the regulatory goal and
also increase the extent to which the goal will be achieved.
A good example is provided by comparing government safety regulation of firms with private market insurance against risks. In the
case of government regulations, violators are punished, commonly
with a fine, which may create incentives for the regulated firms to
conceal possible violations and to avoid cooperation with safety inspectors. If, on the other hand, a firm which is insured can make its
operations safer, it will usually benefit by having its insurance premium reduced. Thus, such firms have an incentive to cooperate with insurance company inspectors and adopt any recommendations which
are made. This is but one example of how a market device, by eliciting cooperation, is more efficient in achieving desired goals than is
regulation, which elicits conflict.
EMPHASIS ON THE GENERAL WELFARE

As stressed throughout this chapter, many current programs provide benefits to special interest groups. These programs are inefficient in that the gains to the beneficiaries are generally less than the
cost to the public as a whole. Nonetheless, the political process, if
unconstrained, would continue to establish such programs. In recent
years effective constraints have been reduced. But if these special interest programs could be eliminated, almost everyone would benefit
because of the losses in economic efficiency caused by these programs. However, it is extremely difficult politically to reduce such




45

programs one at a time, since the beneficiaries would then perceive
their losses clearly and seek to regain them.
The alternative, which this Administration adopted in both its
spending and tax cuts, is to reduce a large number of programs simultaneously. If enough cuts in both spending and tax rates can be
made simultaneously, most individuals may recognize that, while they
may lose from cuts in a specific program, they gain enough from cuts
in other programs and in lower taxes to compensate for their losses.
Thus, the principles of optimal government intervention explain why
the Administration insisted on very broad cuts in spending. Congressional approval of much of this plan indicates that this strategy was
appropriate. A general reduction in special interest programs is a
necessary step to meet the constitutional charge to "promote the
general Welfare. . . ."




46

CHAPTER 3

Monetary Policy, Inflation, and
Employment
THE ECONOMIC STORY of the late 1960s and the 1970s was a
story of rising inflation, slackening growth, and rising unemployment.
The challenge of the 1980s is to eliminate inflation, restore growth,
and reduce unemployment. Despite differences over the precise combination of policies that will do the job, there is widespread agreement that inflation can and must be reduced if the economy is to operate successfully. The obstacles to successful implementation of an
anti-inflation policy have been largely political, although public understanding of this has been complicated by the economic consequences of the oil price shocks of 1974-75 and 1979-80. The proper
policy would be one based on a careful weighing of the long-term
benefits of ending inflation against the costs which are essentially short
run. It is the nature of the political process, however, to focus primarily
on the short-run costs of dealing with inflation, as these appear to be
more easily quantifiable, and to ignore the more distant but equally
important benefits of price stability.
As the acute costs of rising inflation have become more widely recognized, the public has demanded action. That has made possible the
implementation of the current set of fiscal and monetary policies
aimed at reducing inflation. The decision to end inflation over a
period of several years will be sustained by this Administration, even
though short-run costs will be suffered before long-term benefits
begin to accrue. A broad public understanding of the nature of the
immediate but transitory costs and the longer run benefits of reducing inflation can contribute to the overall success of the current policies. On the other hand, any perception that the policies may soon
be reversed would cause transitional costs to rise, since upward adjustments in inflation expectations—and, subsequently, prices and
wages—would then be realized. In short, any lack of credibility would
greatly extend the period of adjustment, thereby increasing the size
and duration of short-term costs.
Chapters 1 and 2 reviewed the economic policies and problems inherited by this Administration and the challenges that its economic
recovery program poses. This chapter focuses first on the legacies re-




47

suiting from macroeconomic policymaking over the past two decades
before turning to a discussion of monetary policy issues whose successful resolution is central to the Administration's economic recovery program. The concluding section of the chapter outlines the challenge to policymakers to improve upon the past.
THE LEGACIES
THE LEGACY OF ECONOMIC STABILIZATION POLICY

To policymakers in the early 1960s, the main solutions to future
economic problems seemed to be in hand. The Eederal Government
was thought to have all of the tools needed for economic stabilization, along with the skills to use them. Recessions might still occur
because investment shifted erratically or because the response to
government action was variable, but it was believed that a discretionary stablization policy could successfully limit the frequency and magnitude of recessions. Inflation might result from decisions to reduce
unemployment and increase output beyond the point consistent with
price stability, but for the most part inflation seemed manageable.
Essentially, it was thought that the economy could be kept on a
steadily rising trend by "fine tuning" government actions.
Three key elements characterized policy prescriptions. Greater use
was made of models and forecasts of short-term economic activity,
prices, and interest rates. Policy decisions were based on a perceived
short-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, and there
was some belief that a long-run tradeoff between inflation and unemployment could also be exploited. Greater emphasis was given to
planned changes in budget deficits or surpluses as a means of achieving annual (and sometimes quarterly) targeted rates of inflation and
unemployment.
To avoid a potentially painful reliance on fiscal and monetary discipline, budget policy was supplemented by other programs. One approach, the creation of guideposts, was designed to influence
changes in individual prices and wages. The belief was that guideposts announced by the government could improve the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. Proponents of guideposts regarded them as efficient devices for slowing inflation during periods of
rising employment and expanding output, and controlling, in the language of the time, "cost-push" inflation. Another program, aimed at
reducing the U.S. balance of payments deficit and sustaining an international monetary system based on fixed-exchange rates, involved
levying taxes on interest payments from foreign sources to Americans
and restricting the amount of U.S. Government and private spending
abroad.




48

Both policy and theory have undergone substantial change since
then. A major reason for the change is that additional research revealed the errors and limitations of earlier policy recommendations.
Although there was some research that supported the activist policies
implemented in the past two decades, many subsequent studies have
cast doubt on those findings.
The major failure of the late 1960s and 1970s was to give insufficient weight to the long-term effects of economic policies. For example, the so-called Phillips curve—the observed inverse relationship
between wage inflation and unemployment—and its implication that
a tradeoff is possible was one of the key notions relied on by economic advisers. But nothing in Phillips' work or in subsequent studies showed that higher inflation was associated with sustainable lower
unemployment, and nothing in economic theory gave reason to believe that the relationship uncovered by Phillips was a dependable
basis for policies designed to accept more inflation or less unemployment. Nevertheless, Phillips curves jumped quickly from scholarly
journals to the policy arena. The speed with which the case made for
this tradeoff was accepted as a cornerstone of economic policy contrasts with the slow acceptance of both neoclassical economic theory
and the substantial body of evidence which suggests that there is no
lasting tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. The economic
policies which are now being implemented by the Administration are
grounded in this tradition.
Another example of policy failure was the imposition of direct controls on prices, which were defended on grounds that they would
bring about lower unemployment in an economy subject to "costpush" inflation without imposing uneven burdens on the various sectors of the economy. The decision to impose these controls was
based on the presumably favorable effects they would have on the
expectations of consumers, unions, and businessmen.
Neither guideposts nor price controls, however, have succeeded in
stopping inflation. The failures of these approaches have not been
failures of economic theory. Instead, they have shown that political
expediency or guesses about expectations of inflation are a less reliable guide to successful policy than sound economic analysis.
While economic analysis provides a framework for policy recommendations designed to reduce inflation, increase efficiency, and
expand long-run growth of output and employment, policy recommendations based on the notion that it is possible to "fine tune" the
economy from quarter to quarter or year to year promise more than
economics can deliver. The events of the past 15 years are a good
illustration of the dangers of pursuing economic policies based on
short-run analysis and focused on immediate problems. Sound policy




49

requires emphasis on a time horizon during which the sometimes
lengthy, and usually unpredictable, lags in economic processes can
work. Good economic policy means long-run economic policy, In
light of the political incentives that place a premium on quick results,
good economic policy also means resisting the previous tendency in
our system to change the course of policies prematurely.
THE LEGACY OF STAGFLATION

The irony of the 1970s was that the attempt to trade inflation for
employment resulted in more inflation and rising unemployment.
This period was characterized by relatively high unemployment rates
and high rates of inflation, a phenomenon often called "stagflation/'
The growth of real output in the United States was slower than
during the preceding two decades, even though the growth rate of
the labor force increased. The rate of increase in the productivity of
labor declined, in part because of the effects of externally imposed
oil price shocks. The combination of inflation with progressive
income tax rates led to steady increases in actual and prospective
taxes on real income in the latter part of the 1970s. Government appeared unable to reduce inflation without increasing unemployment
or to reduce unemployment without, sooner or later, increasing inflation. The actual result was that rates of inflation and unemployment
rose with each succeeding round of expansion and recession, and
measured productivity growth was disappointing at best (Chapter 5).
There are those who argue that a permanent reduction in the rate
of inflation brings about a permanent rise in the unemployment rate.
But the lesson to be learned from the experience of the United
States since World War II is that high rates of unemployment can coexist with either high or low inflation. There is no reason to expect a
systematic association between the average unemployment rate and
the average rate of price-level change, and none is found in the data
when one considers periods of several years or longer (Chart 3-1).
Many factors influence the average rate of unemployment over an
extended period of time. Demographic factors—age, work experience, marital status, and other characteristics of the population—
affect the supply of labor and entry into and exit from the active
work force. Economic policies can either reinforce or offset these demographic factors by influencing the real wage at which workers
choose between labor and leisure and the price at which potential investors choose between consumption and capital accumulation. As is
discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, government taxes and expenditures
have increased relative to national output during the past quarter
century, reducing on the margin the incentive to work and the "cost"
of leisure.




50

Chart 3-1

Inflation and Unemployment Rate
INFLATION (PERCENT)1

101

74

J
3

4

I

5

6

7

8

9

UNEMPLOYMENT RATE (PERCENT)
1

PERCENT CHANGE IN GNP IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

During 1977 and 1978 there was emphasis on idle resources and
an output gap that was to be closed by expansive economic policies. The belief was that stimulative policies would be less inflationary as long as excess capacity existed. The amount of idle capacity
was probably overestimated for a variety of reasons—errors in assessing the effects of the 1974 oil price shock, failure to account for the
effects of regulation, and the effects of tax and income transfer policies on unemployment and potential output. The presumed gap,
however, was not a reliable buffer that would permit additional
output without provoking an increase in the rate of inflation. The
effort to reduce the unemployment rate by stimulating aggregate
demand led to a much higher inflation rate, higher interest rates, and
a sharp depreciation of the dollar, but it had no lasting effect on the
unemployment rate.
The primary reason for the increase in the underlying rate of inflation in 1979-81 was the excessive fiscal and monetary expansion of
1977-78. Moderate policies probably would have left us with an average rate of unemployment no higher, and possibly lower, coupled




51

with lower inflation. The average rate of unemployment and the
average rate of inflation are best regarded as unrelated in the longterm. The failure of previous policymakers to accept this conclusion
is one of the principal reasons we have had a decade of stagflation.
THE BUSINESS CYCLE AND RISING INFLATION LEGACY

A shift toward less inflationary economic policies usually affects
output and employment first. Inflation, and people's expectations
about future inflation, only start to fall after restraint has been maintained for some time.
The more persistent and variable past rates of inflation have been,
the less credible the new noninflationary policies will be and, hence,
the longer it will take for those policies to achieve the intended results. Conversely, an abrupt policy shift toward greater stimulus first
affects output, then employment, and later prices. The lag in the response of prices to stimulative policy also varies; a history of high inflation and frequent policy reversals will tend to shorten these lags.
Cyclical fluctuations in business activity occur primarily because
prices and wage rates (that is, nominal magnitudes) do not adjust immediately to change, whether it is change in government policy or
change in economic factors, such as the price of raw materials. In the
past, this pattern of delayed response was used to justify aggregatedemand management. Most cyclical changes in employment were regarded as "involuntary," the result of insufficient spending by the
private sector. The loss to society was deemed equal to what the unemployed would have produced if they had continued to work.
Hence, government policies to reduce unemployment were regarded
as having low costs and large social benefits. Because the rate of inflation was slow to adjust, policymakers acted as if there was no
reason to expect inflation to increase significantly until after a high
level of employment had been reached.
Repeated attempts to use fiscal and monetary policy to stimulate
output, all the while assuring the public that inflation would be
slowed later, left a residue of higher inflation. These attempts, in
turn, generated expectations about future trends. The entrenchment
of expectations of further inflation induced policymakers to respond
with another episode of restraint, thereby creating another recession,
followed by another attempt at stimulus—in short, repeated rounds
of stop-and-go policy and performance. So long as economic policy
had a short-run perspective, this alternating cycle of restriction and
stimulus persisted. Meanwhile, the trend in the rate of inflation
moved steadily upward.
The costs of adjusting to a low-inflation environment are often underestimated. Policymakers are impatient with the transitory costs ac-




52

companying such a change. Even when policymakers fully intend to
make a permanent change, workers are unable to distinguish immediately between permanent and transitory changes in market conditions
affecting their industry. They do not know whether a layoff is temporary or permanent, or whether the real wages prevailing in their industry will be sustainable in the future. Immediate reductions in
wages are therefore resisted, and workers are often willing to experience a period of unemployment while waiting to be called back to
work in the same industry and at the same wages, rather than change
occupation or relocate.
Although changes in labor market conditions do occur, it is not
always obvious to those affected whether the changes are permanent.
Workers and employers must decide on a course of action while laboring under a high degree of uncertainty. Accepting a lower real
wage will entail a reduction in lifetime income if the reduction in
demand is temporary. But failing to cut real wages when the reduction in demand proves to be permanent also will mean a reduction in
lifetime income as a consequence of lost jobs. The proper choice is
usually not obvious at the time. This is a major reason why businesses
and workers are slow to adjust prices and wages.
For at least two decades the government has responded to recessions by pushing up Federal spending and monetary growth to stimulate the economy. Each time this has been done, output has recovered and employment has risen. Meanwhile, however, the rate of inflation has been higher in each trough than in the previous trough,
and higher at each peak than at the previous peak (Chart 3-2).
The public has apparently drawn two lessons from this experience.
First, people have come to expect on average that the rate of price
and wage change will rise from cycle to cycle. As a result, resistance
to price and wage reduction relative to the increase in the general
price level has increased through successive recessions. As anticipated inflation increased, the pressure for higher wages intensified.
Second, all recessions are expected to be offset by stimulative government policies, and the costs of unemployment are expected to be
reduced by unemployment compensation and related benefits. Thus,
there are fewer incentives to look for employment at lower real
wages and more reasons to wait for stimulative policies to restore
employment in the old jobs at the same real wages.
Discretionary monetary and fiscal policies have added an additional
element of uncertainty to economic life. People who want to know
whether tax rates will rise or fall must guess whether the bulge in
government spending during a recession is a portent of permanently
higher spending and tax rates or simply an indication of temporarily
higher spending. Past experience gives imperfect guidance. Yet dif-




53

Chart 3-2

The Inflation Ratchet (CPI)

i t i i i i t i i i i t i i i i
1961

63

65

67

69

71

73

75

77

79

81

NOTE. — YEAR-TO-YEAR CHANGE IN CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR ALL URBAN CONSUMERS,
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

ferences in anticipated tax rates often have been a key factor in decisions to invest in durable capital, to invest in land or other tax-sheltered capital, or to consume.
We have been through four cycles in the past 15 years. Each time,
government has made a renewed commitment to conquer inflation.
But people's decisions concerning consumption, saving, and investment are now conditioned by the expectation that these cycles will
continue to occur in the future, just as they have in the past.
THE NATURE OF THE INFLATION PROCESS
Inflation is essentially a monetary phenomenon. This is not to
deny the importance of other factors, such as changes in the price of
petroleum, in causing increases in the general price level. What the
statement does deny, however, is that persistent inflation can be explained by nonmonetary factors.




54

Monetary policy actions affect primarily nominal quantities—exchange rates, the price level, national income, and the quantity of
money—as well as the rate of change in nominal quantities. But central bank actions do not have significant long-run effects in achieving
specific values of real magnitudes—the real rate of interest, the rate of
unemployment, the level of real national income, the real quantity of
money—or rates of growth of real magnitudes.
Economists recognized long ago that output and employment may
be no higher when prices are high than when they are low. A main
point of Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations is that a country's wealth and
income depend on the country's real resources and the way in which
production is organized, and not on the level of prices. It was realized that changes in the price level had some short-term effects on
output, but these effects were recognized as the result of transitory
changes in demand.
The classical gold-standard mechanism embodied these principles.
Unanticipated increases in the flow of gold from abroad stimulated
domestic production but gradually raised domestic prices relative to
foreign prices. The rise in domestic prices then reduced exports and
raised imports, thereby lowering domestic production and employment and eventually lowering prices. The continuous ebb and flow of
gold was expected, but the timing of the movements could not be
predicted accurately. Inability to predict the movements was recognized as a cause of changes in prices and output.
Once people anticipate that prices will rise, they seek higher wages
for their labor and higher prices for their products. The increase in
employment produced by stimulative policies vanishes, but the inflation remains. Attempts to reduce unemployment by increasing inflation will work only if people are fooled by the changes in policy.
Once people learn to expect inflation, the short-run gains in employment disappear.
It is often stated that inflation is an intractable problem, caused by
forces beyond our control. But the monetary nature of inflation suggests that this is not so. More importantly, it suggests that a decrease in
money growth is the necessary strategy to end inflation. Frequent use
of monetary policy to reduce unemployment at certain times and
inflation at others would raise the prospect of generating the same kind
of cyclical behavior in economic activity that we have experienced in
the past and analyzed in the previous section.
Stop-and-go policies cause uncertainty, hamper the ability of monetary authorities to achieve noninflationary conditions, and ultimately




55

raise the transitional costs of eliminating inflation. The next section
discusses in detail the nature of these costs.
THE COSTS OF INFLATION
Over the last decade, as inflation worsened, the attention of the
general public: focused on the detrimental effects that rapidly rising
prices have on economic performance. These effects were felt in
many ways, but the mechanisms by which inflation generated them
were not well understood.
The effects of inflation fall into two general categories: (1) those
that occur because no one is able to predict the precise rate of inflation; and (2) those that occur even when the rate of inflation is fully
anticipated.
The concept of a "fully anticipated inflation" implies a rate of inflation that people can predict and hence take action to minimize its
effects. But it is doubtful that a high rate of inflation that was also
predictable could ever exist because the same lack of monetary discipline which leads to unacceptably high inflation is also likely to lead
to more variable inflation. Indeed, periods of high inflation rates
generally have been associated with periods of higher variability of
inflation rates. It would take at least as much monetary discipline to
maintain a constant high inflation rate as it takes to maintain pricelevel stability. Once a positive rate of inflation is accepted it becomes
difficult to argue against a slightly higher rate.
One of the most important costs of unanticipated inflation is its arbitrary redistribution of wealth and income. Economic transactions
are often formalized in contracts that require one party to pay a fixed
dollar amount to the other party at some point in the future. When
both parties anticipate inflation during the life of the contract, these
future dollar payments will be adjusted upward to compensate for
their expected lower real value. This upward adjustment is the socalled inflation premium. If, however, the actual rate of inflation
turns out to be different from the anticipated rate, the real terms of
the contract will have been altered arbitrarily. If the actual rate is
higher than anticipated, the fixed payments in dollars will have a
lower than expected real value, and the debtor will gain at the expense of the creditor. The same kind of arbitrary transfer occurs
when workers and firms agree to wage contracts that implicitly or explicitly assume rates of inflation which later turn out to be incorrect.
In a market economy, changes in the price of one good relative to
another signal changes in demand and supply conditions among various markets. An uncertain rate of inflation obscures these signals
and thereby reduces economic efficiency. Since prices are rising more




56

or less together during a general inflationary period, the fact that a
price has risen is no guarantee that it has risen relative to other
prices. The difficulty of distinguishing between relative and absolute
price changes increases as inflation and its variability increase. This
leads people to use more time and resources to attempt to decipher
relative price changes, as opposed to engaging in more productive
activities. Differently stated, inflation tends to make the economic information that people accumulate through experience more rapidly
obsolescent than when prices are stable.
Perhaps more importantly, inability to correctly anticipate inflation
creates confusion about relative prices over time and compounds the
problem of efficient resource allocation. Economic decisionmaking,
especially in the private sector, is inherently forward-looking. Decisions made today determine tomorrow's levels of capital stock, production, and consumption. Decisions based on correct anticipation of
future relative prices lead to a more efficient allocation of resources
over time. High and variable inflation, on the other hand, leads to
divergent inflation expectations, and therefore to a larger proportion
of incorrect decisions.
Because inability to anticipate the rate of inflation correctly increases the uncertainty associated with economic decisions, especially
those that involve fixed-dollar commitments far into the future, it
leads to a shortening of the time horizon over which such commitments are made. In the financial markets, uncertainty about inflation
causes a relative decline in the volume of long-term bond financing.
Neither borrowers nor lenders are willing to compensate the other
adequately for the risk. Consequently, the sales volume of fixed-rate
long-term debt instruments shrinks and the volume of real investment normally financed in this way decreases. More generally, productive activities yield a relatively lower real return than activities
aimed at "beating" inflation. Hence, as more and more resources are
devoted to coping with the uncertainty that accompanies inflation,
fewer resources are available for real productive activities.
Two costs of anticipated inflation have been widely recognized. In
the economics literature they have been dubbed "menu" and "shoe
leather" costs. Because inflation requires frequent changes in published (that is, "menu") prices, these changes absorb resources that
could be used in other activities. "Shoe leather" costs are those incurred by people attempting to minimize their money holdings by
more frequent trips to the bank. Since a great deal of money is held
as a noninterest-bearing asset, its real value declines with inflation.
People therefore make more strenuous efforts to realize the highest
return on their assets and hence they economize on noninterest-bearing balances.




57

The interaction of a nonindexed tax system with inflation would
impose costs even if the rate of inflation were correctly anticipated.
Imperfect adjustment for inflation in the taxation of both current
labor income and income from capital causes changes in inflation to
affect real after-tax levels of income. These, in turn, alter the level
and composition of these activities relative to each other and relative
to activities on which the return is not distorted. One analyst has estimated the unavoidable costs from this cause alone to be 0,7 percent
of gross national product (GNP), and perhaps as high as 2 to 3 percent of GNP. The indexation of tax brackets beginning in 1985, as
legislated by the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, will substantially reduce this problem.
The interaction between the tax system and inflation also affects
capital formation because of the way in which depreciation
allowances are treated. Depreciation allowances for capital assets are
based on historical cost rather than current replacement cost. During
periods of high inflation the difference between historical cost and
replacement cost widens rapidly, leading to allowances smaller than
would be considered justifiable. Since deductions for depreciation
are determined on the basis of the actual purchase price, smaller real
deductions mean higher capital costs. This, in turn, reduces the pace
of investment and hence of economic growth. (See Chapter 5 for an
extended discussion of these issues.)
THE COSTS OF REDUCING INFLATION

There is, as noted above, a short-lived tradeoff between unemployment and the rate of inflation. This means that policies designed to
reduce inflation significantly will temporarily increase unemployment
and reduce output growth. The temporary decline in output growth
induced by anti-inflation policies forms a rough benchmark against
which the subsequent benefits of reduced inflation can be compared.
The extent of these costs of reducing inflation depends on four factors: (1). the institutional process of setting wages and prices; (2) the
role of expectations in this process; (3) the policy instruments employed to reduce inflation; and (4) the initial rate of inflation.
Flexibility in wages and prices reduces the transitional costs of
ending inflation. A policy-induced decline in the growth rate of monetary aggregates will be associated with a decline in the growth of
real output, but the more rapidly this decline in output is followed by
a moderating of inflation, the more rapidly will output growth return
to a rising trend. One important factor affecting the flexibility of
wages and prices is the institutional environment in which they are
determined. The costs of continuously negotiating and resetting
prices and wages, for example, has given rise to the common practice




58

of changing wage and price agreements relatively infrequently. While
this practice makes economic sense for individuals and firms, it
builds a degree of inertia into the system.
Wage contracts in major industries in the United States typically
cover a 2- or 3-year period. Since these contracts specify basic wage
increases over the life of the contract, the current rate of wage inflation was determined in part as long as 3 years ago. Because major
wage contracts are staggered over approximately 3 years, wage settlements in the first year of each "3-year round" tend to set the pattern
for settlements in the following 2 years. This extends the influence of
any year's wage settlements beyond the lives of the contracts. In addition, many contracts include automatic cost-of-living adjustments
that preclude downward wage flexibility, even when it might be justified by conditions specific to a particular industry or firm.
Government regulations or standards that dictate prices or wages,
reduce competition, or otherwise reduce the flexibility of firms and
workers in responding to economic conditions also add to the inflexibility of wages and prices. Programs now under way to bring regulatory relief to industries that have been overregulated in the past
should diminish this source of rigidity (Chapter 6).
Decisions concerning the determination of prices and wages are
dominated by perceptions of future market conditions, such as the
expected rate of inflation. Workers will accept nominal wage increases that, given their expectation of inflation, imply an acceptable
real wage. If their expectations about inflation are revised downward
in light of announced policies to end inflation, wage and price increases will moderate. The pace of this adjustment in expectations is
an indication of the degree of public confidence in anti-inflationary
policies.
The primary policy tool for ending inflation is a decrease in the
rate of growth of money. The question of how rapidly the monetary
deceleration should proceed must be answered in the context of
public expectations. In view of past experience, when efforts to
reduce inflation were abandoned as the short-run costs began to
accrue, the public has come to expect that such policies will continue
to be short-lived and that inflation will persist. Frequent swings from
restrictive to stimulative policy and back have led to a "wait and see"
attitude on the part of the public. The mere announcement of new
policies is not sufficient to convince people that they will be carried
out. Rather, public expectations regarding the future course of policy
are adjusted only gradually as policy actions turn out to be consistent
with policy pronouncements. The credibility of policy authorities, like
the credibility of anyone else, is enhanced when they do what they
say they are going to do. For the Federal Reserve, this means setting




59

money growth targets consistent with a sustained decrease in the rate
of inflation and then adhering to those targets. The more success the
Federal Reserve has in meeting those targets, the less time it will take
before the public is convinced of the policy's credibility.
In the current environment, even if a successful effort is made to
reduce money growth, past experience with high and variable inflation will affect the speed at which financial markets reflect progress
toward a long-run noninflationary policy. Having repeatedly suffered
sizable capital losses on their holdings of long-term bonds, investors
will be unwilling to commit new funds to these markets unless they
are compensated for the risk that the current commitment to overcome inflation might be abandoned. Without adequate compensation
for this risk, individuals will continue to prefer to invest in short-lived
rather than long-lived financial assets. While this preference may prevent investors from maximizing the expected return on their assets, it
allows them to minimize the adverse effects of future increases in inflation and interest rates.
Present concern about future monetary growth, inflation, and interest rates is related to the knowledge that the Federal budget will
continue to show large deficits for the next several years. Financial
investors fear that these deficits will cause either a sharp increase in
interest rates—which would slow the recovery from recession—or an
increase in monetary growth if the Federal Reserve attempts to hold
interest rates down by adding reserves to the banking system through
open market purchases of government securities.
Interest rates that are considerably higher than the current rate of
inflation can have an adverse effect on investment and real economic
growth. The level of long-term interest rates at the end of 1981 did
not reflect investor willingness to believe that inflation will decline
over the next several years. The presumably large but unmeasurable
premiums being demanded by investors constitute a major obstacle
to achieving rising output and employment with falling inflation.
Expectations about future rates of money growth, like expectations
of future inflation, are likely to be more divergent the greater the
variability of past money growth. These expectations should converge more rapidly as the Federal Reserve improves its ability to control money growth. More precise control of money growth around
the target path will reduce the difficulty of inferring from actual
growth rates whether or not the announced targets are, in fact, a reliable indicator of future money growth. In such an environment, variations in money growth will reflect only random and short-lived deviations, which would have little effect on either short- or long-run expectations about monetary policy. But failure to achieve more precise
monetary control, by impeding a rapid adjustment of expectations,




60

would significantly raise the costs of reducing inflation. Thus, the
payoffs of greater precision could be quite large.
In summary, high and varying inflation imposes costs on society by
reducing future standards of living. These costs, though presumed to
be large and pervasive, are not easily calculated. There is a temporary output loss in the initial stage of a transition to price stability.
Such loss, however, must be weighed against the future increases in
output that would be achieved by ending inflation. The policies of
the Administration are based on the view that the cost of continuing
to endure the high rates of inflation of the 1970s would be greater
than the costs of implementing a successful noninflationary policy.
MONEY AND MONETARY POLICY
MONEY CREATION AND FEDERAL FINANCE

The deficit of the Federal Government is financed by the issuing of
interest-bearing liabilities, such as Treasury bills and long-term
bonds, and noninterest-bearing liabilities, which include currency and
bank reserves held as deposits with the Federal Reserve System. The
noninterest-bearing liabilities constitute the monetary base. When
there is unanticipated inflation, holders of the interest-bearing liabilities are implicitly taxed because the nominal interest rates on their
holdings no longer fully compensate for inflation. Holders of currency and reserves, however, bear an implicit tax even when inflation is
anticipated. Banks usually seek to shift some of the implicit tax on
their reserves to depositors. The portion of the tax ultimately absorbed by depositors depends on the administrative limits on interest
paid on these deposits, and on the degree of competitiveness in the
banking industry.
The purchasing power of the dollar declines over time when the
growth of the money stock exceeds the growth of demand for real
money balances. As a result, holders of money incur a loss that is related to the rate of inflation. As discussed more fully in Chapter 5,
the Federal Government benefits from anticipated inflation because
the real value of its noninterest-bearing liabilities falls. It also benefits from unanticipated inflation because the nominal interest on its
interest-bearing debt does not fully compensate for the decline in the
purchasing power of money. The revenues obtained in this fashion
by the Federal Government serve as a substitute for other, more
direct taxes. This "inflation tax" may be more or less efficient than
other taxes in financing government expenditures, but while all other
taxes are legislated by the Congress (or State and local governments), the inflation tax is not.




61

One troublesome aspect of the inflation tax is not so much its existence as uncertainty about its amount. Historically, high average
rates of inflation have been associated with high volatility—that is,
large swings in inflation rates from year to year. Financial markets
readily incorporate expected rates of inflation into interest rates, but
they are unable to price that portion of the inflation rate that is unanticipated.
MONEY VERSUS CREDIT

Discussions of monetary policy frequently fail to take account of
the difference between money and credit. Money is an asset that
people generally accept as payment for goods and services. It consists of coins, currency, and checkable deposits. Credit, in contrast, is
one party's claim against another party, which is to be settled by a
future payment of money. Confusion about the difference between
money and credit arises because people can increase their spending
either by reducing their money balances or by obtaining credit.
The market for money is distinct from the market for credit. The
supply of and demand for credit influence primarily the interest rate,
which is the price of credit. The supply of and demand for money,
on the other hand, determine the purchasing power of money. Additional confusion about the difference between money and credit
arises because the monetary authorities create money primarily by
purchasing credit market instruments. These actions tend to increase
the supply of available bank credit and consequently tend to lower
interest rates, at least initially. Over a longer period of time, however, the creation of money has important effects on economic activity
that tend to raise interest rates. Monetary expansion leads to an expansion in nominal income and economic activity, which in turn generates an increased demand for credit, thus reversing the initial decline in interest rates. In addition, a sustained higher rate of monetary growth will soon produce higher nominal interest rates to compensate lenders for the expected decline in the real value of their
wealth.
When interest rates are high, credit is often said to be "tight,"
meaning that it is expensive. This does not necessarily mean that
money is tight in the sense that its quantity is restricted. Indeed,
quite the opposite is likely to be the case. "Easy" money, in the sense
of rapid growth in the stock of money, may very well be the underlying reason for a tight credit market. Conversely, tight money in the
sense of slow growth in the stock of money is likely to lead eventually
to a fall in nominal interest rates as inflation expectations subside.
But it is credit, not money, that is easy. Over the long run, the effect
of the growth of money on the real volume of credit is essentially




62

neutral. Monetary expansion can succeed in driving up the nominal
supply of credit as well as other nominal magnitudes. But it cannot
significantly alter the real supply of credit or the real interest rate
(the nominal rate adjusted for inflation), except indirectly through
the uncertainty associated with inflation and because of the effects of
an unindexed tax system. Monetary expansion can permanently
reduce the purchasing power of money, but not the real price of
credit.
It is often stated that such financial innovations as money-market
funds undermine the conduct of monetary policy. Statistical support
for this assertion is dubious. What would have to be demonstrated is
that financial innovation—which is to a large extent the result of
policy-imposed constraints on the financial system in an inflationary
environment—has made it more difficult to achieve a given monetary
target, and that the link between changes in nominal GNP and
changes in the monetary aggregates—that is, changes in velocity—has
become less predictable. The evidence does not seem to support
either proposition. A study recently published by the Federal Reserve
suggests that the monetary authorities have the ability to control the
measure of transactions balances known as Ml with a reasonable
degree of precision. Furthermore, changes in velocity do not appear
to be any more volatile than they have in the past. Indeed, changes
in the trend of the growth rate of nominal GNP over the period 1960
to 1981 are almost entirely attributable to changes in the trend of the
growth rate of the money stock, (Ml), as opposed to changes in the
trend of the growth rate of velocity (Chart 3-3).
It is inflation and a highly regulated financial system that have
spurred financial innovation. Inflation, and consequent higher interest rates, have also raised the real cost of reserve requirements for
financial institutions. At the same time, the public has tended to
economize on noninterest-bearing money balances. Thus, incentives
were created for the public to demand, and for financial institutions
to supply, substitutes for existing transactions accounts that are subject neither to reserve requirements nor interest rate restrictions. But
innovations which are attractive only because they provide a means
of avoiding existing regulations waste resources. The inefficiencies
which such innovations are designed to circumvent could have been
minimized by payment of interest on required reserves and on transactions balances. These inefficiencies will be greatly reduced when
price level stability is restored.
MONETARY POLICY OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY

A slow and steady rate of money growth is one of the four basic
elements of the Administration's economic recovery program. While
the formulation and implementation of monetary policy is the re-




63

Chart 3-3

Money and GNP Growth
PERCENT CHANGE (ANNUAL RATE)1
AVERAGE ANNUAL PERCENT CHANGE
Velocity
1959101970
1970la 1981
1959 to 1981

16

2,8

6.7
5.2

14
MONEY GROWTH
PLUS AVERAGE
VELOCITY GROWTH2

12

10
8
6
4
2
0
1961

63

65

67

69

71

73

75

77

79

81

1
PERCENT CHANGE IN 4-QUARTER MOVING AVERAGES OF SEASONALLY ADJUSTED MONEY
STOCK (M1) AND GNP.
2

AVERAGE VELOCITY GROWTH IS AVERAGE ANNUAL PERCENT CHANGE OVER THE PERIOD

1959 TO 1981.

NOTE.—SHADED AREAS INDICATE RECESSIONS AS DEFINED BY THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF
ECONOMIC RESEARCH.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE SYSTEM.

sponsibility of the Federal Reserve, the Administration believes the
announced policy of the Federal Reserve is consistent with the economic recovery program. Thus, the Administration expects that the
Federal Reserve will achieve an orderly reduction in the trend of
money growth to a noninflationary rate, (See .Chapter 8 for a discussion of recent monetary developments.)
We have discussed in the previous section how large risk premiums—the inflationary psychology—impose costs on the economy and
constitute a major obstacle to achieving a high rate of saving and investment and rapidly rising standards of living. Announced changes
in policy cannot lower these risk premiums in the short run. Credibility must be earned by performance. The longer the heritage of inflation, the longer it will take to demonstrate the credibility of current
policy.
Controlling Monetary Aggregates

Some basic principles can be used to evaluate monetary policy actions. First, the monetary aggregate that is selected for policy purposes should be chosen with two factors in mind. One is that growth




64

of the aggregate should be closely related to a primary objective of
policy, which is to reduce inflation. This means that the aggregate
must be closely related to national income in current prices. The
second factor is that the Federal Reserve should be able to control
the aggregate. Although a broader monetary aggregate may bear a
closer relationship to nominal income than a narrower one, it is not
appropriate for the Federal Reserve to emphasize the broader aggregate if it cannot be controlled as closely. Such a broader aggregate,
however, may be a useful indicator of the effects of policy if timely
data are available. As has already been discussed, the Federal Reserve has the ability to control the Ml aggregate with a reasonable
degree of precision.
Success in controlling monetary aggregates is in part dependent on
prevailing exchange-rate policy. A policy designed to maintain a
given value of the dollar on foreign exchanges is inconsistent in the
long run with a policy of achieving given monetary targets. As will be
discussed in detail in Chapter 7, the policy of the Administration is to
permit exchange rates to be determined by market forces. Such a
posture relaxes an important constraint on the ability of the monetary authorities to set and achieve monetary targets.
Financial innovations in recent years have complicated the evaluation of the inflationary potential of monetary growth. The development of new financial instruments necessitated a recent redefinition
of the monetary aggregates used by the Federal Reserve. The new
measure of transactions balances (Ml), in addition to including the
public's holdings of currency and demand deposits at commercial
banks, also includes the new types of checkable deposits offered by
financial institutions, such as negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW)
accounts. These interest-bearing checkable deposits are clearly used
for transaction purposes and thus properly belong in Ml.
Under the operating procedures of the Federal Reserve, accuracy
in controlling a particular monetary aggregate depends upon the reserve requirement structure. In principle, reserve requirements
should be applied uniformly to all deposits included in the monetary
aggregate that the Federal Reserve is most committed to controlling
and held at zero on deposits the Federal Reserve is less interested in
controlling. Since the existing structure of reserve requirements was
originally specified for other reasons, such as bank safety and allocation of credit, it does not meet this principle. As a result, the Federal
Reserve must continuously monitor and compensate for the shifting
relationships between the various monetary aggregates and total
bank reserves.
This problem, which has been severe in the past, will be reduced
greatly over the next few years. A restructuring of reserve require-




65

ments that will allow closer control of Ml is currently being carried
out under provisions of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and
Monetary Control Act of 1980. After complete implementation of
these provisions is achieved by 1988, reserve requirements on transaction accounts will be nearly uniform, and those on most other accounts could be eliminated.
Interest Rates Versus Money Stock Targets

Prior to the 1970s the Federal Reserve (like most central banks)
judged the appropriateness of monetary policy primarily by looking
at credit conditions and interest rates—specifically, by watching
short-term interest rates as an indicator of money-market conditions.
However, the problem raised by this procedure was the difficulty in
knowing exactly how much to vary interest rates in order to stabilize
the economy. In times when credit demand was strong, too small an
increase in interest rates generated spending in excess of the economy's capacity to produce, thereby fueling inflation. Similarly, interest
rates might be allowed to decline by too little at times of weak credit
demand, contributing to a recession.
In practice, monetary policymakers tended to be cautious in attempting to change interest rates, with the result generally being too
much expansion of money when credit demand was strong and too
little expansion when credit demand was weak. This procyclical
money growth has tended to exacerbate, rather than dampen, business cycle fluctuations (Chart 3-3).
The procyclical growth in money was accompanied by a secular
growth in money and increases in inflation. As the rate of inflation
soared in the 1970s, market interest rates became an even less reliable guide to monetary policy. Market interest rates tend to be high
when the inflation rate is high and low when inflation is low, given
private and public borrowing demand. Consumption and investment
decisions are based on real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates, not
nominal interest rates. High nominal interest rates do not necessarily
mean that *'money is tight." High interest rates, in fact, may go
hand-in-hand with "easy money." Since it is difficult to measure inflation expectations, it is difficult to know how much of an adjustment to make in nominal interest rates to determine the real interest
rate. For these reasons, monetary policy is more appropriately based
on changes in the growth of money than on changes in market interest rates.
When the Federal Reserve first adopted monetary targets in the
early 1970s, it attempted to alter interest rates to achieve a desired
rate of monetary growth. The growth of money was controlled
through the marginal cost to banks of acquiring additional reserves,
as indicated by the Federal funds rate, rather than through direct




66

control of the quantity of reserves. (The Federal funds rate is the
rate at which banks borrow excess reserves from each other.) In
1975, however, the Congress urged the Federal Reserve to adopt
annual targets for monetary growth. With passage of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (the Humphrey-Hawkins
Act), the requirement for money growth targeting became more specific. Since then, monetary authorities have been modifying their procedures in order to achieve their monetary targets.
On October 6, 1979, the Federal Reserve adopted a new approach
which put much less emphasis on fluctuations in short-term interest
rates. Instead, the new procedure placed primary emphasis on the
amount of bank reserves as an operating target and allowed interest
rates to be determined more freely by the market. What the Federal
Reserve decided to do at that point was to control the quantity of reserves, rather than their price. Under the old procedures the average
Federal funds rate typically did not vary by much more than one-half
of a percentage point between monthly meetings of the Federal
Open Market Committee. But after October 1979 the allowable
range of the Federal funds rate was increased.
Enhancing Monetary Control

Stable monetary growth will serve to stabilize prices, act as an
automatic stabilizer against temporary output fluctuations, and help
to make public expectations about inflation consistent with the underlying rate of monetary growth. Achievement of stable monetary
growth will require adequate control over total bank reserves. Two
types of reserves are available. Nonborrowed reserves are owned outright by banks and are supplied by the Federal Reserve through open
market operations. Borrowed reserves are supplied through temporary loans from the discount window of the Federal Reserve. The
monetary authorities can directly control the amount of nonborrowed
reserves, but they have only indirect control over the small but potentially volatile amount of reserves which bank borrow at the discount window.
Although borrowed reserves constitute, on average, only 2 to 3
percent of total reserves, fluctuations in borrowing can contribute
significantly to short-run changes in total reserves. Reform of the discount window has therefore been proposed to make borrowed reserves more controllable and thus more predictable. Under these
conditions, the Federal Reserve would be able to meet its targets for
total banks reserves and the monetary base more accurately.
The volatility in borrowed reserves could be reduced by tying the
discount rate to market rates so as to reduce variability in the incentive to borrow. To keep such variability to an absolute minimum, the
Federal Reserve would also have to set its discount rate somewhat




67

above market interest rates—that is, to act as a penalty. A penalty
discount rate would be especially effective when the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, which
makes reserve requirements significantly more uniform, is fully implemented.
An even more successful operation of a penalty rate would require
a switch from the Federal Reserve's lagged reserve-requirement rule
to a system of contemporaneous reserve requirements. The current
rule, which became effective in 1968, states that in any given week
institutions must hold reserves (as deposits at a Federal Reserve
Bank or vault cash) in prescribed percentages of their various types
of deposits 2 weeks earlier. The earlier system of contemporaneous
reserve accounting required banks to hold reserves based on the current week's deposits.
Under lagged reserve accounting, the amount of borrowed reserves fluctuates considerably over the short run. During any 2-week
period the total reserve requirement is predetermined by deposits 2
weeks earlier. This means that reserves must be supplied within the
period, either borrowed or nonborrowed. Under current operating
procedures, the Federal Reserve controls the growth of total reserves
in future periods by varying the mix between borrowed and nonborrowed reserves. If a penalty discount rate tied to market interest rates
were introduced, borrowed reserves would probably shrink to a small
and relatively constant amount.
The Federal Reserve Board has requested public comment on its
proposal to return to a system of contemporaneous reserve accounting. An important reason for going back to contemporaneous accounting would be to permit greater flexibility in the discount rate, at
a penalty level or otherwise, which in turn would provide more precise short-run control over total reserves by reducing the volatility of
borrowings. Even in the absence of a penalty discount rate, however,
contemporaneous reserve accounting would allow open market operations to have a more immediate effect on total bank reserves.
INSTITUTIONALIZATION OF A NONINFLATIONARY
MONETARY POLICY
The existence of high and varying rates of inflation, high and varying rates of interest, and volatile exchange rates for more than a
decade clearly suggests that monetary management can be improved
in the future. The Administration has supported and will continue to
support the pursuit of a noninflationary monetary policy. The issue
discussed in this section is: Once inflation has been eliminated, how
can price-level stability be maintained?




68

Price stability is an objective that is arrived at through the political
process, but it often conflicts with other political and economic objectives in the short run. It has therefore been difficult to establish
institutional arrangements that will ensure price-level stability. The
traditional argument for an independent monetary authority is that
insulation from politics enables the central bank to resist pressures
for inflating, even when the government would find an inflationary
policy politically appealing.
Existing institutional arrangements have not ensured price stability.
In the past 17 years, gold reserve clauses related to demand deposits
at commercial banks, and then to currency held by the public, have
been terminated. The Bretton Woods fixed exchange-rate system
began to break down in the late 1960s, and the last link between the
U.S. dollar and gold was formally severed in 1971. Since then, the
monetary authorities have had considerable discretion in determining
the rate at which new money is created.
As a result of the rising and volatile inflation of the past, economists have been evaluating alternative approaches to achieving and
maintaining a noninflationary monetary policy. The congressional
mandate to create a Gold Commission is symptomatic of a desire to
find institutional arrangements that will ensure price-level stability.
The remainder of this section discusses two approaches to the problem. One would involve some linkage of our monetary system to the
official U.S. gold stock. The other would involve statutory or constitutional rules limiting monetary growth or requiring a stable price
level.
It is important to keep in mind that alternatives to the present arrangement should be evaluated in terms of the answers they provide
to these two questions: Is the rule or norm perceived to be credible
by the public? Will departures from the stated norm impel policymaking institutions to correct them? If the answer to either question
is "no," institutional change would not have served its purpose.
GOLD STANDARD

Some economists and elected officials have recently been advocating a return to a gold standard as a lasting way to restore confidence
in the U.S. monetary system. The basic idea is that excessive money
creation could be prevented by anchoring money to a scarce resource. In addition, it is argued that the establishment of a gold
standard would induce savers to accept lower nominal rates of return
on their assets. This would occur because fiat money would be convertible into gold at a fixed price, and thus an effective constraint
would be placed on growth of the money stock and the rate of inflation. Lower rates of interest, in turn, would result in a rapid resump-




69

tion of economic growth. So, in essence, the contention is that restoration of a gold standard would not only stabilize prices but also
raise and stabilize output growth.
It is useful to review at this point how gold standards actually performed in the past. The evidence does not suggest that it achieved
greater stability in price levels or growth. Much of the claimed pricelevel stability achieved under previous gold standards is based on
Gustav Cassers observation that "the general level of prices in 1910
was practically the same as in 1850." l Professor Phinney of Harvard
was one of the first to point out that "unfortunately, when Cassel
came to choose base years, he completely forgot the distinction between the secular and the cyclical to which he had called attention/* 2
Chart 3-4

Jevons-Sauerbeck Index
of Wholesale Commodity Prices
1830_~ 100.

120

100

80

60
1820

I
1830

I
1840

I
1850

I
1860

I
1870

I
1880

I\>C/ I
1890
1900

I
1910

NOTE,—INDEX OF PRICES IN BRITISH POUNDS OF A SELECTED GROUP OF INTERNATIONALLY
TRADED COMMODITIES.
SOURCE: REPRODUCED FROM J. T. PHINNEY, "GOLD PRODUCTION AND THE PRICE LEVEL: THE
CASSEL THREE PERCENT ESTIMATE," QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS, VOL. 47,
1932-33, pp. 647-679.

Chart 3-4 reproduces the Jevons-Sauerbeck index which appeared in
the Phinney article. The index shows large and extremely long
swings in prices lasting up to 30 years. Increases and decreases were
on the order of 30 to 50 percent. The chart reveals very little evidence of long-run price-level stability. More information can be
gleaned by considering the wholesale price indexes of four countries
for the period 1814-1913 (Table 3-1). Perusal of the table leads to two
conclusions. First, the gold-standard period was very deflationary on
1
"The Supply of Gold," in Interim Report of the Gold Delegation of the Financial Committee,
Geneva, 1930, p. 72. See also his Theory of Social Economy, p. 441.
2
J. T. Phinney, "Gold Production and the Price Level: The Cassel Three Percent Estimate,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 47, 1932-33, p. 650.




70

the whole, with the price levels in the United States and the United
Kingdom dropping by 44 percent. Second, price-level cycles were
deep and protracted.
TABLE $-\.—Wholesale price indexes, 1814-1913
United
States

Item

United
Kingdom

Germany

France

Italy

Indexes (1913=100):
178
80
133
67
100

129
71
111
71
100

-55
66
-50
49

.

178
90
125
76
100

-49
39
-39
32

45
56
-36
41

-44

1814
1849
1872
1896
1913

-44

-22

U32
96
124
71
100

74
100

-27
29
-43
41

35

Percent change:
1814
1849
1872
1896

to 1849
to 1872
to 1896
to 1913

..

1814 to 1913

2

-24

' Data are for 1820.
Change from 1820.
Source: Robert Triffin, "The Evolution of the International Monetary System: Historical Reappraisal and Future Perspective,"
Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 12,1964, p. 13.
2

Table 3-2 compares the sample mean and coefficient of variation
[standard deviation divided by sample mean] of the rate of change of
the wholesale price level for the United States and the United Kingdom for three different periods.
TABLE 3-2.—Comparison of the behavior of price level, real output, and money growth in the United
Kingdom and the United States, selected periods, 1821-1979
The Interwar Period

The Gold Standard »
Item

Post- World War II

(2) Coefficient of variation of annual percent
changes in the price level (ratio)

United
States

United
Kingdom

United
States

1870-1913
(1821-1913)
(1) Average annual percent change in the price
level

United States

United
Kingdom

1879-1913
(1834-1913)

1919-38

1919-40

1946-79

1946-79

-0.7
(-.4)

0.1
(-.1)

-4.6

-2.5

5.6

2.8

-14.9
(-16.3)

17.0
(6.5)

-3.8

-5.2

1.2

1.3

2.5

3.5

4.9

5.5

1.4

1.6

United
Kingdom

(3) Coefficient of variation of annual percent
changes in real per capita income (ratio)
(4) Average level of the unemployment rate
(percent)

2

4.3

36.8

13.3

11.3

2.5

5.0

(5) Average annual percent change in the
money supply

1.5

6.1

.9

1.5

5.9

5.7

(6) Coefficient of variation of annual percent
changes in the money supply (ratio)

1.6

.8

3.6

2.4

1.0

.5

'Data for the longer periods (in parentheses) were available only for the price level. Years 1838-43 and 1861-78 were
excluded for the United States.
2
1888-1913.
3
1890-1913.
• Note.—Lines 1 and 5 calculated as the time coefficient from a regression of the logarithm of the variable on a time trend.
Lines 2, 3, and 6 calculated as the ratio of the standard deviation of annual percent changes to their mean.
Source: Michael David Bordo "The Classical Gold Standard: Some Lessons for Today", Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review, May. 1981, Vol. 63, No. 5,




71

Again, the evidence is clear that the achievement of low (and often
negative) rates of inflation over the long run during previous goldstandard periods came at the cost of a high variability in inflation
rates.
To the extent that deviations of the price level from its long-run
equilibrium were unanticipated, growth would be expected to be more
variable than in periods when inflation rates were more stable. The
third line of Table 3-2 bears on this question. The coefficient of variation of the growth rate of real per capita income was about twice as
high in the pre-World War I gold-standard period as in the postWorld War II period.
In addition, recessions in the United States lasted twice as long, on
average, from 1879 to 1913 than from 1945 to 1980, while periods of
expansion and recovery were about one-third shorter. Finally, the
measured unemployment rate during the pre-World War I goldstandard period was on the average two-thirds higher than during
the post-World War II period in the United Kingdom and was onethird higher in the United States.
Under a gold standard, the rate of growth in the supply of monetary gold depends on the rate of gold production and the rate at
which demand for gold for nonmonetary uses increases. Gold production depends in part on the purchasing power of gold (the ratio
of the gold price in dollars to the average price level). Table 3-3 contains data on the yearly production of gold from 1800 to 1980. The
numbers encompass a wide range, from a maximum average annual
growth rate of 7,1 percent for the period 1834-1848 to a minimum
of —1.6 percent for the most recent period 1969-1980.
TABLE 3-3.—Changes in gold output, 1800-1980
[Percent change per year]
Period

Gold output

0,4
7.1
6.2

1800-33
1834-48
1849-70
1871-89
1890=1913
1920-33

..
.

.

..

... .
. .

...

,

—> 3
6.0
3.4
7.0
2.7
-1.6

1934=40
1950-68
1969-80

Source: Anna J. Schwartz, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., Memorandum of September 10, 1981 to Members of
the Gold Commission.

Even during the pre-World War I gold standard period, monetary
gold was only a fraction of the total money stock, the bulk of which
consisted of paper currency and bank deposits. The last two lines of
Table 3-2 show the sample mean and coefficient of variation of the




72

annual growth rate of ML The average growth rate of Ml for the
United Kingdom during the pre-World War I gold standard period
was one-fourth of the average during the post-World War II period.
For the United States the two sample means are approximately the
same. However, the variability of Ml growth was over 50 percent
higher in the gold-standard period than in the post-war period.
In sum, the evidence presented indicates that previous gold-standard periods were characterized by: (1) lower average inflation and
money supply growth; (2) greater fluctuations in inflation, money supply
growth, and output growth; and (3) higher unemployment rates than
in the period 1946 to 1979. Although comparisons across time periods are difficult to make because of the difficulty of controlling for
differences, including the effects of wars, droughts, and other shocks
to the economy, it is far from clear that gold standards produced
better overall results than those produced during the post-World
War II period.
Could the United States forge a better gold standard now? There
are two options: restore some form of gold cover requirement without convertibility or restore a gold cover requirement with convertibility; either with partial or full gold backing. The first option prevailed from 1934 until 1968, a period during which Federal Reserve
Banks were required to keep a minimum of legal value gold certificates (valued at $35 an ounce) behind each $1 of their note liabilities. A more structured variant would be to restrain money creation
by linking the central bank's ability to create liabilities to a legislated
schedule of changes in the official price of gold and changes in the
amount of gold reserves required for each dollar of central bank liabilities. Central to such a proposal would be a requirement that the
actual gold stock remain fixed in size and that changes in its value
occur only through variations in the official or bookkeeping price of
gold. Not only would there be no requirement to buy and sell gold at
the official price, the Treasury would be prohibited from doing so. In
other words, there would be a gold reserve requirement for the
money supply, but no convertibility regardless of whether the official
price of gold was below, at, or above the market price. In sum, this
option would essentially constrain the annual growth of the monetary
base.
Under the second option the United States would fix permanently
the dollar price of gold—that is, make the dollar convertible into
gold—without concern for whether or not other countries would
follow our example. The difference between a partial and a full backing would be that, whereas full backing would establish a one-to-one
link between the gold stock and the money stock, partial backing
would not. But in both cases, random shocks in the gold markets




73

would create serious problems in controlling monetary aggregates
and hence the general price level,
A MONETARY RULE

Enactment of a statute or constitutional amendment requiring the
monetary authorities to abide by a rule regarding monetary growth
or inflation is another method that has been suggested for dealing
with the problem of maintaining long-run price stability. Such a rule
would free the Federal Reserve from having to interpret either the
"social welfare function'* of the country or, more practically, the objectives of current elected officials. The rule could be stated either in
terms of an ultimate objective for inflation, as it is in some industrial
countries, or in terms of a monetary growth target that would be
consistent with the maintenance of price-level stability.
A rule fixing a final outcome for inflation would oblige the monetary authorities to maintain monetary conditions consistent with the
stability of a broad index of commodity and service prices (for example, the consumer price index). One might argue that the HumphreyHawkins Act implicitly incorporates such a rule. This legislation has
as goals the reduction of "the rate of inflation to no more than 3 per
centum" in the interim and ultimately to zero. The act, however,
does not make the Federal Reserve responsible for the achievement
of price-level stability. Furthermore, it mandates that "policies and
programs for reducing the rate of inflation shall be designed so as
not to impede achievement of goals and timetables" for reducing unemployment. In sum, there is no recognition in the act of a division
of responsibilities that would include assigning responsibility for
price-level stability exclusively to the Federal Reserve.
The advantage of formulating a rule on the final outcome for inflation is that the monetary authorities would be free to devise the best
monetary strategy to achieve the mandated outcome. The disadvantage would be the rule's potential inflexibility. Temporary changes in
the price level can be caused by a variety of shocks for which the
monetary authorities cannot be held accountable. One approach
would be to state the final outcome in terms of the average rate of
growth of the consumer price index or nominal GNP over a period
of several years.
The alternative of a target rule for monetary growth would have to
be specified in such a way as to be consistent with price-level stability, again, over a period of several years. The rule could be revised
from time to time in light of any changes in the relation of money
growth to inflation. Such calibration would be the job of the central
bank. Of course, the mere enactment of a rule would not ensure its
successful implementation. Suitable institutional constraints would




74

have to be present to correct for possible deviations from desired
outcomes.
At this time it is not clear which rule, if any, would be optimal and
likely to prove preferable over a long period. Hence, the Federal Reserve's current policy of gradually reducing the target growth rate of
money over several years is providing a transition to a less inflationary environment.
One of the Administration's long-run objectives is the elimination
of inflation. The implementation of a monetary policy that is consistent with this objective can be viewed in the following way. Each year,
the monetary authorities would announce the rate of growth of the
money supply that is consistent with achieving their medium-term
objectives for nominal income and inflation. Over the longer run the
rate of growth of the money supply must v be consistent with the
achievement of the rate of nominal income implied by the inflation
objective. To implement this procedure, the Federal Reserve would
determine the rate of growth of total bank reserves that was consistent with the targeted growth of the deposit component of Ml. Open
market operations by the Federal Reserve would expand the monetary base by a sufficient amount to provide total bank reserves and
the currency component of targeted Ml growth.
Ultimately, the Federal Reserve would set a reserve growth path
consistent with the desired price level performance on the basis of
estimates of several parameters. These would include the trend path
of real output, the trend of Ml velocity, and the trend of the ratio of
Ml to the monetary base. As these changed, the targets for nominal
income, Ml growth, and growth of the monetary base would be altered to maintain a stable price level. Unexpected changes in any of
these parameters could be offset to maintain long-run price stability,
THE FUTURE CHALLENGE
A few basic propositions about inflation can summarize the role of
monetary policy in the future. First, there is more agreement now
than there was a decade ago that inflation is essentially a monetary
phenomenon. In addition, events that occurred during the 1970s
showed the importance of distinguishing between a transitory change
in the rate of inflation occasioned by a "real shock" and the underlying rate of inflation. Second, an assumption of a positive but predictable rate of inflation is not very realistic. For the past 20 years the
United States has experienced several cycles around a rising trend of
inflation. We are now experiencing a cyclical decline in inflation. A
major objective of the Administration's economic recovery program
is to achieve the elimination of inflation in the long run. The ulti-




75

mate costs of adjusting to a significantly less inflationary environment
will be influenced by how rapidly expectations about future inflation
are revised downward.
Finally, in a world where the U.S. dollar is the dominant international currency, many other countries* policy options are influenced
by the success of U.S. anti-inflation policies. Most other countries
find it difficult to maintain an inflation rate that is significantly below
that of the United States, although Germany, Japan, and Switzerland
have done so in recent years. Realization of that fact has increased
the sense of urgency felt in the United States about achieving and
maintaining a low rate of inflation.
The appropriate policy for reducing the inflation rate is a decrease
in the rate of money growth. Unfortunately, a slowing of money
growth in the past has tended to reduce output and employment
within roughly two quarters, while as many as eight quarters typically
have had to pass before monetary restraint produced a significant reduction in the inflation rate. However, the whole process of renewed
economic growth without inflation can be speeded up if the policy of
monetary restraint is believed by the public, since it is an unanticipated decrease in the rate of money growth that significantly affects
output and employment in the short run.
If the decrease is generally anticipated, wages and prices will begin
to rise more slowly and the adverse short-run effects on output and
employment will be minimized. That is why it is so important for the
public to be convinced that an anti-inflationary monetary policy has
finally been adopted. The Federal Reserve can maximize the credibility of its monetary policy, and hence reduce the transition costs of
eliminating inflation, by announcing a specific target for the rate of
money growth and by minimizing short-run deviations from that
target.
Theoretically, restrictive monetary policy could achieve price-level
stability regardless of fiscal policy. As a practical matter, however, reducing the growth of government spending and reducing deficits in
the Federal budget will help to strengthen the belief that anti-inflationary policies will be maintained. That, in turn, will help lower the
costs of adjusting to lower rates of inflation. In short, the credibility
of monetary policy is influenced by the fiscal policy that accompanies
it.
The monetary system is evolving toward one in which the Federal
Reserve will have very close control over Ml, suitably redefined from
time to time, through control of reserves. With uniform reserve requirements on transaction accounts, there will be relatively little variability in the ratio of Ml to the monetary base. Longer term movements in this ratio can be offset by open market operations. Mone-




76

tary aggregates other than Ml may serve as useful indicators of the
effects of policy actions, but they will not be directly controllable by
the Federal Reserve and therefore will not be useful as short-run targets.
A policy of providing slow and steady growth of money will not
permit the central bank to attempt to offset the effects of transitory
shocks to aggregate demand or productivity. In other words, shortrun fluctuations in inflation and output growth will occur: economic
expansion and contraction induced by changes in productivity or
price shocks cannot be completely avoided. What can be avoided are
the procyclical changes in the growth of the money supply that have
occurred in the past.




77

CHAPTER 4

Federal Budget Issues
THE FEDERAL BUDGET presents economic policymakers with
three fundamental questions. First, how much should the Federal
Government spend? Second, how should that spending be allocated?
Third, how should the spending be financed—by current taxes only,
by borrowing to cover a deficit in tax revenues, or by adding to the
monetary base. Without spending there would be no need to impose
taxes or to borrow to cover deficits. The composition of a given level
of spending has implications for how it should be financed. And the
choice of the level of spending is influenced by the recognition that
government spending cannot indefinitely grow faster than the economy and that the financing mechanisms available to the government
impose costs on the economy.
This chapter examines issues related to the size and allocation of
the Federal budget and explores the implications for the economy of
financing a part of Federal spending through budgetary deficits. Financing Federal spending through various forms of taxation, together with related issues, are the subject of Chapter 5.
The Administration's spending policies rest on both philosophical
beliefs and economic judgments. As discussed in Chapter 2, the view
that the size and scope of the Federal Government are too large reflects the belief that most individuals know best what they want and
how best to attain it. In the aggregate their actions will generally
result in the most appropriate distribution of our economic resources. This belief is accompanied by the judgment that resources
left in the private sector generally are more effective in generating
growth and productive employment than resources moved to the
public sector.
Because of these philosophical beliefs and economic judgments,
the Administration has initiated a major transformation of the role of
the Federal Government in the U.S. economy. The Administration's
economic recovery program will change both the size and the nature
of government involvement, reversing the trend of recent decades
when the Federal budget usually grew faster than the rest of the
economy as the Federal Government took upon itself responsibilities




78

that had previously been left to the private sector or to State and
local governments.
Federal spending is a highly visible form of government involvement in the economy, and the Administration's economic program
calls for a slowdown in the growth of Federal spending. Federal
spending rose from 20.2 percent of the gross national product (GNP)
in 1970 to 23.0 percent in 198L By fiscal 1987, Federal spending is
projected to fall to 19.7 percent of GNP. Federal tax rates on individuals and businesses will also fall, as will the share of gross national
product used to pay Federal taxes. By 1987, Federal tax revenues will
represent 2.3 percentage points less of the gross national product
than they did in 1981. At the same time the Federal budget deficit
also will shrink relative to the size of the economy, dropping from
2.0 percent of GNP in 1981 and 3.2 percent in 1982 to 1.1 percent
by 1987,
In 1981 the Congress and the Administration took important steps
toward achieving this shift in emphasis from the public to the private
sector. The enactment of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
will reduce income tax rates over the next few years, and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 will restrain the growth of
many open-ended entitlement programs. This shift will be incomplete, however, without further Federal spending restraint in the
years ahead.
The shift in the role of the Federal Government is more than a reduction in size. It also encompasses a restructuring of priorities at
the Federal level and a reallocation of responsibilities and resources
between the Federal and the State and local levels of government.
Within the Federal budget, spending will shift toward those activities
that, in this Administration's view, reflect truly national needs, such
as strengthening the Nation's defenses and maintaining the integrity
of the social insurance programs.
Economic criteria will be applied to various spending programs to
help ensure that the resulting benefits offset the costs to the taxpayers who ultimately must bear them. These criteria should apply not
only to direct Federal spending, but also to on- and off-budget credit
activities. Such Federal credit programs reallocate national resources
by financing activities that might not be attractive to investors in the
private market.
The first step in the realignment of responsibilities among Federal,
State, and local jurisdictions was the consolidation of a number of
categorical grant programs into block grants in fiscal 1982. The
second step, proposed in the budget for fiscal 1983, is to shift responsibility for some programs now jointly operated by the States
and the Federal Government either to the States or to the national




79

government, and to turn some other programs that are now wholly
federally funded back to the States. The proposed restructuring of
functions would be accompanied by a phased withdrawal of the Federal Government from the excise tax base. These proposals are intended to strengthen the Federal system by improving the operation
of government at all levels, making it more responsive to the people.
THE OVERALL LEVEL OF FEDERAL SPENDING
The benefits of many types of Federal spending are easily seen.
Parks are built, research is conducted, and the sick and the elderly
are supported with Federal dollars. Yet Federal spending in the aggregate also imposes many costs on the economy. First, costs arise
through the mechanisms used to pay for what the government
spends. The government can raise taxes now or in the future to
obtain the funds it needs, or it can obtain those funds indirectly
through monetary expansion. As discussed in Chapter 5, taxes tend
to reduce growth in the private sector by transferring productive resources from private to public hands, using tax methods that generally distort the decisions of households and firms to supply labor and
capital to the economy. Deficits also impose real costs on the economy (as explored later in this chapter), whether financed by lower
future spending, higher future taxes, or by expanding the money
supply. For government spending to be economically justified, therefore, the benefits resulting from that spending—whether in terms of
more economic growth or the enhanced well-being of the society—
must exceed the costs.
Discretionary changes in the level of government spending made in
the attempt to offset cyclical fluctuations in the economy can impose
additional costs. Such changes, which increase the uncertainty faced
by households and firms in making their economic decisions, can discourage the supply of productive factors to the economy. Furthermore, attempts to implement discretionary countercyclical policy can
in fact prove to be procyclical.
A third way in which Federal spending can impose costs on the
economy is by altering the allocation of resources, both currently and
over time. For a given level of spending and method of financing, the
allocation of federal resources between current consumption and investment can affect economic growth.
Government spending can be divided into four categories: consumption, transfers, investment (both defense and nondefense investment), and other (which mainly includes interest payments and
grants to State and local governments). Government spending may
absorb private sector resources for use by the public sector or reallo-




80

cate resources within the private sector, or both; the predominant effects differ by category.
Transfer payments do not absorb resources aside from administrative costs, but they may have strong allocative effects within the economy. Transfer payments may lead recipients to change their work or
saving behavior, and they may change the composition of the
demand for goods and services. (Examples of the factor supply response are discussed in Chapter 5.) Federal grants to State and local
governments affect the use of resources in the economy through
their effect on the behavior of those jurisdictions. State and local
governments may respond to the Federal grants by changing the
level of spending and taxing, as well as the composition of the outlays.
The direct effect of government purchases of goods and services
for either consumption or investment is to absorb resources from the
private sector. To the extent that such spending substitutes for private purchases public sector purchases may also redirect the use of
resources within the private sector. For example, public provision of
education or police services reduces the private demand for such activities. The dominant effect that government purchases have on the
economy, however, is likely to be through absorption rather than
reallocation of private sector resources. Since a dollar of government
consumption spending is unlikely to substitute fully for a dollar of
private consumption, an increase in government consumption spending would tend to increase the share of total consumption in GNP
(apart from any effects of the financing arrangements). Similarly,
government investment tends to increase the share of total investment in the economy. Furthermore, government consumption and
investment spending is likely to alter the composition of both consumption and investment in the economy from what would have prevailed if the resources had stayed in private hands.
In practice, the distinction between government consumption and
investment is difficult to make. The government consumption figures
shown in Table 4-1 include various expenditures to promote education, training, and research and development. Like physical capital,
these activities contribute to economic growth. Published measures of
government investment expenditures encounter similar problems.
For example, current Federal investment expenditures mainly comprise purchases of military hardware and structures, whose acquisition will provide future benefits in terms of stronger national security
that cannot be captured in GNP. Although services of government
capital are not counted in GNP, the future services resulting from the
construction of airports, highways, and other civilian investment outlays are reflected in part in the recorded output of private sector




81

users. In practice, therefore, statistics that allocate government purchases between consumption and investment must be viewed with
caution.
TABLE 4-1.—Structure of Federal Government expenditures, NIPA, calendar yean 1951-83
[Percent of GNP]

Period

Total
Federal
Government
expenditures

Federal
Government
consumption 1

Federal
Government
transfer
payments 2

Federal Government
investment 3
Defense

Nondefense

Other
Federal
expenditures 4

1951-60

18.7

7.5

3.8

4.6

0.2

2.6

1961-70

19.5

7.6

5.2

2.7

.3

3.7
5.3

1971-80

21.5

6.2

8.4

1.3

.3

1981 5

23.4

6.1

9.8

1.3

.3

5.9

1982 6

24.0

6.4

10.1

1.4

.3

5.8

1983°

22.9

5.9

9.6

1.7

.2

5.5

1

Purchases of goods and services except durables and structures.
2
Includes transfers to foreigners.
"Purchases of durables and structures. The allocation between defense and nondefense was estimated for years before 1972 by
Council of Economic Advisers.
4
Primarily interest payments and grants to State and local governments,
5
Preliminary.
6
Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers.
Note.—Based on data from the national income and product accounts (NIPA). Expenditures by the Federal Government include offbudget items such as the Postal Service and the Federal Financing Bank as well as regularly budgeted expenditures.
Sources: Department of Commerce {Bureau of Economic Analysis), Office of Management and Budget, and Council of
Economic Advisers.

Despite these limitations, the statistics in Table 4-1 are a useful
summary of changes in Federal spending in these categories in recent
years and how these categories are likely to change under the Administration's current budget plans. Total Federal spending (on a national income accounts basis) as a percent of GNP rose nearly 3 percentage points between the 1950s and the 1970s. The category with the
largest growth was Federal transfer payments. Most of the increase
there—77 percent—represented expansion of the social security
system (discussed later in this chapter). This increase in transfers was
partially offset by a drop in Federal consumption as a share of GNP.
Measured Federal expenditures on investment goods have fallen substantially, largely because less of the Nation's output in the 1970s
was spent on defense hardware than in the earlier postwar decades.
The Administration's budget plans for fiscal 1983 envision a reversal
in the trend of transfer payments rising as a share of GNP. Federal
consumption expenditures should resume their decline as a share of
GNP, Government spending classified here as investment will increase in relative importance primarily because of rising defense outlays.




82

REALLOCATION OF BUDGET PRIORITIES
A substantial shift in the composition of the budget has accompanied the expansion of the Federal role in the economy since 1960.
Table 4-2 shows how the priorities of the Federal Government have
evolved over the last 20 years and how this Administration intends to
restructure them.
TABLE 4-2.—Composition of Federal unified budget outlays, selected fiscal years-, 1960-87
[Percent]
Fiscal years
Item
1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1981l

1982 2

1983 2

19872

Defense 3

48.2

38.9

38.7

24.5

21.5

22.2

23.8

27.0

35.4

Payments for individuals4

26.4

28.4

33.7

48.3

49.1

50.2

50.5

50.5

49.0

17.0
3.0
1.2
3.9
1.5

19.6
2.4
1.5
4.2
.8

20.4
1.7
6.3
3.8
1.5

26,7
4.2
8.3
5.9
3.2

27.1
3.1
10.1
5.9
2.8

28.1
3.3
10.5
5.4
3.0

28.4
4.0
10.7
4.9
2.5

29.2
3.7
11.0
4.1
2.5

29.7
2.0
12.0
3.4
1.9

Retirement4
Unemployment
Medical care
Food, nutrition, and public assistance
Other
. . . .
Interest

9.0

8.7

9.4

9.5

11.2

12,6

13.7

14.9

11.9

Other 3

16.2

23.9

19.9

17.7

18.2

15.0

12.0

7.6

3.7

4.7
2.2
2.8
2.0
4.4
1.0
.2
-1.1

6.0
2.7
3.3
1.9
4.9
1.8

3.6
2.1
2.6
2.3
3.6
4.2
.3
1.2

4.0
2.9
.5
2.9
3.2
4.4
2.2
-2.4

3.4
3.5
.8
3.1
3.6
4.5
1.5
-2.2

3.1
3,6
.8
2.7
3.5
3.8
1.0
-3.7

2.9
2.6
1.2
2.2
2.9
3.0
.9
-3.6

2.9
1.9
.6
1.5
2.5
1.8
1.0
-4.6

2.2
1.1
.3
.9
2.0
1.4
.8
-4.8

7.6

9.2

12.3

15.4

15.9

14.4

12.6

10.7

8.9

4.9

5.9

7.7

10.1

10.0

8.3

6.8

5.8

4.1

international, justice, general government.
Energy, natural resources, environment.
Agriculture
Commerce and community development,. .
Transportation
Education and training
General fiscal assistance
Other, net of offsetting receipts

.

3.1

Addendum:
Grants to State and local governments.- Total
Not for individuals
1
2
3
4
s

Preliminary.
Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers.
Excludes military retirement.
Includes military retirement.
Includes grants to State and local governments other than payments for individuals.

Note.—Detail may not add to 100 percent due to rounding.
Sources: Office of Management and Budget and Council of Economic Advisers.

The most notable change over this period was the substantial reduction in the share of the budget going to national defense, from
nearly one-half to less than one-quarter. While the defense share was
falling, transfer payments to individuals were growing. In 1960 transfer payments absorbed about one-quarter of the budget, whereas by
1981 they accounted for one-half. Most of this growth came in two
types of programs: (1) retirement programs, principally social security, but also outlays for military and civil service pensions, and (2)
the medical assistance programs of medicare for the elderly and medicaid for the poor. (A section of Chapter 6 examines factors contributing to medical cost increases.) The third notable shift in the composition of the budget was the greater fraction of Federal revenues
transferred to State and local governments through such programs as




83

general revenue sharing. (In Table 4-2, grants to State and local governments are included with direct Federal spending in each of the
functional categories.)
This Administration has a different set of spending priorities than
those reflected in the budgets of the recent past. This difference is
expressed in the following guidelines used in developing the Administration's plans for restraining the growth of Federal spending:
• Strengthen the national defense.
• Maintain the integrity of social insurance programs while reforming entitlement programs to ensure that they serve those in
greatest need.
• Reduce subsidies to middle- and upper-income groups,
• Apply sound economic criteria to programs where subsidies are
justified.
• Recover costs that can clearly be allocated to users of services
provided by Federal programs.
• Strengthen the Federal structure of government.
• Reduce the Federal role in allocating credit by restraining onand off-budget credit activities.
The Administration's estimate of 1987 budget outlays reflects
these guidelines, which are consistent with the role for the Federal
Government described in Chapter 2. Despite the substantial changes
accomplished in the budget for fiscal 1982, reforming the budget
cannot be achieved in a year or two. The difference in priorities can
best be seen by comparing the Administration's projections for fiscal
1987 with the budget that ended September 30, 1981.
As Table 4-2 indicates, the Administration intends to raise significantly the share of the budget spent on defense, from 22.2 percent of
total outlays in 1981 to 35.4 percent in 1987. Funding for retirement
programs will increase as a share of the budget while other payments to
individuals are being reduced. An example of a program in this latter
category is trade adjustment assistance, which has provided more generous unemployment benefits to workers who may have been displaced
by foreign competition than to other unemployed workers. Increases
in the share of the budget going to retirement programs and decreases
in the share of other transfer programs will mean that total payments
for individuals will account for approximately the same fraction of
Federal spending in 1987 as in 1981.
The reordering of Federal priorities raises a number of issues that
warrant special attention. First, what will be the economic effects of
the large increase in defense spending? Second, what caused the substantial expansion in retirement programs, and what issues should be
addressed for the future? Third, what advantages can be expected




84

from reallocating responsibilities between the Federal Government
and the State and local governments? Finally, how will changes in
Federal credit activity affect the economy?
DEFENSE

Real military spending is expected to grow 9 percent annually between 1981 and 1987. Over that period, military spending (including
military retirement) will rise from 5.6 percent to 7.8 percent of GNP,
and from 25 percent to 37 percent of total Federal spending. As is
clear from Chart 4-1, such an increase would not even restore defense
spending to its pre-Vietnam share of GNP. Although the military's
shares of national output and Federal spending will not be as high as
in the early 1960s, the buildup will be a sharp reversal of the trend
of the last decade. As a result, some concern has been expressed
about whether this increase could adversely affect the economy. Any
economic effects, however, must be assessed in the context of the
overriding need for maintaining the level of defense spending necessary for national security.
Chart 4-1

Defense Outlays as Percent of GNP

r/i M I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ( I I I 1 I r
1950

1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

FISCAL YEARS
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET,
AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




85

1985

The concern over the economic impact of defense spending has
probably been overstated. The U.S. economy as a whole should be
able to accommodate the projected expansion in defense spending
without experiencing an increase in the general inflation rate. Monetary and budget policies can offset the impact of a large increase in
government spending for national security, although unusual growth
in any spending category, military or civilian, makes the goal of overall restraint that much more difficult to achieve. Moreover, the economy currently has ample slack to accommodate the beginning of a
major expansion in defense work.
As the economy emerges from the current recession, however,
growth in the defense program will compete with expanding demands in the private sector. As the Administration's economic recovery program begins to take full effect, private demand for producer
durables should rise significantly. Expenditures for defense also will be
concentrated in the durables sector. Real purchases of defense durables (research and development and procurement of major weapon
systems) will grow at an estimated rate of 16 percent annually between
1981 and 1987. This exceeds the 14 percent annual rate of increase
that occurred during the 3 peak years of the Vietnam buildup. The
current defense buildup thus will add to pressures on the durable
manufacturing sector in these years.
Although it is difficult to predict which industrial markets will be
especially affected, three results of the defense buildup can be anticipated. First, the substantial transfer of resources in the durables
sector to defense production may increase relative prices in at least
some of the affected industries. Both the Department of Defense
(DOD) and private purchasers may have to pay more for goods from
these industries. Second, increased demand may produce delays in
the delivery of military goods. Delivery timetables that seem realistic
today may in some cases become obsolete as producers try to accommodate the defense buildup and vigorous expansion in civilian investment at the same time. A third effect may be some temporary
crowding out of private investment. Defense procurement and associated production equipment use many of the same physical resources
needed for private investment in civilian producer durables. Some
private firms may turn to foreign sources for materials while others
may cancel or postpone plans for expansion.
The Department of Defense is attempting to minimize the potentially adverse economic effects of the defense buildup through longterm planning, better management of defense contracts, and the development of more comprehensive cost estimates. This long-term
planning will help defense industries increase their capacity in anticipation of new orders. The department's plans to place greater reli-




86

ance on multiyear contracts will also help defense contractors operate more efficiently, especially by providing incentives to increase capacity and to plan optimal production rates.
In the private sector, competition tends to prevent inefficient producers from passing their higher costs on to consumers. In the defense sector the function of encouraging efficiency is largely performed by DOD analysts of contract negotiations and administration.
Their jobs are always difficult because of unanticipated problems in
developing high technology equipment, lack of competition among
suppliers, and a history of erratic fluctuations in defense procurement levels. The defense buildup will therefore increase the challenge to DOD administrators. Careful planning, tight management,
and accurate cost estimates can reduce the adverse consequences of
the buildup, but some problems may arise.
Economic Impact of Increased Military Manpower

Over the next 5 years the armed services plan to increase their
active duty forces by 9 to 10 percent. Quality standards for recruits
are also scheduled to rise. Declining unemployment rates and a reduction in the available manpower pool because of the decline in the
recruiting-age population will make these goals difficult to achieve
and will increase pressure to shift the costs of achieving them from
taxpayers onto the young—that is, by reinstituting the draft.
As the Administration's economic recovery program begins to take
effect, increases in the number of civilian jobs will make it harder for
the military to attract personnel. The problem of attracting first-time
recruits is likely to be especially serious. Between 1980 and the end
of the decade the number of 18-year-old males will fall by 19 percent, from 2.1 million to 1.7 million, with the bulk of that decline occurring before 1985. Thus, the armed services will need to attract a
considerably higher percentage of high school graduates than it does
today. Although a considerably smaller U.S. population supported a
somewhat larger military throughout the 1950s, the United States
had a draft in those years.
Just as the potential supply of recruits will be diminishing, the
demand—especially for high-quality recruits—will be rising. Without
the right combination of incentives, the costs of military compensation may rise sharply while a shortage of recruits may create pressures for a return to a peacetime draft. To prevent such problems,
bonuses for recruits in certain areas and for experienced military personnel with special skills may have to be raised.
Resumption of the draft would bring about an increase in force
levels at substantially lower budget outlays. However, the real costs
to the economy would not disappear; they would simply be moved
out of DOD's budget and onto the draftees, and the costs would




87

probably rise in the process. The output that the draftees would have
produced as members of the civilian work force would be lost in any
case.
SOCIAL SECURITY

Over the past 20 years, 29 percent of the growth in Federal spending has been due to increases in retirement programs, with most of
the growth occurring in the social security program. Over the next 5
years the retirement portion of social security will rise nearly 50 percent faster than the total Federal budget. Because of the large fraction of Federal resources devoted to the social security program, its
rapid growth, and the program's importance to so many Americans,
it is useful to understand the causes of its growth and the problems
that may occur in the future.
Three major factors apart from inflation have contributed to the
growth in social security retirement expenditures over the past two
decades, First, there are 9 million more people 65 or over today than
there were 20 years ago, an increase of 54 percent. Second, social
security eligibility has been broadened steadily since the system
began in the 1930s. In 1960, 66 percent of the elderly received social
security benefits, compared to 93 percent in 1980. Furthermore, the
number of people between 62 and 65 who received retirement benefits more than tripled between 1960 and 1980.
Third, the level of social security benefits, after adjusting for inflation, has also risen substantially. The average real benefit paid to a
retired worker was $191 a month in 1960 (in 1980 dollars) and $341
in 1980. In part, this increase reflects growth in the real wages that
the average worker earns over a lifetime and therefore in 4:he retirement benefit for which the worker is eligible. The growth in eligibility for survivor and dependent benefits, and their levels, has also
been substantial. Much of this liberalization in benefits came in the
late 1960s and early 1970s when the Congress, faced with projected
and growing surpluses in the social security trust funds, chose to
raise benefits. In 1972 the Congress sought to index benefits to
inflation, in part to discourage discretionary increases that had been
raising benefits faster than inflation. However, the Congress effectively
"double-indexed" them through a technical flaw in the indexing
procedure. As a result, nominal social security benefits continued to
rise faster than consumer prices. Congressional action in 1977 corrected the technical problem but did not return real individual benefits to
their 1972 level.
Expansion of the social security system has substantially improved
the lot of the elderly poor. The system has been a major factor in
reducing both the percentage and the absolute number among the




88

elderly with incomes below the official poverty line. In 1959, 35.2
percent of individuals age 65 and over were classified as poor, compared to 22.4 percent of the total population. There was a substantial
decline in poverty during the 1960s, so that by 1970, 24.5 percent of
the elderly and 12.6 percent of the rest of the population had measured incomes below the poverty line. During the 1970s the percentage of those classified as poor among the general population stopped
declining but continued to decline for the elderly. Thus, by 1980
only 15.7 percent of those 65 and over were formally considered to
be living in poverty, compared to 13.0 percent of the rest of the population. In addition to reducing poverty among the elderly, the indexing of social security benefits in 1972 assured them that inflation
would not erode at least that part of their incomes.
The social security system now faces serious problems, however,
both in the short run and in the long run. The short-run problem is
that the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund is in danger of
running out of money. Because of high unemployment and slow
growth in earnings, relative to the consumer price index by which
benefits are automatically adjusted, trust fund receipts have not kept
pace with the rise in outlays required by indexing. In 1981 the Congress authorized borrowing among the Old-Age Survivors Insurance,
Disability Insurance and Hospital Insurance Trust Funds. This action
will ease the short-run problem, which is expected to disappear as economic growth resumes and inflation subsides.
The long-term problem in the social security system arises from
the fact that the baby-boom generation will begin to reach retirement
age around the year 2010. The ratio of the working-age population
(20 to 64) to the elderly (65 and over) will fall from 5.1 today to 4.7
in 2005, and to 3.0 in 2030. After the turn of the century, contributors will not be able to support beneficiaries at today's retirement
age, replacement rates, and payroll tax rates. Because of this shift in
age distribution, today's young workers are unlikely to receive the
same rate of return on their contributions to social security that their
parents received. Thus, some combination of an increase in the retirement age, a decrease in benefits relative to prior earnings, and an
increase in contribution rates will almost certainly be necessary in the
long run. The President has established a National Commission on
Social Security Reform to examine the problems and propose solutions to both the short-run and long-run problems by January 1983.
Indexing in General

The practice of adjusting benefits automatically for inflation raises
a set of issues that applies to all indexed Federal programs. Currently, 30 percent of Federal outlays rise automatically with inflation. Indexing benefit payments to inflation has been intended to preserve




89

the real purchasing power of benefits—to serve as a kind of insurance against inflation. Experience with indexing has revealed problems, however.
One problem is the accuracy of the consumer price index (CPI) as
a measure of inflation. In recent years at least, the method of computing the CPI has caused it to overstate increases in the cost of
living. In October 1981 the Bureau of Labor Statistics announced its
intention to correct these technical deficiencies. The correction will
first affect Federal outlays in fiscal 1985. The cumulative effect of
mismeasurement may have increased the real level of benefits paid by
as much as $10 billion in 1981 alone. These same measurement
problems should have the opposite effect over the next few years,
however, as interest rates come down.
There are more fundamental problems with indexing. Since a continuous inflation is caused by excessive money growth, all incomes
tend to rise proportionally, so that increases in other incomes tend to
keep pace with indexed benefits. However, when supply shocks, such
as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil
price increases of the 1970s, cause changes in the price level, wage
incomes typically do not keep pace with inflation. In such circumstances, recipients of indexed benefits have an advantage, since most
taxpayers who pay for the benefits have no such protection for their
incomes. Several proposals have suggested that, when real wages fall,
it would be more equitable to adjust benefit payments only by the
amount of increases in wages. Automatic increases in benefit payments also give recipients an advantage in times of budget stringency, when the real levels of other programs are being reduced.
STRENGTHENING THE FEDERAL SYSTEM

A central feature of the Administration's budget policies is a commitment to strengthening the concept and the practical application of
federalism. The goal is a system that includes an effective central
government interacting with effective and responsive State governments. As the Federal Government has extended its involvement in
the economy in recent years, it has tended to reduce the autonomy of
State governments and to centralize the responsibility for a number
of social, economic, and regulatory programs. In the Administration's
view, the result has made the entire public sector less effective and
less efficient.
There are four major reasons for seeking to create a stronger and
more balanced Federal system. First, such a system would encourage
diversity among State and local governments. The diversity that
exists among communities and regions requires a structure of government that recognizes the differences in circumstances, prefer-




90

ences, and demands for public services. Many services that are appropriately provided by the public sector generate benefits sufficiently
limited geographically that they are properly the responsibility of
State or local governments. This permits the individuals who will
benefit from and pay for a given service to decide whether it should
be provided and if so, in what quantity.
That diversity also permits a "portfolio" approach to solving problems that are common to many communities, in that a single approach—the Federal Government's approach—is not the only
method that can be tried. As different jurisdictions choose different
strategies for handling similar problems, the chances of finding superior solutions increases. This portfolio approach means that some
methods will fail, possibly more severely than the single method that
the national government would have chosen. But each jurisdiction
can learn from the experience of others, and the portfolio approach
should help the public sector function more effectively.
A second reason for strengthening the Federal system is to make
the public sector more accountable for its actions. Accountability
comes from matching the responsibility for providing services with
the resources for financing them. It can be argued that voters can see
more clearly at the State and local levels of government the connection between their tax bills and the use to which government funds
are put. Greater accountability would make for a more informed balancing of the costs and benefits of public spending and, again, a
more efficient allocation of resources.
The current array of Federal programs reflects some desire for
both greater accountability and diversity. Revenue sharing is an example of a Federal attempt to promote diversity with Federal tax dollars by distributing Federal funds to local governments (and formerly
to State governments too) to use essentially as they wish. Although
such a strategy may achieve substantial diversity, it lacks accountability. Local officials who run revenue sharing programs do not have to
answer at the next election to the taxpayers who pay for the programs. Block grants suffer from some of the same failings.
The usual Federal solution to accountability has been through regulation that by its nature effectively limits diversity. Even where several levels of government are involved in operating a program—such
as medicaid—diversity is often hindered by the need for accountability. This need has been used to justify the imposition of many complex and burdensome regulations, and thereby administrative costs,
on lower levels of government. Thus a third reason for the Administration's commitment to federalism is to reduce some of the administrative burdens that Washington now places on State and local governments participating in Federal programs.




91

Finally, a heightened role for State and local governments is consistent with the Administration's shift in Federal budget priorities
toward clearly national needs, such as defense. In a time of budget
restraint at the Federal level, State and local government may well
want to assume responsibility for some of the activities that can no
longer be financed by the Federal budget.
The consolidation of a number of categorical grant programs into
block grant programs in the fiscal 1982 budget was the first in a
series of steps toward revising the role of the central government in
the Federal system. The Administration is proposing further consolidations of categorical programs in the 1983 budget. A more historic
step toward strengthening the Federal system is the Administration's
proposal to turn back the excise tax base to the States and to produce a clearer division of labor between the States and Washington.
Beginning in 1984, for example, the States would become responsible for the major income-based transfer programs for able-bodied
residents, while the Federal Government would assume full responsibility for medicaid, the major program of medical assistance to the
poor.
One reason for this revised division of labor is a basic tenet of
the Administration that income redistribution is not a compelling justification in the 1980s for Federal taxing and spending programs. It
is the Administration's view that the Federal Government can do
more to provide lasting assistance to the disadvantaged by assuring
strong and less inflationary economic growth than through income
transfer programs.
FEDERAL CREDIT ACTIVITY

Although Federal credit programs, unlike direct Federal purchases
of goods and services, do not take resources out of the private sector
of the economy, they do redirect the allocation of resources within
the private sector. In some instances this redirection can improve the
efficiency of the economy if the private market fails to realize the full
range of benefits that would result from extending particular types of
credit. Otherwise, however, Federal credit programs provide funds
for projects that bring a lower rate of return than if those funds had
been lent by the private sector, thereby reducing the overall efficiency of the economy. In addition, many Federal credit activities add to
the Treasury's borrowing requirements.
Three types of Federal and federally assisted loan programs have
proliferated in recent years. First, there are direct loans by both onbudget and off-budget agencies, which amounted to an estimated
$26.1 billion in net lending in 1981. Direct lending activity includes
credit extensions by such agencies as the Export-Import Bank and




92

the Small Business Administration. These loans must be financed by
Treasury borrowing from the public if tax receipts are not sufficient
to cover them. At one time the unified budget deficit reflected the outlays of most of these direct Federal lending programs, but in recent years
borrowing to supply the loan programs of off-budget Federal entities
has increased dramatically. Most of this borrowing has been undertaken through the Federal Financing Bank which in turn receives its
funds from Treasury borrowing. The Farmers Home Administration
and the Rural Electrification Administration originate the bulk of the
off-budget direct loans.
The effects of direct Federal loan programs on the national allocation of credit depend upon the degree of subsidy involved. When a
loan is subsidized, it is equivalent to providing the loan at market rates
and giving borrowers a cash grant equal to the present value of the
subsidy. The Office of Management and Budget estimates a $14.5
billion present value of subsidy on $57.2 billion in new obligations for
direct Federal loans in 1981.
The second major type of federally related lending activity consists of
loans for which the Federal Government (wholly or partly) guarantees or insures the payment of loan principal or interest. The interest
rate on guaranteed loans is below market rates because Federal participation removes any default risk and because the government promises to pay a share of the interest in some cases. The oldest and best
known examples are FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgages.
However, in recent years Federal guarantees and insurance have increasingly been used outside the housing sector. Net guaranteed and
insured loans amounted to $28.0 billion in 1981. The Office of
Management and Budget has estimated a $4.3 billion present value of
subsidy on $7.8 billion of the most heavily subsidized new guaranteed
and insured loan obligations.
The third major type of loan activity is the lending generated by
government-sponsored but privately owned enterprises, including the
farm credit system, the Federal Home Loan Bank system, the Federal National Mortgage Association, and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. Like federally owned corporations, these sponsored enterprises channel credit to certain sectors of the economy,
primarily through purchases of loans in the private sector. In 1981,
borrowing by federally sponsored agencies amounted to $34.8 billion.
Loans by government-sponsored institutions typically provide a
smaller subsidy to borrowers than either direct Federal loans or guaranteed loans. The subsidy in the former type of loan is created by
the ability to sell the obligations of sponsored agencies at interest
rates only slightly above the rates on comparable U.S. Treasury
issues. In the area of housing it has been estimated that for every $1




93

billion infusion of mortgage credit by sponsored agencies, the stock
of home mortgages has increased* by only $150 million, indicating a
relatively smaller subsidy. The addition to the stock of home mortgages is much smaller than the amount of debt issued by the sponsored
agencies largely because their debt issues draw funds away from thrift
institutions.
As shown in Table 4-3, the importance of Federal credit programs
has greatly increased in recent years. Government redirection of part
of the Nation's credit resources has added to the financing costs borne
by private borrowers who do not receive Federal credit assistance.
TABLE. 4.3—Federal and federally assisted credit program, fiscal years 1970-81
[Billions of dollars, except as noted]
Fiscal years
Item

1970=
74 1

Total funds raised in U.S. credit ma rkets

1975l
79

1980

1981

156.9

Total Federal credit activity as percc nt of total funds raised (percent)

344.7

361.0

42.6

79.9

86.5

2.6
14.4
5.0

Direct loans
Guaranteed loans
Government-sponsored loans....

309.4

22,0

Total Federal credit activity

14.9
14.8
12.9

24.2
31.6
24.1

26.1
28.0
32.4

14.0

13.8

23.2

24.0

Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

This, in turn, leads to reduced demand for credit by unassisted borrowers. Increasingly, therefore, political judgments, rather than marketplace judgments, have been responsible for allocating the supply of
credit. As the discipline of the marketplace is replaced by the political
process, less efficient economic activities are financed, and productivity
in the economy declines.
The Administration is committed to reducing Federal credit programs. A plan for reducing new Federal loan guarantee commit-




94

ments by $20.3 billion for the 1982 fiscal year is already in place.
Further actions are being proposed to reduce Federal and federally
assisted credit commitments in fiscal 1983 and 1984. In addition, the
Administration strongly supports efforts to formalize a Federal credit
budget and to incorporate it into the budget process.
FEDERAL DEFICITS IN PERSPECTIVE
The President and the Congress together determine the annual
level of government spending and tax rates. These decisions, when
carried out in the context of prevailing economic conditions, determine the size of the Federal budget deficit. The deficit cannot be
known in advance; it can only be projected using assumptions about
the future course of the economy. During the last year, better-thanexpected progress on inflation has reduced taxable income, slowing
the growth of revenues below earlier projections. The recession has
temporarily slowed the growth of the tax base while increasing outlays for employment-related programs. In addition, the projected decline in inflation increases the projected deficit because the associated reduction in revenue growth precedes the later reduction in
spending growth, largely as a result of the indexing of government
programs.
All these factors together have contributed to projected deficits.
Thus, the fiscal 1983 Budget projects the unified Federal deficit at
$98.6 billion in fiscal 1982, $91.5 billion in 1983, and $82.9 billion
in 1984.
WHY DEFICITS MATTER

The Administration is strongly committed to reducing the projected
deficits in the years ahead. A variety of economic reasons, as well as
considerations of practical policymaking, make deficits a cause for
continuing concern. In particular, the magnitude of the projected
deficits demands attention to their current and prospective economic
impacts.
Financing a budget deficit may draw on private saving and foreign
capital inflows that otherwise would be available to the private sector.
The Federal Government's demand for funds is insensitive to
changes in interest rates—that is, the Treasury will raise the funds
that it requires regardless of interest rates. Weak and marginal borrowers may be "rationed" out of the market by higher interest rates
unless saving flows are adequate.
The impact of a specific deficit will vary, however, depending on
the conditions that lead to it. For example, during a recession—as
now exists—the borrowing requirements of business and consumers
tend to be relatively small. At such a time a given deficit can be fi-




95

nanced with less pressure on interest rates than during a period of
growth, when business and consumer demands for credit are increasing. This is why it is important for the government to reduce the
budget deficit in fiscal 1983 and beyond, a period of anticipated
rapid economic growth when private investment demands are expected to rise substantially.
The impact of a deficit of a given size will also depend on the
extent of private saving in the economy. An economy with a higher
saving rate can absorb the demands of public sector borrowing more
easily than one with lower saving and still accommodate the needs of
private borrowers. Much of the Administration's tax program is designed to increase the private saving of the Nation. As a consequence, both public and private borrowing will be accommodated
more easily.
A higher volume of Federal borrowing to finance deficits makes
the task of the Federal Reserve System more difficult when it is following a policy of monetary restraint. However, maintenance of monetary restraint is a key part of the Administration's program and
hence the potentially inflationary effects of monetizing the Federal
deficit will not be realized.
Continued budget deficits may generate uncertainty about the ability of government to control spending. Any increases in interest rates
which reflect this uncertainty, in turn, will tend to increase further
the size of the deficit. In contrast, the maintenance of a long-term
policy to reduce the size of budget deficits—the policy of the Administration—will tend to counterbalance the pressures for further increases in government spending.
MEASURING THE DEFICIT

It is important to recognize that there are several measures of the
deficit. The unified deficit, the figure generally cited as "the deficit,"
includes only the deficit arising from on-budget expenditures. But
the Federal Government borrows to finance off-budget activities as
well. Including off-budget activities, the Federal deficit for fiscal 1985
is projected to be $107 billion.
Of course, the Federal Government constitutes only one part of
the public sector; State and local budgets affect the economy in a
fashion similar to the Federal budget. Given the large transfers of
federally raised funds to State and local budgets, Federal, State, and
local deficits should be considered jointly. Because the other levels of
government have been accumulating funds to meet employee pension obligations, their budgets tend to be in current surplus (although some States and localities are generating unfunded liabilities
for future retirement payments). In calendar year 1981, when the
Federal Government reported a total deficit of $62 billion (on the




96

national income and product accounts basis), the State and local sector
showed a surplus of $37 billion. A broader perspective on the Federal
debt is contained in the appendix to this chapter.
Regardless of how inclusive the definition of the deficit, it is not
only the annual deficit that affects the economy but also the trend in
deficits over the business cycle and beyond. Because of the structure
of certain spending and tax programs, deficits tend to vary inversely
with the economy. To some extent, deficits that are generated when
the economy is weak can be made up when the economy is strong. It
is the trend of deficits that serves as an indicator of fiscal discipline.
The relative size of the deficit is far more important than the dollar
magnitude. To the extent that deficits affect the economy, the effects
of a given deficit will be relatively small in a large economy and large
in a small economy. From an historical perspective, the projected
budget deficits for fiscal years 1982-1984 are clearly substantial,
yet they are not unprecedented when measured against the size of
the economy. In recent years only the fiscal 1976 deficit was larger,
as a share of GNP, than the projected deficit for fiscal 1982, as Table
4-4 indicates. However, the ratio is projected to decline fairly rapidly
so that by 1985 the deficit, relative to GNP, will be below the average
for the decade of the 1970s.
In view of concern over the current projections of a large deficit
during economic recovery in 1982, it is worth noting that the 1976
deficit also occurred during a period of economic recovery. In the
four quarters ending in June 1976, nominal GNP rose 12 percent,
real output gained 6 percent, and interest rates were essentially unchanged.
AN ANALYSIS OF DEFICITS AND DEBT FINANCING

A given deficit is consistent with different levels of spending and
taxes. Even if economic conditions do not change, a deficit may increase because spending is increased and tax rates are not increased
to yield the necessary added revenues, or because spending is unchanged but tax rates are reduced, or because spending is reduced
but lower tax rates reduce revenues by a greater amount.
These three circumstances may yield the same deficit but have
quite different effects. The effects will depend on the timing, level,
and composition of government spending as well as the means used
to pay for that spending. The spending imposes a cost on the economy by taking resources away from private use. As discussed earlier,
government spending may augment or it may substitute for private
spending. It will therefore alter decisions about private spending.
Each of the methods of financing spending imposes costs in addition
to the simple transfer of resources from the private sector to the




97

TABLE 4-4.—-Total Federal budget and off-budget surplus or deficit and gross national product, fiscal
years 1958-87
[Amounts in billion of dollars]
Total Federal budget and
off-budget surplus or
deftcit (-)

Fiscal year

Amount

-2.9
-=12.9

1958
1959
I960 .
1961
1962
1963
1964. .

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

As percent
of GNP

...

-0.7
-2.7

.3
-3.4
-7.1
-4.8
-5.9

.1
= .7
-1.3

-7.0
= .2

-1.6
= 3.8
=8,7
-25.2
3.2

— 11

=2.8
-23.0
-23.4
-14.9
-6.1

= .3
-2.2
-2.1
-1.2
-.4

-^53.2
-73.7
-53.6
-59.2
-40.2

-3.6
-4,5
-2.9
-2,8
-1.7

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

= 73.8
= 78.9
= 118.3
-107.2
-97.2

-2.9
-2.8
-3.8
-3.1
-2.6

1985
1986
1987

=82.8
-77.0
-62.5

-2.0
-1.7
-1.3

1970
1971
1972.
1973
1974

...
..

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

. . . .
...

..

-s!o

.4

1
Estimates.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of the Treasury, Office of Management and
Budget, and Council of Economic Advisers,

public sector. The manner of financing, like the type of government
spending, will alter the incentives which determine private resource
allocation and hence may reduce economic efficiency.
If the government wants to pay for its spending on a current basis,
it can set tax rates so that revenues equal outlays. As discussed in
Chapter 5, however, the distorting effects of the tax system will reduce
total output, now and in the future. At recent marginal tax rates the
associated cost may be quite high.
If the government issues bonds instead of raising taxes, it must pay
interest on the added debt. Furthermore, government debt-creation
can impose added costs by absorbing private saving and hence reducing growth. Economic growth will not be reduced to the extent that
an increase in private saving offsets the decline in government saving
measured by growing Federal indebtedness. Private saving may increase, for example, if households anticipate that their future taxes




98

will increase and they respond by setting aside additional saving to
pay for the expected increase in tax liabilities. Since individuals*
saving also tends to be affected by what services they perceive they are
getting from the government, the composition of government spending associated with the deficit will play a key role in determining the
response of saving.
Distortions may also occur in the allocation of resources if the government chooses to finance deficits by adding excessively to the
monetary base. This burdens the economy with inflation in ways discussed in Chapter 3.
Whichever approach, or combination of approaches, the government chooses to pay for its spending, it cannot avoid the reality that
government spending, while it may confer benefits on the economy,
also imposes costs. The choice among financing mechanisms depends on which is the least-cost approach, or on which approach imposes the most appropriate patterns of costs on the economy over
time.
Evaluating these costs is not a simple matter. Since deficits affect
expectations about the future course of economic policies, only part
of the effect of a deficit is an immediate consequence of what the increases in debt do to markets. Deficits also work indirectly through
the changes they produce in individual expectations and the resultant
changes in their behavior. Neither the direct effect nor the effect on
expectations is readily observable. In addition, analysts differ in their
views about the relative effects of different conditions on inflation,
investment, and economic growth. Unless these differences in opinion
are recognized, debates that ostensibly focus on the deficit often mask
broader, underlying debates on how the economy works.
Deficits and Inflation

As discussed in Chapter 3, it is now generally agreed that continued excessive growth in the money supply will cause sustained inflation. Thus, deficits financed by money creation will have persistent
inflationary consequences.
Additional government debt might also raise the price level
through its impact on desired money balances. If the increased
supply of government bonds raises interest rates, households and
firms will respond by reducing their money balances and increasing
total nominal spending. This implies an increase in velocity. Unless the
monetary authorities offset the higher velocity by reducing the monetary base, both the price level and output will rise in the short run,
although the mix of increases in the price level and in output is
indeterminate. To the extent workers and firms believe that




deficits are inflationary, however, and bargain accordingly, the relative effects on the price level will be correspondingly larger.
The magnitude of the increase in aggregate demand that results
from added government debt will depend both on the responsiveness
of money demand to interest rates and on the size of the increase in
interest rates. For the former, empirical studies consistently show the
demand for money to be only weakly responsive to interest rates, so
that any given increase in interest rates will result in a relatively small
increase in nominal spending.
As to the size of the increase in interest rates resulting from
the added debt, the evidence is less clear cut. There are two forces
moderating any increase. First, market interest rates equate the
demand for financial assets with their supply. In any
given year, added debt represents only a small increment to the total
stock of government debt, and is also small by comparison with the
market value of other assets in the economy. Second, a higher interest rate today means that saving is more attractive and current consumption relatively less attractive. Thus, the effect of additional government debt on interest rates will tend to be moderated by an increase in the flow of private saving attracted by the higher rates.
On the other hand, two factors may add to the increase in interest
rates. If participants in financial markets believe that deficits are
inflationary, long-term bond rates may include an additional inflation
premium in response to larger deficits. The incremental uncertainty
caused by deficits may also increase real interest rates. This results in
large measure from the past history of discretionary, countercyclical
policies. The prospect of large deficits contributed to uncertainty in
the financial markets in 1981 and may have raised market interest rates
to a higher level than they otherwise would have been.
If added debt does raise the price level through its effect on desired money balances, this is not equivalent to continued inflation.
For the price level to increase in a sustained fashion, the annual increments to government debt would have to grow continually at a
rate faster than the growth of the economy. Thus, deficits will be inflationary only if the monetary authorities monetize the debt or if the
added debt continually grows as a share of GNP. This is precisely
why the Administration is determined to reduce the budget deficit in
fiscal 1983 and beyond. The maintenance of monetary restraint will
ensure that deficits will not be monetized and that the potentially inflationary effects that might otherwise result from government borrowing will not be realized.
Debt Financing, Crowding Out, and Growth

It has been argued that net government borrowing may preempt
credit that otherwise would have been used to finance private investment. Unless the supply of private saving expands to provide com-




100

pletely for the increased government borrowing, thereby preventing
a rise in real interest rates, the additional government debt will tend
to deter some private investment. Some saving could also come from
abroad. If international credit flows respond sufficiently to only
slightly higher interest rates, significant crowding out of U.S. private
investment may be prevented.
When private saving rates are relatively high (perhaps because of a
tax system that fosters saving rather than consumption), a larger deficit can be accommodated more easily than if saving rates are low. In
recent years, for example, Japan and a number of Western European
nations have experienced larger budget deficits (measured as a percent of their Gross Domestic Product) than has the United States. As
a result of higher rates of saving, however, their ratios of private investment to GNP have also been higher. As discussed in Chapter 5, a
dominant thrust of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 is to
provide increased incentives to household and business saving.
Any current increase in government debt leaves future generations
facing either a higher tax bill or lower government services, or a
combination of the two, than would otherwise have prevailed. This
reduces their economic well-being in two ways. First, if current generations do not provide their successors with the resources to pay for
the accumulated debt, current deficits make future generations worse
off. But even if later generations inherit the additional resources to
meet the tax bill, the tax revenues are likely to be collected in ways
that distort their economic choices and impair the efficient operation
of their economy. There is, then a tradeoff between these later distortions and the distortions from taxing now. Again, a choice of the
less costly alternative must be made. In the case of government
spending in war time, for example, it has long been recognized that
the cost of taxing all at once may be significantly larger than the cost
of issuing debt and paying the debt with taxes spread over many
years.
THE DEFICIT AND POLITICS OF THE BUDGET

Perhaps the most damaging effects of deficits are not directly economic but result from the political process. There are many advocates for government spending because the beneficiaries of spending
have an interest in promoting it. At the same time, those who pay for
additional government spending through taxes have an interest in
holding taxes down. But the interests of future taxpayers are not well
represented in our political process. Deficit spending allows government to be financed in a way that is almost invisible to the taxpayer,
and the pull and tug of the political process may result in more government spending than is generally desired. To counteract this tend-




101

ency, many have argued that policymakers ought to follow a rule—
such as balancing the budget each year (that is, financing it only
through taxes) or limiting Federal revenues to a fixed percent of
GNP—to restrain the tendency toward excessive government spending.
Perhaps the most useful and practical of these rules is the simplest
rule: balance the budget. Even this needs to be seen as a long-run
rule, however, since the business cycle does cause variations that are
difficult to calculate and offset. Furthermore, a strategy of reducing
taxes in advance of spending cuts implies that it will take some time
to achieve the desired level of deficits. Enforcing a trend toward a
balanced budget would impose the fiscal discipline necessary to restrain the growth of government and send a message of governmental restraint to private individuals who can incorporate this essential
information into their planning.
In sum, government spending can never be costless. Although the
government can use direct taxes, debt finance, or money creation to
pay its bills, each imposes costs on the economy. The goal of fiscal
policy is to achieve the mix of financing that minimizes these costs.
Given the high cost of further direct taxes on capital and labor
income, and the high costs imposed on society by excessive expansion
of the monetary base, the Administration has chosen what it views at
this time as the least costly means of financing government spending.
But its current actions are an essential part of a long-term strategy of
reducing the scope of the Federal Government. To achieve this end,
the Administration will continue to enforce a trend toward a balanced budget.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 4

A BROADER PERSPECTIVE ON THE FEDERAL DEBT
The Federal debt is the sum of past budget deficits—the cumulative excess of past spending over past tax receipts. As discussed in
Chapter 4, increases in government debt can alter the Nation's rate
of capital formation as well as real interest rates. Deficits can also influence the distribution across generations of the burden of paying
for government spending.
This appendix discusses different measures of the Federal Government's debt. The broadest measure first subtracts the government's
assets from its liabilities to determine the government's net liabilities.
It uses market prices rather than book values of those assets and
takes account of the erosion of the real value of the debt through inflation by measuring net liabilities in constant dollars rather than current dollars. This measure of government debt also includes most of
the implicit liabilities of the social security system. Table 4-5 pre-




102

sents estimates of these measures over time in constant (1980) dollars.
In 1980 the book value of the financial liabilities of the U.S. Government and its' credit agencies equaled $1.046 trillion, of which approximately two-thirds was privately held. Because the book value
does not change as interest rates fluctuate, the market value is a
better measure of the claim on tax resources that would be needed to
pay off the outstanding debt. The market value in 1980 was $981 billion, $65 billion less than the gross book liability.
Although government debt increases when spending exceeds tax
revenues, some of that spending purchases assets that should be considered as well, To the extent that the government has marketable
assets—financial assets in particular, such as gold, U.S. Government
securities, and mortgages—these assets could be sold to finance its
expenditures and thus obviate (at least for a while) the need for
taxes. In 1980 the market value of the government's financial liabilities less the market value of its financial assets equaled $450 billion.
Valuing tangible assets is particularly difficult. The conventional
approach is to value government buildings, highways, dams, etc., on
a depreciated cost basis, although this value may differ substantially
from the asset's value to the economy. Although certain tangible
assets may not be marketable, they provide a stream of services that
would otherwise have to be purchased through additional taxes. One
private estimate, presented in Table 4-5, values the government's
tangible assets—reproducible capital plus land—at $727 billion. This
estimate does not include the value of mineral resources on Federal
property. Mineral wealth is especially difficult to estimate since it can
change both with fluctuations in the prices of minerals and with new
information on the size of the mineral reserves. In light of these problems, estimates of the replacement cost of the government's net tangible assets should be viewed with caution.
Government debt issued by the Treasury means delaying taxation
to pay for government expenditures. The purchasers of official government debt are not adversely affected by these transactions, but
future generations may be if they have to reduce government services
or pay higher taxes to meet interest payments on the accumulated
debt. If crowding out also occurs future generations will have a
smaller capital stock with which to produce goods and services.
A similar delay in taxation occurs in the case of implicit debt associated with the social security system and the civil service and military
retirement programs. The social security system is financed on a
"pay as you go" basis; the program collects money from younger
people to pay retirement and other benefits to older people and




103

other beneficiaries. Unlike other taxes, which reduce lifetime income,
some economists view social security "tax" contributions as purchases of implicit government pledges of similar benefits in the
future. The contributions do not cover both current outlays and the
expected future benefits. In this manner the levying of taxes to cover
these future benefits is delayed. Hence, succeeding generations may
end up paying for these implicit shortfalls by receiving a lower rate
TABLE 4-5.—Illustrative measures of Federal Government's net liabilities, 1950-80
[Billions of 1980 dollars]

Year

Book value
of gross
financial
liabilities'

Market
value of
gross
financial
liabilities2

Market
value of net
financial 3
liabilities

Replacement value
of tangible
assets4

Value of
unfunded
social
security
retirement
liabilities3

Total net
liabilities
including
social
security

retirement
liabilities ®

1950
1951
1952 ..
1953
1954

792
750
758
769
767

797
743
753
769
769

650
582
590
605
616

372
370
414
474
523

240
358
611
702
829

564
618
840
889
983

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

752
718
693
710
720

742
696
689
688
686

581
542
535
540
525

549
565
550
549
536

1,054
1,029
1,055
1,238
1,298

1,150
1,069
1,100
1,288
1,340

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

710
728
739
744
752

704
715
733
731
740

536
539
546
535
537

535
537
546
558
567

1,310
1,240
1,288
1,326
1,322

1,363
1,292
1,334
1,349
1,339

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

751
754
768
776
751

730
738
740
744
702

520
516
521
512
464

571
570
579
583
592

1,421
1,492
1,356
1,673
1,576

1,414
1,485
1,352
1,658
1,510

1970
1971
1972
1973 ..
1974

760
776
785
792
782

746
773
773
771
763

491
514
506
465
416

584
578
580
600
621

2,012
2,366
2,504
3,086
3,405

1,982
2,364
2,493
3,013
3,258

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

851
921
961
1,004
1,011

842
933
949
963
962

511
581
587
552
456

613
622
647
676
706

3,629
3,749
4,018

3,580
3,757
4,000

PI

HI

1980

1,046

981

450

727

.

0)

1

The sum of total liabilities of the U.S. Government and federally sponsored credit agencies as reported In the flow of funds
accounts of the Federal Reserve.
2
Estimates of the market, value of liabilities of the U.S. Government and credit agencies prepared by Eisner and Pieper.
3
Estimates by Eisner and Pieper of market value of financial liabilities less market value of financial assets held by the U.S.
Government and credit agencies.
4
Estimates of the replacement value of tangible assets owned by the government prepared by Eisner and Pieper. Total
includes land as well as depreciable assets.
s
Estimate of unfunded social security retirement liabilities by Leimer and Lesnoy. This series assumes social security benefits
kept pace with income growth and uses the legislated social security taxes of the period. Social security unfunded retirement
liabilities equals the estimated present value of future retirement benefits less future taxes for the adult population less the
value of the OASI trust fund.
11
Total net liabilities equals the market value of net financial liabilities plus the Leimer and Lesnoy estimated unfunded social
security liabilities less U.S. Government tangible assets plus the OASI trust fund.
7
Not available.
Note.—Data converted to 1980 dollars using GNP implicit price deflator.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Robert
Eisner and Paul Pieper, "Government Net Worth: Assets, Liabilities and Revaluations" (1982); and Dean Leimer and Selig Lesnoy,
"Social Security and Private Saving: A Reexamination of the Time Series Evidence Using Alternative Social Security Wealth
Variables" (1980).




104

of return on their contributions to social security than they would, on
average, have received on money invested elsewhere.
There are important differences, however, between implicit and explicit debt. These implicit promises to pay social security benefits are
not legal commitments; as a consequence, they have a different legal
standing from explicit forms of government debt. Social security
benefits can be, and have been, changed. Although the social security
system has become an enduring feature of U.S. society, and sizable
social security benefits will be paid to current generations when they
retire, the amount of those benefits cannot be predicted with certainty. In addition, most individuals do not know precisely the retirement
benefits to which they would be entitled-under existing law. A given
amount of implicit liabilities is, therefore, likely to reduce
saving by a smaller amount than would the same amount of explicit
debt.
Social security and Federal employee retirement programs are not
the only implicit future liabilities that the Federal Government is
firmly committed to pay. The Department of the Treasury lists three
categories of financial commitments that are not fixed, legally binding liabilities: undelivered orders, long-term contracts, and contingencies. These vary in the likelihood that they will become legal obligations and in the time when they are apt to mature into liabilities.
The implicit -pension liabilities are by far the largest component in
any of these categories. Although there is no single correct way to
measure total implicit and explicit government liabilities, one reasonable approach would be to separate other nonbinding commitments
from the unfunded social security and other pension liabilities because of their size and their possible effects on household saving.
The data presented in Table 4-5 are rough but reasonable illustrations that are useful in examining trends and making general comparisons. Tangible assets are valued at replacement cost, since
market values are not available; the replacement costs of the government's tangible assets, however, can vary substantially from their potential market value, which is ultimately the measure of interest in
terms of the broader concept of debt described here. Estimates of
the unfunded implicit retirement liabilities are extremely sensitive to
assumptions concerning real interest rates, future birth, death, and
immigration rates, labor force participation rates, and benefit to
earnings ratios. The unofficial figures reported in Table 4-5 as estimates of social security's unfunded retirement liabilities include
types of benefits that represent about two-thirds of total social security
unfunded liabilities.
While actuaries of the social security, civil service, and military retirement systems have made recent estimates of their unfunded liabilities that range from $3.5 to $6.5 trillion, depending on the interest rate




105

assumed in the calculations, they have no historical data that could
be included in this table. The estimates in the table refer to unfunded social security retirement liabilities associated with workers and
retirees currently in the social security system. These figures do not
include either expected future benefit payments to or future tax receipts from generations not yet in the system. Hence, these estimates
reflect a snapshot of the system at one point in time in order to
evaluate the current net claims against it, that is, the current trust
fund that would be necessary to fully fund the system.
The first two columns of Table 4-5 compare the government's
gross financial liabilities in 1980 dollars, measured at book and
market values, for the years 1950 through 1980. While the columns
are generally quite similar in many years, the difference in these
values has been growing recently.
Column 3 presents the market value, in constant 1980 dollars, of
the Federal Government's net financial liabilities. The government's
real financial debt in 1980 equaled $450 billion, having fallen fairly
steadily from $650 billion in 1950.
Simultaneous with this decline in real net financial debt has been
an increase in the value of the government's tangible assets, measured at replacement cost, from $372 billion in 1950 to $727 billion
in 1980.
While these components of the broader concept of government
debt suggest an improving fiscal position, the sixth column of Table
4-5 suggests that Federal debt, broadly defined, has increased enormously over the past three decades. While the constant dollar market
value of financial liabilities only rose from $797 billion in 1950 to
$949 billion in 1977, unfunded social security retirement debt, according to this estimate, rose from $240 billion in 1950 to over $4
trillion by 1977. In 1981, actuaries of the social security system officially estimated the system's total unfunded liabilities to be $5.9 trillion.
Broadly defined, government debt is large relative to total household net worth, even when household net worth is also broadly defined to include expected claims to future retirement benefits net of
future contributions to these retirement systems for individuals currently in social security. Table 4-6 presents the ratio of Federal Government total net liabilities to this broad measure of household
wealth. The ratio equaled 0.17 in 1950 and rose to 0.35 by 1977.
The table also presents the ratio of unfunded social security retirement liabilities to the estimate of total Federal net liabilities. In 1950,
this ratio was less than one-half; by 1977 the unfunded social security
retirement liabilities represented almost all of total Federal Government net liabilities.




106

TABLE 4-6.—Comparisons of total measured Federal Government's indebtedness, unfunded social
security retirement liabilities, and household wealth, 1950-77
[Ratio]
Ratio of Federal
Government's total net
liabilities (including
social security
retirement liabilities) to
household wealth

Year

1950.
1951
1952
1953
1954

0.166
.172
212
.217

.

218
231

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

.210
.219
.230

231

0.426
.579
.727
.790
.843
.917
.962
.959
.961
.969

.212
.202

.961
.959
.965
.983
.988

.201
.210
.183
.203
193

1.005
1.005
1.002
1.009
1.044

.241
.267
.265
.304
.326

1.015
1.001
1.005
1.024
1.045

.344

1.014
.998
1005

.234
.211

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

220

1965
1966.
1967
1968
1969

.

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975.
1976
1977

Ratio of unfunded social
security retirement
liabilities to total net
liabilities

.
.

. . .

...

342
350

Note.—Federal Government's total net liabilities equals the market value of net financial liabilities plus estimated unfunded
social security retirement liabilities less U.S. Government tangible assets plus the OASI trust fund. Tangible assets are valued at
replacement cost. Net financial liabilities are valued at market prices. These estimates include liabilities of the U.S. Treasury
held by the OASI.
Unfunded social security retirement liabilities equals the present value of projected retirement benefits less the present value
of projected tax contributions to social security less the value of the OASI trust fund. Retirement benefits and tax contributions
are projected for the adult population separately for each year from 1950 through 1977.
Household net worth as estimated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System plus unofficial estimates of social
security retirement wealth prepared by Leimer and Lesnoy.
Sources.- Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Robert
Eisner and Paul Pieper, "Government Net Worth; Assets, Liabilities and Revaluations" (1982); and Dean Leimer and Selig Lesnoy,
"Social Security and Private Saving: A Reexamination of the Time Series Evidence Using Alternative Social Security Wealth
Variables" (1980).

Conclusion

These adjustments to the traditional book value measure of government liabilities put projected official government deficits in some
perspective. When government's explicit debt is adjusted to take account of inflation and assets, its real net liabilities show a decline
over the last twenty years. Official deficits that merely offset the devaluation of the debt due to inflation or that finance the purchase of
assets do not increase the government's claim on private resources.
Since 1960, however, implicit liabilities have grown considerably so
that by some estimates they greatly overshadow the explicit liabilities.
Under the broader measure that includes implicit debt, total Federal
debt tripled between 1967 and 1977. Compared to historical in-




107

creases in the broad measure of government debt, the unified deficits
projected for the 1980s are small. If the effect of implicit liabilities
on economic behavior is similar to the effect of explicit liabilities, the
effects of the official projected deficits on national investment and
real interest rates would be small relative to the impact of the accumulation of total explicit and implicit debt over the last 20 years.
Thus, when inflation, government holdings of assets, and implicit
debt are taken into account in measuring Federal debt, government
deficits in the range of those projected for the 1980s will add only
marginally to the burden of the debt.




108

CHAPTER 5

Tax Policy and Economic Growth
THE ADMINISTRATION, in cooperation with the Congress,
brought about a fundamental change in Federal tax policy in 1981.
The new policy involves far more than simply reducing tax burdens.
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 has changed the basic character of the tax system by shifting the burden of taxation away from
capital income, thereby providing substantially greater incentives for
capital investments and personal saving.
This tax policy is a sharp break from the policies of the recent
past. It reflects a different understanding of the way tax policy affects
the U.S. economy. This chapter provides a framework for analyzing
the effects of the Administration's tax policy on the economy. The
Administration's fiscal policy has two key characteristics. First, the
Administration views the principal fiscal policy instruments—spending, taxing, and deficit—chiefly in terms of their impact on the individual decisions of households and businesses, since it is these decisions that ultimately generate employment and growth.
The second key element that distinguishes current policies from
those of the past is that they are fundamentally long term in nature.
Economic growth is a long-run process that is determined by technological change and the supply and allocation of such productive factors as raw materials, labor, and capital. Households and businesses
look to the future in making current economic decisions. The government has some direct influence on factor inputs, but its main influence is through the indirect and long-term incentives it provides
to work and save.
The fact that households and businesses make long-term as well as
day-to-day decisions underscores the importance of consistency in
government policy. Frequent changes in policy generate uncertainty
about the probable duration of current policies and jeopardize the
chances that any particular policy will succeed. Since the long run is
simply a sequence of short runs, short-run policies that deviate from
long-run goals ultimately mean abandoning long-run goals. The current economic policies, more than those of any recent Administration, are policies for the long term.




109

Fiscal policy involves three interrelated choices. One is choosing an
expenditure policy—how much to spend, and what kind of expenditures to make. The second is taxation—how much to collect, and
which tax instruments to use, including implicit taxation through the
creation of money, to raise revenues. The third, deficit policy, involves deciding on the size and distribution of the deficit over time;
that is, the difference in the time pattern of receipts and expenditures.
The governments long-term budget constraint provides a framework for considering the coordination of fiscal and monetary policy,
for understanding the impact of deficits on economic growth, and for
discussing the allocation across generations of the burden of taxation. The American people must eventually pay for what the government spends. While the government can borrow from the private
sector to delay payment for its spending on consumption and transfer payments, such borrowing is subject to a limit. Eventually the
government must either reduce spending or raise tax revenues to pay
the interest payments on past accumulations of debt. When the government borrows, and thereby delays levying taxes to pay for its current spending, it shifts the burden of paying for its current spending
to future generations.
The government uses explicit taxation, such as personal and corporate income taxes, to raise revenue. As will be shown in this chapter, it also raises revenue with implicit taxes. By increasing the supply
of money, for example, the Federal Government, in effect, creates
some of the dollars needed to pay for current expenditures. But excessive expansion of the money supply results in a rise in prices that
reduces the real value of the existing stock of money held by the private sector. This is one way in which the money creation process
transfers real resources from the private to the public sector. A
second way is that the inflation produced by excessive monetary expansion reduces the real value of the nominal government debt held
by the private sector. By creating inflation the government can pay
off its obligations in cheaper dollars. The purchasers of government
bonds require higher interest rates to compensate for the expected
inflation. Consequently, the government collects real resources from
devaluing the stock of nominal bonds only when the actual inflation
rate exceeds the expected inflation rate. The reduction in the real
value of outstanding debt that results from inflation means that the
government requires less revenue from explicit taxes. The Administration's program is based on a commitment to reducing both explicit and implicit taxation.
The fact that explicit taxation and money creation are alternative
ways to finance government expenditures means that conventional




110

fiscal and monetary policy must be coordinated. If the government
does not pay for its expenditures with explicit taxes, now or in the
future, it will eventually be forced to resort to the printing press,
Hence, the ultimate path to lower explicit and implicit taxation is a
reduction in the growth of government spending.
The Administration^ with the support of the Congress, has significantly changed national macroeconomic policy. However, the ultimate success of the Administration's policy will depend on the
degree to which it is credible in the eyes of the public. Households
will increase their long-term saving and labor supply in response to
lower taxes on capital and labor income if they believe those taxes
will remain low. Workers and employers will agree to moderate
nominal wage increases only to the extent that they believe inflation
will moderate. Businesses will raise prices at slower rates only if they
know that other prices—primarily those of their competitors—are
also increasing at slower rates. In short, the problem of coordinating
the private sector's response to government policy is a problem of
convincing the public that the Federal Government will be steadfast
in maintaining its new economic course.
ECONOMIC GROWTH: PAST PERFORMANCE AND FUTURE
POTENTIAL
Economic growth in the United States has been unusually low
since 1973. Annual growth in real disposable per capita income between 1973 and 1979 slowed to 1.6 percent from an average rate of
3.0 percent in the period 1959 to 1973. The country is now experiencing its third recession since 1973.
Our recent economic performance has been unsatisfactory not only
in comparison with our own postwar experience but also in comparison with the economic performance of our principle trading partners.
In the 1970s, annual rates of increase in real per capita income
among the other developed countries exceeded U.S. rates by nearly
one-fourth. Other indications of economic malaise were declines in
the measured growth rates of total output, capital input, and total
factor productivity. While the period from 1959 to 1973 witnessed
average annual growth rates in real gross national product (GNP) of
4.0 percent, the rate from 1973 to 1979 was only 2.8 percent.
MEASURING GROWTH

Economic growth reflects increases in factor inputs and total factor
productivity. Each of these concepts, as well as output itself, is difficult to quantify. The growth of productivity is not directly observable. Rather, it is a measure of the real economic growth that is not




111

accounted for by growth of the labor force or growth in the capital
stock. Several problems in defining both output and input must
therefore be addressed in any attempt to measure economic growth
and productivity growth.
The measure of output—real GNP—primarily reflects the value
placed on goods and services traded in the marketplace. While pollution control devices and similar capital goods designed to improve
the quality of life are counted in the input figures, the output figures
exclude such items as cleaner air and water. In addition, there are
problems in measuring the true quantities and qualities of some
goods and services. One problem, for example, is determining the
value of government output. Government services are measured in
terms of their labor costs, which may differ substantially from their
marginal value; other government outputs, such as the value of the
services from tangible assets, are not counted in GNP at all.
Quality changes in tangible commodities also present difficult
problems in measuring productivity growth. Today's color television
set technologically surpasses the 1960 model, and 1981 computers
differ greatly from their 1970 predecessors. These changes in quality
are not adequately reflected in government reports of GNP growth.
The procedures followed for some products ignore quality changes,
in effect, counting a computer as a computer regardless of its year of
manufacture.
There are also difficulties in quantifying inputs. Private capital is
typically measured as the sum of accumulated investment expenditures, with allowances for depreciation rather than as the amount of
capital actually in productive use. In addition, the amount of capital
available for use is miscounted when changes in the longevity of investments are not recognized and depreciation allowances are not adjusted accordingly. The statistics on labor input also fail to capture
many changes in the quality and quantity of labor services. There is,
for example, little available data indicating the intensity with which
workers actually work within any given period of time.
ECONOMIC GROWTH—THE HISTORICAL RECORD

Table 5-1 shows the historic growth rates in real gross national
product, capital input, labor input, and total factor productivity. Because of the problems of aggregating private and public outputs and
inputs, the table also shows growth in the private economy, excluding the farm and housing sectors. These data, based on estimates
prepared by the Council of Economic Advisers, are presented for
four periods. Each of these periods encompasses a full economic
cycle.




112

TABLE 5-1.—Average annual growth rates of real GNP, total factor productivity, and factor
inputs, 1959-79
[Percent]
Real GNP

Period

Total factor
productivity

Labor

Capital

Total GNP
1959
1965
1969
1973

to
to
to
to

1965....
1969
1973
1979

1959
1965
1969
1973

to 1965 . .
to 1969
to 1973
to 1979

4.3
4.0
3.6
2.8

2.5
1.9
2.3
1.2

3.8
4.1
3.5
2.5

0.9
1.2
.4
1.6

Private nonfarm nonhousing GNP
. . .

4.4
4.0
4.1
2.8

.

2.5
1.3
2.4
.6

4.1
5.8
4.2
3.2

1.0
1.3
.7
1.8

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis); Gollop, Frank and Jorgenson, Dale, "U.S. Productivity
Growth By Industry 1947-1973"; and Council of Economic Advisers.

Labor input is measured as total annual hours worked, adjusted by
age and sex. In accounting for total GNP growth, labor input includes agricultural workers, government and civilian workers, and
military personnel. Capital input includes government capital plus
private residential, nonresidential, and agricultural capital. For private GNP, factor inputs are taken to be only those specific to this
segment of the economy. The growth rate of total factor productivity
is computed for both total GNP and private GNP assuming a simple
production relationship between output and the supplies of capital
and labor.
Some of the poorer growth performance in recent years reflects a
slowdown in capital formation. The Nation's total net capital stock,
including both private and government capital, but excluding consumer durables, grew at an average annual rate of 3.8 percent during
the period 1965 to 1973, but at only 2.5 percent per year between
1973 and 1979. The slowdown in capital formation was equally pronounced in the private nonfarm nonhousing sector; the 1973 to 1979
growth rate was less than two-thirds of the growth rate from 1965 to
1973. This reduction in the rate of capital formation coincided with a
decline of nearly one-fourth in the Nation's saving rate. The Nation's saving rate is defined here as the share of net national product not consumed by either the government or household sectors.
Household consumption includes purchases of consumer durables.
Since 1973 the growth of labor input has greatly exceeded that experienced in the previous 25 years. Adjusted for age and sex, labor
input grew at only 0.7 percent per year between 1950 and 1973, less
than half the rate of growth between 1973 and 1979. The primary
causes of the acceleration of labor input are the rapid rise in female
employment rates, particularly for women aged 25 to 44, a rise in the




113

population aged 18 to 35, and a leveling off of employment rates for
males aged 65 and over.
Table 5-1 indicates a sizable reduction in productivity growth rates
during the middle and late 1970s in comparison with prior years.
This reduction reflected a combination of a lower growth rate for
other, nonmeasured inputs and a less efficient allocation of resources. Measured productivity growth of total GNP declined by 48
percent between these periods; the decline for the private nonfarm
nonhousing sector was 73 percent. By itself, the slower productivity
growth from 1973 to 1979 can account for a 1.1 percentage point decline in GNP growth from that experienced in the previous 14 years.
This method of growth accounting attributes a 1.8 percentage point
decline in the growth of private nonfarm nonhousing output to the
productivity slowdown between these periods.
EXPLAINING THE PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN

There have been concerted efforts to explain the measured slowdown. These efforts have met with only limited success. While there
are a number of possible explanatory variables, available studies suggest that none separately nor in combination is capable of explaining
more than half of the decline. Capital expenditures for pollution
abatement equipment (which provides no measurable output) appear
responsible for a small fraction of <he slowdown. Another explanation is the growth of productive factors other than capital and labor
that are typically not included as inputs in growth accounting. As a
result, changes in the availability or use of such inputs as energy or
improved land are measured as a change in productivity. The reductions in the use of energy following the 1974 and 1979 oil price
shocks also explain some fraction of the measured productivity slowdown.
Other possible, but less well-documented, explanations include a
decline in economic efficiency associated with higher levels of distorting taxes and increased levels of government regulation. Regulation
of energy in the 1970s was a prime example of the way in which government intervention in the private economy reduced economic efficiency.
Productive efficiency can also be reduced by tax policies that distort the allocation of inputs. Federal subsidies to particular industries
permit them to gain more access to productive inputs than is economically efficient, and differential tax treatment of productive inputs
can also result in economic inefficiency. For example, if the return on
capital expenditures of a particular type, such as spending for equipment, is taxed at a lower rate than the return on other-capital expenditures, such as those for plant, business investment will shift




114

toward the favorably treated input. Hence, the composition of the
capital stock will be altered, and national output would be produced
less efficiently from what would occur with neutral tax treatment.
One-time changes in regulation or the tax structure that impair the
efficient operation of the economy are more likely to produce a onetime decline in output than permanently alter the growth rate.
During the period in which output drops, however, measured productivity growth will be smaller. Hence, the drop in measured productivity shown in Table 5-1 may reflect, in part, the progressive increase in regulation and effective marginal tax rates through the
1970s.
PROSPECTS FOR GROWTH IN THE 1980s

The Administration projects a 3.2 percent annual rate of growth in
real GNP over the period 1979 through 1987. While higher than the
rate from 1974 to 1979, this rate is one-fifth lower than the rate experienced from 1959 to 1973. An increase in the rate of capital formation from the 1973-79 rate of 2.5 percent per year to the 1969-73
rate of 3.5 percent per year would, by itself, raise output growth to
3.1 percent, even if productivity and labor growth rates remained
constant. Given the incentives for capital formation provided by the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, a 3.5 percent growth in capital
over this period seems attainable. Growth in output will also be stimulated by demographic changes. Between 1979 and the mid-1980s a
large segment of the baby-boom generation will become fully integrated into the U.S. labor market. The associated changes in the age and
sex composition of the labor force should, by themselves, account for
a 0.3 percent annual rate of growth in output between 1979 and 1986.
Growth in labor input is expected to exceed this, however, as the Administration's new incentives for additional labor supply lead to longterm increases in employment rates and hours worked.
A growth in total factor productivity greater than the 1.2 percent
experienced from 1973 to 1979 is not essential to meet the Administration's 1987 GNP projection, but it is likely to occur as a result of
the reduction in the general level of distorting taxation and the new
regulatory environment.
INCREASING FACTOR SUPPLY

Current and future supplies of labor and capital to the economy
primarily reflect the long-term supply and demand decisions of
households and firms. At any point in time the aggregate supplies of
labor and capital depend not only on the number and types of workers and the amount of plant and equipment available, but also on the
rate of utilization of these productive factors. People can work and




115

machines can be worked more or less within any period of time. In
the very short run, changes in the supplies of factor services involve
changes in factor utilization rates. In the longer run, the number and
quality of workers, and the quantity and quality of structures and
equipment, are variable.
Near-term increases in the stock of physical capital require producing or importing more capital goods in the current period. But producing more capital goods means producing fewer goods for consumption. Hence, one way to expand the stock of physical capital is
for the household and government sectors to reduce their combined
demands for current consumption. Another way to expand capital
formation is simply to expand current output faster than current consumption. A third way is to import capital.
The Administration seeks to increase capital formation by both
raising the level of output and reducing the fraction of output consumed. A reduction in the Federal Government's own rate of consumption is an important element in this equation, but creating an
environment where households choose to save a larger share of their
income is of paramount importance. The figures in Table 5-2 illustrate this point.
Table 5»2 presents historical data on household and government
consumption rates and the rate of total net national saving. These
consumption and saving rates are useful for portraying aggregate
saving behavior. The household consumption rate is defined as
household (private sector) consumption divided by the difference between net national product and total government consumption. National output less government consumption provides a measure of
the private sector's effective disposable income, because the private
sector must pay for the government's current consumption, either
now or in the future.
TABLE 5-2.—Average annual consumption and saving rates, 1951-80
[Percent of net national product (NNP)]
Total
Government
consumption as
percent of
NNP

Period

Federal
Government
consumption as
percent of
NNP

Household
consumption as
percent of
nongovernmental NNP

Net national
saving as
percent of
NNP

1951=60

141

82

810

164

1961-70

167

83

81 7

152

1971-80

18.9

70

855

117

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Council of Economic Advisers.

Government consumption is defined here as government expenditures on goods and services immediately consumed. Government
purchases of capital goods are not included. The table also indicates




116

average rates by decade of net national saving, defined as net national product less household and government consumption, divided
by net national product.
From the 1960s to the 1970s the Nation's total net saving rate fell
from 15.2 percent to 11.7 percent. Changes in both government and
household consumption rates played a role in reducing the saving
rate, but the changes in the household consumption rate were far
more important. If the rate of household consumption out of total
disposable income—output less government consumption—had not
changed over this period, the Nation's saving rate would have fallen
by only 0.4 percentage point rather than by 3.5 percentage points,
despite an increase in government consumption as a share of net national product from 16.7 to 18.9 percent. Thus, to achieve higher national saving rates it is important to lower the household consumption rate.
There are two ways in which the household consumption rate can
be reduced and the national saving rate increased. One way is for
households to increase total output by supplying more labor without
at the same time increasing current consumption proportionately.
The other is for households to maintain their current supply of labor
(and therefore output) but reduce their levels of consumption. In
either case the household consumption rate falls, and the economy
saves more.
THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF TAX POLICY
In making the decisions that determine national output and capital
formation households consider their options. Each household makes
decisions on consumption, saving, and work based on the household's current and future resources. These include the household's
net worth (the current market value of all financial and real assets
minus liabilities), the household's expected inheritances, the household's expected receipt of government transfer payments, and the
household's human capital endowment. The endowment of human
capital is the present value of after-tax income the household would
earn if it was solely interested in maximizing its labor earnings.
Household choices between consumption and saving and between
work and leisure are influenced by after-tax wage rates and after-tax
rates of return on capital. When the government changes either the
level or the structure of taxes, it ultimately alters household decisions
about consumption, saving, and work effort. All aspects of the tax
system, including both personal and business taxes, influence these
decisions. For example, higher after-tax returns on capital income
make present consumption more expensive than future consumption;




117

forgoing a dollar of consumption today and investing that dollar provides more than a dollar of consumption tomorrow, with the additional amount determined by the after-tax return on the investment.
It is customary to associate taxes on wage income with changes in
incentives to work and to associate taxes on capital income with
changes in incentives to consume or to save. Wage taxes also influence consumption and saving decisions, however, and taxes on capital income influence labor and leisure decisions. Lowering taxes on
capital income raises the after-tax return on that income. The larger
after-tax return effectively lowers the cost of enjoying leisure as well
as consuming in the future relative to the present. Hence, a reduction in taxes on capital income increases the incentive to work now
and can thus stimulate the supply of labor.
U.S. households and businesses face, at best, a highly uncertain
economic environment resulting from continuing changes in preferences, prices, and productivity. Uncertainty with respect to government fiscal and monetary policy increases the uncertainty under
which households make current and future consumption and labor
supply decisions. In such an environment, households may choose to
postpone supplying labor and businesses may decide to postpone
new investment until the economic environment is more settled.
The Administration and the Congress have greatly reduced uncertainty with respect to the tax policy. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of
1981 clearly spells out the major features of the U.S. tax system for the
next several years; the indexation of the Federal income tax slated to
begin in 1985 will reduce the uncertainty associated with inflation
pushing households into higher marginal tax brackets.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE TAX SYSTEM

The United States has a complex tax system that influences the
choices households make between current and future consumption
and current and future work effort. The tax system also influences
the types of investments businesses undertake and the set of commodities households choose to purchase. The Federal personal and
corporate income taxes, the social security program, the welfare
system, and the money creation process all affect the economic behavior of firms and households. This section describes the changes
introduced by the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 to the personal and corporate income tax systems, and discusses the likely effects of these changes on labor supply and saving rates. Tax aspects
of the social security system, the welfare system, and monetary policy
are also addressed.




118

THE PERSONAL INCOME TAX

Last year's tax legislation made three important changes in the
Federal personal income tax. First, marginal tax rates on given levels
of nominal income will be reduced, in three stages, by 23 percent by
1984. Beginning in 1985 the personal income tax structure will be
indexed to inflation. In addition, the top rate on income from capital
was reduced from 70 percent to 50 percent. Table 5-3 presents marginal tax rates (excluding the social security tax on earnings) at
various levels of real income for the next 5 years, based on Administration projections of future inflation. This table also presents the
marginal tax rates that would have occurred in the absence of the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981.
TABLE 5-3.—Comparison of marginal personal income tax rates by real income level under the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 and old law, 1979-86 1
[Percent]
Real income (1979 dollars)

1979

1980

19812

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

Single:
$10,000:
Old law

21

21

21
21

24
22

24
19

24
18

24
18

26
18

30

30

34
34

34
31

34
28

34
26

39
26

39
26

39

39

39
39

44
40

44
36

49
38

49
38

49
34

49

50

50
49

50
50

50
45

50
48

50
48

50
48

$10,000:
Old law
New law

16

16

18
18

18
16

18
15

18
14

18
14

18
14

$20,000:
Old law
New law

21

24

24
24

24
22

28
19

28
22

28
18

28
18

28

32

32
32

32
29

37
26

37
28

37
28

43
28

43

43

43
42

49
44

49
40

49
38

49
38

49
38

New law

$20,000:
Old law
New law

..

$30,000:
Old law
New law
$50,000:
Old law
New law

.

Married, two workers:

$30,000:

Old law
New law

$50,000:
Old law
New law.,
1
Excludes
2

social security taxes and State and local income taxes.
Tax rates for 1981 under new law rounded to nearest whole percent.
Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis.

Two points are clear from this table. First, without the tax cut,
marginal tax rates for low- and middle-income households would
have been 30 percent to 50 percent higher. Second, although the tax
cut will significantly lower marginal tax rates at all levels of income,
tax rates at given levels of real income will decline by much less.
Bracket creep will offset much of the effect of the tax cut between




119

1981 and 1985. Under the Administration's inflation projections,
most households will still face marginal tax rates that are high by historical standards. Table 5-4 presents past and projected marginal tax
rates for households at 3 points in the income distribution from 1965
to 1984. For the projected inflation path, marginal tax rates for
median income households in 1984 will decline to roughly their
1977-80 levels, but will remain considerably above earlier rates.
Thus, despite the substantial reductions introduced by the 1981 tax
cut, most rates in 1984 will remain near the historical high rates on
real income.
TABLE 5-4.—Marginal personal income tax rates for four-person families, selected years, 1965-84 1
[Percent]
Family income
Year

One-half
median income

Median income

Twice median
income

1965

14

17

22

1970

15

20

26

1975

17

22

32

1980

18

24

43

Under Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981
1981
1982
1983
1984

17.8
16
15
16

1981
1982
1983
1984

18
18
18
21

27.7
25
23
25

42.5
39
40
38

Under old law

28
28
28
32

43
43
49
49

1
Excludes social security taxes and State and local income taxes.
Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis.

To discuss the effects of the tax cuts on labor supply and saving
decisions, it is necessary to understand the various incentives on
household behavior created by reductions in marginal tax rates. Cutting tax rates increases an individual's after-tax wage rate. With the
Federal Government taking a smaller share of the last dollar of earnings, the return to an individual from an extra hour of work or a
more demanding job will increase, strengthening the incentive to
work more hours, or accept a more demanding job.
Similarly, cutting tax rates increases after-tax interest rates. The
higher the after-tax interest rate, the higher the level of future consumption possible for a given reduction of current consumption. The
increase in after-tax interest rates resulting from the tax cuts will thus
tend to decrease present consumption, including consumption of leisure as well as goods. In other words, households will tend both to
work more and to save more.




120

Operating in the other direction is the effect of the tax cut on
household income. As marginal tax rates fall, the total tax bill paid
by a household will fall and its after-tax income will rise. As disposable incomes rise, both in the present and in the future, consumption
of both goods and leisure will rise. Thus the effect of increased
income will tend to decrease saving and decrease work effort. The
net effect of the tax cut on saving and labor supply will vary according to household circumstances. The preponderance of empirical
studies suggests that the labor supply effects of a tax cut are small
for married men, somewhat larger for unmarried people, and substantial for married women. The most important effect of these
changes in personal marginal income tax rates may thus be to increase labor force participation rates and hours of work by married
women.
The second important change in the personal income tax introduced by last year's tax legislation was the extension of the opportunity to use Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) to all working
households. Under the new law, each worker may contribute up to
$2,000 to these accounts regardless of whether the worker is already
covered under an employer-sponsored pension plan. One-earner
couples can contribute up to $2,250. IRAs provide two tax advantages to contributors. First, contributions are deductible from taxable
income. Second, returns on IRA investments accumulate tax-free as
long as the funds are not withdrawn from the account. Given the sizable tax savings available from IRAs, the total amount of money invested in them can be expected to rise sharply. Some of this money
will simply be transferred from other types of savings, including
stocks, bonds, and savings accounts. However, for many households
without sufficient liquid assets to transfer to IRAs, the last dollar
contributed to an IRA will correspond to their marginal saving. That
is, the last dollar of current consumption forgone will correspond to
the last dollar invested in an IRA. Since the marginal tax rate on capital income obtained from these accounts is quite low, this provision
is expected to increase the national saving rate as well as contribute
to an increase in the labor supply.
The prospect of moving into higher marginal income tax brackets
biases households away from activities that would generate higher
future incomes. Hence, income tax progressivity encourages current
consumption and leisure and discourages saving for the future. In
the presence of inflation and an unindexed tax system, "bracket
creep" strengthens this disincentive for generating future income. Indexation of the tax system in 1985 will, therefore, provide further
stimulus for saving and economic growth.




121

Other changes in the tax code will also provide taxpayers with
greater incentives to join the work force. The new law provides married couples filing a joint 1982 return with a 5 percent deduction in
1982 and a 10 percent deduction starting in 1983 on the earnings up
to $30,000 of the lower earning spouse. If the couple's marginal tax
rate would otherwise be 30 percent, the 10 percent deduction after
1982 will reduce the marginal tax rate on earnings of the second
spouse to 27 percent. The spousal deduction will also place certain
households in lower marginal tax brackets, thus further lowering
marginal tax rates. This change should help sustain the growth of
female labor force participation.
TAXATION OF INCOME FROM BUSINESS INVESTMENT

The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 also made major changes
in the taxation of business income. The most important change is the
more generous treatment of the way in which capital can be depreciated for tax purposes, known as the accelerated cost recovery system
(ACRS). A second change was the introduction of leasing rules that
provide businesses with temporarily low taxable income the same investment incentives as other businesses. A third provision of the act
is an increase in the investment tax credit for some types of equipment. Finally, a fourth provision allows small businesses to expense
up to $5,000 of new investment in 1982 and 1983. The $5,000 limit
will rise to $7,500 in 1984 and 1985, and $10,000 thereafter. These
changes should substantially increase business investment by increasing the after-tax return available on new business projects.
TAX TREATMENT OF DEPRECIABLE PROPERTY

The ACRS will encourage business investment by shortening the
period over which assets can be fully depreciated and by allowing
firms to claim more of the depreciation early in the tax life of the
asset. Before the adoption of ACRS, businesses were permitted to
write off industrial equipment over an average period of 8.6 years.
The ACRS asset life for this equipment is 5 years. For industrial
plant, asset lives have been reduced by 37 percent, from an average
of 23.8 years to 15 years. The ACRS depreciation schedules represent a combination of the declining balance and straightline method
of depreciation through 1984. For 1985 and beyond, declining balance switching to sum of years digits is used. The depreciation
schedules for the years after 1984 provide increasingly more acceleration'of depreciation. The combined result of the ACRS and the
investment tax credit will be a decline in effective tax rates on new
investment over the period 1982 to 1987.




122

Table 5-5 shows historic and projected before-tax real rates of
return in new capital investment required to provide a 4 percent
after-tax real return. This real return is a commonly used analytical
assumption. These numbers reflect the combined effect of the depreciation provisions and the investment tax credit. Historical numbers
are based on historical rates of inflation.. Rates of return in future
years are based on the Administration's inflation projections. A
before tax rate of return of 8 percent, for example, implies an effective tax rate of 50 percent on new investments. The calculations
assume the new investment is equity financed. Hence, the tax advantages from the deduction of interest expense associated with debt financing are not included.
TABLE 5-5.—Real before-tax rate of return required to provide a 4 percent real after-tax return,
1955-86
[Percent]

Period

Construction
machinery

General
industrial
equipment

Trucks,
buses, and
trailers

Industrial
buildings

Commercial
buildings

1955-59

8.9

9.5

108

80

80

1960-64

7.4

7.8

8.7

79

79
76

1965-69

65

6.9

75

76

1970-74

6.6

6.7

76

86

8.4

1975-79

6.1

6.4

76

90

87

1981 . ..

34

35

35

66

62

1982

31

33

31

64

61
6.0

1983

2.9

3.2

3.0

6.4

1984

2.9

3.1

2.9

6.4

60

23

27

26

63

60

22

26

25

63

60

1985

..

1986

Note.—Data for 1955-79 are based on Auerbach and Jorgenson calculations of expected inflation in each year. Data for
1981-86 are based on the Administration's projections of inflation (year-over-year percent change in the GNP implicit price
deflator): 1982, 7,9; 1983, 6.0; 1984, 5.0; 1985, 4.7; 1986, 4.6; and 1987 and beyond, 4.5.
Sources: Auerbach, Alan and Jorgenson, Dale, "Inflation Proof Depreciation of Assets," Harvard Business Review, Sept -Oct
1980 (1955-79), and Council of Economic Advisers (1981-86, based on Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981).

Under the assumptions made here, in comparison with the years
1975 to 1979, the 1982 real before-tax rate of return required to justify a new investment in general industrial equipment has been reduced from 6.4 to 3.3 percent. For investment in plant the required
rate of return estimated here declines from 9.0 to 6.4 percent. The
effective tax rates associated with these numbers decline between 1982
and 1986. This reflects both the more favorable depreciation schedules
after 1984 and projections of continued declines in inflation.
Since depreciation allowances are not indexed, higher rates of inflation will raise effective tax rates. Table 5-6 presents the before-tax
rates of return required in 1986 to provide a 4 percent after-tax




123

return under different assumptions about the rate of inflation prevailing in 1986 and beyond. The table shows that a reduction in inflation
from 8 percent to 5 percent will lower the required before-tax rate of
return from 3.2 percent to 2.7 percent in general industrial equipment and from 6.9 percent to 6.4 percent on plant. Conversely, a
1986 level of inflation of 12 percent would raise required before-tax
rates of return to 3.7 percent for equipment and 7.4 percent for plant.
TABLE 5-6.—Real before-tax rate of return required to provide a 4 percent after-tax return in 1986 at
selected rates of inflation
[Percent]
Inflation rate (percent)
Type of capital

12

8

5
Construction machinery

2.3

2.9

3.7

General industrial equipment

2.7

3.2

3.7

Trucks, buses and trailers

2.5

3.1

3.7

Industrial buildings

6.4

6.9

7.4

Commercial buildings

6.1

6.5

6.9

Source: Council of Economic Advisers.

Tables 5-5 and 5-6 also indicate that the ACRS does not treat all
types of business investment equally. Although favorable to all new
investment, ACRS is relatively more favorable to investment in
equipment. As a consequence, industries for which short-lived equipment represents a large fraction of their total capital will face lower
effective tax rates than industries with a low equipment-intensive capital structure. Table 5-7 presents calculations of industry specific tax
rates on new investment for 1982. There are two sets of numbers;
the first indicates the tax rates that would have prevailed under the
old law, while the second column indicates tax rates in 1982 under
the Accelerated Cost Recovery System.
TABLE 5-7.—Effective

tax rates on new depreciable

assets, selected industries, 1982J

Industry

Old Law

Agriculture
Mining
Primary metals .
Machinery and instruments.
Motor vehicles .
Food
Pulp and paper.
Chemicals.
Petroleum refining.
Transportation services.
Utilities
Communications .
Services and trade

32.7
28.4
34.0
38.2
25.8
44.1
28.5
28.8
35.0
31.0
43.2
39.8

532

1

Industries chosen had at least $5 billion in new investment in 1981.
Note.—Assumes a 4 percent real after-tax rate of return and 8 percent inflation.
Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis.




124

New law

16.6
-3.4

7.5
18.6
-11.3
20.8

.9
8.6
1.1
-2.9
30.6
14.1

371

The table shows substantial reductions in tax rates for all industries, but differences among industries in the rate of tax reduction.
The effect on each industry is different because each industry uses a
different mix of capital. Tax rates vary across industries, from a high
of 37 percent in the services and trade sector to a low of -11 percent in the motor vehicle industry. Effective tax rates on new investment are negative for some industries. The result will be lower total
corporate tax liabilities rather than direct payments by the Treasury.
These differential rates of taxation at the industry level will probably
lead to relatively more investment in industries with lower tax rates.
LEASING PROVISIONS

The ACRS provides the same investment incentives to firms with
taxable income and those with nontaxable income. The leasing provision of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 should enhance efficient allocation of capital across industries and across firms within
the same industry. The fundamental principle underlying the leasing
provisions is that investment incentives should be equal for all businesses in a given industry and across industries; that is, investment
incentives should not favor investment in one firm over another.
Prior to the establishment of these leasing provisions, firms with temporary tax losses (a condition especially characteristic of new enterprises) were often unable to take advantage of investment tax incentives. The reason was that temporarily unprofitable companies had
no taxable income against which to apply the investment tax deductions. As a result, these companies were placed at a relative disadvantage, although the new investment undertaken by these companies
was potentially as profitable as investment undertaken by firms with
temporarily positive profits.
The leasing provisions will permit companies with no current taxable income to take advantage of investment incentives by transferring their tax credits and additional deductions associated with investment to firms with taxable income. For example, American automobile manufacturers who are currently reporting losses will now be
able to take the same advantage of the incentives as more profitable
firms. In the absence of the leasing provisions, investment would
probably be too low in the automobile industry relative to the most
productive mix of investment.
The leasing provisions will also have the advantage of reducing incentives for mergers. Under the old law, companies with positive taxable income had an incentive to merge with companies with tax
losses because these tax losses could be used to offset the parent

125
358-691 0 - 82 - 9 : QL3




company's taxable income. The leasing provisions, by permitting
companies with positive taxable income to effectively purchase the
negative taxable income of other companies, will eliminate this motivation for mergers.
EFFECTS OF TAX ACT ON HOUSING AND CONSUMER DURABLES

The 1981 act will alter the allocation of existing capital and labor
among industries. It will also affect the allocation of new business investment, the fraction of investment allocated to business as opposed
to residential investment, and the division of consumption between
durable commodities—such as residential real estate, automobiles,
and furniture—and nondurable commodities.
The Tax Act improves the attractiveness of business investment
relative to other forms of investment. As relative returns rise for
business investment, financial institutions will tend to increase their
business lending and decrease their consumer and mortgage lending.
Households themselves will tend to lower their investments in these
goods in order to put more of their savings directly into business
capital by purchasing corporate stocks and bonds, or indirectly by
placing their savings with financial institutions who will make these
investments for them. In either case, more money will be channeled
to business investment and less to housing and consumer durables
than would have occurred without the ACRS.
To understand the effects of the new depreciation system on the
consumption of durables versus nondurables, one must first realize
that the implicit price of consuming durable goods is the after-tax
return the owners of these durables would otherwise receive if they
sold these assets and invested the proceeds.
The sizable reductions in tax rates on capital income mean that
real after-tax returns on household saving will be substantially higher
than they have been in the recent past. As a result, the implicit price
of consumer durables has risen, and a long-run shift in demand away
from housing, automobiles, and other consumer durables may result.
While housing and durables provide important service flows, the tax
treatment of service flows from durables may have led to overinvestment in them in the 1970s. Much of the spectacular rise in housing
prices during the last decade was associated with the increasingly
pro-durables bias imbedded in a very inflation-senstive system of capital income taxation. As inflation rose, so did effective taxes on capital income. This rise lowered the relative price of consuming durables because it lowered the opportunity costs of holding these durables. As a result, the demand for consumer durables in general, and
housing in particular, was greatly stimulated. In the short run, housing prices were bid up dramatically, reflecting the tax-induced in-




126

creased demand for housing services. The higher housing prices, in
turn, stimulated construction of new housing, since it increased the
price at which newly constructed houses could be sold.
An offsetting consideration with respect to the durables industries
is the relatively more favorable treatment of the motor vehicle industry under the 1981 Tax Act (Table 5-7). The effective tax rate on the
return to new investment in the motor vehicle industry has been cut
from 26 to — 11 percent.
Another pertinent point is that the tax structure is simply one of
numerous determinants of the demand for different commodities.
The surge in new family formation resulting from the baby-boom of
the 1950s will lead to a strong demand for housing that could well
swamp the effects of the tax change on residential investment. The
same is likely to be true of other durables that are in relatively greater demand by young families setting up a household.
IMPLICIT TAXATION OF LABOR SUPPLY BY THE SOCIAL SECURITY AND
WELFARE SYSTEMS

It is ironic that the social security and welfare programs may,
themselves, contribute to the relatively low income levels of the elderly and the poor. Social security and welfare recipients may well
face the highest marginal tax rates of any members of our society.
These systems provide very small incentives to work. Not surprisingly, therefore, relatively few beneficiaries of these two programs work,
especially at full-time jobs.
There is mounting evidence that the social security earnings test
has contributed significantly to the dramatic increase in early retirement. In 1950 the labor force participation rate of males 65 and over
was 46 percent; today it is only 20 percent. Not only are there fewer
older men working on any given day during the year, but there are
fewer older men who work at any time during the year. The fraction
of men 65 to 69 who are completely retired has risen from 40 percent to 60 percent since 1960. For males 60 to 64 the retirement rate
is now 30 percent, double the 1960 figure of 15 percent. Those older
males who do choose to work are working fewer hours. Since 1967
the fraction of working males 65 and over who work part-time has
increased from one-third to almost one-half. This reduction in work
has occurred despite a substantial increase in the general health of
people in this age group.
The social security earnings test currently reduces benefits by 50
cents for every dollar of earnings above $6,000 and represents a 50
percent implicit tax for workers aged 65 to 72. In combination with
the Federal and State income taxes and the social security payroll
tax, this 50 percent tax on earnings penalizes the work effort of the




127

elderly at rates that can easily exceed 80 percent. These exceedingly
large tax rates extend over a wide range of the typical older worker's
potential supply of labor hours.
Eliminating the earnings test, as has been proposed by the Administration, would unquestionably increase the incomes of older workers as well as generate tax revenues that would offset a portion of the
costs of doing so. Because of impending changes in the demographic
structure of the population, it is important to reverse the trend
toward early retirement. By the year 2025 the proportion of the population age 62 and over will rise to 24.5 percent, compared to 13.6
percent in 1981. The ratio of workers paying social security taxes to
retired beneficiaries will fall from a current level of 3.7 to 2.4. If the
work disincentives for older citizens were reduced, U.S. per capita
income would rise more rapidly and social security's long-run financial position would be improved.
Current provisions of the social security system also generate work
disincentives for a significant fraction of married women. While married women are joining the labor force in increasing numbers, the
typical wife's earnings are still one-third to one-half that of husbands.
Hence, the marginal tax contributions to social security of many
wives will yield them no marginal social security benefits because
they will collect benefits based on their husband's earnings record.
(This applies only to retirement and medicare benefits. A wife who
becomes disabled cannot currently Collect disability benefits based on
her husband's account.) The combined employer-employee retirement and medicare tax rates total 11.75 percent and represent a pure
marginal tax on the work effort of married women. The response to
females to the level of net compensation is estimated to be quite
high. Hence, the bias in the current structure regarding dependent
and survivor benefits may represent a significant disincentive to the
participation of married females in the labor force.
Similar work disincentives potentially reduce the labor supply of
welfare recipients. Welfare recipients do not face a single and easily
understood tax schedule relating their gross earnings to their net disposable income. Instead, they are confronted with eight different and
highly complicated implicit and explicit tax schedules. These include
the work and income tests of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), food stamps, housing assistance, social security insurance and medicaid, the earned income tax credit, the Federal income
tax, and State income taxes. Each of the welfare programs has its
own eligibility requirements, its own definition of income, its own set
of deductions and exclusions, and its own tax rates. These explicit
and implicit tax systems differ across States as well. Even within a
State, implicit tax schedules vary, depending on both the charac-




128

teristics of the recipient and the discretion of the social service
worker. The result of all this is a complex set of uncoordinated rules
and regulations that surely leave welfare recipients confused and dismayed. Past reforms of the system simply added more and more programs, with little emphasis on how the work disincentives of new
programs would interact with those of old programs.
The efficacy of any particular income transfer program cannot be
determined in isolation from the rest of the system. Analyses of marginal tax rates arising from the combined earnings tests of the various welfare programs and the explicit Federal and State tax systems
suggest that typical welfare recipients, namely single mothers with
children, face marginal tax rates in excess of 75 percent. Reductions
in these very high implicit and explicit tax rates might generate a sufficiently large addition to their labor supply to pay for themselves. As
State and local governments assume fuller responsibility for the welfare system, they could effectively offset these high, marginal tax
rates by providing additional work incentives.
As this section has shown, many households still face considerable
work disincentives, despite the substantial changes enacted in the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981. Future reforms of social security and welfare policy should take account of these concerns.
MONETARY POLICY AS A FISCAL INSTRUMENT

The inclusion of monetary policy in a discussion of taxation may
seem out of place, but monetary policy is an important instrument of
taxation in the U.S. economy. Increases in the supply of money raise
revenues for the Federal Government in three ways. First, faster
growth of monetary aggregates leads to higher rates of inflation.
Since the Federal personal income tax will not be indexed until 1985,
inflation will continue to raise real taxes through the process of
"bracket creep." Inflation pushes taxpayers into higher marginal tax
brackets, although their real incomes may not have changed—i.e.,
their increase in nominal income may only have kept pace with inflation. Higher inflation rates also raise effective tax rates on capital
income earned by corporate and noncorporate business (Table 5-6).
This is due to the nonindexation of depreciation allowances, and, in
many cases, the reduction in real tax deductions resulting from
changes in inventories valued at historic rather than current cost. A
reduction in inflation will have the effect of lowering marginal personal income tax rates and effective taxation of capital income.
The second way monetary policy acts as a fiscal instrument involves the interaction between deficit financing by the government
and central bank open market operations. In the past the Treasury
has paid in part for goods and services, by selling bonds to the




129

public. When the Federal Reserve purchases Treasury bonds, it increases the monetary base. The net effect of these'transactions is that
the government acquires goods and services while the private sector
is left holding a larger stock of money. The larger stock of money for
the same amount of goods and services in the economy translates
into a higher price level. The increase in prices then lowers the real
purchasing power of the money held by the private sector, and the
transfer of resources from the private sector to the government is
complete.
A third way in which the government "taxes" the private sector
through expansion of the monetary base is that the ensuing higher
prices devalue nominal outstanding debt. The real capital losses experienced by the private sector on their holdings of outstanding government liabilities correspond to the real capital gains accruing to the
government. Private investors are not, however, so foolish as to purchase government bonds in an inflationary environment without requiring higher interest payments to offset expected real capital losses
on the nominal value of these bonds. Given this fact, the government
collects real revenues from "watering down*' the value of nominal
debt only if the actual inflation rate exceeds the rate expected by the
private sector. Actual rates of inflation in excess of expected rates
appear to have been the case for much of the 1970s.
Standard government accounting procedures fail to record either
the increase in base money or the real capital gains on outstanding
nominal government debt as sources of financing government expenditures. Even when actual inflation equals expected inflation, an
alternative method of bookkeeping would suggest entering the government's real capital gain as revenue, since the higher nominal interest payments required because of expected inflation are entered
on the government's books as current real expenditures. The failure to
use accounting procedures that recognize the impact of inflation disguises the government's actual method of financing its expenditures.
There are a variety of possible ways of analyzing changes in the
government's net liabilities. Table 5-8 presents estimates of changes
in the real market value of outstanding Federal net financial liabilities
from 1966 to 1980. The table relates changes in the Federal Government's real net financial debt (valued at market prices) in 1980 dollars to the differences between its real expenditures and its real
taxes, including taxation associated with money creation.




130

TABLE 5-8.—Sources of changes in Federal Government's real net financial liabilities, 1966-80
[Billions of 1980 dollars]
Sources of Government finances
Year

Expenditures '

Tax revenues 2

Change in
monetary
base 3

Revaluation of
net financial
debt 4

Other revenue
sources plus
statistical
discrepancy5

Change in
Federal
Government's
net financial
liabilities 6

1966
1967
1968
1969

331.9
367.4
388.0
385.1

327.7
337.8
374.9
402.4

9.2
8.3
10.1
6.3

7.9
21.9
24.0
27.4

-3.2
-.4
-7.5
-4.1

-9.7
-.2
-13.5
-47.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

396.3
407.6
433.5
443.5
461.9

372.3
367.0
403.7
434.1
444.2

10.1
13.9
6.0
12.6
9.1

-10.3
12.1
31.7
46.0
55.9

-.2
=-2.8
-.7
-.8
-.5

24.5
17.4
= 7.2
-48.3
-46.8

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

504.0
516.8
534.9
544.9
555.0

406.1
445.6
476.0
510.3
538.9

10.2
8.3
15.0
18.0

10.4

-5.9
.1
57.0
73.7
105.2

-7.V
-6.2
-11.9
-11.1
-11.7

101.5
68.9
-1.1
-46.0
-87.8

1980

602.0

540.9

9.3

57.8

-2.5

-3.4

1

Total expenditures, national income and product accounts (NIPA) basis.
2
Total receipts, NIPA basis, deflated by GNP implicit price deflator.
3
Changes in the monetary base equal the sum of changes in member bank reserves, vault cash of commercial banks, and
currency outside banks, flow of funds accounts.
4
Capital gains accruing to the Federal Government on its net financial liabilities,
5
Other revenue sources include Federal sales of mineral rights and household insurance credits and the surplus of federally
sponsored credit agencies' flow of funds accounts.
6
The value of the Federal Government's net financial liabilities equals total liabilities minus financial assets valued at market
prices. Liabilities of the Treasury held by the Federal Reserve as well as the social security trust funds are excluded from this
series.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Eisner,
Robert and Pieper, Paul, "Government Net Worth: Assets, Liabilities and Revaluations (1982)"; and Council of Economic Advisers.

In terms of this accounting framework, taxes associated with
money creation—changes in the real monetary base and in the real
worth of net financial debt—were quite significant in many of the last
30 years. In 1979, for example, these sources are estimated to have
yielded $115.6 billion of real revenues to the government, or 18.0
percent of total 1979 revenue. According to these calculations, in
1979 the Federal Government's real net financial liabilities declined
by $87.8 billion. In contrast, using the deflated statistics shown in
Table 5-8, the difference between explicit expenditures and explicit
tax revenues, was a $16.1 billion increase in government debt.
The estimates in Table 5-8 show that the Federal Government's
real net financial assets increased in 11 of the 15 years between 1965
and 1980 in part as a result of the use of money creation to finance
its expenditures. Official reports indicated a decline in government
debt only in 1969. Given the financial markets' interests in increases
in government debt, this approach to analyzing the Federal Government's financial status should be of interest.
While this concept of Federal debt suggests an improving fiscal position over the 1970s, a broader concept of Federal debt discussed in
the appendix to Chapter 4 indicates that the Federal Government's
total explicit and implicit liabilities have risen enormously over the




131

last 20 years. The narrower focus of this section and objective of
Table 5-7 is to point out that monetary growth raises sizable real
taxes for the Federal Government. Monetary growth is a form of taxation. It is an insidious form of taxation. It is taxation that is not legislated by the Congress, it is taxation that is hard to understand, and
it is taxation that inhibits economic growth by raising effective marginal tax rates on wages and on saving.

STRUCTURAL TAX POLICY AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Structural tax policy probably constitutes the Federal Government's most powerful tool for influencing economic growth. If
households anticipate their own and their descendants' future tax liabilities, changes in the tax structure generating the same revenue
have only "substitution" effects on their decisions; "income" effects
are zero or negligible. If households consider only their own future
tax liabilities and not those of their descendants, income effects do
arise for different age groups, but they are largely offsetting. Such
changes in the tax structure do not change household budgets, in the
aggregate, but they do change household incentives to work and
save. The rate of savings and capital formation can be increased significantly by switching away from taxes on capital income to some
other tax base, such as wages or consumption. As described earlier,
reductions in the tax rates on capital income reduce the relative cost
of future consumption and leisure and encourage the substitution of
future consumption and leisure for current consumption and leisure.
Such substitution leads to increases in the current supplies of both
capital and labor.
The 1981 Tax Act's reduction in marginal tax rates on capital
income under both personal and corporate income taxes, the provision for substantial increases in Individual Retirement Accounts and
Keogh accounts, and the recent expansion of pension fund savings
all constitute major reductions in taxation of capital income. These
historic changes in the structure of taxation, assuming they are maintained for the indefinite future, are expected to lead to a significant
long-term rise in the private business capital stock and increases in
labor supply over what would otherwise be the case.
While capital formation and economic growth are predicted to be
enhanced, it should be emphasized that the choice of a tax base
should be determined on grounds of economic welfare and efficiency, rather than simply the effect of structural tax change on factor
supplies. Economic research suggests that rather sizable efficiency
and welfare gains are available from switching from the taxation of
wage and capital income to the taxation of consumption. In contrast,




132

there is evidence that switching from wage and capital income taxation to wage taxation alone can reduce economic welfare and efficiency, even though this structural tax change would lead to more
capital formation. In recent years, Federal tax policy has increasingly
moved away from marginal taxation of capital income toward an alternative structure that can best be described as a hybrid mixture of
wage and consumption taxation.
The change in the structure of taxation will increase labor supply
and capital formation over time, provided there is no significant deterioration in the government's real net debt position. While the move
away from marginal capital income taxation is necessary to stimulate
saving, the Nation still retains a tax system that is overly complex,
that is still sensitive to inflation (especially with respect to effective
business taxation), that is administratively expensive, and that absorbs too much talent in the fundamentally nonproductive endeavor
of what is gently termed "tax planning." In short, there is a need for
further simplification and rationalization of the U.S. tax code.




133

CHAPTER 6

Reforming Government Regulation of
Economic Activity
GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY expanded rapidly during the 1970s. Although regulation can serve
useful purposes, changes in the world and national economies have
aroused increasing concern that regulation is imposing excessive burdens on individuals and businesses. This chapter focuses on the Administration's efforts to reform the regulatory process. The present
scope of Federal regulation is reviewed, and a framework is presented for judging the desirability of specific regulations. This framework
is then used in reviewing the status of regulation in a number of important industries and sectors of the economy. The chapter concludes with a set of guidelines for regulatory reform.
THE GROWTH OF FEDERAL REGULATION
The number and size of the agencies devoted to carrying out Federal regulation have expanded rapidly during the past 15 years. Since
the mid-1960s we have seen the formation of the Consumer Product
Safety Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Energy, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, to cite just the better known ones. The recent growth in the
number and size of regulatory agencies has been greater than that
which took place during the New Deal period (Chart 6-1).
The direct costs of Federal regulatory activities to the taxpayers
are large. As shown in Table 6-1, the regulatory expenses of Federal
agencies were $2.8 billion in fiscal 1974 and increased to $5.5 billion
in fiscal 1979. A further increase to $7.1 billion was budgeted for
1981van amount 50 percent higher in constant dollars than the 1974
total.
It is apparent that the biggest budgets are not those for the independent regulatory commissions, such as the Interstate Commerce
Commission or the Federal Communications Commission. The largest proportion of funds in recent years has been devoted to broader
regulatory activities, such as those conducted by the Environmental
Protection Agency, and the Department of Agriculture (mainly food
inspection).




134

Chart 6-1

Growth of Federal Regulatory Agencies
NUMBER OF AGENCIES
60 I

50

40

30

20

10

Pre1900

1900
to
1909

1910
to
1919

1920
to
1929

1930
to
1939

1940
to
1949

1950
to
1959

1960
to
1969

1970
to
1980

SOURCE: CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF AMERICAN BUSINESS,

REASONS FOR REGULATION

Why do governments become involved in regulating private economic activity? The question is not, of course, a simple one to
answer, and numerous justifications for public intervention in the private sector have been offered. The basic reason advanced by economists is the occurrence of "market failure"—that is, the failure of
competitive market forces to function efficiently in the allocation of
goods and services. When there is no market failure, most economists would conclude that decentralized market decisions are superior to centralized government regulation.




135

Although regulation is often used by the government as a means of
correcting market failure, regulatory action is not necessarily the only
means available. For instance, consumers can be provided with information about goods or services offered for sale. Special taxes can be
levied on polluters, or property rights could be extended to include
the resources subject to pollution as discussed in Chapter 2.
TABLE 6-1.—Regulatory outlays of Federal agencies, fiscal years 1974-81
[Fiscal years; millions of dollars]
Agency

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

4,916

1981 *

2,834

3,268

3,598

4,062

5,518

6,526

7,088

Agriculture

410

447

475

590

921

979

1,258

1,213

Commerce

76

75

86

94

99

115

129

147

Defense

10

16

22

32

38

43

41

45

Energy

33

6

40

49

79

82

132

144

TOTAL

165

201

218

245

276

300

326

347

Interior

5

6

9

13

22

55

105

184

Justice

22

30

31

35

45

66

62

60

Labor

208

257

314

332

373

446

486

539

Transportation

466

460

506

603

679

767

865

971

Treasury

161

166

185

246

267

288

317

335

89

81

91

103

101

99

117

147

1

11

13

14

15

16

19

65

77

83

91

97

113

127

Health and Human Services

Civil Aeronautics Board
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
Comptroller of the Currency
Consumer Product Safety Commission
Environmental Protection Agency

50
19

34

38

40

40

39

44

42

629

850

772

718

885

1,024

1,259

1,321

EQual Employment Opportunity Commission

42

56

59

72

74

92

131

Federal Communications Commission

38

48

52

56

64

70

76

80

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

58

66

74

88

105

115

116

130

Federa! Energy Regulatory Commission

27

34

36

41

38

50

67

79

6

7

8

8

9

10

11

12

32

39

44

52

59

63

68

69

Federal Maritime Commission ..
Federal Trade Commission

140

7

8

10

n

12

12

14

18

Interstate Commerce Commission

38

44

47

59

65

67

77

77

National Labor Relations Board

55

61

68

81

90

97

109

119

8

9

11

13

16

15

18

18

80

86

180

231

271

309

378

435

Securities and Exchange Commission

35

44

51

54

61

66

74

78

All other

65

71

83

100

122

137

117

192

International Trade Commission

National Transportation Safety Board
Nuclear Regulatory Commission ...

1

Data for 1981 are estimated using the budget revisions made in March 1981.

Source: "Directory

of Federal Regulatory Agencies," Center for the Study of American Business, 3rd Edition,

1981.

Outside the realm of market failure, it is often claimed that "distributive justice," a concern about political or social equity, is a
reason for governmental intervention. In other words, the govern-




136

merit's involvement is seen primarily as a way of bringing about a
transfer of wealth to a worthy segment of society. But in practice a
small group (that is, a "special interest'*) usually benefits at the expense of the mass of consumers. This type of regulation is different
from that designed to correct market failure, although the stated
rationale may be similar. Although economics cannot provide sufficient guidance to resolve equity issues, it can assist by identifying the
costs and benefits of alternative policies addressed to these issues.
AN OVERVIEW OF REGULATION

Many Federal rules have yielded benefits to the public. The automobile emission standards, for example, have substantially reduced
emissions from this source.
Regulations, however, can also impose substantial costs on society.
Regulations themselves can create problems which call for additional
regulations. Furthermore, the resources used to comply with regulations are diverted from other activities, with a resultant loss in productivity and economic growth. Restrictions on the development of
nuclear energy, for example, have resulted in expanding coal mining,
which increases the probability that coal miners will be injured. Nor
is it likely that the costs and benefits of regulations will be evenly
shared. One group in society may receive the bulk of the benefits
from a Federal regulation, while the costs are borne primarily by
some other group. For example, regulations making it uneconomical
to use low sulfur (low-polluting) coal have been supported by people
in areas producing high sulfur coal. To the extent that these regulations have been successful in making low sulfur coal uneconomical,
the producers in the low sulfur coal areas and consumers generally
are losers as a result.
BENEFIT-COST ANALYSIS OF GOVERNMENT REGULATION
Interest has risen in efforts to determine more precisely the benefits and the costs of regulation. The motive for incorporating benefitcost analysis into the regulatory decisionmaking process is to achieve
a more efficient allocation of government resources by subjecting the
public sector to the same type of efficiency tests used in the private
sector. In making an investment decision, for example, business executives compare the costs to be incurred with the expected revenues. The investment is likely to be pursued only if the expected
costs are less than the expected revenues.
The government agency decisionmaker does not face the same
array of economic incentives and constraints. If the costs of an
agency action exceed the benefits, the result may not have an imme-




137

diate adverse impact on the agency. Analytical information on economic costs has in the past rarely existed in the public sector, so that,
more often than not, the governmental decisionmaker has not been
aware of approving a regulation that is economically inefficient. The
aim of requiring agencies to perform benefit-cost analysis is to make
the regulatory process more efficient and to eliminate regulatory actions that, on balance, generate more costs than benefits. This result
is not assured by benefit-cost analysis, since political and other important considerations may dominate the decisionmaking. Even in
those cases, however, benefit-cost analysis may provide valuable
guidance.
The review of a proposed Federal regulatory activity should involve analysis of three types of questions. The first is whether some
form of market failure has occurred that warrants the imposition of
regulation. The second is whether Federal regulation, in contrast to
State and local regulation, is appropriate. The last question, assuming the response to the first two is positive, is whether a specific regulation will increase net benefits to society. Traditionally, much of
the responsibility for answering the first two questions has fallen on
the Congress, while the last question has been addressed by the regulatory agencies.
Careful analysis of the first two questions, unfortunately, has often
been neglected. Such analysis should address itself to whether there
is any significant market imperfection in the absence of regulation.
Observed differences in safety conditions among workplaces, for example, are not sufficient evidence of a market imperfection, because
employer and employee knowledge of these conditions may lead to
compensating differences in wages and employment conditions. Observed differences in economic outcomes among demographic
groups are not sufficient evidence of discrimination because these
differences may be the result of nondiscriminatory processes. More
careful analysis of these types of issues is necessary to determine the
existence and nature of any market imperfection.
For Federal regulations, in addition, it is important to determine
whether the nature of the imperfection is such that Federal regulation, rather than State or local regulation, is appropriate. Federal
regulation is most likely to be appropriate where the externalities of
an activity in one State have substantial effects in other States or
countries, the activity affects basic constitutional rights, or interstate
commerce would be significantly disrupted by varying local regulations. In the absence of these conditions, State and local regulation is
likely to be more efficient by more accurately reflecting local preferences and conditions.




138

When some Federal regulation is clearly appropriate, an analysis of
its benefits and costs can provide valuable information to help select
the form and extent of the regulation. In practice, a benefit-cost analysis will not always be a sufficient basis for resolving all controversy
about the regulation. Given the increasing concern about the efficiency of Federal regulations, however, a more general use of benefitcost analysis can contribute to a broader consensus on appropriate
changes in the nature and degree of Federal regulations.
QUANTIFICATION

The benefits and costs attributable to regulation are the difference
between the benefits and costs that would occur because of regulation and those that would prevail in its absence. Although this idea
may seem straightforward, its application can be complex. Determining what would occur in the absence of regulation may involve a considerable amount of judgment.
Sometimes the indirect effects of regulation may be as important as
the direct ones. Consider, for example, the question of tighter standards on emissions from new automobiles. Higher new car prices, attributable in part to these tighter standards, have reduced the rate at
which older cars with higher emissions are being scrapped. A recent
study indicates that the tighter emission standards implemented in
the 1981 model year may increase total emissions for several years as
a result of this process.
Even when it is not possible to put a dollar sign on benefits, a
cost-effectiveness analysis still can be helpful by ranking the relative
economic efficiency of alternatives. By using this method, originally
developed for military programs, estimates can be made of the costs
of different ways to accomplish an objective. Cost-effectiveness analyses permit policymakers to identify least-cost solutions. In this more
limited approach, the analyst begins with the assumption that the
regulatory objective is worth achieving. This approach may be particularly useful in dealing with programs to reduce personal hazards.
Instead of dealing with such a difficult conceptual question as the
economic value of human life, the emphasis shifts to identifying regulatory approaches that would maximize the number of lives saved for
a given amount of resources.
Reliable measures of costs and benefits are not easily achieved or
always possible. Should the loss of a forest, for example, be measured only by the value of the timber cut? What of the beauty destroyed? What of the area's value as a wildlife habitat? Such unquantifiable questions usually arise in the course of making a decision
about any Federal regulation.




139

However, the difficulties involved in estimating benefits or costs
need not serve as a deterrent to analysis. Merely identifying important but often overlooked impacts may be useful to the decisionmaking process. An example on the cost side is the beneficial drugs that
are not available because of regulatory obstacles. An example on the
benefit side is the more productive work force that results from a
lower rate of accidents on the job.
THE EVOLUTION OF REGULATORY REVIEW
The last decade has been marked by a shift in emphasis from industry-specific regulations to rules affecting specific aspects of the
operation of virtually all industries, such as occupational safety and
environmental protection.
The recent expansion of Federal regulatory activity has occurred
despite the fact that the Federal Government has no explicit power
to regulate intrastate economic activity. The 10th amendment, which
reserves to the States and the people all powers not delegated to the
United States, confirms the States' powers to enact laws to protect
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. The Federal Government was not given comparable power, except as such activity affects interstate commerce.
The recent growth of Federal regulation of economic activities has
been based largely on broadened judicial interpretation of the scope
of the "commerce clause," which gives the Congress the power "to
regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several
States, and with the Indian Tribes." Until the Great Depression, Federal regulation of the economy was small in comparison to control
exercised by the States. Since that time, however, Federal regulation
has expanded and numerous Federal regulatory agencies have been
created and given broad discretion by the Congress to regulate the
economic activity of private institutions. But the Congress and the
executive branch have been limited in their ability to control the specific decisions of regulatory agencies, although both can exert some
control through the appointments process, the budget, and changes
in enabling statutes.
Concern has grown that many of the decisions of regulatory agencies are economically inefficient. Explicit guidance to an agency to
weigh the costs and benefits of its decisions has been Federal law
since it was included in the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1902. The
benefit-cost procedure was explicitly required for the first time under
the Flood Control Act of 1936. Until the 1970s, however, the benefitcost technique was used with regularity only in reviewing expenditure
programs.




140

In 1975 a major expansion in the use of benefit-cost analysis
occurred when the President directed regulatory agencies to prepare
"inflation impact statements" to accompany proposed rules. Under the
next Administration this approach was modified to require "regulatory
analyses,'* However, it was stressed that its requirements for regulatory
analysis should not be interpreted as subjecting proposed rules to a
benefit-cost test.
Regulatory relief is a key element of the President's economic recovery plan, along with expenditure restraint, tax cuts, and monetary
stability. Executive Order 12291, issued on February 17, 1981, directs agencies, to the extent permitted by law, to use benefit-cost
analysis when promulgating new regulations, reviewing existing regulations, or developing legislative proposals concerning regulation.
Administrative decisions on regulations are to be based on adequate
information concerning the need for the regulations and their economic consequences. Not only must the benefits from the regulation
exceed the costs, but the Executive order requires that the approach
selected (where alternative approaches exist) should be chosen to
maximize net benefits.
In the case of major rules, agencies must publish preliminary and
final regulatory impact analyses (RIAs) that set forth conclusions regarding the benefit-cost balance and feasible alternatives. Major rules
consist of those that will have any of the following three effects: (1)
an annual effect of $100 million or more; (2) a major increase in
costs or prices; or (3) a significant adverse effect on a specific industry or on the economy in general. Regulatory impact analyses are to
include: (1) a description of the potential costs and benefits of the
proposed rule; (2) a determination of its potential net benefits; and
(3) a description of feasible cheaper alternatives with an explanation
of the legal reasons why such alternatives, if proposed, could not be
adopted. The analyses and rules must be submitted to the Office of
Management and Budget before publication in the Federal Register.
In addition, regulatory agencies must review rules currently in
effect and prepare regulatory impact analyses for those which are
classified as major. The Executive order also requires agencies to
publish semiannual calendars of proposed regulations and current
regulations that are under review.
To spearhead the Administration's regulatory relief efforts, the
President created the Task Force on Regulatory Relief, which is
chaired by the Vice President. The task force reviews proposed regulations, using the guidelines established by Executive Order 12291,
and is assessing existing regulations with an eye toward their revision. During 1981 the task force earmarked 100 existing rules and
paperwork requirements for review, and more than a third of those




141

reviews have already resulted in formal proposals or final action to
eliminate or revise the rules and programs involved. The task force
will designate other existing programs for review, and it will continue
to press for formal action to implement the conclusions of the
reviews.
Through December 31, 1981, the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) had reviewed 2,715 proposed regulations and had approved 2,546 as being consistent with the Executive order. These
numbers do not reflect the number of regulations that were evaluated within the agencies and found to be inconsistent with the Executive order and therefore not submitted to OMB. Agencies have
issued 40 major regulations. Nineteen were supported by regulatory
impact analyses, while analyses of the 21 others were waived for such
reasons as emergency conditions.
Although the Executive order is an important procedural reform,
some important regulatory areas are still immune from OMB review.
These are areas under the regulatory authority of independent agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission, and programs under the
authority of executive branch agencies which are guided by other
standards based on their enabling legislation. In these areas it will
take legislative changes to open up regulatory activities to OMB
review.
Recent court decisions have demonstrated the importance of including specific economic efficiency criteria in the enabling legislation of agencies. In its June 1981 decision on standards established
for acceptable levels of cotton dust in textile plants, the Supreme
Court held that an agency must meet the standard of "feasibility" if
that is the standard established by its enabling legislation, whether or
not the regulation is reasonable on the basis of other criteria, such as
economic efficiency.
Just as a standard of feasibility can cause agencies to make inefficient regulatory decisions, so can a standard of reasonableness. For
example, the Fifth Circuit Court held that Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) guidelines that allowed motor carriers to seek the removal of restrictions on which commodities they might carry, but
only by choosing to carry commodities in one of three categories, exceeded ICC's authority under the Motor Carrier Act of 1980 to "reasonably broaden" existing carrier certificates. Although the guidelines could be supported on economic grounds as increasing competition, they were rejected by the court because they failed to meet the
legal definition of "reasonable." Although the agency can still exercise some discretion in broadening categories, substantial further deregulation of the for-hire trucking industry may be dependent on a




142

change in the law that would eliminate limitations on the commodities that a certificated carrier can transport.
The Administration has also been working with the Congress on
legislation that would require economic analysis of proposed regulations. The Congress has held extensive hearings on several bills that
would require all Federal regulatory agencies to analyze the costs and
benefits of their major regulations. The Administration is supporting
S. 1080, which would codify the requirements of Executive Order
12291 so that it would apply to all agencies. In addition, the bill
would require that each major rule be reviewed every 10 years.
THE CLEAN AIR ACT AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
The most important regulatory enabling legislation now being reviewed by the Congress is the Clean Air Act. Many of the questions
that permeate social regulation arise in the case of this landmark law.
The Council of Economic Advisers has developed three general principles which illustrate the role of economic analysis in designing a
regulatory program such as the Clean Air Act.
First, Federal regulation should focus on situations where there is a clear national problem. An example of this approach would be strengthening
Federal responsibility for dealing with air pollution transported
across State and national boundaries while leaving air pollution problems that are local in nature to State or local governments whenever
practical.
Second, the benefits and costs of regulation should be considered in designing
a new regulatory program. For example, various emission standards
could be set at levels at which the incremental benefits are equal to
the incremental costs, and benefits and costs could be considered
when determining State implementation strategies.
Third, consumers, businesses, and State and local governments should be
granted flexibility in the way they meet Federal standards. Thus, those subject to regulation would be encouraged to use the lowest cost means
for achieving standards.
The following discussion shows how these three principles relate
to several important provisions of the Clean Air Act.
LONG-RANGE TRANSPORT

The pollution control programs established under the current
Clean Air Act focus on improving ground-level air quality relatively
near the sources of pollution. Although the act contains provisions
for States to notify the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) if a
neighboring State is "exporting" its pollution, EPA's authority to
order remedies is limited. Moreover, the States typically have been




143

unable to arrive independently at appropriate and inexpensive solutions to such problems through negotiation or litigation. Therefore,
a case can be made for strengthening Federal involvement in air pollution problems which transcend State or national boundaries.
AMBIENT AIR STANDARDS

The Clean Air Act requires EPA to set uniform primary and secondary National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for several
pollutants that are considered to endanger public health and welfare.
The primary NAAQS are to be set at levels adequate to "protect the
public health," with an "adequate margin of safety** to account for
scientific uncertainties. However, a Federal court has ruled that the
consideration of costs in setting the primary standards is prohibited.
The secondary standards are to be set at levels that protect the
public welfare, which covers such things as property damage. The
consideraton of costs is also constrained in setting secondary standards.
If the Federal Government were given effective authority to regulate pollution that crosses State and national boundaries, then the
States could play a major role in establishing the primary air quality
standards and an exclusive role in establishing secondary standards.
The Federal Government could set a presumptive primary ambient
air standard, but the States would be free to modify the national primary standard applicable to them in light of local conditions. The
setting of secondary standards could be left entirely to the States.
The desirability of such changes, of course, depends on a variety of
factors in addition to economic impact.
TECHNOLOGY-BASED STATIONARY SOURCE STANDARDS

The Clean Air Act requires EPA and the States to establish emissions standards for stationary sources. EPA must set new source performance standards primarily on the basis of the cost and availability
of control technologies and the financial strength of the individual
industries.
The current system of technology-based emissions standards, however, creates numerous difficulties. EPA does not consider benefits
when setting stationary source standards. The standards are set
primarily on the basis of the feasibility of the control technology,
subject to an industry's ability to pay for the controls. The benefits
and costs of air pollution control are, therefore, only considered indirectly.
Second, under these standards the marginal cost of emission controls may vary widely among different sources within a given region,
thereby unnecessarily increasing the total costs of abatement. For ex-




144

ample, more stringent controls on new sources than on existing
sources often lead to a much higher marginal cost per ton of pollutant removed in new plants than in old, even though a ton of pollutant causes comparable health damage, regardless of its source. The
requirement for more stringent standards on new sources may inhibit
plant modernization and, by delaying the replacement of older
plants, may even increase near-term pollution.
Many students of the subject have urged that the current system be
changed to a system in which marketable permits would be used as
the principal means of achieving control over stationary source emissions. Under a marketable permit system, the State or local pollution
control authority would issue a number of emissions permits consistent with ambient air quality goals. In areas currently within the
standards but experiencing economic growth, the operators of existing sources of pollution would have an incentive to sell their permits
to new polluters when the market value of the permits exceeded the
costs of controlling existing sources of pollution. This would ensure
that ambient standards were achieved at lowest total cost. In areas
not yet meeting the standard, some of the emissions permits would
expire on a predetermined schedule to bring the area into compliance. In this view, the trading of permits among sources would help
to assure that the standard was reached using the most efficient controls.
EPA has been moving toward a transferable permit system with its
"bubble," "emission banking/' and "offset" policies. However, EPA's
efforts are seriously constrained by statutory directives that require
the establishment of various technology-based standards for different
types of sources of air pollution.
In addition, the 1977 amendments to the act require new source
performance standards for fossil-fuel-fired stationary sources to be
set in terms of a percentage reduction from uncontrolled emissions
rates rather than as a maximum allowable emissions rate. Hence, the
percentage reduction in emissions must be the same for both low
and high sulfur coal. Since low sulfur coal is generally more expensive than high sulfur coal and the legislation requires that the percentage reduction in emission rates be the same for sources using
either type of coal, the legislation creates an incentive to burn high
sulfur coal even though low sulfur coal might be the most cost-effective method of meeting the goals of the legislation.
MOBILE SOURCE STANDARDS

The Clean Air Act directs EPA to enforce uniform national standards for motor vehicle emissions. California has been allowed to
maintain a more stringent set of standards for vehicles sold in that




145

State. In the view of some analysts, the uniform Federal standards
result in overcontrolling motor vehicle emissions in some relatively
clean areas and perhaps undercontrolling emissions in some relatively polluted areas.
An alternative approach would be to allow EPA to issue two sets of
standards: a stringent set for autos registered in areas with severe air
pollution problems, and a less stringent set for autos registered in
relatively clean areas. Each State would decide which of the two sets
of standards its cars would be required to meet, which would depend
on the State's ambient air standards.
According to its proponents, such a strategy would not cause significant environmental or health damage, since ttye less stringently
controlled vehicles would be registered in areas where additional
automotive emissions would not violate the standards. Moreover,
studies show that such a strategy might substantially reduce the national costs of controlling automotive emissions.
The Clean Air Act has been interpreted to mean that every automobile line must meet applicable national emissions standards. This
prevents EPA from allowing the manufacturers to meet the standards
by averaging the results of different model lines. An alternative approach, allowing EPA to use an averaging procedure in determining
compliance, might save consumers millions of dollars. Such a change
would not increase overall emissions and thus presumably would
leave average public health conditions unaffected.
The Clean Air Act requires that, smarting in the 1984 model year,
all cars and light trucks must meet the act's high altitude standards,
regardless of the area in which the vehicles are sold. This requirement will have the effect of significantly increasing the amount of
emissions control required of all cars. Since only 3.5 percent of the
country's cars are sold at the specified high altitudes (principally in
and around Denver), this uniform national requirement may require
a large amount of unnecessary expenditures.
HAZARDOUS EMISSIONS STANDARDS

The Clean Air Act instructs EPA to prepare a list of air pollutants
that may cause serious damage to human health and to set emissions
(but not ambient) standards for them. The emissions standards are to
be set at levels which provide "an ample margin of safety to protect
the public health."
Consideration of benefits and costs is not prohibited in listing the
pollutants or setting emissions standards, but it is not required
either. In its rulemakings to date and in its proposed "Airborne Carcinogens Policy," EPA has not always balanced the benefits of air
pollution control against its costs.




146

THE CONTROL OF HEALTH CARE COSTS: A CONTRAST OF
APPROACHES
The policies of this Administration toward the health care industry
offer an interesting contrast to the policies of earlier Administrations.
Few analysts doubt that there are serious economic problems in this
industry. The previous Administration attempted to solve these problems by proposing a Hospital Cost Containment Act, but the Congress did not pass the proposed bill, which would have imposed a
detailed regulatory scheme on hospital managements. This Administration has examined the basic causes of inefficiencies in medical care
and is attempting to change the factors which lead to them. These
inefficiencies are due to inappropriate tax policy and to inadequate
incentives for both consumers of medical services and providers of
health care to reduce costs. In this section the structure of the industry
will be examined to show the nature of the problems, and the changes
proposed by the Administration to resolve these problems are
discussed.
THE INDUSTRY

The health care industry is large, and it is growing rapidly. In 1980
the Nation spent nearly $250 billion on health, representing 9.4 percent of the total gross national product (GNP), substantially more
than the $42 billion and 6.0 percent of GNP in 1965. Prices for
health care have risen more rapidly than prices as a whole throughout the postwar period. From 1975 to 1980 prices in the health
sector rose at an annual rate of 9.1 percent, compared to a rise of 7.4
percent for all personal consumption.
Rising expenditures resulted in a larger quantity and a higher quality of health care, as well as better access for the poor and elderly to
medical services. But because of the structure of the health care industry, this expansion caused a substantial amount of waste. Were
the rising expenditures simply due to changing consumer preferences, rising incomes, or improved technology, there would be no
policy problem. The manner in which people choose to make unsubsidized purchases is generally not a policy matter. Much of the increase, however, has been due to perverse incentives that are built
into the medical system. A set of arrangements for buying and selling
health services has developed which insulates the participants from
the economic consequences of their actions and raises serious questions about the effectiveness of these increased expenditures in
buying more "health." The major problems are the prevalence of
third-party payments and the exclusion of employer contributions for
health insurance from the taxable income of employees.




147

A major defect of the system is a lack of competitive forces among
those who supply health care. Providers of care who are paid according to the costs they incur—cost-based reimbursement—have little incentive to provide care in a cost-effective manner. Retrospective payments, where payments are based on expenses previously incurred, require large administrative bureaucracies in the private as well as.the
public sectors, and provide little reward for attempts to improve
efficiency.
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs), which provide virtually
complete coverage for a flat premium, have introduced an element of
competition into the supply side of the industry. The incentives for
efficient use of health resources rest with the HMOs, not the patients, and health maintenance organizations appear to have succeeded in reducing hospitalization use among their members.
Third-Party Payments
Meanwhile, third-party payments by private insurance companies
or through government programs lower the prices of medical services to people covered by the programs, thus increasing the quantity
of medical services which they seek and bidding up total medical
costs. The larger the fraction of costs borne by third parties, the
larger the effect of third-party payments on the price and quantity of
services consumed.
Two-thirds of the personal health care expenditures of $218 billion
in 1980 were paid by third parties. One hundred and seventy million
people have private insurance for hospital care, 18 million of the
nonelderly poor are covered under medicaid, and 24 million elderly
receive medical care under the medicare program. (There is some
overlap among people in these categories, particularly private plans
and medicare.) About 23 million people in the country do not have
public or private insurance coverage.
The particular provisions of insurance plans determine the prices
that individual patients face and the effect of third-party payments on
demand. For example, a system of deductibles and copayments
makes the individual share in the costs. It leads to a more efficient
use of resources than a plan that covers all medical expenses, beginning with the first dollar of expense. With "first-dollar'* coverage, the
individual has no financial incentive not to seek treatment if it has
any chance of being beneficial, regardless of its cost. First-dollar coverage is necessarily more "shallow" than cost-sharing plans with the
same premium and provides less insurance against unexpected serious illnesses.
The extent of first-dollar coverage and its costs to the individual
vary greatly, but it is prevalent in the private sector. In the public
sector one finds medicare, which, like first-dollar coverage, is not de-




148

signed to encourage efficient use of health care resources. The medicare program only imposes cost sharing late in the hospital stay,
when the patient can least afford it and when it is least likely to influence doctor or patient behavior, and it puts no limit on the out-ofpocket costs people can incur. States are required to provide basic
services to medicaid recipients but are unable to require even minimal copayments. Instead, nonmarket mechanisms, such as regulation
and rationing of services, are used to restrain utilization and costs.
Since most people are risk-averse they seek to avoid large and uncertain costs, such as those which may be imposed by a serious illness. This is why individuals buy insurance, even though the cost of
insurance is greater than the expected value of the benefits. Expenses
which are relatively small and predictable, on the other hand, are
generally not covered by insurance. It is not rational for medical insurance to provide first-dollar coverage, since much of this insurance
would be for predictable routine expenses. Rational medical insurance would contain coverage against catastrophic occurrences where
medical expenses might bankrupt an individual. The reality is quite
different from the logical arrangement just outlined. Some private
plans provide first-dollar coverage but no catastrophic coverage. This
is also true of medicare.
The inefficient use of resources that results from third-party payments leads to higher insurance premiums, even though the insurance
is sold in the private market, where competitive forces presumably
would lead to a lower premium. One reason why this does not
happen is that employer contributions for health insurance premiums
are not subject to payroll or income taxes.
Tax Exclusion

This tax exclusion lowers the price of health insurance to employers and employees, thereby leading to greater spending on insurance
than if employer contributions for health care were included in taxable income or if individuals bought insurance with their own money.
For the employee in the 30 percent income tax bracket paying social
security tax of 6.65 percent, a $100 contribution by the employer to
health insurance costs the worker in effect only $63.35 compared to
receiving the $100 as taxable income and buying the insurance directly. Even though the worker may not want to spend another $100
of his own money on health insurance, if he values the additional insurance at more than $63.35, he will prefer that his employer put the
$100 into health insurance rather than into his taxable earnings. For
workers in higher tax brackets the amount of inefficiency is even
greater. Employers also prefer to put the $100 into insurance premiums rather than into wages, since they do not pay social security and
unemployment insurance taxes on the premiums.




149

The dilution of competition in the health care industry and the resultant inefficiencies have frequently led consumers to purchase more
health care than they would have purchased if compelled to pay true
costs. The lack of competition means that people receive less
"health" for their expenditures, and by spending so much on health
they have less to spend on other goods and services. It is difficult to
quantify this loss in efficiency, but recent estimates place it in the
range of $25 billion a year.
PROPOSALS FOR REFORM

Policymakers have recognized these inefficiencies and have attempted to devise solutions, but the standard solution chosen has
been detailed regulation of the behavior of participants in the system.
The alternative to that kind of regulation, as discussed in Chapter 2,
is to give participants in the medical care system more incentive to
use resources efficiently. This Administration is adopting this approach.
A proposal is under consideration which would require medicare
beneficiaries to pay a part of the costs for each day they are in the
hospital. In addition, a catastrophic health insurance plan which
would guarantee that annual costs to the patient would not exceed a
certain amount is also being considered. These proposals would
reduce many inefficiencies in the system. Other proposals aimed at
increasing competition in the medical care system are currently
under development.
Some analysts have suggested replacing medicare with a voucher
scheme. Recipients would be given a voucher nearly equal to the current cost of medicare and would be able to use this voucher to buy
whatever form of medical insurance they desired, subject to certain
constraints. This would give beneficiaries an incentive to purchase
more efficient forms of medical insurance, since they would reap the
savings.
REGULATORY REFORM IN THE AGENCIES
The current status of Federal regulation can be illustrated by a
review of the situations in five key areas: financial institutions, agriculture, energy, transportation, and telecommunications.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Federal regulation of financial institutions was initially designed to
assure that savings channeled into investments were protected and
that investors had enough information to make rational decisions on
investments. The early regulatory statutes, however, reflected an am-




150

bivalent attitude toward competition in the financial industry. Restrictions on bank mergers and interstate branch banking were imposed
to prevent banking monopoly, but at the same time restrictions on
types of assets, entry, and rates of interest paid to depositors were
imposed to limit competition and dissuade managers from risky ventures. A legal separation of depository institutions and securities
firms was written into law in response to concern about conflicts of
interest.
Over the last decade, however, technological innovation, high inflation, and the slowness of some regulatory bodies to adjust their regulations to conditions in the financial markets have made traditional
depository institutions less attractive to depositors. They have found
it more advantageous to shift their funds among institutions or, in
many cases, to move them outside the banking system itself.
Thrift Institutions

The principal cause of the thrift industry's current problems is the
imbalance between increasingly rate-sensitive liabilities and long-term
fixed-rate assets. Time and savings deposits, the major sources of
funds for thrift institutions, have traditionally been subject to Federal
interest rate ceilings. These funds enabled the thrifts to make longterm loans, for such things as residential mortgages, at fixed rates of
interest during times of steady and low interest rates. As interest
rates began to rise in the 1970s, however, regulation prevented the
thrift institutions from increasing the interest they paid on deposits
to compete with other institutions, which had begun to offer a higher
return on alternative instruments. Some regulatory changes then
were made to allow thrifts to pay market rates of interest on certain
types of deposits as well. These changes, however, did not eliminate
the long-term problem faced by many thrifts. The need to finance
large numbers of fixed-rate long-term loans at low interest rates with
deposits on which they paid higher interest rates severely strained
many thrift institutions.
The removal of two restrictions provided some relief for thrifts. In
1979 they were given limited authority to make loans at variable rates
of interest, and in 1981 most restrictions on variable-rate loans were
lifted. Meanwhile, they have also obtained permission to invest in the
futures markets as a way of hedging their risks.
The Administration supports proposed legislation that would give
thrift institutions greater flexibility in carrying out their operations.
Various proposals would give thrift institutions many of the same
powers to vary their assets and liabilities that commercial banks now
have. Thrift institutions would be permitted to make additional shortterm consumer and commercial loans in addition to residential mortgage loans, and alternative mortgage instruments would be estab-




151

lished to make real estate lending more attractive. Other provisions
of proposed legislation would clarify the authority to utilize interstate
and interindustry mergers to rescue troubled thrifts and commercial
banks, thereby leading to stronger financial institutions.
Commercial Banks

Under the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, depository institutions and
securities firms became legally separate entities offering quite different types of services. In recent years, however, high interest rates
have led securities firms to offer investors the opportunity to invest
in money-market mutual funds, a change that has, in effect, circumvented the 1933 act. The funds invested in money-market funds,
unlike those deposited in commercial bank and thrift institution savings accounts, are not subject to interest rate ceilings, and investors
are generally allowed limited checkwriting privileges. As a result, depositors over the last several years have withdrawn substantial
amounts of funds from low interest accounts at banks and thrifts to
place their money in high yielding money-market instruments, including money-market funds and government securities.
Within the bounds of their statutory constraints, banks have been
trying to meet this new form of competition. They have, for example,
been offering their customers access to market-level rates of interest
through repurchase agreements against their portfolios of government securities. In many respects, however, the regulations that
apply to banks remain more restrictive than those that apply to securities firms.
The Administration has proposed that commercial banks be permitted to engage in some activities previously reserved for securities
firms through the establishment of bank holding company subsidiaries. Commercial banks would be authorized to set up these subsidiaries to underwrite and deal in municipal revenue bonds and to sponsor and underwrite shares in mutual funds. Such a change would
help to equalize competition for funds between commercial banks
and securities firms. The use of the holding company subsidiary
would help separate the riskier securities activities of a bank from its
federally insured depository activities.
Regulatory Relief

Thrift institutions, commercial banks, and securities firms should
be allowed to compete on an equal basis, without the restrictions that
prevent them from offering similar services and paying competitive
rates. The Congress has recently passed laws that should go further
toward achieving a competitive environment, and the regulatory
agencies themselves have taken decisions to bring about more competition.




152

Under the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary
Control Act of 1980, interest rate ceilings on time and savings deposits are to be raised over a period of 6 years, after which the ceilings
will be abolished. The same law permitted depository institutions to
offer negotiable order of withdrawal (NOW) accounts, and certain
State usury ceilings were preempted. Uniform reserve requirements
on transactions liabilities at all depository institutions are being
phased in, and the Federal Reserve System has begun charging banks
for certain services previously provided without charge.
The Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee, created
under authority of the 1980 act, adopted two significant deregulatory
actions in 1981. It removed the ceiling on interest rates paid on 2J/2
to 4-year small saver certificates, resulting in a 50 percent increase in
purchases of such certificates between August and the end of 1981,
and it authorized a 1 %-year account that would not be subject to interest rate ceilings for Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) and
Keogh deposits.
During the last decade, the financial regulatory system has not
adapted quickly to a changing economic environment. To ensure the
future adaptability of financial institutions to evolving technology and
competitive forces, regulation of the financial industry needs to be
reviewed and reformed.
AGRICULTURE

Three important regulatory programs relating to agriculture present important issues: food safety, Federal marketing orders, and
meat inspection.
Food Safety

Certain food safety laws and regulations are outdated and fail to
show adequate recognition of the fact that there is a degree of risk
inherent in providing an economical and sufficient food supply.
These points can be illustrated by a discussion of the problems that
have arisen in connection with the Delaney anticancer clauses of the
1958 Food Additives amendment to the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act. The Delaney clauses prohibit the use of any chemical
substance in any amount as a food additive if the substance has been
found, by appropriate tests, to induce cancer in people or laboratory
animals.
Scientific progress since the Delaney clauses were enacted in 1958
has brought about a quantum improvement in the ability of scientists
to measure chemical substances. It is now possible to detect parts per
trillion of a chemical substance in food. This is significant, since uncertainty exists regarding the degree of risk to human beings from
exposure to extremely low levels of carcinogens, and strict enforce-




153

ment can result in ignoring severe impacts on food availability and
preservation.
It seems clear that the zero-risk approach embodied in the Delaney
clauses has become untenable. Policymakers and scientists need to
establish procedures for defining levels of food contaminants that
represent acceptable levels of risk for consumers, develop ways to
help consumers protect themselves against significant risks when
such risks are found to exist for particular foods, and give firms incentives to develop safe food additives and to reduce contaminants.
Marketing Orders

Legislative authority for Federal marketing orders is contained in
the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937. The orders originally were designed partly to reflate farm prices and thus increase
farmer income during the 1930s. Federal marketing orders for fruits,
vegetables, and specialty crops establish restrictions on the quality
and quantity of products that can be marketed. Those restrictions
vary, but they may include minimum grade and size requirements,
limits on product shipments during all or part of the marketing
season, limits on quantities entering the fresh market, restrictions on
total marketings (in a few cases), and rules on packaging standards.
During 1980 commodities marketed under the orders had a farm
value of $5.2 billion.
As a part of the Department of Agriculture's regulatory reform
effort, a team comprised of Department of Agriculture and university
economists was appointed during 1981 to examine the economic effects of marketing orders for fruits, vegetables, and specialty crops.
The study revealed that Federal orders for hops, spearmint oil, California-Arizona navel oranges, Valencia oranges, and lemons (and perhaps those for walnuts and filberts) had been used in ways that resulted in significant resource misallocation. Marketing allotments,
market allocation provisions, and season-long prorates were the provisions identified as having the greatest capacity for causing misallocation. It was also reported that marketing orders can increase economic efficiency by stabilizing returns to growers, providing quality
assurance for buyers, and facilitating research and container standardization.
Early in 1982, Department of Agriculture officials issued policy
guidelines on marketing orders calling for changing the procedures
to curb the supply restrictions resulting from the use of producer allotments, to lessen restrictions on handler shipments caused by prorate provisions, to reduce supply restrictions caused by stockpiling of
reserves, and to limit the incentives for chronic overproduction. If
carried out, these changes will produce substantial efficiencies.




154

Federal milk orders establish the minimum prices that milk processors pay farmers for Grade A milk. Basically, these orders are price
discrimination (classified pricing) devices. Approximately two-thirds
of the milk marketed in the United States (valued at $12.2 billion at
the plant level) was priced under Federal milk orders in 1981.
Without this kind of regulation, some milk processors would have
an incentive to purchase concentrated milk products (e.g., unsalted
butter and nonfat dry milk) from lower cost sources and add water
to produce a reconstituted fluid milk product. Little reconstituted
milk is now sold in the United States, partly because Federal milk
order regulations strongly encourage processors to buy fresh milk.
During 1979 the Department of Agriculture was asked to hold a
hearing on the question of whether to make reconstituted milk less
expensive for use by processors. This also would have reduced retail
milk prices, since market forces would tend to force processors to
pass along a portion of their savings to consumers. After extensive
study, the Department denied the request for a hearing in April
1981, chiefly because the proposal would have undermined the classified pricing system, caused losses to dairy farmers that would have
exceeded the gains to consumers and the Federal Government, and
ignored the fact that consumers presently have a lower cost alternative to fresh milk priced under the orders—that is, to buy dry milk
and add the water themselves. These are important considerations.
However, if new technologies for handling concentrated milk products are to be accommodated under the Federal orders, this issue will
deserve reexamination in the future.
Meat Inspection

The Department of Agriculture has developed draft legislation to
increase the flexibility and reduce the costs of its meat and poultry
inspection programs. Present meat and poultry inspection laws—
some of which date back to the early 1900s—emphasize continuous,
on-site inspection of slaughtering and processing plants. The proposed change would permit periodic inspection—for example, once a
week or once a month—of meat and poultry processing plants which
have good quality control systems, while retaining continuous inspection of slaughtering plants. The proposed change would reduce the
Department of Agriculture's costs as well as those of plants with effective quality control systems.
While this proposed legislation would produce savings in the Federal meat inspection program, where costs now run to $300 million a
year, other methods might permit still larger savings and produce
other efficiencies. Such alternative programs would include user fees
to cover certain meat and poultry inspection costs, licensed and
bonded private inspectors rather than government inspectors, inspec-




155

tion and insurance arrangements that would give meat processors incentives to maintain effective quality control systems to qualify for
low-cost product liability insurance, and periodic rather than continuous inspection of poultry slaughtering plants.
ENERGY

Many of the past energy policies of the government have not been
consistent with the general principles presented in Chapter 2 for government intervention. The actual effects of such policies have been
highly adverse to the interests of the Nation. The policy of this Administration is to remove the inconsistency, inefficiencies, and uncertainty caused by inherited policy, and thereafter to facilitate the operation of market forces as the guiding and disciplining constraints
shaping investment, production, and consumption decisions in the
energy sector.
Decontrol of the Petroleum Markets

Beginning with the Economic Stabilization Program of 1971, the
petroleum sector has been subject to continuous price and allocation
controls. Because price controls increase quantities demanded and
reduce quantities supplied, they must be accompanied by nonprice
rationing mechanisms. The complex system of controls included entitlements regulations, the "buy-sell" program, and other rules serving
that purpose. These made the task of efficiently allocating available
supplies of crude oil and refined products much more difficult. Other
rules gave special consideration to small refiners and other interests,
thus introducing additional distortions into the system. In particular,
the rules provided strong disincentives to prepare for possible future
supply interruptions.
As the inefficiencies and other adverse effects of the controls
became increasingly manifest, the Congress enacted a law to phase
out all petroleum controls by September 30, 1981. Using the legal
discretion available to him, the President moved the date of full decontrol forward by about 8 months. It is instructive to review the
data on some of the more salient effects of full decontrol.
The steady decline in domestic production (excluding oil from
Prudhoe Bay) during the price control period has been reversed
(Tables 6-2 and 6-3). November 1981 marked the fourth consecutive
month of production increases over year-earlier levels, a feat not observed in the United States for 10 years. Furthermore, oil-drilling activity in 1981 was almost 40 percent greater than in 1980 (Table 62). There has also been a reduction in petroleum imports, part of
which is probably due to other factors (Table 6-4). The entitlements
regulations provided artificial incentives to import crude oil and residual fuel oil; the abolition of the regulatory framework has removed




156

that incentive. The end of artificially high oil import levels has had a
favorable effect upon exchange rates, and thus upon the prices of
foreign goods in the United States. This reduced price of the foreign
goods basket is a major benefit of oil decontrol to the domestic economy. One study has estimated the value of this wealth gain at almost
$6 billion a year.
TABLE 6-2.—Domestic crude oil production and drilling activity, 1973-81
Production
(thousands of
barrels per day)

Period

9,208
8,774

.

., ...
.

.

.

.

.

.

1980
1981
1981:
January
February
March...
April
May
June

.

,
1

.
...

...

27,026
37,645

7,076
7,050

1

1

1,789
2,462
3,102
1
2,905
1
2,604
'3497
1

1

'2790
1
3,137
1
3416
1
3,775
1
3,587
* 4,581

6,902
7,054
7,117
1
7,107
1
7,082
1
7,095

... .
.,

16,408
17,059
18,912
17,775
19,383

7,020
7,068
7,069
7,020
7,001
7,072

. ..

...

July
August
September
October
November
December

9902
12,784

8,375
8,132
7,937
7,618
7,269

1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

Oil wells drilled
(excludes dry
holes)

\

1
Preliminary.
Note.—Production data exclude Prudhoe Bay.

Sources: Department of Energy and American Petroleum Institute.

TABLE 6-3.—Domestic crude oil production, 1980-81
[Thousands of barrels per day]
Month

1980

,
.
..

.

.

.

.

.

1
Preliminary.
Note.—Data exclude Prudhoe Bay.

Sources.- Department of Energy and American Petroleum Institute.




157

7020.
7068
7069
7020
7001
7,072

101
100
86
110
102
60

7041
6906
7,102
7045
7033
7 102

May

July
.
August
September
October * .
November *
December 1

Change

7121
7 168
7 155
7130
7103
7,012

January
February
March
April
June

1981

6902
7054

7ill7
7 107
7082
7095

139
148
15
62
49
7

TABLE 6=4.—/w/w>r/.y of crude oil and refined products, 1980-81
[Thousands of barrels per day]
Month

Crude oil

Total

Refined products

1980:
January
February
March
April
May
June

5,936
5,785
5,555
5,071
5,480

1,983
1,911
1,724
1,430
1,478
1,413

4,645
4,723
4,653
4,570
4,524 I
4,848

1,401
1,379
1,475
1,603
1,729
1,812

6,709
6,697
5,887
5,370
5,317
5,104

4,817
4,793
4,382
4,060
3,881
3,766

1,892
1,904
1,505
1,310
1,436
1,338

5,634
5,480
5,891
5,027
5,436
5,532

....

July
August
September
October
November
December

6359

7,847
7,509
6,985
6,549
6,893
6,046
6,102
6,128
6,173
6,253
6,660

... .

8342

. . .

.

4,161
3,908
4,279
3,957
3,972
3,844

1981:

January
February
March
April
May
June., „

....

...

.. .

July.
August
September
October '
November »
December *

1,473
1,572
1612

1,070
1,464
1,688

1
Preliminary.
Note.—Data exclude Strategic Petroleum Reserve.

Source: American Petroleum Institute.

Natural Gas Policy

Wellhead prices of natural gas sold in interstate commerce have
been regulated by the Federal Government since 1954. Because intrastate gas prices were not subject to control, a two-market system
resulted. This led to shortages in the interstate market because interstate pipeline companies were hampered in competing for gas supplies, while the artificially low prices encouraged consumers to
demand more natural gas than otherwise would have been the case.
Rising oil prices in the 1970s exacerbated the shortage of gas in
the interstate market, leading to nonprice rationing. Existing industrial users of gas were curtailed during periods of particularly intense
shortages, and many potential new users, both at the industrial and
residential level, were proscribed from using gas. The cold winter of
1977 produced a severe shortage of interstate gas, thus illustrating
vividly the adverse effects of the regulations. In short, the wellhead
price controls produced serious inefficiencies: (1) underproduction of
gas for the interstate market, and (2) inefficient allocation of gas,
both between the interstate and intrastate markets and between different users within the interstate market.
Natural gas regulation was changed substantially with passage of
the 1978 Natural Gas Policy Act (NGPA). A small amount of (high




158

cost) new gas was deregulated under the NGPA almost immediately,
and the price of between 40 and 60 percent of all gas is scheduled to
be deregulated on January 1, 1985. The price of a smaller volume of
gas will be deregulated on July 1, 1987. Under the NGPA, price controls were extended to gas sold in intrastate markets. About 20 categories of gas were created, each with its own ceiling price and inflation adjustment or other escalation factor.
Because of the various price categories of gas under the NGPA,
producers receive distorted signals and incentives affecting development and production decisions. Instead of producing the lowest cost
gas first and moving successively to higher cost sources, producers
have been induced by the different price categories to produce highcost sources first in many cases, and otherwise to shift their production efforts away from those most efficient. This means that total gas
production will consume more resources than necessary. The current
boom in drilling for high-cost (deep) gas is illustrative of this process.
Another problem is likely to arise because the prices for new gas
that are scheduled to be decontrolled in 1985 and 1987 are tied until
then by the NGPA to 1978 oil prices. Since oil prices have roughly
doubled since then, and are not likely to fall substantially, partial decontrol will generate a sharp increase in delivered gas prices, as consumers bid up gas prices to levels equivalent to those of close substitutes, such as oil. The Department of Energy estimates that average
domestic wellhead prices in 1980 dollars per thousand cubic feet will
rise under the NGPA from $2.27 in 1982 to $4.45 in 1985. Because
the prices of decontrolled gas can be averaged (rolled in) with those
of controlled gas, and because consumer demands are determined in
substantial part by the prices of substitute fuels, average 1985 prices
under the NGPA are not likely to differ greatly from those that would
evolve under full decontrol. This implies that the prices of decontrolled gas will be bid up well above the levels that would be observed in a fully decontrolled market. Indeed, decontrolled high-cost
gas is now being sold at the wellhead for over $9, while the Department of Energy estimates that the average 1985 price under full decontrol would be $4.65.
The high prices that will be paid for decontrolled gas in 1985 and
thereafter imply that gas consumers in general will not be the
beneficiaries of the remaining controls. Instead, the beneficiaries will
be the producers of decontrolled gas. However, under the NGPA different groups of consumers will fare differently. Pipeline companies
with access to substantial quantities of price-controlled gas will be
able to bid deregulated gas away from other pipelines because the
higher prices on decontrolled gas can be averaged with the lower




159

prices paid for gas still subject to controls. This means that different
consumers may well pay substantially different average prices, and
that large quantities of gas will be reallocated artificially because of
differential access to controlled gas. In particular, the intrastate pipelines will have relatively little access to controlled gas, and so a very
substantial amount of gas will shift out of the intrastate market into
the interstate market. Interstate pipelines also will vary in their ability
to bid for decontrolled gas. In short, in addition to the resource
waste involved in gas production under the NGPA, both controlled
and decontrolled gas will be allocated inefficiently. The Department
of Energy estimates that the efficiency gain to the economy from full
gas decontrol in 1982 would be about $10 billion.
The prospect of a sharp price increase in 1985, along with the
other problems inherent in the NGPA, may provide an impetus
toward extension of price controls on all gas beyond 1985. This
would resurrect all of the additional consumption and production inefficiencies experienced before passage of the NGPA. If price controls were extended, gas production would be reduced and oil consumption and imports would be stimulated. Furthermore, the total
net decrease in proved domestic gas reserves from 1971 through
1979 was almost 96 trillion cubic feet. Extension of controls therefore would have very serious effects upon future domestic gas reserves.
Some observers have argued that decontrol would make producers
better off at the expense of consumers, and that decontrol would
hurt the poor. Both of these assertions are subject to serious question. Compared to conditions under the NGPA, decontrol would
make some producers and consumers better off and some worse off.
The averaging of controlled and uncontrolled prices under the
NGPA results in high prices for some producers and lower ones for
others. Decontrol would move all prices toward the common marketclearing level. Similarly, the NGPA forces some consumers implicitly
to subsidize others, so that consumers as a group would be no better
off under the NGPA than under full decontrol. Moreover, decontrol
would benefit a wide class of individuals and groups, including the
poor, by improving the productive efficiency of the economy as a
whole. Hence, decontrol would make some poor individuals worse
off, but others better off. Price controls are a costly and inefficient
method of avoiding the adverse effects of rising fuel prices.
Some commentators have argued that gas decontrol ought to be
accompanied by a "windfall profits" tax, perhaps patterned after the
crude oil "windfall profits" tax. It should be noted that the latter tax
is not based on profits, windfall or otherwise. It is actually an excise
tax on domestic crude oil production. A "windfall profits" tax on gas




160

would be likely to generate the same sort of inefficiencies: reduced
domestic production, increased imports, and consumption of more
resources in domestic production than otherwise would be the case.
Other taxes, such as severance taxes on old gas, may be less harmful
if they generate only small distortions in incremental production incentives.
TRANSPORTATION

The reduction in Federal economic regulation of the transportation industry is promoting a more efficient transportation system.
The airline, motor carrier, railroad, and intercity bus industries are
not now characterized by any of the market failures discussed in
Chapter 2. There are many competitors in each industry. Transportation is not a public good, since individuals pay for each trip or shipment. There are no external costs or benefits that would warrant the
regulation of prices or the number of competitors.
Since 1978 the Congress has passed three major pieces of legislation to reduce the regulation of these industries. A phased deregulation of the airlines is now being carried out and will be completed
with the elimination of the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) on January
1, 1985. The Motor Carrier Act of 1980 and the Staggers Rail Act of
1980 provide the authority to eliminate significant portions of the
economic regulation of trucks and railroads, but they do not prescribe an end to regulation. Both require definite action by the Interstate Commerce Commission to eliminate as much regulation as the
law permits. A bill to reform regulation of the intercity bus industry
passed the House of Representatives in November 1981.
Airlines

Deregulation of domestic airlines continued in 1981 according to
the schedule of the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978. On December
31, 1981, the Civil Aeronautics Board lost the power to determine
the routes of individual airlines. Earlier in the year CAB approved a
proposal to allow the airlines to file only maximum fares. In the past
they have been required to include in their tariff filings every price
that they offered to the public.
A pending prohibition on U.S. airline participation in the International Air Transport Association conference, which determines air
fares between the United States and Europe, became a bargaining
point in multilateral meetings with European governments. A tentative interim agreement was reached in December 1981. If implemented, greater price flexibility could allow airlines to offer new discount
fares for flights to and from Europe. In exchange, U.S. airlines will
be able to participate in the conferences to set prices.




161

Intercity Trucking

The regulatory framework for the motor carrier industry was
changed by the Motor Carrier Act of 1980. The act's provisions were
rapidly implemented initially by ICC. A large number of applications
for authority to provide service were granted, the geographic and
commodity authority in new certificates was broadened, and price reductions occurred in both the truckload and less-than-truckload sectors. The industry, although not fully deregulated, appears to be
much more competitive than in the past.
More recently, however, the pace of regulatory reform has slowed.
Restrictions on the scope of new certificates have increased, and
some applications for rate reductions have been rejected by the ICC.
Discounts offered to shippers have been called "blatantly illegal/'
Railroads

The deregulatory provisions of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980 have
helped to increase the efficiency of the railroads and to improve their
performance. A new standard of revenue adequacy, based on the current cost of capital, gives greater rate flexibility to railroads with inadequate revenues. Despite an improved financial position during the
last year, almost all railroads are currently considered as having inadequate revenues.
Significant changes in ICC regulation of the rail industry have been
implemented as a result of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980. Contracts
between railroads and individual shippers are now legal and are virtually free of any ICC regulation. Approximately 550 such contracts
were filed at the ICC during the first year of the new law. Rates that
are less than 165 percent of variable cost are not regulated. Rates
and practices for shipping trailers or containers on flatcars are now
exempt from regulation. Rates and practices for shipping fresh fruits
and vegetables have been exempt since 1979. In addition, four railroad mergers have been submitted and two have received ICC approval without the attachment of the traditional restrictive conditions
to protect affected railroads.
Intercity Buses

Federal regulation of the intercity bus industry began almost accidently in 1935, when motor carriers of passengers (buses) were included under ICC regulation of intercity trucks. In November 1981
the House of Representatives passed a bill that would provide for
some regulatory reform of the bus industry. The bill would eliminate
one of the many criteria that the ICC uses to determine whether a
bus company can begin new service. It would also allow more price
flexibility by establishing a zone in which the ICC cannot reject fare
changes, but the rate bureau, which sets collective rates for the in-




162

dustry, would continue. The Administration will work with the Senate
during 1982 to strengthen the deregulatory initiatives in the Housepassed legislation.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Government regulation of telecommunications affects both broadcasters, including owners of cable television systems, and common
carriers.
Broadcasting

The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) exercises control
over broadcasting through the issuance of radio and television broadcasting licenses. There were 4,575 commercial AM, 3,272 commercial
FM, and 751 commercial TV stations (518 VHF and 233 UHF) on
the air on November 30, 1980. Because no party can own more than
7 AM, 7 FM, and 7 TV licenses, ownership is fairly unconcentrated.
Cable television (CATV) had approximately 17 million subscribers in
1980, with the five largest firms having about 30 percent of the subscribers.
The economic justification for government regulation of this industry has been based on perceived rather than actual conditions. The
usual justification has been scarcity of available broadcasting frequencies. Closer examination, however, reveals that the scarcity was a
product of government action as much as it was a product of natural
causes. This was apparent in the manner in which the FCC allocated
channels for TV stations in 1952 to protect existing VHF licensees.
Whatever the justification for regulation in the past, the growth of
CATV, pay TV, and the possibility of direct satellite transmissions
are reducing the importance of the frequency spectrum.
The FCC has made several moves toward deregulation. In February 1981 the Commission deregulated most commercial radio broadcasting, while in May it introduced a simplified renewal application
which has only five questions. On the other hand, the FCC withdrew
its proposal to allow AM radio stations to broadcast at intervals of 9
kilohertz rather than the present 10 kilohertz. This change would
have increased the number of AM stations, although at some cost to
existing AM stations. The standard in most of the world has become
9 kilohertz.
The Congress also contributed to the deregulation of broadcasting
by including some important provisions in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981. This act extended the length of TV licenses
from 3 to 5 years and radio licenses from 3 to 7 years, while establishing a lottery to determine who will get new licenses.
In September 1981 the Commission transmitted legislative proposals to the Congress designed to streamline FCC operations and allow




163

it to rely on market forces as the primary factor in telecommunications policymaking. These proposals would be an important step forward in the deregulation of broadcasting.
Common Carrier
At the present time there is no competition in the provision of
local telephone service. Such service is provided on a franchised monopoly basis by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) (80
percent) and independent telephone companies (20 percent). AT&T
handles 95 percent of long-distance telephone calls, but it now faces
competition in this area from other suppliers, such as MCI and
Southern Pacific.
The growth of effective competitors for AT&T, especially in customer equipment and long-distance service, has eroded some of
AT&T's ability to cross-subsidize from high-profit to low-profit activities. Since regulation has been based on the assumption that the
cross-subsidy would be maintained, the market's new conditions have
made the existing regulatory framework inappropriate.
A restructuring of the industry has come from three directions. In
1980 the FCC permitted AT&T to start selling customer equipment
and enhanced services through a fully separate subsidiary to be established by March 1, 1982. That date has been shifted to January 1,
1983, Meanwhile, the Congress has been considering legislation that
would alter the structure of AT&T by separating it into regulated
and unregulated components under the same corporate framework.
More recently, the Justice Department's antitrust suit against AT&T,
which had sought full divestiture of the company's potentially monopolistic services, was resolved by a tentative agreement that AT&T
would divest itself of all of its local operating companies in exchange
for an end to the court suit. Since the local operating companies are
regulated monopolies, their divestiture is an essential development
for the remainder of AT&T to be a truly competitive force.
ANTITRUST
There has been a dramatic shift in antitrust policy under this Administration. Enforcement will focus on the critical areas implied by
the analysis in Chapter 2: horizontal mergers among dominant firms
in an industry, and price-fixing agreements among competing firms.
Meanwhile, antitrust enforcement actions whose benefits are questionable are under continuous review. The Robinson-Patman Act, which
prohibits price discrimination, can restrict the ability of wholesale
producers to give quantity discounts to retail sellers. Because sellers
find it hard to erect long-term barriers to competition from other
sellers, it is illogical for them to try to carry on the predatory prac-




164

tices which the law seeks to prohibit. Vertical mergers and agreements, which can be illegal under the Clayton Act, generally are motivated more by a desire for greater economic efficiency than a wish
to eliminate competition. For example, it is a common practice for a
dealer to sell the product of one firm after obtaining the contractual
protection of having an exclusive right to make sales in a given territory. Without territorial protection, a dealer would have only a limited incentive to advertise the qualities of the product, since much of
the benefit of advertising would be captured by competitors. Since
advertising is an important source of information for buyers, territorial restrictions can promote its dissemination.
Enforcement of the antitrust laws has now taken a clearly economic
orientation in both the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission. In the Antitrust Division,
decisions on which companies to investigate and what cases to
pursue are carefully scrutinized to determine whether the cases are
economically sound. The department has also been developing a new
set of merger guidelines that would follow broader economic criteria
than the present set, which focuses almost exclusively on concentration ratios and market shares within an industry.
In addition to the tentative agreement in the AT&T case mentioned above, the Department of Justice settled its longstanding case
against International Business Machines (IBM) in early 1982. The
IBM case was dismissed because the Department of Justice decided
that the government's case was without merit. The restructured
AT&T will be an important new competitive element in the markets
that have been served by IBM.
GUIDELINES FOR REGULATORY REFORM
During its first year in office the Administration has attempted to
establish a new regulatory environment. The Administration's goal is
to eliminate wasteful or outdated regulation and to make necessary
regulation more efficient and more flexible. This effort includes
three tasks: (1) review of the basic statutes authorizing regulation; (2)
review of existing regulations; and (3) review of proposed regulations. The Administration's program has not yet focused on the first
of these tasks (except for the Clean Water Act construction grants
program and the Clean Air Act), but it will do so next year after it
has completed its review of the major existing regulatory programs.
In pursuit of the goal of better Federal regulation, several guidelines
may be useful.
1. Individuals should have maximum opportunity for personal choice. Regulation is not a substitute for efficient markets but an alternative to




165

unregulated markets which have failed to allocate resources efficiently. Therefore, regulation should be limited to cases where market
failure has-been demonstrated and the cost of government intervention is less than the benefits of improved resource allocation. Even
though there is a need for government regulation of some markets,
the means used should maintain consumer sovereignty to the maximum extent possible.
2. Regulation should take place at the appropriate level of government The
primary economic reason for most regulation is the existence of external effects. The costs or tolerance of these external effects may
vary among locations. Economic efficiency, therefore, calls for the
degree and type of regulation to vary also. National standards tend
to be too severe in some regions, while being too lax in others. Federal regulation should be limited to situations where the actions in
one State have substantial external effects in other States, constitutional rights are involved, or interstate commerce would be significantly disrupted by differences in local regulations,
3. Wherever possible, the government should provide incentives rather than
directives. Regulation occurs within a dynamic environment. The
lowest cost technology for pollution abatement at the present time,
for example, will certainly be obsolete at some time in the future.
Directives do not create incentives for commercial firms to search for
lower cost technologies, unlike such approaches as the establishment
of marketable rights in pollution emissions, which would create a
continuing incentive for firms to search for methods to achieve lower
levels of pollution. Benefit-cost analysis can be a valuable tool in
evaluating alternative regulatory schemes.




166

CHAPTER 7

The United States in the International
Economic System
THE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICIES to control inflation and restore vigorous real growth in the United States
will have a profound and favorable impact on the rest of the world.
As the President told delegates at the 1981 Annual Meetings of the
World Bank and International Monetary Fund, ". . . the most important contribution any country can make to world development is to
pursue sound economic policies at home." More generally, the Administration's approach to international economic issues is based on
the same principles which underlie its domestic programs: a belief in
the superiority of market solutions to economic problems and an emphasis on private economic activity as the engine of noninflationary
growth.
This chapter reviews three areas important to U.S. international
economic policy: the role of the dollar in the international monetary
system, the increased importance of international trade and finance
for the U.S. economy, and the evolving role of international institutions in promoting a more open international economic environment.
During much of the postwar period, under what was known as the
Bretton Woods system, most governments held their exchange rates
fixed against the dollar by intervening in the exchange markets whenever supply of and demand for their currencies were not in balance
at the prevailing exchange rate. The U.S. Government usually did
not intervene in the exchange markets, but stood ready to buy and
sell gold against dollars at a fixed price with foreign official agencies.
In 1973 the Bretton Woods system of fixed but periodically adjustable exchange rates collapsed. An increasingly expansionary U.S.
monetary policy and a decline in U.S. economic performance accelerated that collapse, but the end of the fixed-rate system probably
would have occurred in any case.
Although the role of the dollar in international markets has declined somewhat over the past three decades, it remains the central
currency of the international monetary system. Consequently, both
the United States and the rest of the world benefit from having a
strong and stable dollar, that is, one with stable purchasing power.




167

This cannot be met through government intervention in exchange
markets. Rather, it requires that the United States pursue noninflationary economic policies designed to strengthen its economic performance.
A strong economy requires the maintenance of open markets both
at home and abroad. Open trade based on mutually agreed upon
rules is consistent with, indeed integral to, the Administration's commitment to strenthening the domestic economy. The maintenance of
open markets has become increasingly important in recent years as
the shares of foreign trade and investment have grown relative to the
size of the U.S. economy.
International institutions have contributed greatly to the economic
prosperity the world has enjoyed since World War II by helping to
promote increased international trade and investment and to
strengthen individual economies. In his World Bank-International
Monetary Fund speech President Reagan also remarked that, "The
Bretton Woods institutions and the General Agreement on Trade
and Tariffs (GATT) established generalized rules and procedures to
facilitate individual enterprise and an open international trading and
financial system. They recognized that economic incentives and increased commercial opportunities would be essential to economic
recovery and growth." As the economic environment in which these
institutions operate continues to change, we must assure that these
institutions continue to evolve in a manner suitable to maintaining
and strengthening the open international economic system from
which we all benefit.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS
THE DOLLAR IN THE INTERNATIONAL SETTING

The availability of a stable and convertible dollar for use as a store
of value and a medium of international exchange contributed significantly to the sustained world economic recovery following World
War II. The U.S. dollar still holds a major position in world financial
markets. However, this position was weakened by high and varying
inflation in the United States relative to that abroad during the
1970s. Poor U.S. economic performance and stronger records in
such countries as Japan and West Germany led to a depreciation of
the dollar in foreign exchange markets and to the diversification of
private and official asset holdings in international financial markets
into other currencies. When the purchasing power of the dollar
became less stable than the purchasing power of other major currencies, foreigners did not want to continue to hold as large a share of




168

their wealth in dollar-denominated assets or rely as much on the
dollar as the standard currency in international transactions.
The dollar remains the principal currency for international commercial and financial transactions. Because of this, both the United
States and the rest of the world would benefit from a stronger and
more stable U.S. dollar. The strength and stability of the dollar
depend directly on the ability of the United States to pursue noninflationary economic policies. In the late 1960s and the 1970s the
United States failed to meet this objective. A continuing high and
varying rate of inflation led to a sharp decline in the dollar's foreign
exchange value during the late 1970s and to the dollar crisis of 1978,
which threatened the stability of international financial markets.
It would be desirable to lessen the differences in economic policies
and performance at home and abroad which have caused much of the
exchange-rate volatility in the recent past. Formal arrangements which
peg exchange rates, however, cannot guarantee lasting coordination,
as was demonstrated by the history of the Bretton Woods system. As
a general proposition, one way to achieve compatibility of policies is
for countries voluntarily to adopt the monetary rule of a large country
whose avowed goal is to stabilize prices. Such a commitment becomes a de facto affiliation which will last as long as that larger country performs its task reliably and the smaller countries determine the
arrangements to be beneficial. The larger country must be aware that
a systematic oversupply of its money will erode confidence and hence
reduce the foreign exchange value of its currency. In international
markets, where there is competition among monies, high confidence
monies eventually replace low confidence monies.
EXCHANGE-RATE MOVEMENTS

Changes in exchange rates, like changes in stock market prices, are
largely unpredictable in the short run. New infomation continuously
leads exchange-market participants to revise their forecasts of the
state of the economy and the stance of economic policies. Exchange
rates can exhibit large short-run fluctuations in response to such
changes in economic outlook.
Over a longer period, exchange-rate changes reflect differences in
inflation rates between countries; that is, purchasing power parity
should hold in the long run. In Chart 7-1, measures of the nominal
and the real effective exchange rates are shown for the United States
from 1973 to 1981. The real effective exchange rate is here defined
as the nominal effective foreign exchange value of the dollar (a tradeweighted exchange rate) multiplied by the ratio of the U.S. consumer
price index (CPI) to the foreign consumer price index (March
1973=100). Purchasing power parity holds when the real effective




169

exchange rate is 100; below 100 the dollar depreciates in real terms;
above 100 the dollar appreciates in real terms. Two observations
about the graph are in order. First, there were substantial and
persistent deviations from purchasing power parity but a tendency
for the real effective exchange rate to gravitate around the 100 line.
Second, nominal and real effective exchange rates generally moved in
the same direction.
Chart 7-1

Nominal and Real Effective
Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar
MARCH 1973-100

120
115
110
105
100

95
90
85
80
75

iimlmiiliiMiliimliiiiiliiiiiliimliiiiilimihiiiih
1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

NOTE.—THE EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE IS COMPUTED USING MULTILATERAL TRADE
SHARES OF THE G-10 COUNTRIES PLUS SWITZERLAND. THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE
IS CALCULATED BY ADJUSTING THE NOMINAL INDEX FOR RELATIVE MOVEMENTS IN
CONSUMER PRICES (THIS IS ONE AMONG VARIOUS WAYS TO MEASURE REAL EXCHANGE
RATES).
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE
SYSTEM.

The substantial movement in this measure of real exchange rates,
however, does not invalidate the long-term purchasing power parity
relationship. There are three main reasons why short-run deviations
from long-run purchasing power parity occur. First, changes in the
general price level, accompanied by changes in the ratio of traded to
nontraded commodities prices (the internal terms of trade), affect
real exchange rates. This is so because the net export surplus (deficit) of the country experiencing an improvement in the relative price
of traded goods rises (falls). For a given price level, the exchange
rate must adjust to restore long-run equilibrium in the current account.




170

Movements in real exchange rates also can take place because the
"terms of finance" change. That is, there may be shifts in the currency preferences and risks faced by participants in international financial markets which in turn affect expected yields on assets denominated
in various currencies.
Finally, real exchange rates tend to move in the same direction as
nominal exchange rates because prices change more slowly than
nominal exchange rates. As a consequence, changes in monetary
policy quickly affect nominal interest rates in financial markets,
and more gradually, the price level. Thus, changes in monetary
growth affect both real and nominal exchange rates in the short run.
Over the longer term, however, monetary growth does not influence
real exchange rates.
All of these forces have been present during the last decade. Over
this period the U.S. economy has been subjected to significant
changes in the prices of internationally traded goods, especially oil.
For instance, the external terms of trade, measured by the ratio of
the price deflator for exports of goods and services to the price deflator for imports of goods and services, fell sharply in 1973 and in
1979 as the two oil price shocks of the 1970s left their marks on the
U.S. economy (Chart 7-2). In addition, the U.S. economy became
Chart 7-2

U.S. External Terms of Trade

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

NOTE.—DATA ARE RATIO OF IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR FOR EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES
TO IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR FOR IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




171

much more open in the 1970s than it used to be. As an example, exports as a proportion of gross national product (GNP) nearly doubled during the 1970s.
Historically, real exchange rates generally have moved in the direction of restoring long-term equilibrium in external accounts. In the
1977-78 period the United States had a cumulative current account
deficit of $28.2 billion. The United States and foreign central banks
then intervened massively in an effort to contain the depreciation of
the dollar. Foreign net purchases of dollars were more than double
the amount of the cumulative current account deficit. Yet the dollar
continued to depreciate, both in nominal and real terms. Market participants judged the intervention to be ineffective and viewed the deterioration in the U.S. current account as an accurate reflection of
underlying U.S. economic policies and performance. The depreciation was pronounced and persistent, but achieved the expected
result of redressing the current account imbalance during 1979 and
1980.
In 1981 the dollar appreciated sharply, both in nominal and real
terms. The nominal appreciation of the dollar on a trade-weighted
basis relative to other major currencies was 15.6 percent. This movement is explained only in part by the current account surplus of the
United States relative to that of its trading partners. Another factor
was a shift toward dollar-denominated assets, which may have been a
consequence of the President's economic recovery program. Large
sales of dollar assets by foreign central banks and an increase in foreign interest rates relative to U.S. interest rates did little to prevent
the dollar from rising. The growing preference for dollar-denominated assets relative to other assets reflected a positive response to underlying economic policies of the Administration.
OFFICIAL INTERVENTION IN THE EXCHANGE MARKETS

There is a long tradition among monetary authorities of intervening in the foreign exchange markets to prevent what is known as
overshooting, undershooting, or, more generally, disorderly market
conditions. But there is no conclusive evidence that official intervention in the past has achieved its purpose. The large purchases of
dollar-denominated assets by foreign central banks in 1977-78 did
not prevent the dollar from depreciating, and their large sales of
dollar assets in 1980-81 did not prevent the dollar from appreciat-




172

ing. Moreover, intervention may have been counterproductive.
Market participants did not know whether it signaled a change in
monetary policy, thereby leading to increased uncertainty on their
part.
When the previous Administration left office, intervention by the
United States was being conducted at a relatively high volume, virtually on a day-to-day basis, with the objective of using the periods of
dollar strength first to cover outstanding foreign currency liabilities
and later to build foreign currency reserves. This was the first time,
at least in recent history, that the United States had embarked on a
deliberate policy of acquiring substantial foreign currency reserves.
(For a brief history of U.S. Government intervention in the exchange
markets, see the appendix to this chapter.)
Early in 1981 the new Administration scaled back U.S. intervention
in foreign exchange markets. In conjunction with a strong emphasis
on economic fundamentals, this Administration has returned to the
policy of intervening only when necessary to counter conditions of
severe disorder in the market.
As in the past, no attempt has been made to define disorderly
market conditions in advance. When making a decision on whether
exchange-market conditions justify intervention, the U.S. Government will consult closely with the governments of other major industrial countries. Also as in the past, the Department of the Treasury
and the Federal Reserve will keep the public informed regarding U.S.
exchange-market intervention policy. Although the Administration
does not expect intervention in the exchange markets to occur on a
regular basis, it will continue to monitor closely developments in
those markets.
With the President's economic program firmly in place, and with
the Federal Reserve following a policy of gradually reducing the rate
of monetary growth to a noninflationary level, the occurrence of disorderly conditions is likely to be significantly less in the future than
in the past. But unforeseen circumstances at home or abroad could
cause disorderly conditions, and intervention may at times be necessary.
IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. MONETARY POLICY

In Chapter 3 it was argued that monetary authorities have the ability to achieve given values and growth rates of nominal magnitudes




173

and that price stability is the principal objective of monetary policy.
Under such a policy, interest rates cannot be fixed. But market interest rates and exchange rates are related by what is known as interest
rate parity: the premium in the forward exchange markets approximates the difference between comparable domestic and foreign interest rates, It follows that as interest rates change over time, nominal
exchange rates will vary as well. A stable price level, therefore, may
not necessarily imply constant nominal interest rates or constant exchange rates.
Price stability in the United States might lessen considerably the
dispersion of inflation rates now prevailing in the world, but cannot
eliminate them altogether. Economic policies and performance will
continue to differ from country to country. Hence, exchange rates
will adjust to reflect such differences. But even if differences in inflation were to disappear, exchange rates would have to accommodate
changes in relative prices. Real exchange rates cannot be held constant in dynamic economies. The greatest contribution that U.S. price
stability will make to the exchange market is that it will act to reduce
exchange rate volatility.
Current U.S. monetary and intervention policies are not expressions of "benign neglect/' That notion was based on the premise
that the foreign trade sector of the United States was so small relative to the rest of the economy that it could be ignored. By contrast,
the Administration stresses the pivotal role of the United States in
the world.
TRADE ISSUES AND POLICIES
TRADE IN THE U.S. ECONOMY

Foreign trade has become a vital factor in U.S. business activity
and employment. In 1980 exports and imports of goods and services
each represented over 12 percent of the gross national product.
Twenty years ago exports were less than 6 percent of GNP; imports,
less than 5 percent. Much of this shift has occurred in the last
decade, during which exports and imports as shares of GNP have
about doubled. In real terms, however, the rate of growth in U.S. imports of goods and services was stronger in the 1960s than in 1970s,
while U.S. export growth was stronger in the 1970s than in the
1960s. The improved export performance reflects two key factors
apart from the evolving ramifications of the trade liberalization of the
postwar period and the real depreciation of the dollar in the 1970s:
our increased trade with developing countries, whose real .GNP
growth slowed less in the 1970s than that of the developed countries,




174

and our specialization in exports of high technology products, agricultural products, and services.
Recent movements in merchandise trade are shown in Table 7-1;
they reflect in part cyclical factors. The sharp decline in real GNP
during the second quarter of 1980 was accompanied by a substantial
drop in U.S. merchandise imports. From a seasonally adjusted total
of $65 billion in the first quarter of 1980, merchandise imports fell to
$59 billion in the third quarter. At the same time, demand for U.S.
exports remained buoyant, yielding in the third quarter of 1980 the
smallest merchandise trade deficit since 1976—$11.6 billion at an annual rate. Thereafter, the rebound in U.S. economic activity from the
extremely weak level in the second quarter of 1980, coupled with a
slowing of growth abroad and the lagged impact of dollar appreciation
on U.S. international competitiveness, acted to widen the deficit. By the
the last quarter of 1981, it had risen to $37.0 billion at an annual rate.
TABLE 7-1.—U.S. merchandise exports, imports, and balance, 1977-81
[Billions of dollars; f.a.s.J
Imp orts

Exp >rts

Period

Agricultural

Nonagriculturai

Petroleum and
products

Nonpetroleum

Balance

1977
1978
1979

24.3
299
35.6

96.5
1122
148.9

45.0
42.3
60.5

106.7
133.5
151.3

-30.9
-33.8
-27.3

1980
1981 1

422
442

1817
192.0

78.9
77.6

170.4
186.4

-253
27.8

1980:
1
II
Ill
IV

103
10.1
10.8
11 1

446
45.6
454
461

21.2
21.0
17.4
193

43.9
41.4
41.8
434

-10.1
-6.7
-2.9
-56

12.7
11.0
100
104

483
49.3
479
464

20.8
21.2
17.9
177

44.9
46.1
470.
484

-4.7
-6.9
-7.0
-9.3

1981:
|

II
II! 1 . .
IV
1
Preliminary.
Note.—Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military.
Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
Data contain revisions for the first three quarters of 1981.
Detail may not add to balance due to rounding.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

A very broad breakdown of trade by major commodity groups is
also shown in Table 7-1. Until recently, agricultural goods accounted
for about 20 percent of total U.S. exports. Quarterly changes in the
value of U.S. imports during 1980 and 1981 were determined largely
by movements in the value of petroleum imports. Petroleum import
volume in 1981 declined 13 percent compared to 1980, in the face of
an increase in price of 12 percent. The value of petroleum imports
fell dramatically in the last half of 1981, with both volume and price
declining. The latter reflected reduced worldwide demand for oil




175

due to the continued appreciation of the U.S. dollar and the downturns in economic activity in the United States and Europe, all in
tandem with adjustments to oil inventories.
While the dollar price of oil has fallen, the appreciation of the
dollar has caused the price of oil in European and Japanese currencies to rise. For Europe and Japan, therefore, oil import values rose
more rapidly than in the United States during 1981 and a parallel increase in their concern with their own trade balances has added to
protectionist pressures in some of those countries.
Although cyclical factors have played and will continue to play an
important role in movements of the trade account, the strong appreciation of the dollar through much of 1981 has already begun to be
reflected in trade flows. While changes in economic activity are
quickly translated into movements of exports and imports, changes in
relative prices generally take more time to alter trade flows. Hence,
trade flows in early 1982 will continue to be influenced by the earlier
sharp real appreciation of the dollar.
In some instances the impact of exchange-rate changes in 1981 was
stronger than cyclical effects. U.S. imports of nonpetroleum products
grew steadily throughout 1981, despite the weakening of U.S. economic activity. The volume of nonpetroleum imports grew very
strongly, while their price fell during the year, both reflecting the appreciation of the dollar.
THE STANCE OF U.S. TRADE POLICY

The Administration spelled out in its July 1981 "Statement on U.S.
Trade Policy" its commitment to pursue, at home and abroad, policies aimed at achieving open trade and reducing trade distortions.
There are five central components to that policy.
• Restoring strong noninflationary growth at home. Fundamental to any
effective trade policy is carrying out domestic programs that increase the incentives to invest, to raise productivity, and to
reduce costs, thus helping to lower inflationary pressures. These
policies will strengthen the ability of American firms to respond
to changes in domestic and international markets.
• Reducing self-imposed trade disincentives. Confusing and needlessly
complex laws and regulations that inhibit exports and imports
will be reformed.
• Effective and strict enforcement of U. S. trade laws and international agreements. Our policy toward other nations' barriers to trade and to
investment or export subsidies is one of strong opposition. Our
trading partners must recognize that it is in their own interest, as
well as ours, to assure that international trade and investment
remain a two-way street.




176

• A more effective approach to industrial adjustment problems. In a healthy
economy some industries and regions will grow more rapidly
than others, and some sectors will experience more difficulty. If
unhindered, the market will signal these changes and provide incentives for adjustments. Market forces, rather than government
bail-outs, will be relied upon to make appropriate adjustments.
• Reducing government barriers to the flow of trade and investment among
nations. To this end it is necessary to continue efforts to improve
and expand existing international trade rules, particularly into
the areas of services and investment.
At home, as well as in other nations, public policy discussions
about international trade often lead to disagreement. The direct
beneficiaries of import relief or export subsidy are usually few in
number, but each has a large individual stake in the outcome. Thus,
their incentive for vigorous political activity is strong.
But the costs of such policies may far exceed the benefits. It may
cost the public $40,000-$50,000 a year to protect a domestic job that
might otherwise pay an employee only half that amount in wages and
benefits. Furthermore, the costs of protection are widely diffused—in
the United States, among 50 States and some 230 million citizens.
Since the cost borne by any one citizen is likely to be quite small, and
may even go unnoticed, resistance at the grass-roots level to protectionist measures often is considerably less than pressures for their
adoption.
The decisions taken in trade cases inevitably reflect political and
social forces as well as basic economic considerations. The record of
decisions, not surprisingly, continues to be mixed. For example, the
extension of the Multifiber Arrangement, agreed upon in December
1981, is more restrictive than open-trade advocates might have preferred, but the principle of openness was adhered to closely in the
decision concerning the nonrubber footwear industry. A similar contrast can be found in the automobile and industrial fastener cases.
CHANGING ATTITUDES TOWARD INTERNATIONAL TRADE

The gradual opening of the world economy to trade in the postwar
period has brought major benefits both to the United States and to
our trading partners. Long experience has shown that the benefits of
trade tend to be mutual. Competition, whether domestic or international, fosters the allocation of resources to relatively more productive activities. Better products, at lower prices, appear in the marketplace. Consumer choice is expanded. Technologies are more readily
diffused. Inflationary pressures are reduced. With time, productivity,
and hence income, rise.




177

The benefits from open trade are derived as much from reductions
in barriers to imports as from expansion of exports. American exporters seek foreign buyers who have access to the U.S. dollars necessary to buy U.S. goods and services. While the U.S. dollar is a convertible currency that, is widely used in a variety of international
transactions, significant amounts of dollars are made available when
Americans import foreign goods and services, paying in U.S. dollars.
Put simply, our imports put U.S. dollars into the hands of foreigners
who then use those dollars—be it to buy U.S. goods, services, or
assets, or to exchange currencies with others who want dollars. In the
short run, we can, and in many cases do, lend foreigners the dollars
to finance their purchases of our exports. When such loans are made
at market rates of interest, trade is advanced. But when governmentsubsidized credit is provided, instead, such funds are denied to other,
more productive uses.
Restricting U.S. imports would reduce the amount of dollars available to those in other countries who would buy our wheat, aircraft,
chemicals, or machinery unless we made up the difference by loans
to foreigners. In some cases, the connection between imports and exports is even more direct. Import restraints can reduce employment
and profits in our more productive export industries. The nonrubber
footwear industry offers one such example. U.S. exporters of hides to
foreign shoe producers suffered as a result of our restraints on
imports of foreign shoes. More generally, import restriction by one
country may invite others to retaliate.
Pressures for retaliation, which tend to strengthen when, as now,
output growth rates are declining and unemployment is rising, are
one of a number of forces threatening to stem the growth of world
trade. In the last year or so, the U.S. automobile, footwear, steel, and
textile industries have been among those actively seeking relief from
import competition. There are similarly strong pressures for government subsidy of export expansion—for example, in agriculture and in
high technology industries.
Such pressures for further government intervention reflect a potentially troublesome "neomercantilist" view which stresses export
expansion to the near exclusion of all other factors in a healthy international trading climate. If the U.S. Government, the reasoning runs,
were to take steps to favor sectors with export potential, the domestic economy would benefit. In this view, a large surplus in the
merchandise trade account is deemed an unmitigated "good/* a deficit "bad."
There is a fundamental inconsistency between such neomercantilism and the overall economic philosophy of the Administration,
which is committed to the goal of less, not more, government inter-




178

ference in the marketplace. It is just as easy to waste taxpayer dollars
and scarce economic resources on subsidizing exports as it is to
waste them on better-known examples of Federal profligacy. What is
desirable, indeed necessary, is that, consistent with the Administration's "Statement on U.S. Trade Policy/' the U.S. Government assure
the proper enforcement of trade laws, remove any unnecessary domestic impediments to trade, and likewise seek elimination of foreign
trade barriers which effectively limit our exports.
Competitiveness that is impaired by market forces should not be
restored by raising tariffs or subsidizing export industries. Such actions simply protect the trade-dependent industries, inviting them to
postpone the steps necessary to meet world competition while raising
costs to consumers and reducing the choices available in the marketplace. Policymakers can design and implement policies that invite improvements in investment, productivity, and employment, but the decision on whether to make such improvements is best left to the private sector.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF EXTERNAL IMBALANCES

In most circumstances a trade deficit by itself should not cause
concern. A trade deficit is a narrow concept. Goods are only part
of what the world trades; another major part of trade is composed of
services. Hence, the current account, which includes both, better indicates the country's international payments position. But the current
account balance is not a complete measure of international competitiveness either. What also matters is how current account deficits are
financed.
Table 7-2 sets out the major components of the current account of
the U.S. balance of payments: exports and imports (from Table 7-1),
services, and unilateral transfers. The growing importance of trade in
services is evident. The major contributor, by far, to the surplus on
services is investment income. Net investment income rose from less
than $18 billion in 1977 to almost $33 billion in 1980. As has been the
case in the recent past, large surpluses in the services account offset
large deficits in the merchandise account, yielding a small surplus in
the current account for the first three quarters of 1981.
Concern with the country's international payments position is appropriate when the basis of that concern is that the country is simultaneously experiencing a sustained deficit in its current account and a
persistent depreciation of its currency in the exchange markets. The
joint occurrence of these two events should alert economic policymakers to the possibility that the country may be losing competitiveness.




179

TABLE 7-2.—I'.S. international transactions, 1977-81
[Billions of dollars]

Exports

Imports

Balance

Exports

Imports

Balance

Unilateral
transfers, net

1977
1978
1979

120.8
142.1
184.5

151.7
175.8
211.8

-30.9
-33.8
-27.3

63.5
79.0
104,5

42.1
54.2
70.1

21.4
24.8
34.4

-4.6
-5.1
-5.6

1980 y
1981

224.0
236.1

249.3
264.0

-25.3
-27.8

120.7

84.6

36.1

-7.1

3.7

55.0
55.7
56.3
57.1

65.0
62.4
59.2
62.7

-10.1
^6.7
=2.9
-5.6

30.9
28.0
30.4
31.5

21.0
20.4
21.0
22.2

9.9
7.5
9.4
9.3

-1.9
-1.3
-1.5
=2.3

-=2.1
0.5
5.0
1.4

61.0
60.4
57.9
56.8

65.7
67.3
65.0
66.1

=4.7
= 6.9
= 7.0
-9.3

33.3
34.6
36.2

23.9
25.0
25.2

9.5
9.6
11.0

-1.5
-1.5
-1.9

Services

Merchandise *
Period

1980;

It
til
IV
1981:

II ".'. .
Ill 2
|V a

' " ' ' . " .

! .' '.

Current
account
balance

- 14,1
-14.1
1.4

3.3
1.1
2.1

1
Excludes
2

military.
Preliminary,
Note.—Data are on a balance of payments basis.
Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
Merchandise trade data contain revisions for the first three quarters of 1981.
Detail may not add to balances due to rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

It is particularly important not to become unduly preoccupied with
the trade or current account balances with a single foreign country.
Any policy to reduce a bilateral imbalance by restricting imports is likely to reduce the absolute volume of trade, and in consequence, the level
of economic well-being of both countries, and could have wider repercussions. A far more constructive approach would be for the nations
with restrictive trade practices and institutional barriers to imports to
reduce systematically those obstacles to the freer flow of trade and investment. Actions like those recently taken by Japan, for example,
should prove far more beneficial than measures by the United States to
restrict imports.
More broadly, and setting aside the sometimes significant statistical
discrepancies, global current account imbalances must add up to
zero. All countries cannot possibly run surpluses simultaneously. If
each nation tried to achieve such a goal, strong deflationary forces
would be set in motion. Today, for example, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) continues to report large current account surpluses; these have to be matched by current account
deficits in other countries. Given the important role of the United
States in world financial markets, one need not be concerned if the
U.S. current account moves into deficit as domestic economic policies
begin to revitalize the economy. With strong domestic performance,
U.S. import demand will also strengthen; the effects of this revitalization on U,S. exports will take more time. Thus, a deficit on current
account will simply reflect the adjustment process at work.




180

Nor should a current account deficit that is comfortably financed
by net inflows of capital evoke concern. The relationship is straightforward: goods and services comprise one aspect of international
commerce, financial and real assets another. If foreigners purchase
more U.S. real and financial assets in the United States—land, buildings, equities, and bonds—then the United States can afford to
import more goods and services from abroad. To look at one aspect
without considering the others is misleading.
In sum, the macroeconomic significance of a current account deficit depends on what gave rise to it and how it is financed. It is in
itself neither good nor bad. Nor should exchange-rate changes
required by long-term current account considerations be viewed as,
in themselves, good or bad; the costs to society of suppressing
exchange-rate movements must be compared to the costs of allowing
those movements. It is for these reasons that interference with
market mechanisms—whether in markets for goods or markets for
foreign exchange—is not part of the Administration's policy.
DEVELOPMENT, ADJUSTMENT, AND INTERNATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS
THE HERITAGE AND THE CHALLENGES

In his speech to the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia on October 15, 1981, President Reagan said:
"The postwar international economic system was created on the
belief that the key to national development and human progress is
individual freedom—both political and economic. This system provided only generalized rules in order to maintain maximum flexibility
and opportunity for individual enterprise and an open international
trading and financial system."
The record of this economic system is a record of more achievements than failures. As Table 7-3 shows, the industrialized world has
not been the only beneficiary of an open international trading and
financial system. A number of developing countries have done well
too. The real per capita GNP of 60 middle-income countries rose
about as fast as that of the industrial countries over the period 1950
to 1980, while GNP in those middle-income countries grew over 30
percent faster than in the industrial countries. On the other hand,
there are many low-income countries whose economic progress has
been disappointing.
As a result of faster economic growth abroad than in the United
States, the U.S. share of world output declined substantially over the
same period. Immediately after World War II this share was estimated to be approximately 40 percent. By 1950, with Europe and Japan




181

back on their feet, it had declined to one-third. It dropped to 25 percent by 1970 and further declined to 23 percent by 1980.
TABLE 7-3.—Real GNPgrowth rates, 1950 to 1980
[Average annual percent change]
Country grouping

GNP per
capita

GNP

Industrial countries

4.2

3.2

Market
No n market

4.2
45

3.1
34

5.5

Developing countries
Middle-income countries
Low-income countries

..

Capital-surplus oil exporters

3.2

5.6
5,1

3.1
2.9

11.2

7.9

Note,—Country groupings are classified according to World Development Report, 1981, World Bank.
Source: National Foreign Assessment Center.

Despite this favorable record for much of the rest of the world and
the United States, the open international system today faces three
major challenges. The first challenge arises from the conflict between
each country's short-term internal domestic objectives and mutual
longer term external interests. In the past, leadership in meeting
such a challenge was provided by large countries. The United Kingdom fulfilled this role for much of the 19th century up to World War
I, while the United States played a larger role after World War II.
Under U.S. leadership the Western alliance developed a nuclear
"umbrella,** achieved massive reductions of tariffs and other impediments thus giving major impetus to world trade, and created an international monetary system which provided rules of conduct for adjusting balance of payments imbalances. In today's environment, addressing issues such as defense and the evolution of international
economic arrangements are part of this challenge. The nature and
mutual importance of these issues implies that solutions to these
problems must be arrived at through consultation.
The second challenge is to maintain an open international economic system. A new wave of protectionism has taken the form of
quotas, subsidies, international cartels, administrative delays, and
burdensome enforcement of product standards. Imposition of such
measures has increased dramatically since the international negotiations in the Kennedy Round (completed in 1967) sharply reduced
both tariffs and the scope for their future use. The gains made in
opening markets for international trade, investment, and finance are
now threatened.
The third challenge is to respond to the aspirations of the developing countries for greater growth and development. Work under the
rubric of the New International Economic Order, as well as the




182

Brandt Commission report and the Tinbergen report, have focused
global attention on important development and resource issues
before the world community. While these reports make an effective
case for aid to the least developed countries, they in general place
too much emphasis on resource transfer and not enough emphasis
on resource development through private market mechanisms.
Indeed, these reports tend to downplay the role of the private sector
in the development process and instead rely on governments and international organizations as the best vehicles to promote development.
As already noted, a sizable number of developing countries have
done well in the post-World War II era. On the other hand, developing countries continue to be justified in claiming that the world trading system discriminates against them. Some industrial countries
have restricted trade in sensitive sectors of particular export interest
to developing countries, such as textiles.
MEETING THE CHALLENGES

The U.S. response to these challenges is based on an explicit shift
toward market-oriented solutions to economic problems. Solutions to
common problems in the world economy should be found through
continued efforts at cooperation and consultation among nations.
These efforts should aim at a renewed resolve to fight inflation and
secure higher investment with sustainable growth. At the Ottawa
Summit in July 1981 the President, along with other Western leaders, reaffirmed "our common objectives and our recognition of the
need to take into account the effects on others of policies we pursue.
We are confident in our joint determination and ability to tackle our
problems in a spirit of shared responsibility . . ."
International cooperation is particularly vital in stemming the drive
for greater protectionism both at home and abroad. The response of
many countries during the recent period of sluggish worldwide
growth has been to call for or impose new barriers to investment and
trade flows. The United States will continue to resist these tactics and
work for reductions in trade barriers through the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and through bilateral relationships.
In approaching the challenge to contribute to the needs of the developing world, the Administration seeks to emphasize the important
and historically dominant roles of trade and investment in economic
development. Although economic assistance on concessionary terms
continues to be a vital part of U.S. policy, establishment of a vibrant
private sector through trade and investment offers the best hope for
sustained noninflationary growth. The program for action that the




183

President put forth at the Cancun Summit in October 1981 contains
five guiding principles for development policy:
• stimulating international trade by opening up markets;
• tailoring particular development strategies to specific needs and
regions;
• guiding assistance toward the development of self-sustaining productive capacities;
• improving the climate in many developing countries for private
investment and technology transfer; and
• creating a political climate in which practical solutions can move
forward rather than founder on the reef of government policies
that interfere unnecessarily with the marketplace.
In line with these principles, the major goal of concessional foreign
aid programs should be to help those poorer countries which, for
reasons beyond their control, have not been able to improve their
standards of living. The rationale for aid to countries whose low economic performance results more from inappropriate domestic policies than from external factors needs to be reexamined.
EVOLVING ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTIONS

The United States recognizes the important roles and specialized
functions of the international financial institutions and believes these
institutions must continue to evolve. It is important to review the
roles of these institutions to ensure that they remain effective in the
years ahead. Most importantly, these institutions should be directed toward promoting market-oriented rather than government-administered solutions to international and domestic economic problems.
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has served the world
well in promoting and monitoring progress toward a liberalized trading system. Originally written in the immediate post-World War II
era with a small number of Western industrial countries as Contracting Parties, the GATT system has had to adapt to the changing world
economy. During the 1960s a Part V was added to the General
Agreement to take into account the special problems of developing
countries and to allow many of them to be brought within the GAIT
system. Special Protocols of Accession were drafted to bring Eastern
European nonmarket economies under the GATT umbrella as well.
Over the years, the emphasis of GATT has been altered to cope
with the ingenuity of governments and interest groups in devising
new forms of economic protectionism. The first several rounds of ne-




184

gotiations under GATT were concerned mainly with reducing high
tariff levels. The Kennedy Round, in addition to achieving sizable
tariff reductions, made a modest attempt to negotiate other commitments—including one on antidumping—while the principal focus of
the Tokyo Round (completed in 1979) was on extending GATT discipline to areas other than tariffs. These agreements proved decisively that the GATT system is flexible and can be improved over time.
However, GATT now faces a challenge because of increasing protectionist pressures worldwide and because the effectiveness of
GATT rules, which formally include all goods, has tended in practice
to be limited to trade in manufactures. GATT must now address
areas of international commerce where existing norms are inadequate, such as agriculture, and must define its role in establishing
norms in areas which traditionally have not been dealt with in GATT,
such as trade in services. Another area where distortions exist and
where greater international efforts are needed is in international investment. Finally, steps to integrate developing countries more completely into the GATT framework should be made, along with efforts
to encourage nonmembers to join agreements under GATT.
A new political impetus among developed and developing countries is required to revitalize GATT. The GATT Ministerial meeting
set for November 1982 will offer the international community an opportunity to maintain momentum toward a more open trading
system.
The World Bank

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) was created to lend funds for reconstruction of the war-ravaged economies and for economic development. Having accomplished
the first task admirably, it has, over the last quarter century, come to
focus heavily on the second. With the creation in 1956 of the International Finance Corporation—mandated to promote private sector enterprise in developing countries—and in 1960 by the establishment of
the International Development Association (IDA) to lend on highly
concessional terms to the poorest countries, the World Bank group was
formed.
During the 1970s these three institutions underwent rapid growth
and innovation, some of which has been controversial. President
Reagan indicated at the 1981 World Bank-International Monetary
Fund Annual Meetings that because the United States strongly supports the World Bank, the Administration also feels "a special responsibility to provide constructive suggestions to make it more effective." A major U.S. policy reassessment of the World Bank and
the regional development banks was thus carried out during 1981
and the final report was recently released.




185

That study strongly endorses the overall performance of the multilateral development banks, but also identifies key aspects which require improvement. Loan quality, not quantity, should have highest
priority. In addition, renewed attention should be focused on the criteria under which countries "mature" from soft loan window to hard
loan window, and "graduate" to unsubsidized participation in international capital markets. The study recommends that the United
States should begin to reduce its contributions to the soft loan facilities, noting that such reductions would not adversely affect users of
these facilities as long as strengthened "maturation" and "graduation" policies are followed,
In further assessing how the World Bank can be most effective, it
is useful to distinguish between its soft loan window (IDA) and its
hard loan window (IBRD), since these give it the capacity to tailor its
financing to a broad range of developing countries. There is no dispute that a good many countries need development assistance. But
views do vary on how best to give assistance—that is, through loans
or grants—and whether assistance should be on a multilateral or bilateral basis. A multilateral approach to official aid has the presumed
advantages of being cost-effective (that is, greater volumes of resources can be obtained for a given budget dollar), of allowing politics to be bypassed to some extent, and of facilitating policy reform
by conditioning loans and grants on certain changes. An arguable
disadvantage is that taxpayers in donor countries lose some control
both over where aid goes (since decisions are made collectively) and
how it is used. Verification of the effectiveness of aid is an issue
which was emphasized at times during the 1970s when the Bank itself
was among the chief spokesmen for larger aid programs. In light of
these considerations, the Council takes the view that official aid
would be more effective on a bilateral basis, and the Administration
has repeatedly stressed its intention to pursue a larger bilateral aid
program.
In any case, soft loan resources disbursed by the World Bank
should be directed to countries which are making serious attempts to
develop their economies on a rational basis but have inadequate
debt-servicing capacity and hence have little or no access to credit
markets. Part of the inability of some countries to achieve greater development can be traced to their domestic policies, and aid from
both the soft and hard loan windows should be more explicitly conditioned on improvements in those policies. In practice, there has been
resistance in some recipient countries to adopting policies which
reduce government intervention and allow a fuller play of market
forces. The chances that more efficient development will take place




186

are improved to the extent that the lending activities of the Bank are
designed so as to generate an increase in privately produced output.
Finally, there remain unresolved questions about the future size
and emphasis of World Bank activities. The success of the Bank
should not be measured by its ability to obtain funds from donor
countries, but rather by its performance in fostering economic
growth in developing countries.
The International Monetary Fund

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) currently provides a
framework in which governments can consult and cooperate in determining the structure and functioning of the international monetary
system. In particular, the Fund extends technical assistance and temporary balance of payments financing to members, in part conditioned on the implementation of economic policy measures designed to
correct the factors underlying their balance of payments imbalances.
In addition, it serves as a means for monitoring the exchange rate arrangements and policies of member governments. Finally, the IMF is
also charged with reviewing the adequacy of international liquidity
and with supplementing reserves, when necessary, through the allocation of Special Drawing Rights.
The Administration's approach to the IMF reflects a basic view of
the world economy which focuses on economic fundamentals, support for timely adjustment, and recognition of the pervasiveness and
benefits of market forces. The IMF Articles of Agreement recognize
that exchange-rate stability requires stability in the underlying economic and financial determinants of exchange rates.
Although nations may differ on the appropriate degree of exchange-market intervention, there is consensus that exchange-rate
developments are influenced fundamentally by domestic economic
conditions within member countries. The Administration strongly
supports further development under the IMF surveillance procedures
of what has become known as the Article IV consultation process.
Under the second amendment to the Articles of Agreement, the
Fund set forth a set of principles to govern developments and policy
actions that are consistent with an open international economic
system. In cases where the Fund believes that these principles may
not have been honored, it may send a staff mission to a member's
capital to discuss the member's economic policies with government
officials.
IMF Article IV consultations contribute to international stability in
a number of ways. First, such consultations provide information to
member governments regarding the national economic policies of




187

other member governments. Such information may be helpful in
shaping each member's domestic policies as well as useful in avoiding
conflicts because of misundertandings. Second, Article IV consultations provide a valuable base of information for Fund staff assessments of global economic and exchange-rate developments which in
turn provide useful information for national economic authorities.
Third, Article IV consultations provide a framework for frank critiques among the representatives of member governments. Fourth,
Article IV consultations provide a base from which all nations can develop a better understanding of the economic linkages among nations. And finally, these consultations can help a country to identify
and address emerging payments problems at an early stage.
The Administration, however, has encouraged the Fund to give renewed attention to the kinds of financial programs that it supports in
member countries. The U.S. Government has stressed the importance of effective IMF conditionality in promoting balance of payments adjustments. The justification for IMF financing is to encourage appropriate payments adjustment.
With the emergence of very large imbalances in world payments
since 1974, a major effort was made to expand access to IMF resources and to enhance the Fund's ability to support its members*
adjustment efforts. The access of individual countries to IMF financing has been increased significantly. In addition, IMF resources have
been expanded through the implementation of a 50 percent quota increase at the end of 1980 and through the establishment of IMF borrowing arrangements with Saudi Arabia and a few other countries.
The duration of IMF adjustment programs has been lengthened in
many cases because of the structural nature and depth of countries'
adjustment problems. Also, greater emphasis is being placed on
structural change—the reduction of economic distortions and disincentives, and enhancement of factors that will lead to greater saving,
innovation, investment, and growth.
The IMF must ensure that its increased resources are used in a
manner that is consistent with its Articles of Agreement. Traditionally, this has meant that access to IMF resources is available on a temporary basis to countries confronted with an external imbalance and
willing to undertake economic policy adjustments to eliminate these
imbalances and repay the Fund. Effective balance of payments adjustment frequently requires wider acceptance of market-oriented solutions. Import and export restrictions, price controls, rigid exchange
rates, and excessive government regulation often prevent a country
from achieving a sustainable balance of payments over time as well as
higher domestic growth rates.




188

Finally, the Administration has looked closely at the justifications
for a new proposed allocation of Special Drawing Rights. This issue
is controversial, given some countries1 financing problems and differences of opinion about the meaning and role of international liquidity. Although many countries have advocated an increase in holdings
of this international reserve asset, the United States has opposed
such an allocation at this time, given world inflation and the current
level of world liquidity. Even a modest new allocation of Special
Drawing Rights in present circumstances would appear to conflict
with the policies of monetary restraint being pursued in many countries.
Most international institutions were created after World War II,
each with clear objectives to satisfy. Over the last three and a half
decades the economic environment has changed dramatically, and
the member governments of these institutions have had to reach
agreement on how to reorganize the priorities and functions of the
institutions. These institutions continue to play vital roles in the
world economy. But to guarantee their ongoing viability, member
governments must continue to review the approaches and goals of
these institutions in light of the changing economic environment.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 7

U.S. POLICIES ON EXCHANGE-RATE INTERVENTION
SINCE 1973
The current era of floating exchange rates formally began in March
1973, when most major industrial countries abandoned their efforts
to maintain fixed-exchange rates against the dollar. Although rates
were no longer held fixed, many governments outside the United
States continued to intervene in exchange markets from time to time to
influence their exchange rates. Initially the United States adopted a
policy of nonintervention, but substantial changes in dollar exchange
rates led the United States to intervene during the summer of 1973 and
from late 1974 to early 1975.
In July 1973 the U.S. Government adopted a policy of active intervention at whatever times and in whatever amounts were appropriate
for maintaining orderly market conditions. In November 1975, as
part of the "Declaration of Rambouillet" following an economic summit meeting, the heads of the industrial countries announced that they
had agreed to act to counter disorderly market conditions or erratic
fluctuations in exchange rates. Although the difference between the
statements may appear to be only one of nuance, the latter statement
more accurately reflected what in effect was a limited intervention
policy on the part of the United States.




189

The previous Administration also began its term of office supporting limited intervention in exchange markets. Official U.S. statements,
however, were interpreted as favoring a decline in the dollar to reduce
the U.S. current account deficit (that is, "benign neglect*' of the dollar).
Using Federal Reserve swap arrangements, the United States intervened in support of the dollar, beginning in September 1977.* In total,
the United States sold (net) $2.6 billion in foreign currencies in support
of the dollar between September 1977 and March 1978, financed by
Federal Reserve and Department of the Treasury drawings under
swap agreements. When the dollar recovered in the second and third
quarters of 1978, the United States was able to acquire $2.1 billion in
foreign currencies, permitting repayment of a substantial portion of
the earlier swap drawings.
In April 1978, pursuant to the notification provisions of the
amended IMF Articles of Agreement, the United States notified the
IMF that, ". . . exchange rates are determined on the basis of
demand and supply conditions in the exchange markets. However,
the [U.S.] authorities will intervene when necessary to counter disorderly conditions in the exchange markets."
The definition of disorderly markets was left open and of necessity subject to interpretation by officials. Although at times intervention was heavy, it is fair to characterize U.S. policy until late 1978 as
one in which intervention was the exception, and not the rule.
In late 1978, however, the character of U.S. intervention changed.
In August 1978 pressure on the dollar renewed amid spreading recognition of serious U.S. economic problems—including inflation and
inadequate energy adjustments—and growing skepticism over the effectiveness of the previous Administration's plans to deal with them.
President Carter announced a dollar support package on November
1, 1978. A major element of this program was a commitment to a
more active intervention policy, to be funded by mobilizing large foreign currency resources, including the issuance of foreign currency
securities (which became known as "Carter bonds"). From November
1, 1978, until shortly after the Administration took office in January
1981, U.S. intervention in exchange markets often reached massive proportions by historical U.S. standards (although not by the
more activist standards of many foreign governments). As of March
1981, the U.S. Government had acquired $11.9 billion worth of foreign currencies. Since the values of these currencies dropped dra*Under a swap agreement, the Federal Reserve and Department of the Treasury borrow foreign
currencies from foreign central banks and then use the currencies to intervene in foreign exchange
markets. The United States has used swap agreements with Belgium, France, Germany, Japan, the
Netherlands, and Switzerland since July 1973, all but Belgium and the Netherlands since November




190

matically relative to the U.S. dollar in 1981, as of October 31, 1981,
the government (Federal Reserve System plus Treasury) sustained a
bookkeeping loss on these holdings of $661 million. This loss would
have been realized had the United States sold these currency holdings and repaid its liabilities.




191

CHAPTER 8

Review and Outlook
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN 1981 reflected the inflationary
economic policies of more than a decade and the transitory effects of
reversing those policies. Past policies alternated periodically between
short-run efforts to reduce unemployment and short-lived attempts
to fight inflation. Economic forecasting, however, was not sufficiently
accurate to produce finely tuned countercyclical policies that made
proper allowance for the lag between policy actions and their effects.
Stimulative policies had relatively immediate effects on employment,
followed by delayed effects in the form of higher inflation. Restrictive
policies for fighting the inflation were not seen by the public as part
of a credible long-term commitment and therefore were not expected
to be sustained. Consequently, they tended to have a more severe
impact on output and employment than on inflation. The result has
been a ratcheting-up in the trend rate of inflation from one cycle to
the next.
This legacy of stop-and-go policies prevented a direct move to
lower inflation and higher real growth in 1981. During the first half
of 1980, restrictive policies—in the form of credit controls and a
sharp reduction in monetary growth—had produced a brief, sharp recession. The subsequent removal of these controls and a postwar
record high rate of monetary growth then led to an unsustainable
rate of economic expansion through early 1981.
OVERVIEW OF 1981
The historical patterns of monetary growth, inflation, and real
output are shown in Chart 8-1. The average growth of money over
5-year periods (solid line) has trended upward since the 1960s; this is
reflected in the rising rate of inflation. The two-quarter growth rate
of money (dashed line) has fluctuated sharply, compared to the underlying growth trend, and has contributed to rapid expansions and
contractions of real economic growth, after a one- or two-quarter lag.
Variations in money growth result in changes in spending and nominal income growth. During short periods, such changes show up as
changes in real income growth since inflation responds to money
growth only after a considerable lag.




192

Chart 8-1

Growth Rates of Money Stock, Real GNP,
and GNP Deflator
PERCENT CHANGE (ANNUAL RATE)

1965 66

81

PERCENT CHANGE (ANNUAL RATE)
GNP IMPLICIT
PRICE DEFLATOR
.' ' 20-QUARTER GROW

/V

REAL GNP
2-QUARTER
GROWTH

-10

1965 66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

NOTE.—BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA. SHADED AREAS INDICATE RECESSIONS
AS DEFINED BY THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE SYSTEM.




193

81

This pattern held true in 1981 as well. In the last half of 1980 the
money stock, as measured by Ml, rose at a 12.9 percent annual rate,
a postwar record. Then, in the first quarter of 1981, the rate of
growth in nominal gross national product (GNP) leaped by 19.2 percent, with growth in real output rising 8.6 percent. Money growth in
the first two quarters of 1981 receded to a 6.9 percent rate, followed
by a further reduction to 3 percent in the final two quarters. These
decelerations in monetary growth led to a sharp decline in real
output in the final quarter of the year.
Continued business investment demand and high inflation in early
1981 sustained a rise in short-term interest rates, which peaked
during the spring. Long-term interest rates peaked in early fall.
These increases had their most adverse effects on the most creditsensitive industries—housing, consumer durables, and, to a lesser
extent, business investment. The sharp reduction in money growth in
the summer and fall led to a sharp decline in total output and interest rates. By December 1981, short-term interest rates were about 5
to 6 percentage points lower than in December 1980, while longterm interest rates were about one point higher.
The average level of real GNP in 1981 was 1.9 percent higher than
in 1980, but this increase for the year as a whole masked a pattern of
declining output for two of the final three quarters. After growing at
an unsustainable rate in the first quarter, the economy remained on a
plateau for a time: a modest annual rate of decline of 1.6 percent in
the second quarter and an increase of 1.4 percent in the third. In the
final quarter the economy dropped sharply, with real GNP declining
at an annual rate of 5.2 percent.
The unemployment rate at the close of 1980 had been 7.3 percent,
and it averaged around 7.4 percent through the first 9 months of
1981. But the weakening of the economy in the last quarter brought
with it a rapid increase in the unemployment rate to 8.8 percent in
December. Civilian employment grew slowly, from 99.6 million at
year-end 1980 to over 101 million by May 1981, before dipping to
99.6 million at year-end 1981.
Meanwhile, however, the deceleration in monetary growth began to
produce declining inflation in 1981. The growth of Ml slowed to 4.9
percent during 1981, compared to an average growth rate of 7.8 percent over the previous 4 years. The GNP deflator advanced 8.6 percent through 1981, down from 9.8 percent during the four quarters
of 1980, while the consumer and producer price indexes slowed more
sharply. The producer price index for finished goods, which had risen
12.4 percent during 1980, rose at a 10.1 percent annual rate in the first
two quarters of 1981 and at only a 4.4 percent rate in the last two
quarters.




194

TABLE 8-1.—Performance in 1981 compared to January 15 projections
Projected

Item

Actual

Projected

Actual

Fourth quarter to
fourth quarter

Year to year
Percent change:
0.9

Real GNP
l
Consumer price index

12,5

1.9

10.2

1.7
12.6

0.7
9.4

Fourth quarter

Year
Level:
7.8

Unemployment rate (percent)

7.6

7.7

8.3

1

Consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Sources: Actual data: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor
Statistics); projected data.- Office of Management and Budget (January 15, 1981).

As shown in Table 8-1, the average performance of the economy
in 1981 was better than had been predicted by the prior Administration. Actual real GNP in 1981 was 1.9 percent higher than in 1980,
compared with a 0.9 percent growth rate forecast by the prior Administration. Consumer prices in 1981 exceeded their 1980 level by
10,2 percent, but this was significantly less than the 12.5 percent rate
of inflation that had been forecast. In addition, the average rate of
unemployment for 1981 turned out to be 0.2 percentage point less
than had been forecast. However, real growth from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth quarter of 1981 was lower than forecast,
and unemployment in the fourth quarter of 1981 was greater than
forecast as a result of the decline in output and employment late in
the year.
Although the Administration was able to effect some reductions in
the growth of Federal spending in fiscal 1981, such spending as a
share of GNP continued to rise. In nominal terms, Federal spending
growth (including off-budget outlays) in 1981 slowed to 14.8 percent,
from 17.4 percent in fiscal 1980, one of the largest peacetime increases in history.
The real Federal tax burden was increased by the scheduled payroll tax increase on January 1, 1981, and the tax burden drifted
upward during most of the year as inflation contributed to higher
nominal incomes and rising marginal tax rates. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, however, provided an initial 5 percent cut in
marginal tax rates for individuals, effective October 1. This had the
effect of reducing marginal tax rates by only 1*/4 percent over the full
1981 tax year, not large enough to prevent a substantial increase in
the total tax burden. For business, however, many of the changes in
the tax code were retroactive to the beginning of the year.
Since tax revenues as a share of GNP will decline by about 2 percentage points over the next few years and budget outlays will not
yet have been reduced as much, large Federal budget deficits can be
expected unless the growth of Federal spending is reined in even




195

more. The possibility of large deficits received much attention in the
financial markets during 1981. The concern was that these deficits
might engender an acceleration of inflation and higher interest rates.
Fear of inflation kept long-term interest rates at high levels, although
some decline did occur in the final months of the year.
In the climate of high interest rates, investments in money-market
funds provided savers with some of the highest yields in history.
Many thrift institutions were not able to compete successfully for deposits, and the resulting outflow of funds contributed to a reduction
in the availability of mortgages and construction financing. Mortgage
rates on new homes remained above 15 percent throughout 1981. In
consequence, home sales and housing starts were among their
postwar lows. The motor vehicle industry also suffered from the high
cost of credit.
MAJOR SECTORS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND
Mirroring the small expansion in real output during 1981 was the
slow expansion in the real growth of consumer expenditures (1.2
percent), business fixed investment (1.4 percent), and total government purchases (1.2 percent). Purchases of consumer durables
declined 4.4 percent, partially offsetting modest gains in purchases of
other consumer items. As shown in Table 8-2, residential construction
decreased by a dramatic 21.9 percent. Net exports also declined last
year, as real exports declined 1.0 percent while imports increased 9.5
percent.
TABLE 8-2.—Growth in major components of real gross national product, 1977-81
[Change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
Component

1977

1978

1979

1980

198 11

Percent change:
Real gross national product

....

58

1.7

=0.3

0,7

48
90

20
29
-61
1.9

.6
=-43
-129

12
14
219
1.2

3.3

2.1
1.7

4.1
.1

59

44

1.7

-.3

5.9
-55

.

5.3

50
135
125
3.6

.

Personal consumption expenditures
Business fixed investment
Residential fixed investment
Government purchases of goods and services

2.3
12.6

-11.3
11.7

5.0
2.7

Federal
State and local
Real domestic final sales 2

-0

1.6
-1.3

1.6

6.6
-2.0

4

Change in billions of dollars:
Inventory investment
Net exports of goods and services
1
2

.
.

.

.

.

Preliminary.
GNP excluding change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




196

=6.5

6.3

15.7
-118

PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES

Although the rising costs of borrowing discouraged purchases of
consumer durables, growth in personal income was sufficient to sustain purchases of nondurables and services. The latter categories
managed to show a modest increase for the year. But durables purchases (approximately 20 percent of which are expenditures on new
autos) exhibited sharp swings from quarter to quarter, with the
fourth quarter level 4.4 percent below the same quarter in 1980. The
slow pace of durables purchases ensured a modest improvement in
the consumer debt burden, as the ratio of consumer installment
credit to personal income declined from its recent peak in May 1979
of 14.9 percent to 13.2 percent in November. The personal saving rate,
after dropping one-half of a percentage point to 4.6 percent in the first
quarter, recovered somewhat in the next two quarters and rose sharply
to 6 percent in the final quarter of the year.
Real expenditures on consumer durables declined for the third
consecutive year. The pace of durables purchases had been stalled by
the imposition of credit controls in the first half of 1980, but rebounded sharply in the last two quarters of 1980 and the first quarter
of 1981. Then came the termination of rebates on auto sales and rapidly rising interest rates, resulting in a sharp 23.3 percent reduction
in durables purchases at an annual rate in the second quarter. A
moderation in interest rates in the third quarter, in conjunction with
factory subsidized financing and further rebates, then helped to stimulate auto sales, allowing outlays for consumer durables to rise moderately. Although the fourth quarter saw a significant drop in interest
rates, it was not enough to boost total durables purchases. The result
was another steep decline in such purchases, this time at a 19.2 percent annual rate.
At the beginning of 1981 new cars were being sold at an annual
rate of about 10 million units, some of this relatively high volume
being attributable to manufacturers' rebates. In the second quarter
sales dropped to an annual rate of 7.8 million units; they then rose to
9.1 million units in the third quarter, before falling to 7.4 million
units in the final quarter. Sales of American cars accounted for about
73 percent of all U.S. car sales for the year. In order to defuse protectionist pressures in the United States, the Japanese government instituted an export restraint program, which limited Japanese car exports to the United States to 1.68 million units during its first year.
Because of the weak U.S. market, however, the limit probably has not
been binding.




197

RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT

Investment in residential structures during 1981 continued a decline that started in 1979. The decline was evident in the construction of both single-family homes and multiple units. By the fourth
quarter of 1981, starts of new single-unit structures had declined
44.8 percent below their year-earlier level, and multiple-unit construction declined 34.5 percent. In the last quarter of 1981 the inventory of new private homes waiting to be sold was about eight times
the monthly sales pace. During the latter half of the 1970s the inventory-sales ratio typically was less than that, approximately six times
sales.
The continued slow pace of residential construction was primarily
due to tightness in the financial markets in which the housing industry competes for funds. Mortgage rates on new homes rose to over
18 percent in October, up from 15 percent at the beginning of the
year. By year-end, however, the rate had fallen to 17 percent.
Home purchase prices were essentially unchanged during 1981.
Thus, there was a significant decrease in the real price of housing—
that is, housing prices in relation to the general price level. In contrast the rapid increase in house prices from 1977 to 1980 had reflected rising expectations about inflation and a growing tendency to
view real estate as a good hedge against inflation.
BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT

Real business fixed investment finished the year above the previous
year's fourth quarter level. This fact, however, masks the underlying
variations that occurred during the year. Business investment varied
from quarter to quarter in the same direction as real GNP, but the
percentage deviations were much larger. Real business investment
rose at a 13.3 percent annual rate in the first quarter of 1981, remained relatively flat in the second and third quarters, and then fell
10.9 percent in the fourth quarter.
Producers' durable equipment was responsible for most of the variation in business fixed investment, with fleet sales of cars and trucks
accounting for a large part of this instability. The structures component of investment maintained a steady increase that began in the
fourth quarter of 1980. Though investment in structures is less than
half as large as investment in producer's durable equipment, its increase of 7.5 percent from the fourth quarter of 1980 to the fourth
quarter of 1981 more than offset the decline in the latter, allowing a
modest increase in total real business investment.




198

INVENTORY ACCUMULATION

Inventory levels at the start of 1981 were lean. Real business inventory levels in the fourth quarter of 1980, after declining for four
of the five previous quarters, were equivalent to 2.7 months of
output. In the first quarter of 1981, real output rose to nearly match
final sales so that the real level of inventories declined only $1.4
billion at an annual rate. In the second quarter inventory accumulation was led by a rise in new car inventories, and there was also some
buildup in other stocks in the third quarter. The speed with which
output declined in the fourth quarter prevented an excessive accumulation of stocks at year-end.
NET EXPORTS

Economic growth abroad was subdued during 1981, contributing
to a small decline in real exports from the United States. In contrast
to 1980, the volume of non-oil imports grew briskly during the year
due in part to the steady appreciation of the dollar from the latter
part of 1980 through August 1981. For the year as a whole, net exports (measured in 1972 dollars) slipped $7.7 billion below the level
of 1980.
Measured in current dollars, the merchandise trade deficit (NIPA
basis) increased $4.2 billion from the $27.7 billion registered for
1980. Merchandise exports increased moderately in the first quarter
and then declined to post a small gain for the year, while merchandise imports rose during most of the year. Growth in the value of
agricultural exports was weak, as a strong U.S. dollar and better harvests abroad dampened foreign demand. The strong growth in the
value of imports of nonpetroleum products was only partly offset by
a drop in imports of petroleum and related products. Average net oil
imports in the first three quarters of 1981 fell to their lowest level
since 1972, partly as a result of reduced domestic consumption.
That, in turn, was due primarily to higher oil prices.
Net service inflows for 1981 increased $4.8 billion over 1980 to
$55.8 billion. Almost all of this increase was due to a rise in net receipts of factor income. This continued strong performance on the
service account produced an overall net export surplus for 1981 of
$23.8 billion in current dollars.
THE FARM ECONOMY
Record large crops, sluggish demand for farm products, high interest rates, and a nearly constant tonnage of agricultural exports limited the recovery of farm incomes and created cash flow problems for
some farmers during 1981. In nominal terms, farm exports totaled a




199

record $43 billion in 1981; however, the tonnage of farm exports for
the year was about the same as in 1980.
According to Department of Agriculture forecasts, net farm income
for 1981 in current dollars will be approximately $23 billion. This
figure is about $3 billion higher than the comparable income figure
for 1980, but approximately $10 billion lower than the total for 1979,
which was a prosperous year for U.S. farmers. For 1981, real net
farm income is forecast to exceed the 1980 total by about 4 percent.
The value of large crop inventories, which is reflected in the 1981
income figures, accounts for part of the increase.
Large grain stocks and weakness in the demand for certain livestock and crop products are expected to exert downward pressure on
farm prices and net farm incomes during much of the first half of
1982, but the expected recovery of the economy should expand the
demand for farm products during the final two quarters of 1982.
Also, farm price support payments provided under the Agriculture
and Food Act of 1981 will supplement the incomes of farmers during
1982.
The statistics on aggregate farm income mask how different groups
of farmers fared during 1981. Farmers carrying small amounts of
debt experienced a less severe cash flow squeeze than highly leveraged operators. Many in the latter group had cash flow problems because of high interest rates and lower commodity prices. However,
some farmers who experienced cash flow problems used equity accumulated from rapid appreciation of their farmland to refinance their
operations. As usual, income earned by farmers from off-farm
sources, which recently has comprised over 60 percent of the average
farmer's income and a substantially larger share of the income of
small farmers, supplemented farm incomes.
Food prices generally exerted a moderating influence on the consumer price index during 1981, although two minor supply shocks
produced temporary increases in food prices. The first was a midJanuary freeze in Florida, which pushed up prices for citrus products
and tomatoes last winter and spring. The second was a reduction in
meat supplies during the summer. Food prices for the fourth quarter
of 1981 were 5.0 percent higher than in the fourth quarter of 1980.
This increase was 5.2 percentage points less than the comparable
year earlier figure.
The moderate increases in food prices largely reflected supply phenomena. Supplies of many raw food products, including poultry,
dairy products, sugar, and grain were abundant during 1981, as were
beef supplies during the first half of the year. Data available so far
suggest that marketing costs, which account for about two-thirds of




200

every dollar spent for food, were about 9 percent higher for the
fourth quarter of 1981 than a year earlier.
LABOR MARKET DEVELOPMENTS
Changes in employment during 1981 lagged slightly behind
changes in real output. Total civilian employment during the year
reached a peak of 101 million workers in May before declining to
99.6 million at year-end. The ratio of civilian employment to the total
noninstitutional working-age population also declined in the last half
of the year. Declines in employment during the year were initially
limited to interest-sensitive sectors, such as motor vehicles and residential construction and their suppliers. By the end of 1981, however, the decline had spread to other manufacturing industries as well.
The overall unemployment rate, which was 7.4 percent at the beginning of last year, fluctuated between 7.2 and 7.6 through September,
then rose sharply to 8.8 percent in December.
TABLE 8-3.—Labor market developments, 1977-81
1977 IV

Component

1978 IV

1979 IV

1980 IV

Percent change from year earlier
4.5

Increase in civilian employment (16 years and over)

3.8

2.3

1981 IV

1

-0.2

0.6

.2
2.8
-8.9

Males 20 years and over .
Females 20 years and over .
Both sexes 16-19 years..

3.5
5.4
8.0

2.7
5.6
2.7

1.5
4.0
-.8

-.6
1.6
-6.6

White
Black and other .

4.4
5.2

3.3
7.3

2.2
3.3

-.1
-.6

.6
.1

Percent 2
Unemployment rate (16 years and over) 3

6.6

5.9

6.0

7.5

8.3

Males 20 years and over
Females 20 years and over
Both sexes 16-19 years

4.8
6.7
16.6

4.1
5.8
16.3

4.4
5.7
16.2

6.3
6.7
18.2

7.2
7.2
21.1

White
Black and other

5.7
13.2

5.1
11.5

5.2
11.2

6.6
13.8

7.3
15.4

62.6

63.5

63.8

63.7

63.8

79.9
48.6
56.7

79.9
50.1
58.2

79.6
51.0
57.9

79.3
51.5
56.3

78.9
52.3
54.6

62.8
61.2

63.6
62.4

64.0
62.3

64.0
61.9

64.2
61.5

Participation rate (16 years and over)4
Males 20 years and over
Females 20 years and over
Both sexes 16-19 years
White
Black and other

f

1
Changes for 1978 IV adjusted for the increase of about 250,000 in employment and labor force in January 1978 resulting
from changes in the sample and estimation procedures introduced into the household survey.
2
Seasonally adjusted.
3
Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force.
4
Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population.

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

As Table 8-3 indicates, employment growth during 1981 varied
considerably by demographic group. Adult female employment rose
by 2.8 percent, while adult male employment rose by 0.2 percent;
teenage employment fell by a dramatic 8.9 percent. The unemploy-




201

ment rate for adult men, who tend to work in disproportionate numbers in cyclically sensitive industries, rose from 6.1 percent in December 1980 to 7.9 percent in December 1981. The unemployment
rate for adult women, who work in industries that exhibit more cyclical stability, rose 0.7 of a point, from 6.7 percent to 7.4 percent,
during the same period. The teenage unemployment rate increased,
from 17.8 percent to 21.5 percent, over the year.
The age-sex composition of the unemployed depends on the unemployment rates of different demographic groups and on their
share of the total labor force. Teenagers, for instance, have relatively
high unemployment rates, but in December 1981 they comprised
only 7.9 percent of the labor force. Adult men have relatively low unemployment rates, but in 1981 they constituted 52.8 percent of the
labor force. Thus, 19.4 percent of the unemployed in December
1981 were teenagers, 47.5 percent were adult men, and 33.2 percent
were adult women.
The unemployment insurance system is designed to moderate the
financial burden placed on experienced workers who lose their jobs
by providing income until they can find employment. However, the
system does not cover recent entrants to the labor market or workers
who quit their jobs voluntarily. In December 1981 the number of individuals receiving unemployment compensation was 41 percent of
the total unemployed. This was partly because 44.2 percent of the
unemployed had left their jobs voluntarily or had no recent work experience. Over two-thirds of the people who had lost their jobs involuntarily were receiving unemployment benefits.
The percentage of take-home pay replaced by unemployment
benefits varies widely according to an individual's weekly earnings,
marginal tax rate, and State of residence. Replacement rates are generally higher for lower paid workers than for higher paid workers.
However, several studies suggest that the average replacement rate is
about one-half of take-home pay.
A combination of cyclical and secular trends produced disparate
changes in labor force participation rates during 1981. Labor force
participation rates continued to increase for adult women, and by the
fourth quarter 52.3 percent of all women 20 or older were in the civilian labor market, an increase of 0.8 of a percentage point over 1980.
Meanwhile, the labor force participation rates of adult men continued
their long-term downward trend.
The ratio of civilian employment to the total working-age population varied inversely with the unemployment rate. The number of
employed rose from 58.3 percent of the noninstitutional population
in December 1980 to 58.8 percent in May 1981, but fell to 57.5 percent in December. Although this percentage was less than the last
peak of 59.3 percent, reached in the fourth quarter of 1979, it exceeded the previous 1973 peak (Chart 8-2).




202

Chart 8-2

Employment Ratio and Unemployment Rate
PERCENT

PERCENT

1961
1
2

EMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION.
UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE.

NOTE. —DATA RELATE TO PERSONS 16 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER; SEASONALLY ADJUSTED
QUARTERLY AVERAGES.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

WAGES, PRICES, AND PRODUCTIVITY
Wage increases showed moderation in 1981. As indicated in Table
8-4, the average hourly earnings index, compensation per hour, and
wages set in larger collective bargains slowed significantly, while the
employment cost index increased at about the same rate as in 1980.
TABLE 8-4.—Measures of compensation, 1978-81
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter, except as noted]
Measure

1978

2

1979

1980

1981 *

77

87

90

3

91

80
76

90
85

109
80

3

99
88

Average hourly earnings index4

84

80

96

83

Compensation per hour5

90

99

102

93

Wage changes in large collective bargaining agreements (total effective adjustment)

8.2

9.1

9.9

9.1

Employment cost index
Union
Nonunion

1

3

Preliminary.
Data are for wages and salaries of all private nonfarm workers.
Changes are from third quarter to third quarter.
4
Data are not seasonally adjusted.
5
Data are for private business sector, all employees.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), and
Council of Economic Advisers.
2
3




203

Labor productivity declined by 0.5 percent during 1981 (Table 85). This was the fourth successive year of little change in productivity. Chapter 5 has discussed various reasons for the disappointing
trends in productivity over the last decade. In addition, during the
last 3 years, total output growth has been low, which has also tended to
depress productivity performance. The near-zero productivity result
meant that unit labor costs, the largest single cost in production, had
to increase roughly one-for-one with total compensation last year.
TABLE 8-5.—Changes in productivity and unit labor costs, 1977-81
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
1977

Item

1978

1979

1980

1981 1

Output per hour

21

-05

-06

02

-05

Unit labor costs

5.2

9.5

10.5

9.9

9.8

1

Preliminary.
Note.—Data relate to private business sector, all employees.
Sources: Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics) and Council of Economic Advisers.

During a year in which unit labor costs rose by 9.8 percent, prices
could not rise at a substantially lower rate without sharply squeezing
profits. The GNP deflator rose by 8.6 percent during 1981, somewhat lower than the 9.8 percent increase experienced during 1980
(Table 8-6).
TABLE 8-6.—Measures of price change, 1977-81
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
Item

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981 »

Implicit price deflators.-2

6.1
59
5.7

Gross national product
Personal consumption expendituresPrivate nonfarm business output

8.5
78
8.3

8.1
95
8.3

9.8
101
100

86
78
93

Consumer prices:
CPI-U, X-l

6.2

7.8

106

108

88

CPI-U

6.6

9.0

12.7

126

96

64
82
89
6.1

175
75
134
7.5

73
365
198
80

135
189
178
98

52
126
119
92

71

88

128

124

72

7.7
110
64

11.1

76
569
94

83
292

18
152
76

Farm value of food
Energy3
Home purchase and finance4
All other
Producer prices of finished goods ..
Food
Energy
All other

74
80

11 1

1

Preliminary.
Seasonally adjusted data.
Includes only prices for direct consumer purchases of energy for the home and for motor vehicles.
4
Consists of home purchase and financing, taxes, and insurance on owner-occupied homes.
2

3

Sources: Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), and Department of Labor
(Bureau of Labor Statistics).




204

The deflator for personal consumption expenditures rose only 7.8
percent last year, down significantly from the year before. Inflation,
as measured by the consumer price index for urban workers (CPI-U),
declined even more, from 12.6 percent during 1980 to 9.6 percent
during 1981. The CPI-U is widely recognized as having an upward
bias in a period of rising mortgage interest rates, due to its treatment
of owner-occupied housing. Some of the components that are used
to measure the cost of homeownership—finance, insurance, and
taxes—jumped quite sharply during much of 1981. An alternative
measure of consumer prices known as "CPI-U, X-l" more appropriately measures the consumer cost of owner-occupied homes. It advanced only 8.8 percent. In late 1981 the Bureau of Labor Statistics
announced plans to incorporate this alternative method of measuring
the rise or fall in homeowner costs into the index. As shown in Table
8-7, real compensation per hour, computed on the basis of either the
deflator for personal consumption expenditures or the alternative CPI
measure, rose in 1981 after declining for 2 straight years.
TABLE 8-7.—Alternative measures of changes in real earnings per hour, 1979-81
[Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter]
1979

1980

1981 1

-4.2
-2.4
-2.1

-2.6
-1.1

-1.1

-25
-.7

Item

-21
-.6

Average hourly earnings index:
Deflated by:
CPI-U..
CPI-U, X-l
Fixed-weight price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE).

-.9

-.5
.2

Compensation per hour: 2
Deflated by:
CPI-U
CPI-U, X-l
Fixed-weight price index for PCE
1
2

_ 4

_ 4

_ 2

.4

1 1

Preliminary.
Data are for the private nonfarm business sector, all employees.

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).

CREDIT MARKETS
During the first three quarters of 1981, total funds raised in U.S.
credit markets rebounded from the depressed levels of a year earlier,
when credit controls and the recession restrained borrowing. Nevertheless, borrowing by all private domestic nonfinancial sectors remained well below the pace reached in 1979. High interest rates discouraged borrowing for purchases of consumer durables and housing
and resulted in a rate of household debt accumulation, although up
from 1980, only about three quarters of that experienced in 1979.
Borrowing by the nonfinancial business sector grew only modestly

205
358-691 0 - 8 2 - 1 4




QL3

during the first three quarters of 1981. This sector relied heavily on
short-term financing, as extremely high and rising long-term bond
rates restrained net bond issues to only half the total of the previous
year. As a result, bank loans to businesses and the volume of outstanding commercial paper surged.
Borrowing by State and local governments declined modestly in
1981, as growth of expenditures slowed relative to tax receipts. However, Federal Government borrowing was up from 1980, and at more
than double the rate of 1979. Federal borrowing totaled $79.3 billion, of which approximately $55.6 billion was used to finance expenditures on goods and services or transfer payments, while the rest
was used for relending. Federally guaranteed loans declined in 1981,
but borrowing by federally sponsored enterprises grew by almost
two-thirds. Overall Federal participation in the credit markets rose to
approximately the level of the previous peak in 1976.
INTEREST RATES AND MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS

One of the four key elements of the Administration's program is
support for a policy of continued gradual reductions in the rate of
monetary growth to bring down inflation. This restraint was more
important to the 1981 economy than other features of the Administration's program, which are aimed at encouraging long-term growth.
From the fourth quarter of 1979 to the fourth quarter of 1980, Ml
(currency plus checkable deposits) grew at a 7.3 percent annual rate.
The Administration assumes a gradual but steady reduction in the
growth of money to one-half that rate by 1986. After a period of adjustment, sustained declines in inflation and nominal interest rates
are expected.
Federal Reserve policy in 1981 did produce a substantial reduction
in monetary growth (as measured by Ml) on a fourth-quarter to
fourth-quarter basis—from 7.3 percent during 1980 to 4.9 percent in
1981. Nonetheless, interest rates remained high on average. The
yield on 3-month Treasury bills, which had averaged 15.5 percent in
December 1980, fell in early 1981, then rose again and peaked at
16.3 percent in May 1981. The prime rate charged by commercial
banks declined from a peak of 21.5 percent in January 1981 to 17
percent in April 1981 before rising again to 20.5 percent by the end of
May. By year-end, the prime rate had declined to 15.75 percent.
Given that prices were advancing at somewhat less than double-digit
rates, real short-term interest rates (that is, adjusted for inflation)
were unusually high during most of 1981 (Chart 8-3).




206

Chart 8-3

Interest Rates in 1981
PERCENT PER ANNUM

22

20

18

16

14
30-YEAR GOVERNMENT
BONDS

12

(CONSTANT MATURITIES)

10 _
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I >
JAN
FEB MAR APR MAY
JUN JUL AUG
SEP OCT
NOV DEC
1981

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE SYSTEM.

When allowance is made for the effects of taxes on interest rates,
the high average level of short-term rates becomes more understandable. In an environment of high expected inflation, interest rates
tend to rise sufficiently to compensate lenders for the anticipated loss
in purchasing power of their money. Under the U.S. tax system, interest payments are deductible, and interest receipts are taxed as ordinary income. We would expect market interest rates to exceed a
given real after-tax interest rate by .more than the expected inflation.
For example, if the real after-tax interest rate is 3 percent and the
applicable income tax rate is 30 percent, an expected inflation rate of
10 percent would tend to produce a nominal interest rate of 19 percent—not very different from the peaks in short-term rates actually
experienced in 1981. Viewed in this light, the question is not why
short-term interest rates were so high in 1981, but why they were so
low in the 1970s.
At least a partial answer to this question is that in the 1970s low
State usury and Regulation Q, ceilings prevented the effects of expected inflation from being fully reflected in interest rates, while the
inflation that actually occurred was probably more than had been anticipated. Also, the oil price shocks of the 1970s, coupled with in-




207

creasing regulatory and tax burdens, may have reduced the expected
real return on capital. With the change in the investment outlook
brought about by the Administration's program, this negative influence on real interest rates began to disappear. However, as the Federal Reserve's program of bringing down the rate of monetary
growth succeeds in reducing current and expected rates of inflation,
nominal interest rates will fall somewhat more than the expected rate
of inflation, even as real after-tax interest rates rise somewhat.
INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS

High real returns on U.S. securities helped to attract foreign investment to the United States during 1981. The dollar's foreign exchange value rose 23 percent on a trade-weighted average basis from
January through August before falling back slightly through December.
Net foreign private purchases of U.S. securities during the first three
quarters of 1981 totaled $8.3 billion, an increase of 68 percent over
the same period a year earlier. A large part of this increase was in
purchases of U.S. stocks, possibly suggesting confidence abroad in
the medium-term potential of U.S. industry and the Administration's
program.
Direct U.S. investment abroad in the first three quarters of 1981
slowed somewhat from its 1980 rate, making 1981 the second year of
decline. The drop was due in part to sluggish foreign economic activity. In contrast, foreign direct investment in the United States remained strong during 1981 and may have approached the record levels
of 1979.
Monetary flows associated with official transactions between the
United States and other industrialized countries swung from a moderate net inflow in late 1980 to a substantial net outflow in the first
three quarters of 1981. These net outflows primarily reflected sales
of dollar-denominated assets by foreign central banks (mainly U.S.
Treasury securities) related to intervention in foreign exchange markets. Changes in official U.S. reserve assets moved from net acquisitions of foreign currencies in late 1980 and the first quarter of 1981
to negligible acquisitions from the second quarter on. This reflected
the decision by this Administration to adopt a policy of nonintervention in foreign exchange markets, except in conditions of severe disorder. (The issues involved in this policy are discussed in Chapter 7.)
Net capital flows between the United States and the Organization
of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) recently have been
quite stable relative to flows between the United States and the
industrialized countries. The capital movements between the OPEC
countries and the United States have been net inflows since early
1979 and generally have taken the form of investments in U.S. Treas-




208

ury securities, although investments in real estate and energy-related
industries have risen during the past year.
THRIFT INSTITUTIONS

High interest rates and regulatory restrictions had an adverse effect
on thrift institutions in 1981. From November 1980 to November
1981, the net worth of thrifts dropped over $5.7 billion, or approximately 13 percent. Net new deposits also declined.
In response to the plight of the thrift institutions, the Congress included in the Economic Recovery Tax Act a provision authorizing
those institutions, as well as commercial banks, to issue All-Savers
Certificates. The certificates were given tax-exempt status so as to
provide thrifts and banks with a lower cost of funds. From October
to December, the first 3 months of issuance, thrift institutions issued
approximately $24 billion in certificates. Their impact on the net deposit inflows of the thrifts is in some doubt, however, since the availability of the certificates caused some savers to transfer funds from
other thrift accounts, such as passbook savings, 6-month moneymarket certificates, and small savers' certificates.
Meanwhile, delinquent loans rose and liquidity ratios for insured
savings and loans deteriorated. The delinquent loan ratio—the dollar
amount of mortgage loans and contracts delinquent 60 days or more
as a percentage of total mortgages and contracts held at the end of
each month—increased steadily last year. The ratio rose from just
over 1 percent in late 1980 to almost P/2 percent in late 1981. The
liquidity ratio—cash and other liquid assets as a percent of savings
deposits plus loans payable in a year or less—declined from almost 9
percent to about 8.5 percent in late 1981. The deterioration of these
ratios was not surprising in light of historically high inflation and interest rates and the weakness of the economy in the past couple of
years. The financial condition of thrift institutions can be expected to
improve substantially, however, as inflation expectations and interest
rates fall and financial asset prices rise.
PROSPECTS FOR 1982 AND 1983
The current recession is expected to end early in 1982, followed
by a resumption of growth by mid-year. The moderating pattern of
price increases which began last year should become more generalized and significant this year. With money growth expected to be
moderate, the extent of the deceleration of inflation will become the
critical factor in sustaining economic recovery beyond 1982. Apart
from the very high rate of expected inflation reflected in current in-




209

terest rates, the economy is generally free of impediments to expansion.
The proportion of employed working-age adults will turn upward
by this summer, reversing the general decline that began in 1979.
Even at the expected low point of the employment ratio this spring,
the proportion of people with jobs will be significantly higher than at
the trough of all past recessions, except the very short 1980 contraction. The strong economic recovery this year and next is expected to
expand civilian employment to over 103.5 million for 1983, well
above the 98.8 million employed in 1979 before output declined.
The key areas of rebound in the economy this year are expected to
be consumer goods, housing, autos, and defense (Table 8-8). The
principal areas that are anticipated to lead the expansion next year are
business investment, inventories (including a rising trend of defense
work in progress), and a further acceleration in defense deliveries.
TABLE 8-8.—Economic outlook for 1982
Forecast range
1982

1981 »

Item

Growth, fourth quarter to fourth quarter (percent):
Real gross national product

. . . .

Personal consumption expenditures
Nonresidential fixed investment
Residential investment
Federal purchases
State and local purchases
.

.

.

. . . .

....

0.7

12
14
-219

66
-20

.

GNP implicit price deflator

86

Compensation per hour2

9.3

3.0
2Vfe
BVz
24
-2
— IVfe

to 31/2
to 7V2
to 27
to -1
to —¥2

7 to 7V2
8 to 9

_ 5

1 tO 1V2

83
.9

Output per hour2

1 to 1V2

Level, fourth quarter:3
Unemployment rate (percent)
Housing starts (millions of units)4

84

1

Preliminary.
Private business, all employees.
Seasonally adjusted.
4
Annual rates.
2
3

Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics), and
Council of Economic Advisers.

The decline in inflation, which has so far been most evident in the
consumer price index and in producer prices, will influence trends in
wages as 1982 progresses. But the expected 1 to l*/2 percentage point
slowdown of inflation in product prices will be only slightly less than
the slowdown of labor costs. Therefore, the currently narrow margin
of corporate profits is likely to recover only modestly during the year.
The unemployment rate is expected to reach the vicinity of 9 percent
this spring until growth strengthens in the summer. Thereafter, the
rapid pace of expansion should pull the unemployment rate down
between one-quarter and one-half of a percentage point a quarter.




210

The growth in household consumption was restrained last year by
high interest rates as well as by modest income growth. By the last
quarter of 1981, consumption was approximately 1 percent higher in
real terms than a year earlier, and new auto sales had fallen to an
annual rate of 7.4 million. The decline in interest rates that began
last fall, and improvements in household financial positions due to
the reduced consumer debt burden and the first step of the personal
tax cut, should lead to increased consumption early this year. The
second step of the tax cut and the scheduled step-up in social security benefits will raise household disposable income roughly 2 percent this summer. It is difficult to predict how much of this increase
will be allocated to saving or consumption. If between one-quarter
and one-half of it is saved and the remainder is spent, the addition to
the growth rate of consumption in the second half of this year would
be about 3 percent at an annual rate. A large share of this would be
expected to be used for the purchase of durables, whose annual
growth rate in the second half is projected to approach 10 percent.
The recent improvement in early indicators of housing activity
presages a rapid recovery that should be apparent by spring and
proceed through the year. In 1980 the decline in housing early in the
year was quickly reversed, and the ensuing recovery was quite rapid.
Though the second reversal in the housing industry in as many years
has forced some builders out of business, a rapid expansion this year
is still possible. The necessary capital equipment remains, and additions to the stock of construction equipment and tools can be made
rapidly. Though the supply of unsold homes relative to monthly sales
is large, the absolute number of available new homes is not. Hence,
rising sales will quickly generate faster building activity. While housing starts for 1982 as a whole may only exceed last year's by 10 percent, the increase during the year could exceed 50 percent. This
would raise the pace of new housing starts from about 900,000 at an
annual rate for the last quarter of 1981 to the vicinity of 1.5 million
by the end of this year.
Business fixed investment has been maintained at a reasonably
high level during the past year. The stimulus of the Accelerated Cost
Recovery System depreciation package should make itself felt when
recovery begins. Since businesses have not allowed inventories to
build by large amounts, stepped-up sales this spring and summer will
translate quite directly into rising output.
The Administration's program of strengthening U.S. defense capabilities will continue to be reflected in the overall economy as 1982
progresses. Deliveries of defense goods and services in real terms will




211

rise about 8l/2 percent during this fiscal year, about twice the increase
in 1981. The rise in procurement of military hardware will be steeper.
It will also generate stepped-up economic activity prior to deliveries.
Defense industries are beginning to build up inventories of work in
progress as components and materials move through the stages of
fabrication toward delivery to the Department of Defense. Though this
step-up has not yet become particularly evident in statistics of work in
progress, this type of inventory accumulation will be strengthened in
coming quarters.
Nondefense Federal purchases increased 10.7 percent in real terms
during 1981 but may shrink as much as 9 percent during 1982 as the
Administration's fiscal 1982 budget cuts take effect. The much larger
volume of purchases by State and local governments is also expected
to decline slightly in real terms. Taken in aggregate, the budgets of
State and local units of government have shown small operating surpluses in the past 2 years. Increased revenue from economic growth
is expected to more than offset declines in Federal grants, permitting
a modest increase in nominal spending by State and local units.
Earlier parts of this Report have emphasized the relative size of the
prospective Federal deficits in comparison to GNP. While it is helpful
to standardize deficits against the size of the economy, this relation
gives little feel for the distribution through the economy of the flow
of government securities. These are purchased by banking, other corporate, household, and foreign savers, who are also filling their portfolios with privately issued notes for everything from consumer loans
to mortgages to loans for business capital projects.
It is anticipated that each of these groups will not be called upon
to raise their holdings of U.S. Government securities disproportionately. Thus, household purchases of U.S. securities should be about
one-quarter of the volume of personal saving, which is near historic
rates, and domestic financial institution purchases should be near
1.5 percent of GNP, also close to historic experience. While foreign
investors also can be expected to take some of the securities issued,
these two domestic sectors likely will account for most U.S. security
purchases.
The net export balance of the United States is expected to be
boosted by rising exports of goods and services as the economic recovery abroad strengthens but depressed by a large expansion of imports as growth picks up here later this year. Continued market adjustments to last year's appreciation of the dollar may also depress
net exports. Depending on the timing of these effects, net exports of
the United States may decline from a surplus of $23.8 billion last
year to an approximate balance this year. Because the United States
earns much more abroad through the export of services than it




212

spends on services imports, our net export position is stronger than
the frequently cited trade balance on merchandise alone would suggest. That balance will move to a sizable negative position by yearend.
With a continuation of monetary restraint and further significant
downward adjustments in inflationary expectations, 1982 and 1983
should become the first of several years of prosperous growth and
declining inflation occurring simultaneously. While business investment and defense will continue to expand more rapidly than other
sectors, the total growth in the economy should be sufficient to accommodate further sizable increases in the output of consumer durables, motor vehicles, and housing.
PROSPECTS BEYOND 1983
Continuing deceleration in money growth, fairly rapid adaptation of
expectations to lower inflation, and growth aided by tax policies that are
weighted toward investment are expected to be characteristic of the mid1980s. The combination of growth-oriented fiscal policy and antiinflationary monetary policy should mean substantial progress toward
the economic goals embodied in the Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act of 1978.
The general objectives of this act—and those of the Administration—are to achieve full employment, growth in productivity, price
stability, and a reduced share of governmental spending in the
Nation's output. The act states clearly that ultimate price stability
means eliminating inflation altogether. Although it does not define full
employment as any specific unemployment rate, the act establishes as a
national goal "the fulfillment of the right to full opportunities for
useful paid employment at fair rates of compensation of all individuals
able, willing, and seeking to work." It places emphasis on encouraging
capital formation and relying on the private sector to meet the act's
objectives of full employment, growth in productivity, and price stability. It requires an annual Investment Policy Report, which is provided
in Chapters 4 and 5 of this volume. In addition, the act responds to the
widespread desire for reduced governmental intervention by calling
for steady reductions in the share of the Nation's output accounted for
by governmental spending, and for the ultimate reduction of Federal
outlays to 20 percent of GNP.
To provide a focus for the government in its effort to achieve these
general objectives, the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act
requires that the Administration set annual numerical goals for key
indicators over a 5-year horizon leading toward a group of interim
goals set forth by the Congress. Table 8-9 responds to this require-




213

ment, based on the economic outlook for 1982 and 1983, and the
longer term economic projections included in the fiscal 1983 budget.
The act sets an interim goal for Federal outlays equal to 21 percent
of GNP for 1981, and interim goals of a 4 percent unemployment
rate and a 3 percent inflation rate for 1983. However, according to
the act, the President may, if he deems it necessary, recommend
modification of the timetable for achievement of the interim and final
goals for unemployment, inflation, and Federal outlays as a share of
GNP. The prior Administration extended the timetable for achieving
all three goals beyond its 5-year planning horizon.
TABLE 8-9.—Economic Projections, 1982-1987
Item

|

1985

1986

106.2

108.6

110.9

7.9

7.1

6.4

5.8

5.3

22.1

21.3

21.0

20.4

19.7

1982

1983

100.9

103.8

8.9

23.5

|

1984

1987

Level
Employment (millions) *
Unemployment rate (percent)
Federal outlays as percent of GNP (fiscal year basis)

113.0

Percent change, fourth quarter to fourth quarter
Consumer prices

6.6

5.1

4.7

4.6

4.6

4.4

Real GNP

3.0

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.3

Real disposable income

4.3

4.1

2.7

4.6

4.0

4.0

.6

2.3

2.7

2.6

2.6

2.6

Productivity 2
1

Includes 1980 census benchmark.
2
Real GNP per hour worked.
Source: Council of Economic Advisers.

Economic projections consistent with this Administration's policies
indicate attainment of the interim and final goals for Federal outlays
as a share of GNP within a 5-year horizon. The interim goal for Federal outlays as a share of GNP is expected to be met by 1985. The
act's final goal of a 20 percent share of Federal outlays in GNP is
anticipated to be achieved by 1987. Significant progress toward the
interim goals for unemployment and inflation is also anticipated
within this period. The economic expansion will reduce unemployment rates for significant subgroups of the labor force as well, including youth, women, minorities, handicapped persons, veterans,
and middle-aged and older persons.
The Council emphasizes two points about the setting of a timetable for reaching these goals and about targeting economic performance in general. First, as has been emphasized elsewhere in this
Report, the speedy adaptation of inflationary expectations to the antiinflationary monetary regime set for the 1980s is of central importance in turning away from the rising inflation and unemployment of
the last decade to an extended period of declining inflation with
prosperous growth. However, as this Report points out—particularly




214

in Chapter 3—government efforts to intervene directly in wage and
price setting in the private sector are essentially destabilizing and do
not alter the longer term path of the economy. Second, the Federal
Government cannot fully anticipate the course of the economy; neither
can it direct economic outcomes precisely. In view of these limits,
the annual goals should best be viewed as benchmarks of economic
progress.




215




Appendix A
REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES
OF THE
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING 1981







LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,
Washington, D.C., December 31, 1981.
MR. PRESIDENT:
The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year 1981 in accordance with the requirements of the Congress, as set forth in section 10(d) of the Employment Act of 1946 as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced
Growth Act of 1978.
Sincerely,




MURRAY L. WEIDENBAUM, Chairman
JERRY L. JORDAN
WILLIAM A. NISKANEN

219




Report to the President on the Activities of the
Council of Economic Advisers during 1981
The Employment Act of 1946 (P.L. 304-79th Congress), as amended, provides the statutory base for the activities of the Council of
Economic Advisers. The Council, through the Chairman, provides
advice to the President on a wide range of domestic and international
economic policy issues, assists in the preparation of the President's
Economic Report to the Congress, and conducts analyses and studies
on a wide range of economic issues in support of its primary mission.
The membership of the Council of Economic Advisers changed
early in 1981, following the inauguration of President Reagan.
Murray L. Weidenbaum was designated Chairman of the Council on
January 23, and was formally sworn in on February 27, 1981, replacing Charles L. Schultze, who returned to the Brookings Institution.
The Chairman is on leave of absence from Washington University
(St. Louis), where he holds the Mallinckrodt Distinguished University
Professorship.
William A. Niskanen and Jerry L. Jordan became Members on June
12, 1981, and July 14, 1981, respectively. They succeeded George C.
Eads, who returned to the Rand Corporation, and Stephen G. Goldfeld, who returned to Princeton University. Mr. Niskanen is on leave
of absence from a position as a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. Mr. Jordan is on leave of absence from the University of New Mexico, where he was the Dean of the Anderson Schools
of Management.

358-691 0 - 8 2 - 1 5 : Q L 3




221

Council Members and their dates of service are listed below:
Position

Name
Edwin G. Nourse
Leon H. Keyserling
John D. Clark
Roy Blough
Robert C Turner
Arthur F Burns
Neil H Jacoby
Walter W Stewart
Raymond J Saulnier
Joseph S Davis
Paul W McCracken
Karl Brandt
Henry C Wallich
Walter W Heller
James Tobin. . . .
Kermit Gordon.. ..
Gardner Ackley . . .

. . . .

John P. Lewis
Otto Eckstein . . . .
Arthur M. Okun
James S. Duesenberry
Merton J. Peck
Warren L Smith .
.
Paul W. McCracken
Hendrik S. Houthakker
Herbert Stein
Ezra Solomon
Marina v N. Whitman
Gary L Seevers
William J. Fellner
Alan Greenspan
Paul W. MacAvoy
Burton G. Malkiel
Charles L Schultze
William D Nordhaus
Lyle E. Gramley
George C Eads
Stephen M. Goldfeld
Murray L. Weidenbaum
William A. Niskanen
Jerry L. Jordan

.

Chairman
Vice Chairman
Acting Chairman
Chairman
Member
Vice Chairman
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Chairman
Member
Member
Member
Member
Chairman
Member
Member

Oath of office date
August 9, 1946
August 9, 1946..
November 2 1949
May 10, 1950.
August 9, 1946.
May 10, 1950
June 29 1950
September 8 1952
March 19 1953
September 15 1953
December 2, 1953
April 4 1955
December 3, 1956
May 2, 1955
December 3, 1956 .
November 1, 1958.
May 7, 1959.
January 29, 1961 ,
January 29, 1961
January 29, 1961
August 3, 1962..
November 16, 1964.
May 17, 1963.
September 2, 1964.
November 16, 1964.
February 15, 1968.
February 2, 1966.
February 15, 1968
July 1, 1968
February 4, 1969.
February 4, 1969..
February 4 1969
January 1, 1972
September 9, 1971.
March 13, 1972.
July 23, 1973.
October 31, 1973.
September 4, 1974.
June 13, 1975.
July 22, 1975.
January 22 1977
March 18 1977
March 18, 1977..
June 6, 1979
August 20, 1980.
February 27, 1981
June 12 1981
July 14, 1981

Separation date
November 1, 1949.
January 20, 1953.
February 11, 1953.
August 20 1952
January 20 1953
December 1 1956
February 9 1955
April 29, 1955.
January 20, 1961
October 31, 1958
January 31, 1959
January 20, 1961.
January 20, 1961.
November 15, 1964.
July 31, 1962.
December 27, 1962.
February 15, 1968.
August 31, 1964.
February 1, 1966.
January 20, 1969.
June 30, 1968.
January 20, 1969.
January 20, 1969.
December 31, 1971.
July 15, 1971.
August 31 1974
March 26, 1973
August 15, 1973
April 15, 1975.
February 25, 1975.
January 20, 1977.
November 15, 1976.
January 20, 1977.
January 20 1981
February 4 1979
May 27, 1980.
January 20 1981
January 20, 1981.

MACROECONOMIC POLICIES

As is its tradition, during 1981 the Council devoted much of its
time to assisting the President in the formulation of broad economic
policy objectives and the programs to carry them out. The development of economic assumptions and monitoring of current developments, under Council Member Jordan, were an area of major interest. Monetary policy developments received especially close attention.
Council Member Jordan chaired the interagency subcabinet
"Troika" forecasting group, consisting of representatives from the
Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and
Budget, with participation by the Department of Commerce. The
Chairman of the Council continued his responsibility for presenting
to the President the economic assumptions developed with the Office
of Management and Budget and the Department of the Treasury.




222

Council Members chaired or participated in numerous Cabinet
Council working groups dealing with such issues as economic statistics, financial industry deregulation, conditions in the thrift industry,
and the balance of payments.
The Chairman actively participated during the early months of the
Administration, and then during the late fall budget cycle, in Cabinet
level reviews of agency budget requests and appeals.
MICROECONOMIC POLICIES

A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention
during the year. Council Member Niskanen chaired Cabinet Council
working groups dealing with the Alaska National Gas Pipeline and
employee pension legislation. Trade issues were an area of continuing attention. Early in the year the Council studied in depth the
impact of automobile import quotas on the economy.
The Council assisted in the preparation of agency guidelines for
implementing Executive Order 12291 dealing with Executive Office
review of agency regulatory proposals, and worked closely with the
Office of Management and Budget on selected regulatory issues.
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES

The President's economic recovery program evoked considerable
interest on the part of U.S. friends and allies, and the Council devoted considerable effort to explaining the program to interested parties
in the United States and abroad. Council Members and staff assisted
in the preparations for the Ottawa Economic Summit in June. Members and staff also participated in the various working parties of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
dealing with economic and financial issues. The Chairman served as
Chairman of OECD's Economic Policy Committee.
PUBLIC INFORMATION

The Council's Annual Report is the principal medium through which
the Council informs the public of its work and its views. It is also an
important vehicle for presenting and explaining the Administration's
domestic and international economic policies. Distribution of the
Report in recent years has averaged about 50,000 copies. The Council
also assumes primary responsibility for the monthly Economic Indicators, a publication prepared by the Council's Statistical Office under
the supervision of Catherine H. Furlong. The Joint Economic Committee issues the Indicators, which has a distribution of approximately
10,000 copies. Information is also provided to members of the public
through speeches and other public appearances by the Chairman,
Members, and staff economists of the Council. In 1981 the Chairman




223

and Members made 25 appearances before Committees of the Congress to testify on Administration economic policies.
ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL
OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN

The Chairman is responsible for communicating the Council's
views to the President. This function is carried out through direct
consultation with the President, and through written memoranda and
reports on economic developments and on particular programs and
proposals. The Chairman exercises ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff. He represents the Council at
meetings of the full Cabinet and the various Cabinet Councils, and the
Trade Policy Committee. Chairman Weidenbaum also served as a
member of the President's Task Force on Regulatory Relief, the congressionally established Gold Commission, and the President's Task
Force on Military Manpower.
COUNCIL MEMBERS

The two Council Members are responsible for all subject matter
covered by the Council, including direct supervision of the work of
the professional staff. Members represent the Council at a wide variety of interagency and international meetings and assume major responsibility for selecting issues for Council attention.
In practice, the small size of the Council permits the Chairman and
Council Members to work as a team in most circumstances. There was,
however, an informal division of subject matter among them in 1981.
Mr. Jordan assumed primary responsibility for domestic and international macroeconomic analysis, economic projections, and monetary
and financial issues. He also served, with the Chairman, on the Gold
Commission. Mr. Niskanen is primarily responsible for microeconomic
and sectoral analysis, international trade questions, and regulatory
issues.
PROFESSIONAL STAFF

At the end of 1981 the professional staff consisted of the Special
Assistant to the Chairman, who also acts as staff director, the Senior
Statistician, 13 senior staff economists, and 5 junior staff economists.
The professional staff and their special fields at the end of 1981
were:
James B. Burnham

Special Assistant to the Chairman
Senior Staff

Geoffrey O. Carliner
William D. Dobson




Economists

Labor and Pensions
Agriculture and Food Policy

224

Michele U. Fratianni
Steven H. Hanke
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Michael J. McKee
David C. Munro
Susan C. Nelson
Allen M. Parkman
Paul H. Rubin
Elinor Y. Sachse
Adrian W. Throop
Benjamin Zycher

Monetary Economics and International Finance
Natural Resources and Environment
Taxation and Social Security
Macroeconomic Analysis, Productivity, and
Prices
Macroeconomic Analysis, Forecasting, and
Economic Statistics
Public Finance, Taxes, Social Security, and
Health and Welfare
General Microeconomics and Regulation
General Microeconomics and Regulation
International Trade
Money, Banking, and Financial Institutions
Energy and Microeconomics
Statistician

Catherine H. Furlong

Senior Statistician
Junior Economists

Lawrence B. Lindsey
Robert G. Murphy
Dan C. Roberts
Chris P. Varvares
F. Katharine Warne

Public Finance
International Trade and Finance
Financial Institutions and Markets
Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting
Regulation

Catherine H. Furlong, Senior Statistician, continued to be in
charge of the Council's Statistical Office. Mrs. Furlong has primary
responsibility for managing the Council's statistical information
system. She supervises the publication of Economic Indicators and the
preparation of all statistical matter in the Annual Report. She also
oversees the verification of statistics in memoranda, testimony, and
speeches. Natalie V. Rentfro, Linda A. Reilly, and Barbara L. Sibel
assist Mrs. Furlong.
Serving as consultants during the year were Martin J. Bailey (University of Maryland), William L. Breit (University of Virginia), Karl
Brunner (University of Rochester), Robert Eisner (Northwestern University), A. Nicholas Filippello (Monsanto Company), Arthur G. Gandolfi (Citibank), Henry P. Korytkowski (Citibank), Marvin H. Kosters
(American Enterprise Institute), and James F. Smith (Union Carbide).
In preparing the Annual Report the Council relied upon the editorial
assistance of John Phillip Sawicki.




225

SUPPORTING STAFF

The Administrative Office of the Council of Economic Advisers
provides general support for the Council's activities. Serving in the
Administrative Office were Elizabeth A. Kaminski, Staff Assistant to
the Council, and Catherine Fibich.
Members of the secretarial staff for the Chairman and Council
Members during 1981 were Carolyn L. Bazarnick, Patricia A. Lee,
Georgia A. O'Connor, and Alice H. Williams. Secretaries for the professional staff were Catherine Fibich, Bessie M. Lafakis, Rosemary M.
Rogers, Margaret L. Snyder, and Lillie M. Sturniolo. Elizabeth A.
Cralle, Secretary, and Joseph Henley, Clerk, provided assistance
during the summer months.
DEPARTURES
The Council's professional staff members are in most cases on
leave from universities, other government agencies, or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to 1 or 2
years. Senior staff economists who resigned during the year and their
subsequent affiliations were William T. Boehm (the Kroger Company), Marshall L. Casse (Department of State), Stephen H. Brooks
(Consultant), Jose A. Gomez-Ibanez (Harvard University), Val L.
Koromzay (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development), Robert A. Leone (Harvard University), Perry D. Quick (staff of
Senator Gary Hart), and Andrew J. Strenio (Federal Trade Commission). Susan J. Irving, Special Assistant to the Chairman, joined the
International Monetary Fund.
Junior Economists who resigned in 1981 were Martin A. Asher
(Joel Popkin and Associates), Elizabeth J. Jensen (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Stephen A. O'Connell (Massachusetts Institute
of Technology), David H. Romer (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), and Robert W. Turner (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)Retired during the year were Nancy F. Skidmore, Administrative
Officer, Joyce A. Pilkerton, Secretary, and Earnestine Reid, Statistical
Assistant. Pauline H. Thompson, secretary, resigned from the Council staff.




226

Appendix B

STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME,
EMPLOYMENT, AND PRODUCTION







CONTENTS
NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE:
B-l.
Gross national product, 1929-81
B-2.
Gross national product in 1972 dollars, 1929-81
B-3.
Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-81
B-4.
Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product, 1972
weights, 1959-81
B-5.
Changes in gross national product and GNP price measures, 192981
B-6.
Gross national product by major type of product, 1929-81
B-7.
Gross national product by major type of product in 1972 dollars,
1929-81
B-8.
Gross national product by sector, 1929-81
B-9.
Gross national product by sector in 1972 dollars, 1929-81
B-10. Gross national product by industry, 1947-80
B-ll. Gross national product by industry in 1972 dollars, 1947-80
B-12. Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business, 192981
B-l3. Output, costs, and profits of nonfinancial corporate business,
1948-81
B-14. Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-81
B-15. Gross private domestic investment, 1929-81
B-16. Gross and net private domestic investment, 1929-81
B-17. Inventories and final sales of business, 1946-81
B-18. Inventories and final sales of business in 1972 dollars, 1947-81
B-l9. Relation of gross national product, net national product, and national income, 1929-81
B-20. Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-81
B-21. National income by type of income, 1929-81
B-22. Sources of personal income, 1929-81
B-23. Disposition of personal income, 1929-81
B-24. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and 1972 dollars, 1929-81
B-25. Gross saving and investment, 1929-81
B-26. Saving by individuals, 1946-81
B-27. Money income (in 1980 dollars) and poverty status of families and
unrelated individuals by race of householder, 1952-80
POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY:
B-28. Population by age groups, 1929-80
B-29. Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-81
B-30. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age, 1947-81 ..
B-31. Selected employment and unemployment data, 1948-81
B-32. Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic, 1954-81
B-33. Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic, 1948-81




229

Page

233
234
236
238
239
240

241
242
243
244
245
246

247
248
250
251
252
253
254
255
256
258
260
261
262
263
264
265
266
268
269
270
271

Page

B-34.
B-35.
B-36.
B-37.
B-38.
B-39.
B-40.
B-41.

Unemployment by duration, 1947-81
Unemployment by reason, 1967-81
Unemployment insurance programs, selected data, 1946-81
Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 192981
Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries, 1947-81
Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries, 1947-81
Productivity and related data, private business sector, 1947-81
Changes in productivity and related data, private business sector,
1948-81

PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY:
B-42. Industrial production indexes, major industry divisions, 1929-81 ....
B-43. Industrial production indexes, market groupings, 1947-81
B-44. Industrial production indexes, selected manufactures, 1947-81
B-45. Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing, 1948-81
B-46. New construction activity, 1929-81
B-47. New housing units started and authorized, 1959-81
B-48. Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment,
1947-82
B-49. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade, 1947-81
B-50. Manufacturers' shipments and inventories, 1947-81
B-51. Manufacturers' new and unfilled orders, 1947-81
PRICES:
B-52.
B-53.
B-54.
B-55.
B-56.
B-57.
B-58.
B-59.
B-60.

Consumer price indexes, major expenditure classes, 1929-81
Consumer price indexes, selected expenditure classes, 1939-81
Consumer price indexes, commodities, services, and special
groups, 1939-81
Changes in consumer price indexes, commodities and services,
1948-81
Changes in special consumer price indexes, 1958-81
Producer price indexes by stage of processing, 1947-81
Producer price indexes by stage of processing, special groups,
1974-81
Producer price indexes by major commodity groups, 1940-81
Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods, 1948-81

MONEY STOCK, CREDIT, AND FINANCE:
B-61. Money stock measures and liquid assets, 1959-81
B-62. Components of money stock measures and liquid assets, 1959-81...
B-63. Commercial bank loans and investments, 1939-81
B-64. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors, 197381
B-65.
Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves, 1929-81....
B-66. Aggregate reserves and monetary base, 1959-81
B-67. Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-81
B-68.
Consumer credit outstanding and net change, 1950-81
B-69. Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated, 1950-81
B-70. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing,
1939-81
B-71. Mortgage debt outstanding by holder, 1939-81




230

272
273
274
275

276
277
278
279
280
281
282
283
284
286
287
288
289
290
291
292
293
295
296
297
299
300
302
303
304
305
306
308
309
310
312
313

314
315

GOVERNMENT FINANCE:
Page
B-72. Federal budget receipts, outlays, and debt, fiscal years 1971-83
316
B-73. Federal budget receipts and outlays, fiscal years 1929-83
317
B-74. Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the
national income and product accounts to the unified budget,
1980-83
319
B-75. Government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts, 1929-81
320
B-76. Federal Government receipts and expenditures, national income
and product accounts, 1958-83
321
B-77. State and local government receipts and expenditures, national
income and product accounts, 1946-81
322
B-78. State and local government revenues and expenditures, selected
fiscal years, 1927-79
323
B-79. Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation, 196781
324
B-80. Estimated ownership of public debt securities, 1967-81
325
B-81. Maturity distribution average length and of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors, 1967-81. 326
CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE:
B-82. Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption
adjustments, 1929-81
B-83. Corporate profits by industry, 1929-81
B-84. Corporate profits of manufacturing industries, 1929-81
B-85. Sales, profits, and stockholders' equity, all manufacturing corporations, 1950-81
B-86. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales,
all manufacturing corporations, 1947-81
B-87. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales,
all manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1979-81
B-88. Determinants of business fixed investment, 1955-81
B-89. Sources and uses of funds, nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business, 1946-81
B-90. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations, 1939-81
B-91. State and municipal and corporate securities offered, 1934-81
B-92. Common stock prices and yields, 1949-81
B-93. Business formation and business failures, 1929-81
AGRICULTURE:
B-94. Farm income, 1929-81
B-95. Farm output and productivity indexes, 1929-81
B-96. Farm input use, selected inputs, 1929-81
B-97. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, 1940-81
B-98. U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities, 1940-81
B-99. Balance sheet of the farming sector, 1929-82
INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS:
B-100. Exchange rates, 1967-81
B-101. U.S. international transactions, 1946-81
B-102. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category, 1965-81
B-103. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area, 1973-81




231

327
328
329
330
331
332
333
334
335
336
337
338
339
340
341
342
343
344
345
346
348
349

Page
B-104. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups,
1958-81
B-105. International investment position of the United States at year-end,
selected years, 1970-80
B-106. World trade: Exports and imports, 1965, 1970, 1975, and 197881
B-107. World trade balance and current account balances, 1965, 1970,
1975, and 1978-81
B-108. International reserves, selected years, 1952-81
B-109. Growth rates in real gross national product, 1960-81
B-110. Industrial production and consumer prices, major industrial countries, 1960-81
B-lll. Unemployment rate and hourly compensation, major industrial
countries, 1960-81

General Notes
Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding.
Unless otherwise noted, all dollar figures are in current dollars.
Symbols used:
p
Preliminary.
—Not available (also, not applicable).




232

350
351
352

353
354
355
356
357

NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE
TABLE B-l.—Gross national product, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net exports of goods and
services
Year or quarter

Personal Gross
Gross
conprivate
national sumption jomestic
product expendi- investNet
tures
ment exports

Government purchases of goods and
services
Federal

Exports Imports

Total

Tntal National Nonloiai defense defense

State
and
Inral
lOCdl

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
national
product 1

1929

103.4

77.3

16.2

1.1

7.0

5.9

8.8

14

7.4

6.5

1933

55.8

45.8

1.4

.4

2.4

2.0

8.2

2.1

6.1

-4.2

1939

90.9

67.0

9.3

1.2

4.6

3.4

13.5

5.2

1.2

3.9

8.3

7.0

1940..
1941.
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

100.0
125.0
158.5
192.1
210.6
212.4
209.8
233.1
259.5
258.3

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

13.1
17.9

1.8
1.5
.2

2.2

16.9
52.0
81.3
89.4
74.6
17.6
12.7
16.7
20.4

13.7
49.4
79.7
87.4
73.5
14.8

10.0
25.0
26.7
21.3

10.7
13.2

3.9
3.2
2.6
1.6
2.0
1.1
2.8
3.7
6.0
7.2

8.1
8.0
7.8
7.5
7.6
8.2
9.9

11.9

3.6
4.7
4.8
6.5
7.2
7.9
7.3
8.3

6.1

10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

5.4
6.1
5.0
4.6
5.5
7.4

12.8
15.3
18.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.5
330.8
348.0
366.8
366.8
400.0
421.7
444.0
449.7
487.9

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.5
524.6
565.0
596.7
637.7
691.1
756.0
799.6
873.4
944.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981 P..

6.9
6.5

15.1
20.2
17.5
16.3

10.5

9.8

14.2
24.9
59.8
88.9
97.0
82.8
27.5
25.5
32.0
38.4

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
78.1

2.2
4.4
3.2
1.3
2.5
3.0
5.3
7.3
3.3
1.4

14.4
19.7
19.1
18.0
18.7
21.0
25.0
28.1
24.2
24.8

12.2
15.3
15.9
16.7
16.2
18.0
19.8
20.8
21.0
23.4

38.5
60.1
75.6
82.5
75.8
75.0
79.4
87.1
95.0
97.6

18.7
38.3
52.4
57.5
47.9
44.5
45.9
50.0
53.9
53.9

14.0
33.5
45.8
48.6
41.1
38.4
40.2
44.0
45.6
45.6

4.7
4.8
6.5
8.9
6.8
6.0
5.7
5.9
8.3
8.3

19.8
21.8
23.2
25.0
27.8
30.6
33.5
37.1
41.1
43.7

10.9
15.5

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.5
430.4
465.1
490.3
536.9
581.8

75.9
74.8
85.4
90.9
97.4
113.5
125.7
122.8
133.3
149.3

5.5
6.6
6.4
7.6

28.9
29.9
31.8
34.2
38.8
41.1
44.6
47.3
52.4
57.5

23.4
23.3
25.4
26.6
28.8
32.3
38.1
41.0
48.1
53.3

100.3
108.2
118.0
123.7
129.8
138.4
158.7
180.2
199.0
208.8

53.7
57.4
63.7
64.6
65.2
67.3
78.8
90.9
98.0
97.6

44.5
47.0
51.1
50.3
49.0
49.4
60.3
71.5
76.9
76.3

9.3
10.4
12.7
14.3
16.2
17.8
18.5
19.5
21.2
21.2

46.5
50.8
54.3
59.0
64.6
71.1
79.8
89.3
101.0
111.2

3.8
3.6
7.7
5.6
6.9
8.4
9.4
5.8
9.2
8.1

992.7
1,077.6
1,185.9
1,326.4
1,434.2
1,549.2
1,718.0
1,918.0
2,156.1
2,413.9

621.7
672.2
737.1
812.0
888.1
976.4
1,084.3
1,205.5
1,348.7
1,510.9

144.2
166.4
195.0
229.8
228.7
206.1
257.9
322.3
375.3
415.8

14.2
13.4
26.8
13.8
-4.2
13.4

65.7
68.8
77.5
109.6
146.2
154.9
170.9
183.3
219.8
281.3

59.0
64.7
76.7
95.4
132.8
128.1
157.1
187.5
220.4
267.9

220.1
234.9
253.1
270.4
304.1
339.9
362.1
394.5
432.6
473.8

95.7
96.2
101.7
102.0
111.0
122.7
129.2
143.9
153.4
167.9

73.6
70.2
73.1
72.8
77.0
83.0
86.0
93.3
100.0
111.2

22.2
26.0
28.5
29.1
33.9
39.7
43.2
50.6
53.4
56.7

124.4
138.7
151.4
168.5 .
193.1
217.2
232.9
250.6
279.2
305.9

2,626.1
2,922.2

1,672.8
1,858.1

395.3
450.6

23.3
23.8

339.8
366.7

316.5
342.9

534.7 198.9
589.6 228.6

131.7
153.3

67.2
75.2

335.8
361.1

2,340.6
2,374.6
2,444.1
2,496.3

1,454.1
1,478.0
1,529.1
1,582.3

408.3
423.2
421.7
410.0

19.9

259.1
266.8
293.1
306.3

239.2
258.6
275.2
298.7

458.2
465.1
475.4
496.4

164.8
163.6
165.1
178.1

106.0
108.1
112.0
118.7

58.8
55.5
53.1
59.4

293.4
301.6
310.4
318.3

12.7

2,571.7
2,564.8
26373
2,730.6

1,631.0
1,626.8
16822
1,751.0

415.6
390.9
377 1
397.7

337.3
333.3
3424
346.1

329.1
316.2
2979
322.7

516.8
530.0
5335
558.6

190.0
198.7
1949
212.0

125.0
128.7
1314
141.6

64.9
70.0

326.8
331.3

12.6
-1.1

635 3386

118

70.4

346.6

14.9

2,853.0
28858
2,965.0
2,984.9

1,810.1
18291
1,883.9
1,909.5

437.1
4586
463.0
443.6

367.4
3682
368.0
363.0

338.2
3475
338.7
347.1

576.5
5774
588.9
615.7

221.6
2195
226.4
246.7

145.2
1482
154.1
165.8

76.4

354.9

19.2

713 3579

47

72.2
81.0

362.5
369.0

11.4

9.9
5.8
7.2

-1.9
-1.7

-.5
7.8

10.1

8.8
6.5
6.3
4.3
4.2
6.7
4.1
.7

-.6

9.0

9.6
.9

-1.2
11.1
11.3

-.5

5.2
5.4
.0
9.0
5.4
5.3
1.3
8.5

5.2
8.6

10.1
11.8

8.1
8.0

10.9
11.6
12.4
12.0

8.8
11.3

1979

1
II
III
IV.

8.2

17.9

7.6

5.9
12.2

8.8

1980:

1
II
Ill
IV

8.2
17.1

445
23.3

1981:

1
II
III

IV P

29.2

208
29.3
16.0

1

2.7

Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




233

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product in 1972 dollars, 1929-81
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross private domestic investment

Personal consumption expenditures

Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

Fixed investment
Total

Durable
goods

NonHurohlo
ouraoie
goods

Services

Nonresidential

Tntal
lOTdl

Total

Total

oiruc- Producers'
durable
tures equipment

Qtrnr

16.4

1929

315.7

215.1

20.9

98.1

96.1

55.8

51.2

37.5

21.1

1933

222.1

170.5

10.7

82.9

76.9

8.4

13.2

10.4

5.0

5.5

1939

319.8

219.8

18.6

115.1

86.1

33.6

32.0

20.9

8.7

12.1

1940.
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

344.1
400.4
461.7
531.6
569.1
560.4
478.3
470.3
489.8
492.2

229.9
243.6
241.1
248.2
255.2
270.9
301.0
305.8
312.2
319.3

21.2
24.2
15.7
14.0
13.0
14.4
25.4
30.1
32.5
35.5

119.9
127.6
129.9
134.0
139.4
150.3
158.9
154.8
155.0
157.4

88.8
91.8
95.5
100.2
102.8
106.3
116.7
120.9
124.7
126.5

44.5
55.8
29.5
18.1
19.7
27.7
70.9
70.0
82.1
65.4

38.3
43.8
24.3
18.0
22.0
31.4
58.7
70.2
76.6
69.8

25.8
30.4
17.6
14.0
18.7
27.6
42.1
48.9
51.1
46.0

10.0
12.0
6.8
4.2
5.5
8.3
18.9
17.4
18.4
17.9

15.8
18.5
10.9
9.8
13.2
19.2
23.2
31.5
32.6
28.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

534.8
579.4
600.8
623.6
616.1
657.5
671.6
683.8
680.9
721.7

337.3
341.6
350.1
363.4
370.0
394.1
405.4
413.8
418.0
440.4

42.6
39.1
38.0
42.1
42.5
51.1
48.8
48.6
45.3
50.7

161.8
165.3
171.2
175.7
177.0
185.4
191.6
194.9
196.8
205.0

132.9
137.2
140.9
145.6
150.5
157.6
165.0
170.3
175.9
184.8

93.5
93.9
83.0
85.3
83.1
103.8
102.6
97.0
87.5
108.0

83.0
80.2
78.7
83.8
85.3
96.1
96.8
95.5
89.3
100.9

50.0
52.9
52.1
56.3
55.4
61.3
65.4
66.2
59.3
63.6

19.2
20.7
20.6
22.6
23.6
25.4
28.3
28.4
26.8
27.4

30.8
32.2
31.5
33.7
31.8
35.9
37.0
37.8
32.5
36.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

737.2
756.6
800.3
832.5
876.4
929.3
984.8
1,011.4
1,058.1
1,087.6

452.0
461.4
482.0
500.5
528.0
557.5
585.7
602.7
634.4
657.9

51.4
49.3
54.7
59.7
64.8
72.6
78.4
79.5
88.3
91.8

208.2
211.9
218.5
223.0
233.3
244.0
255.5
259.5
270.5
277.3

192.4
200.2
208.8
217.8
229.8
240.9
251.8
263.7
275.6
288.8

104.7
103.9
117.6
125.1
133.0
151.9
163.0
154.9
161.6
171.4

101.2
100.9
109.7
117.5
125.9
140.1
146.2
142.7
152.6
160.4

66.9
66.7
72.0
75.1
82.7
97.4
108.0
105.6
109.5
116.8

29.5
30.2
31.6
31.9
34.4
40.6
43.4
42.0
42.8
45.0

37.4
36.5
40.4
43.1
48.3
56.8
64.5
63.6
66.8
71.8

1970
1971
1972.
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,085.6
1,122.4
1,185.9
1,255.0
1,248.0
1,233.9
1,300.4
1,371.7
1,436.9
1,483.0

672.1
696.8
737.1
768.5
763.6
780.2
823.7
863.9
904.8
930.9

89.1
98.2
111.1
121.3
112.3
112.7
126.6
138.4
146.3
146.6

283.7
288.7
300.6
308.0
303.3
308.2
322.5
334.0
345.7
354.6

299.3
309.9
325.3
339.2
348.0
359.3
374.7
391.5
412.8
429.6

158.5
173.9
195.0
217.5
195.5
154.8
184.5
213.5
229.7
232.6

154.8
165.8
184.8
200.4
183.9
161.5
176.7
201.2
215.8
222.5

113.8
112.2
121.0
138.1
135.7
119.3
125.6
140.6
153.4
163.3

43.9
42.8
44.1
47.4
43.6
38.3
39.5
40.5
44.6
48.5

69.9
69.3
76.9
90.7
92.1
81.1
86.1
100.0
108.8
114.8

1980
1981"

1,480.7
1,509.6

935.1
959.1

135.8
139.4

358.4
367.4

440.9
452.4

203.6
215.0

206.6
206.8

158.4
161.6

48.4
50.7

110.0
110.8

14799
1,473 4
1,488 2
1,490.6

9255
9228
933.4
941.6

1496
1442
1467
146.0

351 1
350'6
3554
361.3

4248
4280
431.3
434.3

237J
2387
232.6
221.5

222.3
2204
225.'0
222.2

161.4
1613
166.4
164.1

45.8
48^0
494
50.7

115.6
113^2
1170
113^5

1,501 9
1,463 3
14719
1,485.6

9434
9193
9308
946.8

1454
126.2
1326
139.1

3615
3566
3549
360.4

4365
436.5
4433
447'.3

2183
200'.5
1953
200'.5

2192
199^2
200.2
207^6

1650
1561
155.5
157^0

505
48'7
46.8
47^8

114.5
1074
108 8
109*3

1,516.4
15104
1,515.8
1,495.6

960.2
9551
962.8
958.3

146.8
1374
140.3
133.0

364.5
3670
368.8
369.2

4489
4507
453.7
456.1

211.6
2197
221.5
207.1

213.1
2089
206^5
198.7

1620
161 1
163!9
159.2

496
504
5L5
51.4

112.4
110 7
1124
107.8

1979:

1
II ....
Ill
IV

1980:

I..
II
Ill
IV

1981:
1

II

III

IV p

See next page for continuation of table.




234

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product in 1972 dollars, 1929-81—Continued
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross private domestic investmentcontinued

Net exports of goods and
services

Government purchases of
goods and services

Fixed investment— continued
Year or
quarter

Residential

Total

Nonfarm
structures

Farm
structures

Producers'
durable
equipment

Change
in
business
inventories

Net
exports

Exports

Imports

Total

Federal

State
and
local

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
national
product 1

1929

13.7

13.0

0.6

0.1

4.6

3.7

16.7

12.9

41.0

7.0

33.9

6.6

1933

2.8

2.5

.2

.1

-4.9

.4

9.1

8.6

42.9

10.9

32.0

-2.2

1939

11.1

10.4

.6

.1

1.6

3.4

14.3

10.9

63.0

22.8

40.3

7.8

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

12.5
13.3
6.7
4.0
3.4
3.8
16.6
21.3
25.6
23.8

11.6
12.3
6.0
3.5
3.0
3.4
15.3
19.7
23.8
22.1

.8
.9
.6
.4
.4
.3
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.4

.1
.2
.1
.0
.0
.1
.2
.3
.3
.3

6.2
12.0
5.2
.1
-2.3
-3.6
12.2
-.2
5.5
-4.4

4.4
3.2
-.6
-5.9
-6.2
-3.7
13.2
18.9
10.8
10.7

15.5
16.4
11.4
9.8
10.5
13.8
27.3
32.2
26.3
25.8

11.1
13.2
12.0
15.7
16.8
17.5
14.0
13.3
15.5
15.2

65.3
97.8
191.6
271.3
300.4
265.4
93.1
75.7
84.7
96.8

26.7
61.0
157.4
239.6
269.7
233.7
58.2
36.3
42.8
49.2

38.6
36.8
34.3
31.7
30.7
31.7
34.9
39.4
41.9
47.5

7.6
16.3
15.3
15.1
7.1
-1.5
-14.7
-1.7
4.1
.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

33.0
27.3
26.6
27.5
29.9
34.8
31.5
29.2
30.0
37.4

31.3
25.7
25.1
26.1
28.5
33.5
30.0
27.8
28.6
35.9

1.3
1.3
1.2
1.2
1.1
.9
1.0
1.0
.9
1.0

.3
.3
.3
.3
.3
.4
.4
.4
.5
.6

10.6
13.7
4.3
1.5
-2.2
7.7
5.8
1.5
-1.8
7.0

5.9
10.1
7.9
4.8
6.9
7.3
10.1
11.8
5.6
2.7

23.6
28.6
27.9
26.6
27.8
30.7
35.3
38.0
33.2
33.8

17.7
18.5
20.0
21.8
20.9
23.4
25.2
26.1
27.6
31.1

98.1
133.7
159.8
170.1
156.0
152.3
153.5
161.2
169.8
170.6

47.3
82.2
107.2
114.7
96.1
88.2
86.8
90.6
93.4
91.4

50.8
51.5
52.7
55.3
59.9
64.1
66.7
70.6
76.4
79.2

8.7
8.3
3.7
3.8
-1.2
6.7
2.1
1.8
-.4
6.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

34.2
34.3
37.7
42.5
43.1
42.7
38.2
37.1
43.1
43.6

32.9
32.8
36.3
40.9
41.5
41.2
36.6
35.4
41.3
41.7

.8
1.0
.9
.9
.9
.8
.9
.9
.8
.9

.5
.5
.6
.6
.7
.7
.8
.8
.9
1.1

3.5
3.0
7.8
7.5
7.1
11.8
16.8
12.2
9.0
11.1

7.7
8.5
7.5
9.4
12.8
10.1
6.5
5.4
1.9
.9

38.4
39.3
41.8
44.8
50.3
51.7
54.4
56.7
61.2
65.0

30.7
30.9
34.3
35.4
37.5
41.6
47.9
51.3
59.3
64.1

172.8
182.9
193.2
197.6
202.6
209.8
229.7
248.5
260.2
257.4

90.4
95.3
102.8
101.8
100.2
100.3
112.6
125.1
128.1
121.8

82.4
87.5
90.4
95.8
102.4
109.5
117.1
123.4
132.1
135.6

2.2
2.6
5.8
4.0
5.3
6.0
6.0
2.7
4.6
2.8

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

41.0
53.7
63.8
62.3
48.2
42.2
51.2
60.6
62.4
59.1

39.2
51.6
61.5
59.9
45.3
39.8
48.7
57.8
59.5
56.2

.6
.7
.7
.6
1.1
.8
.8
1.0
1.0
.9

1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.7
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0

3.8
8.1
10.2
17.2
11.6
-6.7
7.8
12.3
14.0
10.2

3.9
1.6
.7
15.5
27.8
32.2
25.4
21.9
24.6
37.7

70.5
71.0
77.5
97.3
108.5
103.6
110.1
113.2
127.5
146.9

66.6
69.3
76.7
81.8
80.7
71.4
84.7
91.3
103.0
109.2

251.1
250.1
253.1
253.5
261.2
266.7
266.8
272.3
277.8
281.8

110.6
103.7
101.7
95.9
96.6
97.4
96.8
100.7
99.8
101.7

140.5
146.4
151.4
157.6
164.5
169.3
170.0
171.6
178.0
180.1

-.2
3.4
5.7
5.8
-.6
-1.1
5.4
5.5
4.8
3.2

1980
1981 P

48.1
45.2

45.2
42.2

.9
1.0

2.0
2.0

-2.9
8.2

52.0
44.3

161.1
160.0

109.1
115.8

290.0
291.2

108.1
111.0

181.9
180.2

-.2
1.9

60.8
59.1
58.6
58.1

58.1
56.3
55.5
54.9

.8
.8
.9
1.1

2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1

15.4
18.4
7.6
-.7

36.0
31.6
41.1
42.2

141.1
140.5
151.3
154.8

105.1
108.8
110.2
112.6

280.6
280.3
281.1
285.3

102.9
100.8
99.9
103.1

177.7
179.4
181.2
182.2

3.9
-1.7
4.1
.6

II
Ill
IV

54.2
43.1
44.7
50.6

51.2
40.3
41.9
47.5

1.0
.8
.7
1.0

2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0

-.9
1.3
-5.0
-7.2

50.1
51.7
57.6
48.5

165.9
160.5
160.5
157.4

115.8
108.9
102.8
108.9

290.1
291.9
288.2
289.8

107.6
110.7
106.9
107.4

182.5
181.2
181.3
182.4

3.1
-9.9
2.4
3.8

1981:
1
II
Ill
IV p

51.0
47.8
42.7
39.5

48.0
44.8
39.7
36.4

.9
.9
1.0
1.0

2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0

-1.4
10.8
14.9
8.5

50.9
46.2
43.2
36.7

162.5
161.5
160.1
155.9

111.6
115.4
116.9
119.2

293.6
289.5
288.3
293.4

111.2
108.7
109.6
114.5

182.5
180.7
178.8
178.8

8.6
-1.6
1.4
-5.2

....

1979:

1
||
III
IV

1980:
I

1
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




235

TABLE B-3.—Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-81
[Index numbers, 1972=100, except as noted; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Gross private domestic investment 1

Personal consumption expenditures

Year or quarter

Fixed investment

Gross
national
product *
Total

Nondurable
goods

Durable
goods

Nonresidential
Services
Total
Total

Structures

Producers'
durable
equipment

1929

32.76

35.9

44.2

38.4

31.6

28.3

28.3

24.3

33.4

1933

25.13

26.9

32.5

26.8

26.1

22.4

22.9

19.2

26.2

1939

28.43

30.5

35.9

30.5

29.2

27.7

28.2

23.0

32.0

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.
1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949.

29.06
31.23
34.32
36.14
37.01
37.91
43.88
49.55
52.98
52.49

30.9
33.2
36.7
40.1
42.4
44.1
47.8
52.9
56.0
55.8

36.7
40.0
43.7
46.7
51.3
55.5
62.1
67.8
70.3
70.5

30.9
33.6
39.1
43.7
46.2
47.8
52.1
58.7
62.3
60.3

29.5
30.8
32.4
34.2
36.1
37.3
38.8
41.7
44.4
46.0

28.5
30.7
33.5
35.7
37.0
37.2
41.3
49.0
53.7
54.9

29.1
31.0
33.9
35.9
36.8
36.7
40.0
46.9
51.5
53.0

23.4
24.9
28.4
32.4
33.8
33.9
36.6
44.0
48.8
48.4

32.8
34.9
37.3
37.3
38.0
37.9
42.8
48.6
53.0
56.0

1950.
1951
1952.
1953.
1954.
1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

53.56
57.09
57.92
58.82
59.55
60.84
62.79
64.93
66.04
67.60

56.9
60.6
62.0
63.2
63.7
64.4
65.6
67.8
69.2
70.6

72.2
76.3
76.7
77.2
75.0
75.6
77.7
80.9
81.3
83.8

60.7
65.8
66.5
66.3
66.6
66.3
67.3
69.4
71.0
71.4

47.4
49.9
52.6
55.4
57.2
58.4
60.1
62.2
64.1
66.0

56.7
60.9
62.3
63.1
63.6
65.0
68.5
71.1
71.0
71.8

54.5
59.1
60.1
61.2
61.7
62.9
67.3
71.0
70.9
72.2

49.3
55.1
56.3
57.4
56.5
57.6
62.4
64.9
63.9
64.2

57.8
61.7
62.6
63.8
65.5
66.6
71.1
75.5
76.6
78.3

1960.
1961
1962.
1963.
1964.
1965.
1966.
1967.
1968.
1969.

68.70
69.33
70.61
71.67
72.77
74.36
76.76
79.06
82.54
86.79

71.9
72.6
73.7
74.8
75.9
77.2
79.4
81.4
84.6
88.4

83.8
84.3
85.4
86.2
87.1
86.8
86.7
88.2
91.1
93.3

72.6
73.3
73.9
74.9
75.8
77.3
80.1
81.9
85.3
89.4

67.9
69.0
70.4
71.7
72.7
74.2
76.4
78.7
81.9
86.0

72.1
71.8
72.2
72.3
72.9
74.0
76.3
78.8
82.2
87.0

72.5
72.0
72.5
73.1
73.8
74.7
76.9
79.5
82.8
86.7

63.7
63.3
63.6
64.1
64.9
66.4
69.2
72.2
75.8
81.5

79.4
79.3
79.4
79.7
80.1
80.6
82.1
84.3
87.2
89.9

1970.
1971.
1972 .
1973.
1974.
1975.
1976.
1977.
1978.
1979.

91.45
96.01
100.00
105.69
114.92
125.56
132.11
139.83
150.05
162.77

92.5
96.5
100.0
105.7
116.3
125.2
131.6
139.5
149.1
162.3

95.7
99.0
100.0
101.7
108.2
117.3
123.9
129.2
136.2
144.8

93.6
96.6
100.0
108.3
123.1
132.1
137.0
143.4
153.2
169.8

90.5
95.6
100.0
104.7
113.0
121.6
129.6
139.9
1501
162.1

91.1
95.7
100.0
105.5
116.7
131.9
139.2
149.7
163.7
179.1

91.3
96.2
100.0
103.8
115.4
132.2
138.6
146.2
157.7
171.3

88.2
94.5
100.0
107.7
128.2
144.8
149.0
159.4
176.4
198.6

93.2
97.2
100.0
101.8
109.3
126.2
133.9
140.9
150.1
159.7

1980.
1981 *..

177.36
193.58

178.9
193.7

156.0
166.5

188.6
202.4

178.1
195.1

194.2
209.1

186.8
202.5

224.7
246.4

170.2
182.3

158.16
161.17
164.23
167.47

157.1
160.2
163.8
168.0

142.0
143.9
145.4
148.0

162.9
167.3
172.1
176.9

157.7
159.9
163.3
167.4

172.8
177.0
181.5
184.9

165.5
169.2
173.4
176.8

190.6
194.0
201.4
207.4

155.6
158.7
161.5
163.2

171.23
175.28
179.18
183.81

172.9
177.0
180.7
184.9

151.9
154.1
157.5
160.5

182.9
186.2
190.0
195.2

171.6
176.0
180.3
184.3

188.5
192.5
196.4
199.9

180.5
185.7
189.1
192.4

214.3
222.4
229.5
233.3

165.6
169.0
171.7
174.5

188.14
191.06
195.61
199.58

188.5
191.5
195.7
199.3

162.3
165.4
168.3
170.2

199.2
200.4
203.7
206.1

188.4
192.2
197.6
202.2

203.1
208.4
210.9
214.4

195.0
201.4
204.5
208.9

236.2
244.1
249.2
255.6

176.8
182.0
184.0
186.6

1979:

1
II.
Ill
IV.
1980:

1
II.
Ill
IV.

1981:

1
II.
III.

IV.

See next page for continuation of table.




236

TABLE B-3.—Implicit price deflators for gross national product, 1929-81—Continued
[Index numbers, 1972 = 100, except as noted; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Gross private domestic investment l—
continued

Exports and
imports of goods
and services 1

Fixed investment— continued

Government purchases of
goods and services

Residential

Year or quarter
Total

Nonfarm
structures

Farm
structures

Producers'
durable
equipment

Exports

Imports

Total

Federal

State
and
local

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
national
product
implicit
price
deflator 2

1929

28.2

27.8

28.6

77.2

42.2

45.5

21.5

20.5

1933

20.7

19.8

19.5

58.8

26.5

23.6

19.2

19.4

19.1

-2.1

26.6

26.3

23.4

61.1

32.1

31.0

21.4

22.7

20.7

-.8

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.
1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949.

27.4
30.0
32.4
34.9
38.1
40.8
44.6
53.7
58.1
58.7

27.2
29.7
31.8
34.3
37.3
40.0
43.9
53.0
57.5
58.1

23.6
26.6
30.7
35.7
40.8
42.9
46.6
52.8
57.3
58.0

59.6
63.8
71.3
71.4
75.0
84.6
95.2
105.6
111.5
107.9

34.9
37.3
43.6
46.8
51.9
53.6
55.4
62.8
66.5
63.1

32.8
35.4
40.0
41.3
42.7
44.9
51.8
62.3
67.8
64.6

21.7
25.5
31.2
32.8
32.3
31.2
29.6
33.6
37.7
39.7

22.7
27.8
33.0
34.0
33.1
31.9
30.2
35.0
39.0
41.4

20.9
21.7
22.8
23.7
24.8
25.8
28.5
32.4
36.4
37.8

2.2
7.5
9.9
5.3
2.4
2.4
15.7
12.9
6.9
-.9

1950.
1951.
1952.
1953. .
1954.
1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

60.0
64.4
66.4
66.9
67.1
68.7
71.0
71.4
71.2
71.1

59.5
63.8
65.8
66.3
66.6
68.2
70.5
70.9
70.7
70.6

59.4
63.8
65.7
66.2
66.5
68.3
70.6
70.9
70.8
70.7

107.4
114.9
114.6
114.2
112.4
109.1
104.3
103.4
101.9
101.8

61.0
68.8
68.6
67.5
67.2
68.5
71.0
74.0
73.1
73.5

68.8
82.6
79.9
76.7
77.2
77.1
78.4
79.6
76.1
75.2

39.2
45.0
47.3
48.5
48.6
49.2
51.7
54.0
56.0
57.2

39.6
46.6
48.9
50.1
49.9
50.4
52.9
55.1
57.7
59.0

38.9
42.3
44.1
45.2
46.5
47.6
50.2
52.6
53.8
55.1

2.1
6.6
1.4
1.6
1.2
2.2
3.2
3.4
1.7
2.4

1960.
1961.
1962.
1963.
1964.
1965.
1966
1967.
1968
1969.

71.4
71.3
71.5
70.9
71.2
72.3
74.6
77.0
80.7
87.7

70.9
70.9
71.1
70.5
70.8
72.0
74.3
76.7
80.5
87.5

71.1
70.7
71.2
70.6
70.9
72.2
74.2
76.7
80.6
87.5

100.8
99.0
96.8
95.3
94.3
92.1
90.8
91.0
93.5
95.7

75.2
76.1
76.0
76.3
77.2
79.4
81.9
83.5
85.5
88.5

76.1
75.5
74.2
75.2
76.8
77.7
79.4
79.9
81.1
83.2

58.0
59.1
61.1
62.6
64.1
66.0
69.1
72.5
76.5
81.1

59.4
60.2
62.0
63.5
65.1
67.1
70.0
72.7
76.5
80.1

56.5
58.0
60.1
61.6
63.1
64.9
68.2
72.4
76.4
82.0

1.6
.9
1.8
1.5
1.5
2.2
3.2
3.0
4.4
5.1

1970.
1971.
1972
1973.
1974.
1975
1976.
1977.
1978
1979.

90.5
94.8
100.0
109.1
120.3
131.0
140.7
158.0
178.3
200.5

90.3
94.7
100.0
109.4
120.8
131.6
141.3
159.0
179.8
202.7

90.6
95.0
100.0
109.2
120.5
131.9
140.7
157.2
179.0
202.0

97.8
99.3
100.0
100.6
106.8
116.9
122.7
126.6
132.7
140.3

93.2
97.0
100.0
112.7
134.7
149.6
155.2
161.9
172.4
191.5

88.6
93.3
100.0
116.7
164.6
179.5
185.5
205.4
214.0
245.4

87.7
93.9
100.0
106.7
116.4
127.5
135.7
144.8
155.7
168.1

86.6
92.7
100.0
106.3
114.9
126.0
133.5
142.9
153.7
165.1

88.6
94.7
100.0
106.9
117.4
128.3
137.0
146.0
156.9
169.8

5.4
5.0
4.2
5.7
8.7
9.3
5.2
5.8
7.3
8.5

1980
1981 "..

218.6
232.8

221.7
236.3

219.9
235.0

149.4
159.4

211.0
229.2

290.1
296.2

184.4
202.5

183.9
205.9

184.7
200.4

9.0
9.1

1979
1
II.
III.
IV

191.9
198.4
204.6
207.7

193.7
200.4
207.0
210.1

192.1
199.7
205.5
207.7

138.4
139.7
140.5
142.4

183.7
189.9
193.7
197.9

227.7
237.6
249.8
265.2

163.3
166.0
169.2
174.0

160.1
162.2
165.2
172.8

165.1
168.1
171.3
174.7

8.4
7.8
7.8
8.1

1
II.
Ill
IV

212.6
217.4
221.9
223.3

215.2
220.7
225.2
226.3

213.6
219.4
223.1
224.2

145.5
148.5
151.1
152.4

203.4
207.6
213.4
219.9

284.2
290.4
289.7
296.4

178.1
181.6
185.1
192.8

176.5
179.5
182.4
197.4

179.1
182.8
186.7
190.0

9.3
9.8
9.2
10.7

1981
1
II
III
IV

228.7
231.8
235.4
236.7

231.8
235.0
239.1
240.7

229.6
233.4
237.6
239.0

155.2
158.0
161.5
163.1

226.1
228.0
229.8
232.9

303.1
301.2
289.8
291.2

196.4
199.5
204.2
209.9

199.4
201.9
206.6
215.4

194.5
198.0
202.8
206.4

9.8
6.4
9.9
8.4

1939.

1980:

.

21.8

1
Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment, change in business inventories, and net exports of
goods and services.
2
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here. Quarterly
changes are at annual rates.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

 358-691 0 - 8 2 - 1 6 : Q L 3


237

TABLE B-4.—Fixed-weighted price indexes for gross national product, 1972 weights, 1959-81
[Index numbers, 1972 = 100; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Exports and
imports of
goods and
services1

Gross private domestic
investment 1

Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

Personal
consumption
expenditures

Fixed investment

Total

Nonresidential

Residential

Exports

Imports

Government purchases of
goods and services

State
Total

Federal

and
local

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
national
product
fixedweighted
price
index 2

1959

69.8

73.1

74.4

74.1

74.9

73.4

75.0

56.9

58.5

55.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

70.8
71.6
72.4
73.2
74.1

74.1
74.8
75.5
76.3
77.2

74.7
74.4
74.2
74.0
74.3

74.5
74.3
74.4
74.7
75.3

74.9
74.7
73.9
72.6
72.6

75.0
76.0
76.0
76.3
77.1

76.0
75.2
73.7
74.7
76.3

58.3
59.5
61.3
62.8
64.4

59.6
60.5
61.7
63.3
65.3

57.4
58.9
61.0
62.5
63.9

1.5
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.2

1965
1967
1968
1969

75.3
77.5
79.8
83.1
87.3

78.2
80.1
82.0
85.0
88.7

75.2
77.0
79.3
82.5
87.3

76.1
77.9
80.3
83.3
87.0

73.5
75.3
77.5
81.0
87.8

79.4
81.8
83.3
85.5
88.5

77.1
78.8
79.3
80.7
83.0

66.2
69.2
72.4
76.4
81.3

67.1
69.6
71.5
75.7
79.8

65.6
68.8
73.1
76.9
82.3

1.7
2.9
3.0
4.1
5.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

91.8
96.2
100.0
105.9
115.8

92.7
96.6
100.0
106.0
117.0

91.2
95.8
100.0
105.8
117.9

91.6
96.3
100.0
104.0
116.5

90.6
94.9
100.0
109.2
120.5

93.1
97.0
100.0
112.6
137.4

88.4
93.3
100.0
116.7
161.5

87.9
94.0
100.0
106.9
117.7

86.7
92.9
100.0
106.7
117.0

88.7
94.8
100.0
107.0
118.2

5.2
4.8
4.0
5.9
9.4

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

126.3
133.6
142.1
153.0
167.3

126.2
132.9
141.3
151.5
166.0

132.3
140.2
151.8
167.1
185.0

132.9
139.9
148.5
161.1
176.7

131.2
140.8
158.0
178.3
200.9

151.7
156.9
164.1
174.8
196.7

175.0
178.7
195.0
210.1
244.2

128.9
136.9
146.4
157.2
171.8

128.0
135.4
145.4
154.8
169.0

129.5
137.9
147.1
158.8
173.6

9.0
5.8
6.4
7.6
9.4

1980
1981 p

183.3

184.3
201.0

203.8
220.7

195.5
213.6

219.6
234.4

217.1
237.2

302.9
320.9

190.8
209.1

191.2
213.2

190.5

200.4

206.3

9.6
9.4

1979:
i
II
Ill
IV

161.9
165.4
168.9
173.1

160.2
163.7
167.8
172.4

177.8
182.8
187.9
191.7

170.3
174.4
178.8
183.0

192.1
198.6
205.1
208.1

188.0
195.4
199.5
203.4

225.6
235.5
250.9
264.3

166.1
169.0
173.2
179.3

162.8
165.2
169.8
179.3

168.3
171.6
175.5
179.3

9.3
8.9
8.8
10.3

177.1
181.1
185.1
189.7

177.8
182.1
186.3
190.8

196.7
202.4
207.1
209.7

188.0
193.9
198.6
202.0

213.2
218.4
223.1
224.3

209.9

290.3
299.4
308.7

184.4
188.4
192.1
198.2

184.5
187.8
190.8
201.2

184.3
188.8
193.0
196.2

9.7
9.3
9.0
10.4

206.7

229.7

232.9

233.1
237.3
238.8

239.0

202.7
206.9
210.6
216.2

205.5

211.8
216.1
219.7

200.7
204.3
208.6

10.2
7.9
9.5
8.3

1980:

I
II
Ill .
IV

213.2
219.1
226.6

315.5

1981:

1

II
Ill
IV.

194.4
198.1

195.8
198.9

214.6
219.1

202.6
206.7

202.9
206.3

223.4
226.3

236.1
241.0

324.4
324.8

318.6
316.9

210.8
213.7
222.9

211.7

Separate deflators are not calculated for gross private domestic investment, change in business inventories, and net exports of
goods and services.
2
Quarterly changes are at annual rates.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




238

TABLE B-5.—Changes in GNP and GNPprice measures, 1929-81
[Percent change from preceding period; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Personal consumption expenditures

Gross national product

Period

Current
dollars

Constant
(1972)
dollars

Implicit
price
deflator

Chain
price
index

Fixedweighted price
index
(1972
weights)

Current
dollars

Constant
(1972)
dollars

Implicit
price
deflator

Chain
price
index

Fixedweighted price
index
(1972
weights)

1929

6.6

6.6

0.0

1933

-4.2

-2.2

-2.1

-5.7

-2.0

-3.8

1939.

7.0

7.8

-.8

4.6

5.3

-.7

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

10.0
25.0
26.7
21.3
9.6

7.6
16.3
15.3
15.1
7.1

2.2
7.5
9.9
5.3
2.4

6.0
13.8
9.7
12.2
8.8

4.6
5.9
-1.0
2.9
2.8

1.3
7.4
10.8
9.0
5.8

1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949.

.9
-1.2
11.1
11.3
-.5

-1.5
-14.7
-1.7
4.1
.5

2.4
15.7
12.9
6.9
— .9

10.5
20.3
12.5
8.0
1.9

6.2
11.1
1.6
2.1
2.3

4.1
8.3
10.7
5.8
-.3

1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.

10.9
15.5
5.2
5.4
.0

8.7
8.3
3.7
3.8
-1.2

2.1
6.6
1.4
1.6
1.2

7.8
7.9
4.8
5.8
2.7

5.6
1.3
2.5
3.8
1.8

2.0
6.5
2.3
1.9
.9

1955.
1956.
1957.
1958
1959.

9.0
5.4
5.3
13
8.5

6.7
2.1
1.8
_4
6.0

2.2
3.2
3.4
17
2.4

7.6
4.9
5.4
32
7.4

6.5
2.9
2.1
10
5.4

1.0
1.9
3.3
22
1.9

1960.
1961.
1962.
1963.
1964.

3.8
3.6
7.7
5.6
6.9

2.2
2.6
5.8
4.0
5.3

1.6
.9
1.8
1.5
1.5

1.6
1.2
1.4
1.3
1.4

1.5
1.1
1.2
1.1
1.2

4.5
3.1
6.0
5.5
6.9

2.6
2.1
4.5
3.8
5.5

1.9
1.0
1.5
1.6
1.4

1.7
1.1
1.1
1.4
1.2

1.5
.9
.9
1.2
1.1

1965.
1966.
1967.
1968.
1969.

8.4
9.4
5.8
9.2
8.1

6.0
6.0
2.7
4.6
2.8

2.2
3.2
3.0
4.4
5.1

1.9
3.1
3.0
4.3
5.0

1.7
2.9
3.0
4.1
5.0

7.5
8.1
5.4
9.5
8.4

5.6
5.1
2.9
5.3
3.7

1.8
2.9
2.4
4.0
4.5

1.5
2.7
2.5
3.8
4.5

1.3
2.4
2.4
3.6
4.4

1970.
1971.
1972.
1973.
1974.

5.2
8.6
10.1
11.8
8.1

-.2
3.4
5.7
5.8
-.6

5.4
5.0
4.2
5.7
8.7

5.3
4.9
4.1
5.9
9.1

5.2
4.8
4.0
5.9
9.4

6.9
8.1
9.6
10.2
9.4

2.2
3.7
5.8
4.3
-.6

4.6
4.3
3.7
5.7
10.1

4.6
4.3
3.6
6.0
10.3

4.5
4.2
3.5
6.0
10.4

1975.
1976.
1977.
1978.
1979.

8.0
10.9
11.6
12.4
12.0

-1.1
5.4
5.5
4.8
3.2

9.3
5.2
5.8
7.3
8.5

9.2
5.7
6.2
7.5
8.7

9.0
5.8
6.4
7.6
9.4

9.9
11.0
11.2
11.9
12.0

2.2
5.6
4.9
4.7
2.9

7.6
5.2
6.0
6.8
8.9

7.7
5.3
6.3
7.1
9.3

7.8
5.3
6.3
7.2
9.6

1980.
1981 P..

8.8
11.3

-.2
1.9

9.0
9.1

8.6
9.3

9.6
9.4

10.7
11.1

.5
2.6

10.2
8.3

10.6
9.0

11.0
9.1

12.7
5.9
12.2
8.8

3.9
-1.7
4.1
.6

8.4
7.8
7.8
8.1

8.9
8.2
7.3
8.6

9.3
8.9
8.8
10.3

11.0
6.7
14.6
14.7

.9
-1.2
4.7
3.6

10.0
8.0
9.4
10.7

9.8
8.8
9.9
10.9

10.3
9.2
10.4
11.4

12.6
-1.1
11.8
14.9

3.1
-9.9
2.4
3.8

9.3
9.8
9.2
10.7

8.7
8.8
9.3
10.5

9.7
9.3
9.0
10.4

12.9
-1.0
14.3
17.4

.8
-9.8
5.1
7.0

12.0
9.8
8.8
9.7

12.5
9.7
9.5
10.1

13.2
9.9
9.5
10.1

19.2
4.7
11.4
2.7

8.6
-1.6
1.4
-5.2

9.8
6.4
9.9
8.4

9.8
7.7
10.0
8.4

10.2
7.9
9.5
8.3

14.2
4.3
12.5
5.6

5.8
-2.1
3.3
-1.8

8.0
6.5
9.0
7.5

10.3
6.5
8.7
7.3

10.9
6.5
8.2
7.0

1979:

1.
II.
III.
IV.

1980:

1
II
III
IV

1981:

1.
tl
III.
IV P

Note.—Changes are based on unrounded data and may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown elsewhere in these
tables.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




239

TABLE B-6.—Gross national product by major type of product, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Goods
Year or
quarter

Gross
national
product

Final
sales

Durable goods

Total

Inventory
change
Total

Final
sales

Inven- Final Inventory
tory
change sales change

Nondurable goods
Final
sales

Inventory
change

Services Structures

Auto
output

1929

103.4

1.7

56.1

54.4

1.7

16.1

1.4

38.3

0.3

35.9

11.4

1933

55.8

57.4

-1.6

27.0

28.6

-1.6

5.4

-.5

23.2

-1.1

25.9

2.9

1939

90.9

90.5

.4

49.0

48.6

.4

12.4

.3

36.2

.1

34.4

7.5

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

100.0
125.0
158.5
192.1
210.6
212.4
209.8
233.1
259.5
258.3

97.8
120.6
156.7
192.8
211.6
213.5
203.5
233.5
254.8
261.4

2.2
4.5
1.8
-.6
-1.0
-1.0
6.4
-.5
4.7
-3.1

56.0
72.5
93.7
120.4
132.3
128.9
125.3
139.8
154.4
147.7

53.8
68.0
91.9
121.0
133.3
129.9
118.9
140.3
149.7
150.8

2.2
4.5
1.8
-.6
-1.0
-1.0
6.4
-.5
4.7
-3.1

15.4
23.8
34.5
54.2
58.5
50.1
31.8
44.4
48.0
50.0

1.2
3.1
1.0
.0
-.6
-1.3
5.3
1.4
1.0
-1.8

38.4
44.2
57.4
66.8
74.8
79.8
87.1
95.9
101.7
100.9

1.0
1.4
.7
-.6
-.3
.2
1.1
-1.9
3.7
-1.3

35.7
40.8
50.8
63.0
72.3
77.0
68.8
71.6
77.2
82.2

8.3
11.8
14.0
8.7
6.1
6.5
15.7
21.7
28.0
28.4

7.2
8.8
11.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.5
330.8
348.0
366.8
366.8
400.0
421.7
444.0
449.7
487.9

279.7
320.5
344.8
366.3
368.4
394.1
417.0
442.6
451.2
482.2

6.8
10.3
3.1
.4
-1.5
6.0
4.7
1.3
-1.5
5.7

162.4
189.5
194.6
203.1
196.1
214.5
223.3
232.3
228.2
248.5

155.6
179.2
191.5
202.7
197.6
208.5
218.6
231.0
229.7
242.9

6.8
10.3
3.1
.4
-1.5
6.0
4.7
1.3
-1.5
5.7

56.2
66.4
72.5
77.8
73.9
81.4
85.9
91.3
84.4
90.8

3.6
6.1
1.2
1.5
-2.5
3.4
2.1
.5
-2.8
3.1

99.4
112.8
119.0
124.9
123.7
127.1
132.7
139.6
145.3
152.1

3.2
4.2
2.0
-1.1
1.0
2.6
2.6
.8
1.3
2.5

88.5
103.5
113.9
121.6
126.2
136.1
146.2
158.7
167.7
179.8

35.6
37.8
39.4
42.0
44.5
49.5
52.2
53.0
53.8
59.5

15.4
13.3
12.0
16.1
14.7
21.2
16.9
19.4
14.4
19.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.5
524.6
565.0
596.7
637.7
691.1
756.0
799.6
873.4
944.0

503.6
522.2
558.8
590.7
632.1
681.2
741.9
789.3
865.5
934.2

3.0
2.3
6.3
6.0
5.6
9.9
14.1
10.3
7.9
9.8

254.2
257.4
278.5
290.3
309.8
338.4
375.0
389.4
421.3
450.2

251.3
255.0
272.2
284.3
304.2
328.5
360.9
379.1
413.4
440.4

3.0
2.3
6.3
6.0
5.6
9.9
14.1
10.3
7.9
9.8

93.3
92.7
102.9
109.4
118.9
131.6
147.0
153.5
167.9
178.5

158.0
162.4
169.3
174.9
185.3
196.9
213.9
225.6
245.5
261.9

1.3
2.4
2.8
3.3
1.6
3.2
3.9
4.9
3.1
3.4

193.8
207.0
222.0
237.1
255.0
273.3
299.0
326.5
358.2
391.9

58.5
60.2
64.5
69.3
72.9
79.3
82.0
83.6
94.0
101.8

21.3
17.8
22.5
25.2
25.9
31.2
30.4
28.0
35.1
34.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

992.7
1,077.6
1,185.9
1,326.4
1,434.2
1,549.2
1,718.0
1,918.0
2,156.1
2,413.9

989.5
1,070.0
1,175.7
1,307.9
1,420.1
1,556.1
1,706.2
1,897.0
2,133.9
2,396.4

3.2
7.7
10.2
18.5
14.1
-6.9
11.8
21.0
22.2
17.5

456.6
459.9
477.7
485.3
519.4
529.6
604.1
585.6
646.7
632.5
694.0
700.9
771.1
759.3
831.6
852.6
924.4
946.6
1,055.9 1,038.5

3.2
7.7
10.2
18.5
14.1
-6.9
11.8
21.0
22.2
17.5

179.2
187.1
207.4
237.6
250.7
279.4
312.5
353.9
392.0
439.7

1.6
-.1
3.4
2.7
4.0
6.7
10.2
5.5
4.7
6.4
_}
2'.8
7.2
13.1
12.0
-8.4
7.7
8.8
17.8
11.5

277.5
290.6
312.0
348.0
381.8
421.5
446.7
477.7
532.5
598.8

3.3 429.9
4.8 472.0
3.0 519.0
5.3 571.5
2.2 636.1
1.5 705.2
4.2 779.3
12.2
869.0
4.4 976.2
6.0 1,097.2

102.9
120.3
137.3
150.8
151.4
150.0
167.6
196.4
233.2
260.8

28.7
39.1
41.6
46.2
39.2
40.7
55.9
65.3
69.6
68.0

1980
1981 P

2,626.1
2,922.2

2,632.0
2,904.0

-5.9
18.2

1,130.4 1,136.3
1,271.2 1,253.0

-5.9
18.2

462.6
498.0

-4.0
9.0

673.7
754.9

-1.8 1,229.6
9.2 1,370.3

266.0
280.7

60.2
70.2

2,340.6
2,374.6
2,444.1
2,496.3

2,316.2
2,341.5
2,430.8
2,497.1

24.3
33.1
13.3
-.8

1,038.6
1,041.9
1,064.9
1,078.3

1,014.3
1,008.8
1,051.6
1,079.1

24.3
33.1
13.3
-.8

434.7
426.4
449.2
448.4

18.9
20.9
6.7
-.4

579.5
582.4
602.4
630.7

5.5
12.2
6.6
-.5

1,055.5
1,078.5
1,112.0
1,142.8

246.5
254.2
267.3
275.1

76.0
69.5
64.9
61.8

2,571.7
2,564.8
2,637.3
2,730.6

2,569.1
2.5
2,557.4
7.4
2,653.4 -16.0
2,748.0 -17.4

1,116.9
1,106.4
1,129.4
1,169.0

1,114.4
2.5
1,099.0
7.4
1,145.4 -16.0
1,186.3 -17.4

468.2 -11.8
441.3
3.3
464.9 -8.4
.7
476.0

646.2
657.7
680.5
710.3

14.3
4.1
-7.7
-18.1

1,178.6
1,205.6
1,249.0
1,285.3

276.2
252.8
258.9
276.4

64.4
53.6
54.3
68.8

2,853.0
2,885.8
2,965.0
2,984.9

2,848.5
2,862.5
2,937.6
2,967.3

1,247.5
1,257.0
1,298.3
1,282.0

1,243.1
1,233.7
1,270.8
1,264.4

505.5
498.3
506.6
481.6

737.5
735.3
764.2
782.8

8.6
4.8
8.9
14.6

1,317.1
1,344.7
1,390.5
1,429.0

288.4
284.1
276.3
273.9

68.1
73.6
76.8
62.3

101.7

1979:

1
II
Ill
IV
1980:

1
II
Ill
IV
1981:

1
II
Ill
IV P.

4.5
23.3
27.5
17.6

4.5
23.3
27.5
17.6

Source.- Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




240

-4.2
18.5
18.6
3.1

TABLE B-7.—Gross national product by major type of product in 1972 dollars, 1929-81
[Billions of 1972 dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Goods
Gross
Year or quarter national
product

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Structures

Total
Total

Inventory
change

Final
sales

Final
sales

Inventory
change

Final
sales
99.3

Auto
output

Inventory
change
127.4

43.9

1929

315.7

311.0

4.6

144.3

139.7

4.6

40.4

1933

222.1

227.0

-4.9

97.5

102.3

-4.9

17.5

-2.1

84.9

-2.8

110.7

14.0

1939.

319.8

318.2

1.6

154.3

152.7

1.6

35.5

.7

117.2

.9

135.2

30.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

344.1
400.4
461.7
531.6
569.1
560.4
478.3
470.3
489.8
492.2

337.9
388.4
456.5
531.5
571.4
564.0
466.1
470.6
484.3
496.6

6.2
12.0
5.2
.1
-2.3
-3.6
12.2
-.2
5.5
-4.4

171.7
198.6
221.4
263.3
287.3
278.5
238.3
237.7
244.8
240.3

165.5
186.6
216.2
263.3
289.6
282.2
226.2
237.9
239.4
244.7

6.2
12.0
5.2
.1
-2.3
-3.6
12.2
-.2
5.5
-4.4

43.1
57.8
75.7
118.8
135.9
121.2
60.3
75.5
77.3
78.3

3.4
8.2
3.5
.7
-1.8
-3.7
10.8
1.4
1.6
-2.9

122.4
128.7
140.5
144.4
153.7
161.0
165.8
162.4
162.1
166.4

2.8
3.8
1.7
-.6
-.5
.1
1.3
-1.6
3.8
-1.5

139.9
158.5
193.9
242.0
263.7
263.0
200.8
188.1
192.5
198.3

32.5
43.3
46.3
26.2
18.1
18.8
39.1
44.6
52.4
53.6

12.3
13.9
18.0

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

534.8
579.4
600.8
623.6
616.1
657.5
671.6
683.8
680.9
721.7

524.2
565.6
596.5
622.1
618.2
649.8
665.8
682.2
682.7
714.7

10.6
13.7
4.3
1.5
-2.2
7.7
5.8
1.5
-1.8
7.0

261.5
283.7
292.1
306.8
292.7
316.7
320.9
321.7
311.6
332.5

250.9
270.0
287.8
305.3
294.9
309.0
315.1
320.2
313.4
325.5

10.6
13.7
4.3
1.5
-2.2
7.7
5.8
1.5
-1.8
7.0

86.1
98.2
107.9
116.2
109.0
117.2
117.8
119.4
109.2
113.6

5.5
9.0
1.7
2.3
-3.7
4.5
2.9
.9
-3.4
3.9

164.8
171.8
179.9
189.1
185.9
191.9
197.2
200.8
204.3
211.9

5.1
4.7
2.6
-.8
1.5
3.2
2.9
.6
1.6
3.1

207.4
231.3
243.2
247.5
249.1
260.1
270.2
282.4
287.6
299.4

65.9
64.3
65.5
69.3
74.3
80.7
80.5
79.7
81.7
89.8

23.0
19.3
17.1
22.6
21.6
29.8
23.0
24.5
18.6
23.2

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

737.2
756.6
800.3
832.5
876.4
929.3
984.8
1,011.4
1,058.1
1,087.6

733.7
753.7
792.4
825.0
869.3
917.5
968.0
999.2
1,049.1
1,076.6

3.5
3.0
7.8
7.5
7.1
11.8
16.8
12.2
9.0
11.1

335.8
338.0
361.3
372.2
393.8
422.6
456.4
463.4
483.1
496.0

332.3
335.0
353.5
364.7
386.7
410.8
439.6
451.2
474.1
484.9

3.5
3.0
7.8
7.5
7.1
11.8
16.8
12.2
9.0
11.1

115.6
114.7
125.7
132.5
143.0
157.2
174.0
178.3
187.4
193.0

2.0
-.1
4.2
3.4
5.1
8.2
12.3
6.6
5.4
7.2

216.6
220.3
227.8
232.2
243.7
253.6
265.6
272.9
286.7
291.9

1.6
3.0
3.7
4.2
1.9
3.6
4.5
5.6
3.6
3.9

312.5
326.9
341.5
356.2
374.0
390.7
412.6
434.1
453.0
469.2

89.0
91.7
97.4
104.1
108.6
116.0
115.9
113.9
122.0
122.5

25.3
21.2
26.0
28.7
29.4
35.7
34.8
31.8
38.5
37.4

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,085.6
1,122.4
1,185.9
1,255.0
1,248.0
1,233.9
1,300.4
1,371.7
1,436.9
1,483.0

1,081.8
1,114.3
1,175.7
1,237.8
1,236.4
1,240.6
1,292.7
1,359.3
1,422.9
1,472.9

3.8
8.1
10.2
17.2
11.6
-6.7
7.8
12.3
14.0
10.2

486.9
497.2
529.6
573.0
564.0
549.2
588.9
628.8
655.9
674.5

483.2
489.1
519.4
555.8
552.4
555.9
581.1
616.5
641.9
664.3

3.8
8.1
10.2
17.2
11.6
-6.7
7.8
12.3
14.0
10.2

187.5
188.7
207.4
236.1
234.1
230.3
242.8
264.2
278.6
290.2

.0
3.0
7.2
12.7
9.4
-6.4
5.4
5.8
10.9
6.7

295.7
300.4
312.0
319.7
318.3
325.7
338.3
352.3
363.3
374.1

482.4
497.8
519.0
542.9
563.0
576.4
595.6
618.2
649.0
678.0

116.3
127.3
137.3
139.1
121.0
108.3
116.0
124.6
132.1
130.6

29.8
38.9
41.6
46.4
37.1
35.7
45.3
50.7
50.2
46.8

1980
1981 "

14807
l!509'.6

14836
l!5014

—29
8'.2

665 2
685ll

668 1
67619

—2 9
8^2

9
81 3
2783

— 19
3^8

386 8
398i6

3.7
5.1
3.0
4.5
2.2
-.3
2.4
6.5
3.0
3.5
11
4.4

695 7
7074

1198
117'.1

386
4L9

14799
1,4734
14882
1,490.6

14644
1,455'.0
14806
1,491.3

154
184
76
-.7

6818
669'.!
6736
6713

6664
650i8
6660
674'.0

154
18'.4
7.6

_'l

2950
283^8
292 1
289'.9

114
1L9
38
-!3

3713
367^0
3738
384J

40
64
38
-'.4

669 1
674!8
6830
684^9

129 0
129i5
1316
1324

532
484
440
414

1,501.9 1,502 8
14633 14620
1,471.9 1,476.9
1,485.6 1,492.7

_9
13
-5.0
-7.2

6821
6581
657.5
662.9

6830
6568
662.4
670.1

_9
13
-5.0
-7.2

295.2
2701
2784
281.5

-4.6
7
-3.8
.3

387.7
3867
384iO
388.6

3.7
6
-U
—7.5

6907
6906
699i9
701.7

129.1
1146
114.'5
121.0

42.5
346
34.6
42.8

15164
1,510.4
1,515.8
1,495.6

-14
10.8
14.9
8.5

6889
686.3
6919
673.1

6903
675.5
6770
664.7

-14

2925
279J
2792
261.8

-3 1
8.9
78
1.5

3979
395.8
3978
402.8

17
1.9
71
7.0

7036
7047
7099
711.2

1239
1194
1140
111.2

428
44^3
448
35.8

1979:

I
II
Ill
IV

1980:

1
II
III
IV

3.5

1981:

1

II

Ill

IV *

15178
1,499.6
1,500.9
1,487.1

10.9

149
8.5

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




241

1.1

TABLE B-8.—Gross national product by sector, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross domestic product

Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

Business
Total

Total

Nonfarm 1

Farm

Households
and
instidiscrep- tutions
ancy
Cfatk
Oldllotiral
llCdl

Government 2

Total

Federal

State
and
local

Percent
change
from
Poet
K6SI
precedof the
ing
world period,
gross
national
product 3

1929.

103.4

102.6

95.4

84.7

9.7

1.1

2.9

4.3

0.9

3.5

0.8

6.6

1933.

55.8

55.5

49.1

43.8

4.6

.7

1.7

4.7

1.2

3.5

.3

-4.2

1939.

90.9

90.5

80.6

72.9

6.3

1.4

2.3

7.6

3.4

4.2

.5

7.0

1940.,
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.
1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949.

100.0
125.0
158.5
192.1
210.6
212.4
209.8
233.1
259.5
258.3

99.6
124.5
157.9
191.6
210.1
212.0
209.0
231.8
257.9
256.9

89.4
112.6
139.9
162.8
174.2
172.8
183.8
210.0
234.9
231.5

81.8
103.1
127.7
149.3
156.2
152.7
164.4
188.2
213.1
212.2

6.4
8.9
13.0
15.3
15.3
16.0
18.8
20.2
23.3
18.8

1.1
.6
-.8
-1.8
2.7
4.1
.5
1.5
-1.6
.6

2.4
2.5
2.9
3.2
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.1
5.6
5.9

7.8
9.4
15.1
25.6
32.2
35.2
20.8
16.7
17.4
19.4

3.5
5.0
10.6
20.9
27.2
29.8
14.6
9.4
8.9
10.0

4.3
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.9
5.4
6.2
7.3
8.5
9.4

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5
.4
.8
1.2
1.6
1.4

10.0
25.0
26.7
21.3
9.6
.9
-1.2
11.1
11.3
-.5

1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.
1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

286.5
330.8
348.0
366.8
366.8
400.0
421.7
444.0
449.7
487.9

284.8
328.7
345.7
364.6
364.5
397.3
418.5
440.5
446.6
484.6

257.5
294.4
307.3
324.9
323.9
354.0
372.1
390.8
393.1
428.3

236.3
268.3
283.4
302.3
302.3
333.9
355.7
373.7
372.2
410.6

20.0
22.9
22.2
20.3
19.7
18.8
18.6
18.4
20.7
19.0

1.3
3.2
1.7
2.3
2.0
1.3
-2.1
-1.2
.2
-1.3

6.4
6.9
7.2
7.8
8.1
9.1
9.8
10.5
11.4
12.3

20.9
27.4
31.2
31.9
32.5
34.2
36.6
39.1
42.1
44.0

10.7
16.2
18.9
18.6
17.8
18.4
19.0
19.6
20.5
20.9

10.1
11.2
12.3
13.3
14.7
15.8
17.6
19.6
21.6
23.1

1.6
2.1
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.8
3.2
3.5
3.0
3.3

10.9
15.5
5.2
5.4
.0
9.0
5.4
5.3
1.3
8.5

1960.
1961.
1962.
1963
1964.
1965
1966.
1967
1968.
1969.

506.5
524.6
565.0
596.7
637.7
691.1
756.0
799.6
873.4
944.0

502.9
520.7
560.5
591.8
632.3
685.2
750.3
793.7
866.7
937.1

442.0
455.7
490.6
517.2
551.6
598.4
652.6
685.1
745.4
803.2

424.2
435.7
468.1
495.0
532.2
577.7
628.4
663.3
725.0
782.1

20.2
20.2
20.4
20.5
19.3
21.9
22.8
22.1
22.6
25.1

-2.4
-.1
2.1
1.7
.1
-1.2
1.4
-.3
-2.1
-3.9

13.8
14.4
15.5
16.6
17.8
19.2
21.1
23.4
26.1
29.4

47.1
50.5
54.3
58.0
62.9
67.6
76.5
85.1
95.2
104.5

21.7
22.6
24.1
25.2
27.0
28.3
32.4
35.6
39.3
41.9

25.5
27.9
30.2
32.9
35.9
39.3
44.1
49.5
55.9
62.6

3.6
3.9
4.6
4.9
5.5
5.9
5.6
5.9
6.7
6.9

3.8
3.6
7.7
5.6
6.9
8.4
9.4
5.8
9.2
8.1

1970.
1971.
1972.
1973.
1974.
1975.
1976..
1977.
1978.
1979.

992.7
1,077.6
1,185.9
1,326.4
1,434.2
1,549.2
1,718.0
1,918.0
2,156.1
2,413.9

985.4
1,068.5
1,175.0
1,310.4
1,414.4
1,531.9
1,697.5
1,894.5
2,126.2
2,370.1

837.3
907.1
998.6
1,118.7
1,206.4
1,301.7
1,447.3
1,623.1
1,829.4
2,046.3

813.1
875.4
963.4
1,068.0
1,155.0
1,247.3
1,396.3
1,571.1
1,765.1
1,974.1

25.8
27.6
31.9
49.9
47.7
48.9
45.9
47.6
57.9
70.0

-1.5
4.1
3.3
.8
3.7
5.5
5.1
4.4
6.4
2.2

32.3
35.4
38.6
42.1
45.8
50.6
55.6
61.0
67.5
75.7

115.8
126.0
137.8
149.6
162.2
179.6
194.6
210.4
229.2
248.1

44.8
46.8
50.1
51.9
54.9
59.0
62.4
66.3
71.7
75.8

71.1
79.3
87.7
97.7
107.3
120.6
132.3
144.0
157.5
172.3

7.3
9.2
10.9
16.0
19.8
17.3
20.5
23.5
29.9
43.8

5.2
8.6
10.1
11.8
8.1
8.0
10.9
11.6
12.4
12.0

1980.
1981 "..

2,626.1
2,922.2

2,576.5
2,868.2

2,221.2
2,477.2

2,153.7
2,405.8

68.1
72.2

-.7
-.8

85.9
97.7

269.3
293.3

81.9
90.0

187.4
203.3

49.7
54.0

8.8
11.3

1979
1
II.
Ill
IV

2,340.6
2,374.6
2,444.1
2,496.3

2,301.0
2,333.7
2,396.0
2,449.7

1,987.3
2,014.2
2,069.8
2,113.9

1,913.5
1,942.9
1,996.5
2,043.6

68.0
70.6
70.4
71.0

5.8
.7
2.8
-.7

72.3
74.2
76.9
79.4

241.4
245.4
249.4
256.4

74.6
74.6
74.9
79.0

166.8
170.8
174.5
177.3

39.6
40.9
48.1
46.6

12.7
5.9
12.2
8.8

1980:
1
II.
Ill
IV

2,571.7
2,564.8
2,637.3
2,730.6

2,520.2
2,516.7
2,586.9
2,682.0

2,176.9
2,166.4
2,230.0
2,311.4

2,106.4
2,100.8
2,159.1
2,248.6

67.7
67.5
67.9
69.4

2.8
-1.9
3.0
-6.6

82.1
84.4
86.9
90.4

261.2
265.9
269.9
280.3

79.6
80.5
80.7
87.1

181.6
185.4
189.3
193.3

51.5
48.1
50.5
48.6

12.6
-1.1
11.8
14.9

1981
1
II
III
IV..

2,853.0
2,885.8
2,965.0
2,984.9

2,800.7
2,835.5
2,909.4
2,927.3

2,420.8
2,449.2
2,517.6
2,521.2

2,350.1
2,383.7
2,442.2
2,447.0

67.3
72.4
75.2
74.1

3.4
-6.9
.2
.2

93.9
96.4
98.4
102.0

285.9
289.9
293.5
304.0

87.9
88.2
88.5
95.3

198.0
201.6
205.0
208.7

52.3
50.4
55.6
57.6

19.2
4.7
11.4
2.7

1
Includes compensation of employees in government
2
Compensation of government employees.
3

enterprises.

Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




242

TABLE B-9.—Gross national product by sector in 1972 dollars, 1929-81
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross domestic product
Government 2

Business
Gross
national
product

Year or quarter

Statisti-

Total
Total

Nonfarm

l

Farm

ral
Cdl

Households

and

instidiscrep- tutions
ancy

State
Total

Federal

and

Rest
of the
world

local

Percent
change
from
preceding
period,
gross
national
product 3

1929

315.7

313.2

271.5

244.7

23.6

3.1

15.6

26.2

5.2

21.0

2.4

6.6

1933

222.1

220.9

180.0

152.5

24.9

2.6

12.2

28.8

6.6

22.1

1.3

-2.2

1939

319.8

318.2

261.0

231.3

25.2

4.6

15.1

42.1

16.9

25.2

1.6

7.8

1940..
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

344.1
400.4
461.7
531.6
569.1
560.4
478.3
470.3
489.8
492.2

342.8
398.7
460.1
530.3
567.7
559.3
476.4
467.8
486.8
489.4

282.7
327.6
361.8
385.6
403.6
397.9
385.5
393.8
412.0
409.8

254.6
299.8
335.3
362.1
370.1
362.8
358.6
367.0
389.0
383.4

24.5
26.2
28.6
27.7
27.1
25.6
25.8
24.0
25.8
25.6

3.6
1.6

16.1
15.9
16.4
15.2
15.1
15.0
15.1
16.0
16.7
17.3

44.0
55.2
81.9
129.4
149.1
146.4
75.9
58.0
58.1
62.3

18.6
29.6
56.7
105.0
125.2
121.8
49.7
29.8
29.2
31.3

25.4
25.6
25.2
24.5
23.9
24.6
26.2
28.2
29.0
31.0

1.4
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.4
1.1
1.8
2.5
3.0
2.7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

534.8
579.4
600.8
623.6
616.1
657.5
671.6
683.8
680.9
721.7

531.8
575.6
596.9
619.8
612.1
653.0
666.5
678.3
676.2
716.8

448.7
478.0
492.8
515.6
508.5
547.0
557.4
566.1
561.7
600.0

419.4
447.2
463.7
484.3
477.0
516.0
531.5
539.5
532.0
574.0

27.0
25.8
26.4
27.7
28.4
29.3
28.9
28.2
29.3
27.8

18.3
18.7
18.6
19.3
19.4
21.4
22.5
23.1
24.2
24.7

64.7
79.0
85.5
85.0
84.1
84.6
86.7
89.1
90.3
92.2

32.7
46.2
51.6
49.6
47.2
45.9
45.6
45.8
44.5
44.5

32.0
32.8
33.9
35.4
36.9
38.6
41.0
43.3
45.8
47.7

3.0
3.7
3.9
3.7
4.0
4.5
5.1
5.5
4.6
4.9

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

737.2
756.6
800.3
832.5
876.4
929.3
984.8
1,011.4
1,058.1
1,087.6

732.0
751.0
793.8
825.6
868.9
921.4
977.5
1,003.9
1,050.0
1,079.7

610.1
625.1
663.2
691.6
730.3
777.7
824.0
842.0
882.1
907.1

584.2
596.3
631.5
659.7
701.3
749.6
794.1
812.8
855.6
881.9

29.2
28.9
28.8
29.6
28.8
29.8
28.2
29.5
29.0
29.5

-3.3

26.6
27.0
28.1
28.9
29.8
30.9
32.6
34.3
35.4
37.0

95.3
98.9
102.5
105.2
108.8
112.7
120.8
127.7
132.4
135.7

45.2
46.2
48.3
48.2
48.5
48.7
53.0
57.2
58.0
58.2

50.1
52.7
54.3
57.0
60.4
64.0
67.9
70.5
74.4
77.4

5.2
5.7
6.5
6.9
7.5
7.9
7.4
7.5
8.2
7.9

2.2
2.6
5.8
4.0
5.3
6.0
6.0
2.7
4.6
2.8

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,085.6
1,122.4
1,185.9
1,255.0
1,248.0
1,233.9
1,300.4
1,371.7
1,436.9
1,483.0

1,077.6
1,112.8
1,175.0
1,239.9
1,230.7
1,220.0
1,284.8
1,354.7
1,416.8
1,455.9

904.8
938.6
998.6
1,061.4
1,049.1
1,034.7
1,097.6
1,165.1
1,222.6
1,258.3

875.4
901.7
963.4
1,029.1
1,014.1
996.7
1,061.6
1,128.9
1,185.5
1,222.1

31.1
32.6
31.9
31.6
31.8
33.6
32.1
33.0
32.9
34.9

-1.7

4.2
3.3
.7
3.2
4.4
3.9
3.2
4.2
1.4

36.7
37.6
38.6
39.4
39.3
40.5
40.9
41.3
42.3
43.7

136.1
136.7
137.8
139.1
142.3
144.9
146.3
148.4
151.9
153.9

55.2
52.5
50.1
48.2
48.5
48.4
48.5
48.6
49.3
49.0

80.9
84.2
87.7
90.8
93.8
96.5
97.8
99.7
102.6
104.9

8.0
9.5
10.9
15.1
17.3
13.9
15.6
16.9
20.1
27.2

-.2
3.4
5.7
5.8
-.6

1980
1981 "

1,480.7
1,509.6

1,452.4
1,481.4

1,251.8
1,279.6

1,216.8
1,242.2

35.3
37.8

-.4
-.4

45.4
47.0

155.2
154.9

49.2
49.0

106.0
105.9

28.3
28.1

1,479.9
1,473.4
1,488.2
1,490.6

1,454.6
1,447.8
1,458.6
1,462.4

1,258.8
1,250.8
1,260.0
1,263.6

1,221.8
1,215.0
1,223.2
1,228.2

33.3
35.3
35.1
35.8

37
.5
1.7
_.4

429

1529
153.7
154.4
154.5

491

43.3
44.2
44.4

49.0
49.0
48.9

1038
104.7
105.3
105.6

25.6
29.6
28.1

1,501.9
1,463.3
1,471.9
1,485.6

1,471.5
1,435.5
1,443.4
1,458.9

1,271.9
1,235.2
1,242.3
1,257.5

1,233.3
1,198.5
1,207.6
1,227.9

37.0
37.8
33.1
33.2

1.6
-3.6

44.8
44.9
45.6
46.1

154.8
155.4
155.5
155.3

49.0
49.4
49.4
48.9

105.8
105.9
106.1
106.3

30.4
27.8
28.5
26.7

1,516.4
1,5104
1,515.8
1,495.6

1,488.4
1,483 8
1,487.1
1,466.4

1,286.4
12818
1,285.7
1,264.4

1,250.9
1,248 9
1,246.2
1,222.7

33.6

1.8
-36
.1
.1

46.7

155.3
1552
154.6
154.5

49.0

106.4
1062
105.6
105.4

28.0

46.8
47.5

-2.1
-4.2

6.4
9.4
1.1
2.9

-2.8

.8

2.4
5.0
2.6
3.6
3.1
1.8
-3.0
-1.7

.3

-1.9

-.2
2.9
2.3
.2

-1.6

1.7
-.3

-2.5
-4.4

7.6
16.3
15.3
15.1

7.1

-1.5
-14.7
-1.7

4.1
.5
8.7
8.3
3.7
3.8
-1.2

6.7
2.1
1.8
4

e'.o

-1.1

5.4
5.5
4.8
3.2

-.2
1.9

1979:

1
II
Ill
IV

1980:
1
II
Ill
IV

,

-1.1

1.7

253

39
-1.7

4.1
.6
3.1

-9.9

2.4
3.8

1981:

1
II
Ill

IV *

365

39.4
41.6

1
2

469

490

49.0
49.1

266
28.7
29.2

8.6
-16
1.4
-5.2

Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises.
Compensation of government employees.
3
Changes are based on unrounded data and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from data shown here.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




243

TABLE B-10.—Gross national product by industry, 1947-80
[Billions of dollars]
Gross domestic product
Gross
nationYear

al
product

Manufacturing
Agriculture,
forestry,

Mining

and

Transportation

Construction

DuraTotal

Non-

ble

durable
goods

goods

fisheries

1947
1948
1949

259.5
258.3

20.8
24.0
19.5

6.8
9.4
8.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

286.5
330.8
348.0
366.8
366.8

20.8
23.8
23.1
21.3
20.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

400.0

421.7
444.0
449.7
487.9

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

9.1

UUhrtlo
wnoie-

and
public
utilities

and
retail
trade

sale

Finance,
insurance, Services

and
real
estate

Government

and

Statist!pal
cai

governdiscrepment
ancy
enterprises

1.5

Rest
of the
world

.6

1.2
1.6
1.4

1.3
3.2
1.7
2.3
2.0

1.6
2.1
2.3
2.2
2.3

1.3

2.8
3.2
3.5
3.0
3.3

66.2
74.7
72.1

33.5
38.1
37.1

32.7
36.5
35.0

20.5
23.1
23.4

44.2
48.4
48.0

23.2
26.2
28.6

20.2
21.9
22.6

19.3
20.2
22.5

10.2
10.1
10.6
10.9

13.0 83.7
15.4 98.7
16.6 103.0
17.1 112.1
17.2 106.4

45.8
55.4
58.9
65.9
60.8

37.9
43.3
44.1
46.2
45.6

25.7
29.2
31.0
32.9
32.6

51.3
56.4
58.5
59.8
60.8

31.9
35.2
38.7
42.8
46.5

24.0
25.9
27.5
29.4
30.5

23.8
30.8
35.3
36.4
36.9

19.9
19.7
19.5
21.9
20.2

12.4
13.4
13.5
12.4
12.3

18.5 120.9
20.6 126.8
21.4 131.4
21.0 123.8
22.8 141.3

70.6
73.7
77.7
69.7
81.2

50.3
53.2
53.7
54.1
60.0

35.6
38.3
40.2
40.4
43.7

66.2
70.4
73.9
75.2
81.9

50.0
53.5
57.6
62.4
67.3

34.0
37.3
40.2
42.3
46.3

38.5
40.7
44.0
47.1
50.0

506.5
524.6
565.0
596.7
637.7

21.4
21.5
21.9
22.0
21.0

12.6
12.7
12.8
13.1
13.4

23.2
24.0
25.7
27.4
29.8

143.8
144.4
157.9
167.4
179.4

82.1
81.3
91.5
97.6
105.3

61.7
63.1
66.4
69.8
74.2

45.8
47.4
50.2
53.0
56.3

84.2
86.3
92.1
96.1
104.7

71.6
75.4
80.6
85.3
91.0

49.2
52.3
56.1
60.0
65.3

53.4
56.7
61.1
65.9
71.2

-2.4

3.6
3.9
4.6
4.9
5.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

691.1
756.0
799.6
873.4
944.0

23.8
24.8
24.2
25.0
27.8

13.5
14.2
14.6
15.3
16.1

32.8
35.9
37.5
41.3
46.3

197.7
216.6
222.3
242.8
256.7

118.0
130.4
133.6
146.0
154.5

79.7
86.3
88.7
96.8
102.2

60.5
65.3
68.6
74.0
80.0

112.6
121.5
130.1
144.4
157.0

98.0
105.9
114.2
123.8
133.6

70.8
78.4
86.1
94.2
105.3

76.7
86.4
96.3
108.1
118.2

-1.2

5.9
5.6
5.9
6.7
6.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

992.7
1,077.6
1,185.9
1,326.4
1,434.2

28.6
30.8
35.4
53.8
52.2

17.6
17.4
19.0
21.7
32.2

48.9
53.6
59.4
66.3
69.2

252.2
265.6
292.5

146.2
153.9
173.2
195.9
201.3

105.9
111.7
119.3
130.2
139.4

85.7
93.8
104.3
114.3
122.9

166.5
181.4
199.5
221.5
241.5

142.4
156.4
169.8
184.9
202.0

114.4
123.6
136.5
153.1
167.5

130.5
141.8
155.4
167.8
182.7

-1.5

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,549.2
1,718.0
1,918.0
2,156.1
2,413.9

53.3
51.2
53.8
65.2
78.4

38.8
43.0
48.6
53.6
69.4

69.9
76.6
86.7
99.9
113.1

358.2
410.4
462.4
519.0
569.5

207.6
240.0
276.6

135.7
152.6
170.5
192.8
211.7

266.2
291.4
322.5
355.3
392.0

216.2
238.6
274.0
310.0
350.8

186.2

317.9
350.6

150.6
170.4
185.8
201.1
218.9

208.2
234.3
264.7
302.5

1980

2,626.1

77.2

94.1

119.7 591.1

354.9

236.3

234.5

421.7

392.0

343.5

233.1

9.3

11.5
11.5

326.1
340.7

-1.6

-2.1
-1.2

.2

-1.3

-.1
2.1
1.7
.1
1.4
-.3

-2.1
-3.9

7.3
9.2

4.1
3.3
.8
3.7

10.9
16.0
19.8

202.0
220.4
237.2
259.2
280.7

5.5
5.1
4.4
6.4
2.2

17.3
20.5
23.5
29.9
43.8

303.4

-.7

49.7

Note.—The industry classification is on an establishment basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




244

TABLE B-ll.—Gross national product by industry in 1972 dollars, 1947-80
[Billions of 1972 dollars]
Gross domestic product

Year

Gross
national
product

Agriculture,
forest-

ry, and
fisher-

Trans-

Manufacturing

porMining

lA/hnlo
wnoie-

Con-

tation

sale

struction

and
ble durable public
utilgoods goods
ities

and
retail
trade

Non-

Dura-

Total

ies

Finance,
insurance,

and

Government
Services

real
estate

and
government
enterprises

Statistical

dis-

Poet
Kesi
of the
world
ual !

Resid-

crepancy

-.6

2.5
3.0
2.7

2.4
5.0
2.6
3.6
3.1

.8
.2
2.6
4.1
4.6

3.0
3.7
3.9
3.7
4.0

1.8

4.2
3.4
.9
4.5
4.0

4.5
5.1
5.5
4.6
4.9

3.1
4.4
-.2
3.2
2.9
2.3 -1.5
.2
1.7

5.2
5.7
6.5
6.9
7.5

2.3
3.0
6.7
6.2
4.6

7.9
7.4
7.5
8.2
7.9

4.7
1.2
4.2
.0
3.3
.7 -1.8
3.2 -4.8

10.9
15.1
17.3

4.4 -2.0
2.0
3.9
5.4
3.2
.3
4.2
1.4 -2.4

13.9
15.6
16.9
20.1
27.2

1.9

28.3

2.9 -7.4

1947
1948
1949.

470.3
489.8
492.2

26.3
28.2
28.0

10.8
11.3

9.9

22.9
26.5
26.5

114.9
121.4
115.1

68.5
72.0
66.3

46.4
49.4
48.8

42.3
42.1
39.2

75.9
78.0
79.8

54.7
56.6
59.8

55.9
57.5
57.6

68.7
69.2
73.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

534.8
579.4
600.8
623.6

29.3
28.4
29.2
30.5
31.3

11.1
12.1
11.9
12.2
11.8

29.3
32.5
33.8
34.8
36.0

131.1
78.1
146.0
89.9
150.8 94.3
161.1 102.6
149.6
91.7

53.0
56.1
56.5
58.5
57.9

41.2
45.5
45.5
46.6
45.8

87.5
88.3
91.0
93.9
94.5

63.9
66.7
70.9
73.9
77.3

59.7
60.8
61.6
62.7
62.9

75.6
90.0
96.9
96.3
95.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

657.5

671.6
683.8
680.9
721.7

32.1
31.7
31.1
32.2
30.6

13.2
13.9
13.8
12.7
13.3

38.2
40.9
40.9
42.1
45.5

165.7
166.9
167.7
153.3
171.2

103.4
102.5
102.9
88.8
100.9

62.3
64.4
64.8
64.5
70.3

49.7
52.1
53.2
51.9
55.4

103.1
106.2
107.9
107.8
115.4

81.8
85.8
89.8
93.4
98.5

67.6
70.9
74.1
76.2
80.8

95.7
97.8
100.4
101.7
104.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

737.2
756.6
800.3
832.5
876.4

32.1
31.8
31.7
32.5
31.8

13.5
13.6
13.9
14.5
15.1

46.1
46.7
48.4
49.9
52.2

171.8
172.0
186.7
202.2
216.7

101.0
99.5
110.0
119.5
129.8

70.8
72.5
76.7
82.8
86.8

57.5
58.6
61.5
65.0
68.1

117.5
118.7
126.3
131.1
139.1

102.7
107.3
113.3
116.8
122.1

83.5
86.6
90.3
94.0
98.8

107.7
111.6
115.5
118.7
123.1

-3.3

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

929.3
984.8
1,011.4
1,058.1
1,087.6

32.8
31.3
32.6
32.1
32.7

15.7
16.5
17.0
17.6
18.2

54.4
54.6
53.4
56.9
55.8

236.7
254.9
254.3
268.2
277.2

144.6
157.3
157.4
165.5
170.3

92.0
97.6
96.9
102.7
106.8

73.4
79.4
81.6
88.2
92.6

148.2
156.3
160.1
169.9
173.6

128.5
133.9
139.4
145.7
152.9

103.1
109.0
115.0
118.8
124.0

127.8
136.9
144.1
148.9
152.5

-1.6

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

1,085.6
1,122.4
1,185.9
1,255.0
1,248.0

34.4
35.9
35.4
35.3
35.8

18.9
18.4
19.0
19.2
19.2

53.4
57.9
59.4
60.1
53.3

261.2

155.2
156.4
173.2
194.2
186.3

94.9
106.0
110.4 97.9
119.3 104.3
131.1 110.6
125.3 111.9

176.4
185.5
199.5
211.1
207.0

155.8
162.6
169.8
177.2
184.5

126.7
128.4
136.5
144.8
147.9

152.9
153.9
155.4
157.2
161.2

-1.7

266.8
292.5
325.3

1975.
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,233.9
1,300.4
1,371.7
1,436.9
1,483.0

37.1
35.8
36.8
37.2
39.6

18.9
19.1
19.8
20.5
21.0

48.3
52.8
55.3
58.8
58.3

289.6 168.8
317.4 187.2
338.7 202.9
356.9 217.4
368.0 223.5

120.8
130.1
135.8
139.5
144.5

113.5
118.6
125.2
134.3
141.1

209.7
220.2
230.8

208.9

242.1
248.1

148.5
154.7
162.4
218.9 171.2
227.5 178.6

164.3
165.7
168.1
172.3
174.9

1980

1,480.7

40.2

22.1

54.4

351.0 208.7

142.3

144.0

243.0

236.4

183.5

176.3

616.1

311.7

187.9
194.8

-2.8

.8

-3.0
-1.7

.3

-1.9

1.7
-.3

-2.5
-4.4

-.4

-1.2

8.0
9.5

1

Equals GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of incomes less GNP in constant dollars measured as the sum of gross
product by industry.
Note.—The industry classification is on an establishment

basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




245

TABLE B-12.—Gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net domestic product

Year or
quarter

Gross
domestic
product
of
nonfinancial
corporate
business

Capital
consumption
allowances
with
capital
consumption
adjustment

Domestic income

Total

Indirect
business
tax,
etc.1

Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital
consumption adjustments
Total

CompenProfits
Inven- Capital Net
sation
tory
interof
Profits after tax
Prof- Profvalua- consump- est
employ- Total its
its
tion
tion
ees
Undis- adjust- adjustbe- tax
Diviment
fore lia- Total dends tributed ment
profits
tax bility
0.5

1.4

8.4

1.2

7.3

5.1

.6

.5

.1

2.0

4.2

6.1

1.4

4.7

3.3

1.4

-.7

-1.1

1.5

31.2
39.8
51.0
62.2
65.1
61.9
67.2
79.1
87.8
85.3

7.4
12.7
17.7
21.8
21.6
17.1
13.8
19.7
25.6
22.9

8.8
16.4
20.1
23.6
22.2
17.8
22.0
29.1
31.8
24.9

2.7
7.5
11.2
13.8
12.6
10.2
8.6
10.8
11.8
9.3

6.1
9.0
8.9
9.8
9.6
7.6
13.4
18.3
20.0
15.6

3.5
3.9
3.7
3.9
4.1
4.1
4.8
5.5
6.0
6.0

2.6
5.0
5.2
5.8
5.6
3.5
8.6
12.8
14.0
9.6

-.2
-2.5
-1.2
-.8
-.3
-.6
-5.3
-5.9
-2.2
1.9

-1.2
-1.3
-1.2
-.9
-.3
-.2
-3.0
-3.5
-4.0
-3.9

1.4
1.3
1.3
1.1
1.0
1.0
.7
.8
.9
1.0

125.2
144.7
149.7
160.0
156.6
178.4
189.0
196.1
188.8
214.8

94.7
110.2
118.3
128.7
126.5
138.5
151.4
159.1
155.9
171.6

29.6
33.4
30.2
30.0
28.6
38.3
35.9
34.9
30.2
40.1

38.5
39.1
33.8
34.9
32.1
42.0
41.8
39.8
33.7
43.1

16.9
21.2
17.8
18.5
15.6
20.2
20.1
19.1
16.2
20.7

21.6
17.9
16.0
16.4
16.4
21.8
21.8
20.7
17.5
22.4

7.5
7.1
7.1
7.3
7.4
8.5
9.0
9.3
9.3
10.0

14.1
10.8
8.8
9.1
9.0
13.4
12.7
11.4
8.2
12.4

-5.0
-1.2
1.0
-1.0
-.3
-1.7
-2.7
-1.5
-.3
-.3

-3.9
-4.6
-4.5
-3.9
-3.2
-2.0
-3.2
-3.4
-3.2
-2.7

.9
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.6
1.7
2.2
2.7
3.1

221.9
227.3
249.9
266.8
289.3
319.8
353.0
369.5
406.1
439.1

181.1
185.1
199.8
210.7
226.3
246.1
273.5
291.9
322.8
358.5

37.4
38.3
45.6
51.2
57.7
67.7
72.2
68.8
73.3
67.5

39.7
39.5
44.2
48.9
55.4
65.2
70.3
66.3
72.9
69.4

19.2
19.5
20.6
22.8
24.0
27.2
29.5
27.7
33.4
33.1

20.5
20.1
23.5
26.2
31.4
38.0
40.8
38.6
39.5
36.2

10.6
10.6
11.4
12.6
13.7
15.6
16.8
17.5
19.1
19.1

9.9
9.5
12.2
13.5
17.7
22.4
24.0
21.2
20.4
17.1

-.2
.3
.0
.1
-.5
-1.2
-2.1
-1.6
-3.7
-5.9

-2.1
3.5
-1.5
3.9
1.4 4.5
2.3 4.8
2.9
5.3
3.7 6.1
3.9 7.4
4.0 8.7
4.0 10.1
4.0 13.1

63.4
448.1
70.5
482.1
538.7
76.7
83.7
607.9
89.7
649.7
97.1
697.9
105.3
791.2
897.8
115.1
125.2 1,015.8
133.6 1,135.9

378.4
402.0
447.0
506.2
556.5
581.1
654.4
738.2
841.4
954.0

52.7
62.1
72.7
78.6
63.6
86.1
107.3
126.3
137.6
136.7

56.8
65.4
76.6
96.0
105.3
107.3
135.0
153.5
174.3
193.4

27.0 29.8
29.8 35.6
33.6 43.0
40.0 56.0
42.0 63.3
41.2 66.1
52.6 82.3
59.4 94.1
67.3 107.0
69.7 123.7

18.5
18.5
20.1
21.1
21.4
25.7
30.1
31.9
36.0
37.3

11.3
17.1
22.9
35.0
41.9
40.4
52.2
62.2
70.9
86.3

-6.6
-4.6
-6.6
-20.0
-40.0
-11.6
-14.7
-15.8
-24.3
-42.6

1929

50.1

5.5

44.5

3.4

41.2

32.3

1933

24.4

4.3

20.2

3.8

16.3

16.7 -2.1

1939

43.7

4.8

39.0

5.1

33.9

28.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

50.4
65.6
82.9
98.7
102.1
95.3
99.3
120.0
137.3
133.5

4.9
5.4
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.5
7.6
9.3
10.9
11.7

45.4
60.2
76.8
92.4
95.8
88.8
91.8
110.7
126.4
121.8

5.5
6.4
6.8
7.3
8.1
8.9
10.1
11.2
12.1
12.6

40.0
53.8
70.0
85.2
87.7
79.9
81.6
99.6
114.3
109.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

151.9
174.5
182.3
195.0
191.9
216.7
231.6
242.3
236.3
266.0

12.6
14.6
15.8
16.8
17.9
19.1
21.8
23.8
24.8
25.8

139.3
159.9
166.6
178.2
174.0
197.6
209.8
218.5
211.6
240.2

14.1
15.2
16.8
18.2
17.4
19.2
20.8
22.4
22.8
25.4

I960.....
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

277.0
285.0
311.3
331.8
358.4
393.6
431.5
454.1
500.2
544.1

26.8
27.5
28.4
29.4
30.8
32.7
35.6
38.9
42.6
47.1

250.2
257.5
283.0
302.3
327.6
360.9
395.9
415.2
457.6
497.0

28.3
30.1
33.0
35.6
38.4
41.1
42.9
45.8
51.5
58.0

7.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

563.7
609.9
678.0
759.4
818.9
890.0
1,001.3
1,129.5
1,270.7
1,417.0

52.2
511.4
57.3
552.6
62.6
615.5
67.9
691.6
79.5
739.4
94.9
795.1
104.8
896.5
116.6 1,012.8
129.7 1,141.0
147.5 1,269.5

1980
1981 ".

1,535.2
1,730.6

165.9
186.6

1,369.3
1,544.0

152.5
183.4

1,216.9 1,037.2 123.6 183.8 63.1 120.6 40.4
1,360.6 1,152.2 144.1 182.0 57.9 124.1 50.6

1,378.7
1,399.5
1,432.1
1,457.7

140.5 1,238.2
146.0 1,253.5
150.7 1,281.5
152.9 1,304.8

130.9
131.5
134.8
137.3

1,107.3
1,122.0
1,146.7
1,167.5

919.9
939.8
965.2
991.1

146.0
138.6
134.8
127.3

195.7
191.4
195.5
191.1

71.2
68.9
70.5
68.4

124.5
122.5
125.0
122.7

38.2
37.9
34.9
38.2

1
II
Ill
IV

1,502.1
1,496.3
1,537.7
1,604.7

158.2 1,343.9
163.6 1,332.7
168.6 1,369.1
173.0 1,431.7

141.7
147.7
155.4
165.1

1,202.3
1,185.0
1,213.6
1,266.6

1,017.3
1,018.0
1,034.8
1,078.5

132.6
112.5
121.2
128.2

207.2
158.6
177.9
191.3

74.3
52.0
60.3
65.9

132.9
106.6
117.6
125.4

36.9
41.1
40.8
42.7

1981:
1
II
Ill
IV ".

1,690.1
1,716.3
1,760.3

177.1
183.7
189.7
195.9

2.2

-1.9

-2.1

-1.4
-.6

1.7

2.4
1.3
2.7
2.6
-1.8
-9.7
-13.0
-11.4
-12.4
-14.1

17.0
18.0
19.1
23.0
29.6
30.8
29.5
33.2
36.8
45.2

80.3 -45.7
73.5 -27.3

-14.4
-10.5

56.1
64.2

86.3
84.5
90.1
84.5

-35.3
-37.9
-46.5
-50.8

-14.4
-14.8
-14.2
-13.0

41.4
43.5
46.7
49.1

96.0
65.5
76.8
82.7

-61.4
-31.1
-41.7
-48.4

-13.1
-14.9
-15.0
-14.7

52.3
54.4
57.6
59.9

87.9 -39.2
75.4 -24.0
75.2 -25.3
-20.9

-11.6
-11.4
-9.9
-9.1

60.5
63.4
65.8
67.4

1979:

1
II
Ill
IV

1980:

1

1,513.1
1,532.6
1,570.6

179.2 1,333.9 1,121.3 152.1 202.9 68.1 134.8 46.9
182.1 1,350.5 1,140.6 146.5 181.9 57.8 124.1 48.8
185.7 1,384.9 1,167.2 152.0 187.2 59.5 127.6 52.5
186.6
1,1798
54.2

Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies.

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




246

TABLE B-13.—Output, costs, and profits of nonfinancial corporate business, 1948-81
[Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or
quarter

Gross domestic
product of
nonfinancial
corporate
business (billions
of dollars)

Current-dollar cost and profit per unit of output (dollars) '

Total
cost
and
profit 2

Capital
consumption
allowances
with
capital
consumption
adjustment

Indirect
business
tax,
etc.3

Compensation
of
employees

Corporate profits with
inventory valuation and
capital consumption
adjustments
Net
interest

Profits
tax
liability

Profits
after
tax 4

Output
per hour
of all
employees
(1972
dollars)

Compensation
per hour
of all
employees
(dollars)

Current
dollars

1972
dollars

1948
1949

137.3
133.5

229.7
219.9

0.598
.607

0.047
.053

0.053
.057

0.382
.388

0.112
.104

0.051
.042

0.060
.062

0.004
.004

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

151.9
174.5
182.3
195.0
191.9

247.5
270.2
275.2
292.0
283.4

.614
.646
.663
.668
.677

.051
.054
.057
.058
.063

.057
.056
.061
.062
.061

.383
.408
.430
.441
.446

.120
.124
.110
.103
.101

.068
.079
.065
.063
.055

.051
.045
.045
.040
.046

.004
.004
.004
.004
.005

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

216.7
231.6
242.3
236.3
266.0

315.1
324.1
328.3
313.4
347.4

.688
.715
.738
.754
.766

.061
.067
.073
.079
.074

.061
.064
.068
.073
.073

.439
.467
.484
.497
.494

.122
.111
.106
.097
.116

.064
.062
.058
.052
.060

.057
.049
.048
.045
.056

.005
.005
.007
.009
.009

5.206"
5.433

2.589
2.684

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

277.0
285.0
311.3
331.8
358.4

358.4
367.2
399.7
426.3
455.6

.773
.776
.779
.778
.787

.075
.075
.071
.069
.068

.079
.082
.083
.083
.084

.505
.504
.500
.494
.497

.104
.104
.114
.120
.127

.054
.053
.052
.053
.053

.051
.051
.062
.067
.074

.010
.011
.011
.011
.012

5.536
5.727
5.997
6.248
6.469

2.797
2.887
2.998
3.089
3.213

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

393.6
431.5
454.1
500.2
544.1

495.2
530.7
543.0
578.9
604.0

.795
.813
.836
.864
.901

.066
.067
.072
.074
.078

.083
.081
.084
.089
.096

.497
.515
.538
.558
.594

.137
.136
.127
.127
.112

.055
.056
.051
.058
.055

.082
.080
.076
.069
.057

.012
.014
.016
.017
.022

6.673
6.776
6.847
7.076
7.098

3.316
3.492
3.680
3.946
4.213

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

563.7
609.9
678.0
759.4
818.9

599.6
626.8
678.0
731.9
708.2

.940
.973
1.000
1.038
1.156

.087
.091
.092
.093
.112

.106
.113
.113
.114
.127

.631
.641
.659
.692
.786

.088
.099
.107
.107
.090

.045
.047
.049
.055
.059

.043
.052
.058
.053
.030

.028
.029
.028
.031
.042

7.126
7.467
7.688
7.891
7.622

4.498
4.788
5.068
5.458
5.989

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

890.0
1,001.3
1,129.5
1,270.7
1,417.0

694.2
745.5
799.0
845.1
873.3

1.282
1.343
1.414
1.504
1.623

.137
.141
.146
.153
.169

.140
.141
.144
.148
.153

.837
.878
.924
.996
1.092

.124
.144
.158
.163
.157

.059
.071
.074
.080
.080

.065
.073
.084
.083
.077

.044
.040
.042
.044
.052

7.881
8.132
8.348
8.384
8.384

6.596
7.138
7.713
8.347
9.159

1980
1981 P.

1,535.2
1,730.6

867.2
896.0

1.770
1.931

.191
.208

.176
.205

1.196
1.286

.143
.161

.073
.065

.070
.096

.065
.072

8.432

10.085

I
II
Ill
IV

1,378.7
1,399.5
1,432.1
1,457.7

874.7
870.8
874.3
873.4

1.576
1.607
1.638
1.669

.161
.168
.172
.175

.150
.151
.154
.157

1.052
1.079
1.104
1.135

.167
.159
.154
.146

.081
.079
.081
.078

.086
.080
.074
.067

.047
.050
.053
.056

8.396
8.404
8.388
8.338

8.830
9.071
9.260
9.462

1980:
1
II
Ill
IV

1,502.1
1,496.3
1,537.7
1,604.7

878.2
853.2
860.4
876.9

1.710
1.754
1.787
1.830

.180
.192
.196
.197

.161
.173
.181
.188

1.158
1.193
1.203
1.230

.151
.132
.141
.146

.085
.061
.070
.075

.066
.071
.071
.071

.060
.064
.067
.068

8.369
8.359
8.496
8.496

9.694
9.973
10.218
10.450

1,690.1
1,716.3
1,760.3

901.0
901.2
901.1

1.876
1.904
1.954

.197
.204
.211

.199
.202
.206

1.244
1.266
1.295

.169
.163
.169

.076
.064
.066

.093
.098
.103

.067
.070
.073

8.628
8.674
8.660

10.737
10.978
11.216

Total

1979:

1981:

1
II
Ill
1

Output is measured by gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business in 1972 dollars.
This is equal to the deflator for gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporate business with the decimal point shifted two
places to the left.
3
Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies.
4
With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).
2




247

TABLE B-14.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Nondurable goods

Durable goods
Year or quarter

Personal
consumption
expenditures

Durable
goods

Nondurable goods

Services

Motor
vehicles
and parts

Furniture
and
household
noiu
equipment

Other

Food

Clothing
and
shoes

1929

77.3

9.2

37.7

30.3

3.3

4.7

1.2

19.5

9.4

1933

45.8

3.5

22.3

20.1

1.1

1.9

.5

11.5

4.6

1939

67.0

6.7

35.1

25.2

2.3

3.4

1.0

19.1

7.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

7.8
9.7
6.9
6.5
6.7
8.0
15.8
20.4
22.9
25.0

37.0
42.9
50.8
58.6
64.3
71.9
82.7
90.9
96.6
94.9

26.2
28.2
31.0
34.3
37.1
39.6
45.3
50.4
55.3
58.2

2.8
3.5
.7
.8
.8
1.0
4.1
6.6
8.0
10.6

3.8
4.8
4.6
3.9
3.8
4.5
8.4
10.6
11.5
11.3

1.1
1.3
1.6
1.9
2.1
2.5
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.2

20.2
23.4
28.4
33.2
36.7
40.6
47.4
52.3
54.2
52.5

7.5
8.8
11.0
13.4
14.6
16.5
18.2
18.8
20.1
19.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

30.8
29.8
29.1
32.5
31.8
38.6
37.9
39.3
36.8
42.4

98.2
108.8
113.9
116.5
118.0
122.9
128.9
135.2
139.8
146.4

63.0
68.5
74.0
80.6
86.1
92.1
99.2
105.9
112.8
121.9

13.7
12.2
11.3
13.9
13.0
17.8
15.8
17.2
14.8
18.9

13.7
14.0
14.0
14.6
14.6
16.2
17.1
16.9
16.6
17.8

3.3
3.6
3.9
4.1
4.2
4.6
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.8

53.9
60.4
63.4
64.4
65.4
67.2
69.9
73.6
76.4
79.1

19.6
21.2
21.9
22.1
22.1
23.1
24.1
24.3
24.7
26.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.5
430.4
465.1
490.3
536.9
581.8

43.1
41.6
46.7
51.4
56.4
63.0
68.0
70.1
80.5
85.7

151.1
155.3
161.6
167.1
176.9
188.6
204.7
212.6
230.6
247.8

130.7
138.1
147.0
156.1
167.1
178.7
192.4
207.6
225.8
248.2

19.7
17.8
21.5
24.4
26.1
30.0
30.4
30.1
36.3
38.7

17.7
17.9
18.9
20.3
22.8
24.7
27.7
29.5
32.3
34.1

5.8
5.8
6.3
6.7
7.6
8.3
9.9
10.5
11.8
13.0

81.1
83.2
85.5
87.8
92.7
98.9
106.6
109.6
118.7
127.5

26.7
27.4
28.7
29.5
31.9
33.5
36.6
38.2
42.1
45.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

621.7
672.2
737.1
812.0
888.1
976.4
1,084.3
1,205.5
1,348.7
1,510.9

85.2
97.2
111.1
123.3
121.5
132.2
156.8
178.8
199.3
212.3

265.7
278.8
300.6
333.4
373.4
407.3
441.7
479.0
529.8
602.2

270.8
296.2
325.3
355.2
393.2
437.0
485.7
547.7
619.6
696.3

36.2
45.4
52.4
57.1
50.4
55.8
72.6
85.0
94.3
95.5

35.2
37.2
41.7
47.1
50.6
53.5
59.1
65.8
72.9
81.1

13.9
14.6
16.9
19.2
20.5
22.9
25.2
28.0
32.1
35.8

138.9
144.2
154.9
172.1
193.7
213.6
230.6
250.3
276.4
312.1

46.8
50.6
55.4
61.4
64.8
69.6
75.3
82.1
91.9
98.9

1980
1981"

1,672.8
1,858.1

211.9
232.0

675.7
743.4

785.2
882.7

89.9
98.2

84.6
92.7

37.3
41.2

345.7
382.1

104.8
115.9

1,454.1
1,478.0
1,529.1
1,582.3

212.5
207.4
213.3
216.1

571.8
586.4
611.5
639.2

669.9
684.2
704.3
727.0

100.1
91.7
94.7
95.4

78.0
80.1
82.4
83.8

34.4
35.6
36.2
37.0

299.1
306.0
314.3
329.0

95.8
97.0
100.3
102.5

1,631.0
1,626.8
1,682.2
1,751.0

220.9
194.4
208.8
223.3

661.1
6640
674.2
703.5

749.0
7684
799.2
824.2

100.6
775
87.0
94.6

83.6
813
84.6
88.9

36.8
356
37.2
39.8

336.2
3384
347.7
360.4

102.2
1023
105.3
109.4

1,810.1
1,829.1
1,883.9
1,909.5

238.3
227.3
236.2
226.4

7260
735.3
751.3
760.9

8458
866.5
896.4
922.2

1054
93.4
101.6
92.3

923
92.4
93.2
93.0

406
41.6
41.4
41.1

3725
377.8
386.5
391.6

1134
115.8
117.5
116.8

1979:

1.
II
III.
IV.

1980:

1
II
Ill
IV

1981:

1
II
Ill

IV P

See next page for continuation of table.




248

TABLE B-14.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-81—Continued
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Services

Nondurable goods— cont'd
Year or
quarter

1929..

Gasoline
and oil

Fuel oil
and coal

Household operation
Other

Housing '

Total

Electricity
and gas

Other

Transportation

Other
Total

Medical
care

1.8

1.6

5.4

11.7

4.0

1.2

2.9

2.6

12.0

1.5

1.2

3.5

8.1

2.8

1.1

1.7

1.5

7.7

1.5

1939..

2.2

1.4

5.3

9.4

3.8

1.4

2.4

2.0

10.0

2.1

1940..
1941..
1942
1943..
1944
1945..
1946
1947
1948
1949

2.3
2.6
2.1
1.3
1.4
1.8
3.4
4.0
4.8
5.3

1.5
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.0
2.2
2.5
3.0
3.4
3.1

5.6
6.4
7.5
8.7
9.6
10.8
13.8
15.8
17.5
17.7

9.7
10.4
11.2
11.8
12.3
12.8
14.2
16.0
17.9
19.6

4.0
4.3
4.8
5.2
5.9
6.4
6.8
7.5
8.1
8.5

1.5
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.6
2.9

2.6
2.7
3.2
3.5
4.1
4.5
4.7
5.1
5.4
5.6

2.1
2.4
2.7
3.4
3.7
4.0
5.0
5.3
5.8
5.9

10.3
11.2
12.2
13.9
15.2
16.4
19.4
21.7
23.6
24.1

2.2
2.4
2.6
2.9
3.3
3.6
4.5
5.5
6.3
6.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955..
1956
1957
1958
1959

5.5
6.1
6.8
7.4
7.8
8.6
9.4
10.2
10.6
11.3

3.4
3.5
3.4
3.4
3.5
3.8
3.9
4.1
4.2
4.0

19.2
21.1
21.8
22.7
22.6
24.1
25.5
27.1
28.2
29.9

21.7
24.3
27.0
29.8
32.2
34.3
36.7
39.3
42.0
45.0

9.5
10.4
11.1
12.0
12.6
14.0
15.2
16.2
17.3
18.5

3.3
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.1
6.5
7.1
7.6

6.2
6.7
7.0
7.5
7.6
8.5
9.2
9.7
10.2
10.9

6.2
6.7
7.1
7.8
7.9
8.2
8.6
9.0
9.3
10.1

25.6
27.0
28.8
31.0
33.3
35.6
38.7
41.4
44.3
48.3

6.9
7.3
8.0
8.9
9.7
10.3
11.0
12.0
13.1
14.3

1960
1961
1962
1963..
1964
1965..
1966
1967
1968
1969..

12.0
12.0
12.6
12.9
13.5
14.7
16.0
17.0
18.6
20.7

3.8
3.7
3.7
4.0
4.1
4.4
4.7
4.8
4.7
4.5

31.3
32.7
34.8
36.8
38.7
41.6
45.6
47.8
51.1
54.1

48.1
51.2
54.7
58.0
61.4
65.5
69.5
74.1
79.8
87.0

20.1
21.0
22.2
23.4
24.8
26.3
28.0
30.0
32.2
35.0

8.3
8.8
9.4
9.9
10.4
10.9
11.5
12.2
13.1
14.2

11.8
12.2
12.8
13.6
14.4
15.4
16.5
17.8
19.2
20.8

10.7
11.2
11.7
12.2
12.8
13.7
15.0
16.2
17.6
19.5

51.7
54.8
58.3
62.5
68.1
73.3
79.9
87.2
96.2
106.8

15.4
16.4
18.0
19.5
22.3
23.9
26.0
28.4
31.4
36.5

1970..
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

22.4
23.9
25.4
28.6
36.6
40.4
44.0
48.2
52.7
68.4

4.4
4.5
5.0
6.2
7.7
8.2
9.8
10.6
11.7
16.0

57.6
60.1
64.9
71.2
78.2
83.7
91.9
98.4
108.8
122.9

93.9
102.7
112.5
123.8
137.4
149.8
166.5
186.8
213.1
241.9

37.7
41.0
45.2
49.6
55.2
63.3
71.6
80.8
89.5
98.7

15.4
17.0
18.8
20.5
24.0
29.2
32.9
38.2
42.4
47.3

22.2
24.0
26.4
29.1
31.2
34.1
38.7
42.6
47.1
51.3

22.0
25.1
27.5
28.8
30.9
33.2
38.6
45.3
51.0
57.2

117.2
127.4
140.1
153.0
169.8
190.7
209.0
234.8
266.0
298.5

41.0
45.9
51.4
57.4
64.5
73.7
83.3
97.8
109.4
124.3

1980
1981 "...

89.0
94.5

19.8
21.0

136.2
150.9

272.0
306.7

111.6
126.3

55.7
62.8

56.0
63.5

64.1
68.8

337.5
380.9

143.6
169.5

1979
1
II
III.
IV.

60.6
63.2
72.1
77.6

13.1
14.9
17.9
18.1

116.3
120.3
124.9
130.0

231.4
238.1
244.9
253.0

96.1
96.4
99.5
102.7

46.4
45.9
47.3
49.8

49.7
50.6
52.2
52.9

54.4
56.5
58.2
59.9

288.0
293.2
301.7
311.4

120.4
122.2
125.0
129.8

1980
1
II
III
IV.

89.4
90.9
85.3
90.5

18.8
19.2
20.7
20.5

133.3
132.4
136.0
143.3

259.8
267.3
275.7
285.3

104.2
109.3
116.1
116.9

50.0
54.5
59.3
58.8

54.2
54.8
56.8
58.2

61.4
61.6
65.8
67.5

323.7
330.2
341.5
354.5

135.3
141.2
145.0
152.8

1981
1
II
III.
IV P

93.5
92.4
95.1
97.1

20.5
21.0
21.3
21.0

146.6
149.4
152.1
155.5

293.6
302.1
310.9
320.3

118.1
123.4
130.5
133.1

58.4
61.5
65.5
65.8

59.7
61.9
65.0
67.3

67.6
67.9
69.6
70.1

366.5
373.0
385.4
398.8

159.9
165.6
172.9
179.5

1933..

1
Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




249

2.2

TABLE B-15.—Gross private domestic investment, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Fixed investment

Year or quarter

Gross
private
domestic
investment

Total

Total

Change in
business
inventories

Residential

Nonresidential

Structures

Producers'
durable
equipment

Total

Nonfarm
structures

ProFarm ducers'
durstruc- able
tures equipment

1929

16.2

14.5

10.6

5.1

5.5

3.9

3.6

0.2

0.1

1933

1.4

3.0

2.4

1.0

1.4

.6

.5

.0

.0

Total

1.7

-1.6

Nonfarm

1.8

-1.4

1939

9.3

8.8

5.9

2.0

3.9

2.9

2.7

.1

.1

.4

.3

1940..
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

13.1
17.9
9.9
5.8
7.2
10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

10.9
13.4
8.1
6.4
8.1
11.7
24.3
34.4
41.1
38.4

7.5
9.4
6.0
5.0
6.9
10.1
16.9
23.0
26.3
24.4

2.3
3.0
1.9
1.4
1.9
2.8
6.9
7.7
9.0
8.7

5.2
6.4
4.1
3.7
5.0
7.3
9.9
15.3
17.3
15.7

3.4
4.0
2.2
1.4
1.3
1.5
7.4
11.4
14.9
13.9

3.2
3.6
1.9
1.2
1.1
1.4
6.7
10.4
13.7
12.8

.2
.2
.2
.2
.1
.1
.5
.7
.9
.8

.1
.1
.1
.0
.0
.0
.2
.3
.3
.3

2.2
4.5
1.8
-.6
-1.0
-1.0
6.4
-.5
4.7
-3.1

1.9
4.0
.7
-.6
-.6
-.6
6.4
1.3
3.0
-2.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
78.1

47.0
48.9
49.0
52.9
54.3
62.4
66.3
67.9
63.4
72.5

27.3
31.3
31.3
34.5
34.2
38.5
44.0
47.0
42.0
45.9

9.5
11.4
11.6
12.9
13.4
14.6
17.7
18.4
17.2
17.6

17.8
19.9
19.7
21.5
20.8
23.9
26.3
28.6
24.9
28.3

19.8
17.6
17.7
18.4
20.1
23.9
22.3
20.9
21.4
26.6

18.6
16.4
16.5
17.3
19.0
22.8
21.2
19.7
20.3
25.3

.8
.8
.8
.8
.7
.6
.7
.7
.7
.7

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.5
.5
.5
.6

6.8
10.3
3.1
.4
-1.5
6.0
4.7
1.3
-1.5
5.7

6.0
9.1
2.1
1.1
-2.1
5.5
5.1
.8
-2.3
5.7

1960
1961.
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

759
74.8
85.4
90.9
97.4
113.5
125.7
122.8
133.3
149.3

72.9
72.5
79.2
84.9
91.7
103.7
111.6
112.5
125.4
139.5

485
48.0
52.2
54.8
61.0
72.7
83.1
83.9
90.7
101.3

188
19.1
20.1
20.5
22.4
27.0
30.1
30.3
32.4
36.7

297
28.9
32.1
34.4
38.7
45.8
53.0
53.7
58.2
64.6

245
24.5
27.0
30.1
30.7
30.9
28.5
28.6
34.8
38.2

23.3
23.2
25.8
28.9
29.4
29.6
27.1
27.2
33.3
36.5

.6
.7
.6
.7
.7
.6
.7
.7
.6
.7

5
.5
.5
.6
.6
.7
.7
.7
.9
1.0

30
2.3
6.3
6.0
5.6
9.9
14.1
10.3
7.9
9.8

27
2.0
5.5
5.2
6.2
8.9
14.3
9.6
7.8
9.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

144.2
166.4
195.0
229.8
228.7
206.1
257.9
322.3
375.3
415.8

141.0
158.8
184.8
211.3
214.5
213.0
246.0
301.3
353.2
398.3

103.9
107.9
121.0
143.3
156.6
157.7
174.1
205.5
242.0
279.7

38.7
40.5
44.1
51.0
55.9
55.4
58.8
64.6
78.7
96.3

65.2
67.4
76.9
92.3
100.7
102.3
115.3
140.9
163.3
183.4

37.1
50.9
63.8
68.0
57.9
55.3
72.0
95.8
111.2
118.6

35.4
48.9
61.5
65.6
54.8
52.4
68.8
91.9
106.9
113.9

.6
.7
.7
.7
1.3
1.0
1.1
1.5
1.8
1.8

1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.6
2.9

3.2
7.7
10.2
18.5
14.1
-6.9
11.8
21.0
22.2
17.5

3.1
6.4
9.6
15.2
16.0
-10.5
13.9
20.2
21.8
13.4

1980
1981 P

395.3
450.6

401.2
432.4

296.0
327.1

108.8
125.0

187.1
202.0

105.3
105.3

100.3
99.8

2.0
2.3

3.0
3.2

-5.9
18.2

-4.7
15.9

408.3
4232
421.7
410.0

384.0
3901
408.3
410.8

2673
2729
288.5
290.2

873
932
99.6
105.1

1799
1797
189.0
185.1

116.7
1172
119.8
120.6

112.5
1129
114.9
115.4

2.Q

1.6
16

2.3

2.7
28
2^9
3.0

24.3
33 1
13^3
-.8

20.8
292
7.'8
-4.4

4156
390.9
3771
397.7

4131
383.5
3932
415.1

2978
289.8
2940
302.1

1082
108^4
1073
111.5

1897
181.4
1868
190.7

1152
93.6
992
113.0

110 1
88.9
945
107'.6

22
1.8
17
2'.2

30
2^9
30
3'.1

— 160
-17'.4

-123

437.1
4586
463.0
443.6

432.7
4353
435.6
426.0

315.9
3246
335.1
332.6

117.2
123 1
128.3
131.4

198.7
201 5
206.8
201.2

116.7
1107
100.5
93.4

111.4
1054
94.9
87.7

2.2
21
2.3
2.5

3.2
32
3'.3
3.3

4.5
233
27'.5
17.6

6.8
215
23^1
12.2

1979:

1
II
III
IV

1980:

1
II
Ill

IV

25

1A

15

e!i

-RO

1981:

1
II

iv p

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




250

TABLE B-16.—Gross and net private domestic investment, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars]
Equals: Net private domestic investment

Gross
private
domestic
investment

Less:
Capital
consumption
allowances
with
capital
consumption
adjustment

1929

16.2

9.7

1933

1.4

7.4

1939

9.3

8.7

.6

.1

-.6

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

13.1
17.9

9.1

1.9
3.4

.7

10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

10.0
11.2
11.5
11.7
12.2
14.0
17.3
20.2
21.8

4.1
7.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
78.1

23.5
27.2
29.3
31.0
32.7
34.8
38.7
41.7
43.5
44.9

30.3
32.0
22.8
22.4
20.0
33.6
32.3
27.5
18.4
33.2

23.5
21.7
19.7
21.9
21.6
27.6
27.6
26.1
19.9
27.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

75.9
74.8
85.4
90.9
97.4
113.5
125.7
122.8
133.3
149.3

46.3
47.5
49.0
50.6
52.9
56.0
60.7
65.9
72.1
80.0

29.6
27.3
36.5
40.3
44.5
57.5
65.0
57.0
61.2
69.3

26.7
24.9
30.2
34.4
38.9
47.6
50.9
46.6
53.3
59.5

12.3
10.9
14.0
15.3
19.7
28.9
35.4
31.9
33.6
38.1

12.9
14.8
13.8
14.5
16.6

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

144.2
166.4
195.0
229.8
228.7
206.1
257.9
322.3
375.3
415.8

88.1
96.5
106.4
116.5
136.0
159.3
175.0
196.0
221.2
253.6

56.2
69.9
88.6
113.3
92.7
46.8
82.8
126.3
154.2
162.2

52.9
62.3
78.4
94.8
78.5
53.7
71.0
105.3
132.0
144.7

33.9
31.1
37.0
51.9
49.2
30.3
34.3
50.1
68.0
80.9

1980
1981 "..

395.3
450.6

287.3
321.5

108.1
129.1

114.0
110.9

69.4
71.6

Year

9.9
5.8
7.2

Net fixed investment

Total
Total
Total

6.5
-6.0

-1.3
-5.7
-4.6
-1.6
16.6
16.6
25.6
13.5

4.8
-4.5

-3.0
-5.0
-3.6

-.6
10.3
17.1
20.9
16.6

Structures

3.1
-3.5

2.0'
-2.5
-3.5
-1.7

1.3
6.6
10.2
11.3

8.1
9.6

10.7

9.1

10.8

9.1

11.9
13.9
14.3

8.1

10.6

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




Residential

Nonresidential

251

1.7
-1.6

Producers'
durable
equipment

1.4
-1.8

Total

1.7
-1.0

Nonfarm
structures

1.7

Farm
structures

-0.1

Producers'
durable
equipment

0.0

-.9

-.1

-.0

Change
in
business
inventories

1.7
-1.6

.3

.8

.8

-.0

.0

.4

1.2
1.5
-.6

1.1
1.4
-.5

.0
.0
-.0
-.1
-.1
-.1
.1
.2
.2
.1

2.2
4.5
1.8
-.6

2.4
2.1
2.7
2.3

1.4
2.2
-.7
-.9
.3
2.4
4.2
8.2
8.6
5.8

2.9
3.9
3.8
4.8
5.1
5.9
7.9
7.9
6.4
6.4
7.3
7.3
7.9
7.8
9.1

-1.0
_ 7

3.7
6.8
9.7
8.5

3.4
6.4
9.1
7.9

.0
.0
-.1
-.1
-.1
-.2
.2
.3
.4
.4

6.7
6.7
5.3
6.0
4.0
6.0
6.0
6.4
1.8
4.2

13.9
11.0
10.6
11.1
12.5
15.7
13.7
11.8
11.8
16.9

13.4
10.6
10.3
10.8
12.2
15.6
13.4
11.7
11.6
16.7

.3
.3
.3
.3
.2
.0
.1
.1
.1
.1

.2
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.2

5.0
3.6
6.1
7.5
10.6
16.0
20.6
18.2
19.1
21.5

14.4
14.0
16.2
19.0
19.1
18.7
15.5
14.7
19.8
21.3

14.3
13.9
16.1
18.8
18.9
18.6
15.3
14.5
19.6
21.0

-.0
.1
.0
.0
.0
-.0
.0
.0
-.1
-.0

.1
.1
.1
.1
.2
.2
.2
.2
.3
.4

16.3
15.6
16.6
20.7
18.9
13.1
14.1
16.2
23.2
32.1

17.6
15.5
20.4
31.2
30.3
17.3
20.2
34.0
44.8
48.9

19.0
31.2
41.3
42.9
29.3
23.4
36.8
55.1
64.0
63.8

18.9
30.9
40.9
42.5
28.4
23.1
36.5
54.5
63.3
63.1

-.2
.2
-.2
-.2
.1
.1
-.0

.4
.5
.6
.7
.7
.5
.5
.6
.6
.7

10.2
18.5
14.1
-6.9
11.8
21.0
22.2
17.5

35.2
42.7

34.2
28.9

44.5
39.3

44.1
38.7

-.2
.1

.6
.6

-5.9
18.2

-'.3
-1.7
-2.6
-2.0
-1.2

-1.6
-1.9
-1.8

-1.4
-1.7
-1.6

_ 2

-.2
-A

-1.0
-1.0

6.4
-.5
4.7

-3.1

6.8
10.3

3.1
.4
-1.5

6.0
4.7
1.3

-1.5

5.7

3.0
2.3
6.3
6.0
5.6
9.9
14.1
10.3

7.9
9.8
3.2
7.7

TABLE B-17.—Inventories and final sales of business, 1946-81
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; seasonally adjusted]
Inventory— final
sales ratio

Inventories *
Year and quarter

Fourth quarter:
1946
1947.
1948
1949

Nonfarm
Total

Farm

Total

Manu- Wholesale
facturing trade

Retail
trade

Final
sales 2
Other

Total

Nonfarm 3

72.0
82.6
87.2
78.7

22.7
25.1
22.9
19.8

49.3
57.5
64.3
59.0

26.7
29.3
32.5
28.9

10.1
10.5
11.7
11.8

11.4
13.1
15.1
14.0

3.5
4.6
5.0
4.3

16.0
18.3
19.6
19.5

4.50
4.51
4.44
4.03

3.08
3.14
3.27
3.02

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

98.0
110.5
109.2
110.1
107.6

26.1
28.3
26.0
24.6
23.8

71.9
82.2
83.19
85.5
83.9

35.2
43.4
44.4
46.4
44.3

13.8
14.6
14.8
15.0
15.3

17.5
18.0
17.7
18.3
18.5

5.4
6.1
6.2
5.8
5.9

21.7
24.6
26.1
27.2
27.5

4.53
4.49
4.18
4.05
3.91

3.32
3.34
3.18
3.15
3.05

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

114.8
124.0
127.6
127.3
132.0

22.5
22.9
24.3
25.6
24.4

92.2
101.0
103.3
101.7
107.6

48.8
54.5
54.8
53.2
55.7

16.6
17.9
18.2
18.3
20.0

20.9
21.7
22.9
22.9
23.9

6.0
6.9
7.3
7.3
8.0

29.7
31.4
32.7
33.7
35.6

3.86
3.95
3.90
3.77
3.71

3.10
3.22
3.16
3.01
3.02

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

136.0
137.9
144.6
150.4
156.2

25.6
25.9
27.3
27.6
26.5

110.4
112.1
117.3
122.7
129.7

56.6
57.7
60.9
62.9
66.4

20.4
20.9
21.5
23.1
24.4

25.3
24.9
26.3
27.6
29.0

8.1
8.7
8.6
9.2
9.9

36.9
38.8
41.1
43.7
46.2

3.69
3.55
3.52
3.44
3.38

2.99
2.89
2.85
2.81
2.81

1965
1966.
1967.
1968.
1969.

170.5
187.4
199.4
213.5
234.6

29.9
29.6
29.5
30.6
33.3

140.6
157.8
169.9
182.9
201.3

71.5
81.7
88.7
95.2
104.8

26.3
29.9
32.4
34.3
37.7

31.9
34.6
35.3
39.0
42.8

10.9
11.6
13.5
14.4
16.0

51.0
54.1
57.6
63.3
67.4

3.34
3.46
3.46
3.37
3.48

2.76
2.92
2.95
2.89
2.99

1970.
1971.
1972.
1973.
1974.

244.0
260.8
288.7
357.7
434.4

32.3
36.7
45.6
66.6
62.4

211.6
224.1
243.1
291.2
372.0

108.4
109.9
116.8
141.1
189.6

41.7
44.9
49.4
60.2
76.9

44.3
50.5
55.7
64.8
74.1

17.3
18.8
21.2
25.0
31.3

70.8
77.2
85.8
94.5
102.0

3.45
3.38
3.37
3.79
4.26

2.99
2.90
2.83
3.08
3.65

1975.
1976.
1977.
1978.
1979.

439.4
473.6
520.9
600.5
710.1

64.5
60.6
61.4
76.0
84.3

374.9
413.0
459.5
524.5
625.9

189.8
207.5
225.6
254.7
311.2

77.3
86.9
98.5
114.2
134.6

74.6
82.9
93.7
108.4
122.6

33.3
35.7
41.6
47.2
57.5

113.6
124.1
139.2
159.3
176.2

3.87
3.82
3.74
3.77
4.03

3.30
3.33
3.30
3.29
3.55

1980..
1981 '..

785.4
834.9

92.6
84.0

692.8
750.9

344.2
373.7

151.7
164.2

130.3
141.0

66.5
71.9

194.1
208.6

4.05
4.00

3.57
3.60

626.2
654.5
681.9
710.1

79.4
80.5
83.4
84.3

546.7
574.0
598.5
625.9

267.6
281.9
295.0
311.2

118.8
123.9
129.4
134.6

111.3
116.3
119.7
122.6

49.0
51.9
54.5
57.5

163.6
165.1
171.4
176.2

3.83
3.96
3.98
4.03

3.34
3.48
3.49
3.55

724.5
740.4
765.8
785.4

77.8
81.8
92.6
92.6

646.6
658.5
673.2
692.8

325.0
331.2
335.3
344.2

138.5
142.0
146.3
151.7

122.8
124.0
127.3
130.3

60.3
61.3
64.3
66.5

181.2
179.9
187.2
194.1

4.00
4.12
4.09
4.05

3.57
3.66
3.60
3.57

796.9
811.3
825.6
834.9

86.9
86.7
85.1
84.0

710.0
724.6
740.5
750.9

355.2
363.2
369.7
373.7

155.7
158.8
160.6
164.2

129.8
132.6
139.2
141.0

69.4
70.0
71.0
71.9

201.4
202.2
207.5
208.6

3.96
4.01
3.98
4.00

3.53
3.58
3.57
3.60

1979:

1.
II
III.
IV.

1980:

1.
II
III
IV

1981:

1
II.
III.
IV "..

1
End of quarter.
2
Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions,
government, and rest of the world, and includes a small amount of final sales by farms.
3
Ratio based on total business final sales, which includes a small amount of final sales by farms.
Note.—The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) beginning 1948 and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




252

TABLE B-18.—Inventories and final sales of business in 1972 dollars, 1947-81
[Billions of 1972 dollars, except as noted; seasonally adjusted]
Inventories J
Year and quarter

Fourth quarter:
1947
1948
1949.

Inventory— final
sales ratio

Nonfarm
Total

Farm

Total

Manu- Wholesale
facturing trade

Retail
trade

Final
sales 2
Total

Other

Nonfarm 3

1161
121.6
117.2

257
26.7
26.2

905
94.8
91.0

47.4
48.8
46.2

160
17.2
17.2

18.3
20.3
19.8

8.7
8.6
7.8

33.2
34.4
34.6

3.50
3.53
3.38

2.73
2.76
2.63

1950.
1951.
1952,
1953,
1954,

127.7
141.4
145.7
147.2
145.0

27.5
29.1
30.4
30.2
31.1

100.2
112.3
115.4
117.1
114.0

49.3
60.0
62.7
64.5
60.9

19.2
19.7
20.1
20.3
20.6

23.0
23.0
23.0
23.6
23.7

8.7
9.5
9.6
8.7
8.8

36.9
39.8
41.6
43.0
43.1

3.46
3.55
3.51
3.42
3.36

2.72
2.82
2.78
2.72
2.64

1955,
1956..
1957.
1958..
1959..

152.8
158.6
160.1
158.3
165.3

31.5
30.7
31.4
32.4
32.4

121.2
127.8
128.7
125.9
132.9

64.3
69.1
68.7
66.1
69.1

22.1
22.8
22.5
22.5
24.6

26.5
26.8
27.8
27.5
28.7

8.4
9.2
9.8
9.8
10.5

45.6
46.5
47.1
48.1
49.7

3.35
3.41
3.40
3.29
3.33

2.66
2.75
2.73
2.62
2.68

I960..
1961,
1962,
1963.
1964,

168.8
171.8
179.7
187.2
194.3

32.8
33.2
34.5
35.7
35.1

136.1
138.6
145.2
151.5
159.Z

69.9
71.7
75.6
78.2
82.0

25.1
25.7
26.6
28.4
29.9

30.3
29.8
31.6
33.0
34.5

10.7
11.4
11.4
12.0
12.8

50.7
53.1
55.3
58.3
60.9

3.33
3.24
3.25
3.21
3.19

2.68
2.61
2.62
2.60
2.61

1965,
1966,
1967,
1968.
1969

206.1
222.9
235.1
244.1
255.1

36.2
36.0
36.8
37.0
37.3

169.9
186.8
198.3
207.0
217.8

87.0
97.2
104.1
108.4
112.8

31.6
35.3
37.8
38.9
41.2

37.4
40.0
40.0
43.0
45.9

13.8
14.3
16.3
16.8
17.9

66.1
67.5
70.1
73.8
74.7.

3.12
3.30
3.36
3.31
3.41

2.57
2.77
2.83
2.81
2.92

1970. .
1971.
1972
1973
1974

258.9
267.0
277.2
294.4
306.0

37.7
39.2
39.8
42.1
41.8

2212
227.8
237.4
252.3
264.2

112.9
111.8
114.4
121.8
130.9

440
45.9
47.9
50.4
54.1

461
51.2
54.6
58.8
58.3

18.2
19.0
20.5
21.4
20.9

752
78.9
84.7
87.3
85.1

344
3.38
3.27
3.37
3.59

2.94
2.89
2.80
2.89
3.10

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

299.2
307.0
319.3
333.3
343.5

43.0
41.1
41.1
41.1
43.5

256.3
265.9
278.3
292.2
300.0

127.1
130.9
133.9
139.1
145.9

52.2
55.5
59.5
63.2
64.2

55.8
58.8
63.0
66.8
66.8

21.1
20.8
21.9
23.0
23.1

88.3
92.4
97.9
103.1
105.4

3.39
3.32
3.26
3.23
3.26

2.90
2.88
2.84
2.83
2.85

1980
1981 P

340.6
348.7

43.0
44.2

297.6
304.6

145.0
147.8

64.7
66.9

64.6
66.5

23.4
23.3

105.4
104.7

3.23
3.33

2.82
2.91

337.2
341 7
343.7
343.5

41.6
422
43.0
43.5

295.5
2995
300.7
300.0

141.8
1439
145.0
145.9

63.9
64 1
64.5
64.2

66.8
684
68.' 1
66.8

23.0
232
23.1
23.1

103.6
1027
104.4
105.4

3.25
333
3.29
3.26

2.85
292
2.88
2.85

343.3
3436
342.3
340.6

43.6
438
43.4
43.0

299.6
2998
299.0
297.6

147.3
1472
145.9
145.0

64.1
645
64.7
64.7

64.9
647
651
64.6

23.4
234
23.4
23.4

106.1
1028
1039
105.4

3.24
334
329
3.23

2.82
292
2.88
2.82

340.2
342.9
346.6
348.7

42.7
42.9
43.5
44.2

297.5
300.0
303.2
304.6

146.1
146.3
147.7
147.8

64.4
65.2
65.8
66.9

63.5
65.2
66.4
66.5

23.4
23.2
23.3
23.3

107.3
105.9
105.9
104.7

3.17
3.24
3.27
3.33

2.77
2.83
2.86
2.91

1979:

L
II
III
IV

1980:

I
if".
Ill
IV

1981:

1.

II.
Ill

IV".

1
End of quarter.
2
Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Business final sales equals final sales less gross product of households and institutions,
government, and rest of world, and includes a small amount of final sales by farms.
3
Ratio based on total business final sales, which includes a small amount of final sales by farms.

Note.—The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) beginning 1948 and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

253
358-691 0 - 82 - 17 : QL3




TABLE B-19.—Relation of gross national product, net national product, and national income, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Less:

Less-.

Year or quarter

Gross
national
product

consumption
allowances
with
capital
consumption
adjustment

PIUS:
CnhciHioc

Equals:
Net
national
product

Indirect
business
tax and
nontax
liability

Business
transfer
payments

Statistical
discrepancy

less
current
surplus
of
government
enterprises

Equals:
National
income

1929

1034

9.7

93.7

7.1

0.6

11

-02

84.8

1933

558

74

48.4

7.1

.7

.7

-0

39.9

1939

909

87

82.2

9.4

.5

1.4

.4

71.4

1940.
1941
1942.
1943
1944
1945
1946.
1947
1948
1949

100.0
125.0
158.5
192.1
210.6
212.4
209.8
233.1
259.5
258.3

9.1
10.0
11.2
11.5
11.7
12.2
14.0
17.3
20.2
21.8

91.0
115.0
147.3
180.7
198.9
200.2
195.8
215.7
239.3
236.5

10.1
11.3
11.8
12.8
14.2
15.5
17.1
18.4
20.1
21.3

.4
.5
'.5
.5
.5
.5
.6
.7
.8

1.1
.6
-.8
-1.8
2.7
4.1
L5
-1.6
.6

.4
.1
.1
.1
.6
.7
.9

79.7
102.7
135.9
169.3
182.1
180.7
178.6
194.9
219.9
213.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

286.5
330.8
348.0
366.8
366.8
400.0
421.7
444.0
449.7
487.9

23.5
27.2
29.3
31.0
32.7
34.8
38.7
41.7
43.5
44.9

263.0
303.6
318.7
335.8
334.1
365.3
383.0
402.3
406.2
443.0

23.4
25.3
27.7
29.7
29.6
32.2
35.1
37.5
38.7
41.8

.8
.9
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.8

1.3.
3.2
1.7
2.3
2.0
1.3
-2.1
-1.2
.2
-1.3

.1
-.1

237.6

-.5

302.1
301.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

506.5
524.6
565.0
596.7
637.7
691.1
756.0
799.6
873.4
944.0

46.3
47.5
49.0
50.6
52.9
56.0
60.7
65.9
72.1
80.0

460.2
477.0
516.1
546.1
584.8
635.0
695.3
733.7
801.3
864.0

45.4
48.0
51.6
54.6
58.8
62.6
65.3
70.2
78.9
86.6

2.0
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.7
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.4
3.9

-2.4
-.1
2.1
1.7
-1.2
1.4
-.3
-2.1
-3.9

.4
1.7
1.8
1.1
1.7
1.6
2.5
1.6
1.4
1.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

992.7
1,077.6
1,185.9
1,326.4
1,434.2
1,549.2
1,718.0
1,918.0
2,156.1
2,413.9

88.1
96.5
106.4
116.5
136.0
159.3
175.0
196.0
221.2
253.6

904.7
981.1
1,079.5
1,209.9
1,298.2
1,389.9
1,543.0
1,722.0
1,934.9
2,160.3

94.3
103.7
111.5
120.9
129.1
140.1
151.7
166.0
178.1
188.4

4.1
4.4
4.9
5.5
5.8
7.4
7.9
8.2
8.7
9.4

-1.5
4.1
3.3
.8
3.7
5.5
5.1
4.4
6.4
2.2

2.9
2.6
3.8
3.4
1.1
2.4
1.0
3.1
3.6
3.1

963.6
1,086.2
1,160.7
1,239.4
1,379.2
1,546.5
1,745.4
1,963.3

1980
1981 p

2,626.1
29222

287.3
3215

2,338 9
26007

2123
2512

105

7

116

8

46
51

23437

23406
23746
24441
2,496.3

2401
2498
2596
265.1

21005
2 1248
2'l84 6
2 231.2

1845
1858
1900
1935

91

58
7
28

24
30
40
27

19036
19320
19862
203l'3

25717
2,564.8
26373
2,730.6

2746
283.7
2918
2989

22971
2281 1
23455
24317

1989
2063
2158
2280

10 1

28
19
30
66

31

20885
20700

28530
28858
29650
29849

3065
3167
3265
3361

25464
25691
26385
26488

2455
2494
2540
2558

11 2

34
69
2

47

2 291 1

51

2 377 6

1979:

1
||
III
IV

93
96
98

_ 7

~'.l

-'.Q
.7
.7
1.1
.1

274.1

287.9
330.5
349.4
365.2
366.9
400.8
415.7

428.8
462.0
488.5
524.9
572.4
628.1

662.2
722.5
779.3
810.7
871.5

21214

1980:

1
II
Ill . .
IV

103
106
109

37
63
54

2 1224

22048

1981:

1
II
Ill

IV P

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




254

115
118

12 1

57

48

23209

TABLE B-20.—Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or quarter

National
income

Equals:

Plu S:

Le SS:
Corporate
profits
with
inventory
valuation
and
capital
consumption
adjustments

Net
interest

9.0

4.7

0.2

0.0

0.9

6.9

5.8

0.6

85.0

4.1

.3

.0

1.5

5.5

2.0

.7

47.0

GovernWage
Contribu- accruals
ment
transfer Personal Personal Business Personal
tions for
less
interest dividend transfer
social
disburse- payments income income payments income
to
insurance ments
persons

1929.

84.8

1933.

39.9

1939.

71.4

5.3

3.6

2.1

.0

2.5

5.4

3.8

.5

72.4

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944..
1945.
1946.
1947
1948.
1949.

79.7
102.7
135.9
169.3
182.1
180.7
178.6
194.9
219.9
213.6

8.6
14.1
19.3
23.5
23.6
19.0
16.6
22.3
29.4
27.1

3.3
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.4
2.2
1.8
2.3
2.4
2.7

2.3
2.8
3.5
4.5
5.2
6.1
6.1
5.8
5.4
5.9

.0
.0
.0
.2
-.2
.0
-.0
.0
.0
-.0

2.7
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.1
5.6
10.8
11.2
10.6
11.7

5.3
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.2
5.9
6.6
7.6
8.1
8.7

4.0
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.6
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
.5
.6
.7
.8

77.9
95.4
122.6
150.8
164.5
170.0
177.6
190.1
209.0
206.4

237.6
274.1
287.9
302.1
301.1
330.5
349.4
365.2
366.9
400.8

33.9
38.7
36.1
36.3
35.2
45.5
43.7
43.3
38.5
49.6

3.0
3.5
4.0
4.4
5.3
5.9
6.6
7.9
9.6
10.3

7.1
8.5
9.0
9.1
10.1
11.5
12.9
14.9
15.2
18.0

.0
.1
-.0
-.1
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

14.4
11.6
12.1
12.9
15.1
16.2
17.3
20.1
24.3
25.2

9.7
10.5
11.2
12.5
13.7
14.9
16.7
18.8
20.3
22.5

8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1
10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

.8
.9
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.8

227.2
254.9
271.8
287.7
289.6
310.3
332.6
351.0
361.1
384.4

1960
1961.
1962.
1963.
1964.
1965.
1966.
1967.
1968.
1969.

415.7
428.8
462.0
488.5
524.9
572.4
628.1
662.2
722.5
779.3

47.6
48.6
56.6
62.1
69.2
80.0
85.1
82.4
89.1
85.1

11.4
13.0
14.7
16.4
18.3
21.0
24.4
27.6
30.0
34.8

21.1
21.9
24.3
27.3
28.7
30.0
38.8
43.4
47.9
55.0

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

27.0
30.8
31.6
33.4
34.8
37.6
41.6
49.5
56.4
62.8

25.0
26.4
29.0
32.2
35.6
39.7
44.4
48.3
53.4
61.1

12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3
19.1
19.4
20.2
21.9
22.4

2.0
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.7
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.4
3.9

402.3
417.8
443.6
466.2
499.2
540.7
588.2
630.0
690.6
754.7

1970.
1971.
1972.
1973.
1974.
1975.
1976.
1977.
1978.
1979.

810.7
871.5
963.6
1,086.2
1,160.7
1,239.4
1,379.2
1,546.5
1,745.4
1,963.3

71.4
83.2
96.6
108.3
94.9
110.5

138.1
164.7
185.5
196.8

41.4
46.5
51.2
60.2
76.1
84.5
87.2
100.9
115.8
143.4

58.6
64.6
74.2
92.4
104.3
110.9
126.0
140.6
161.8
187.1

.0
.6
.0
_i
-.5
.0
.0
.0
.2
-.2

76.1
90.0
99.8
114.0
135.4
170.9
186.4
199.3
214.6
239.9

69.4
74.8
80.9
93.9
112.4
123.2
132.5
151.6
173.2
209.6

22.2
22.6
24.1
26.5
29.1
29.9
36.5
38.7
43.1
48.6

4.1
4.4
4.9
5.5
5.8
7.4
7.9
8.2
8.7
9.4

811.1
868.4
951.4
1,065.2
1,168.6
1,265.0
1,391.2
1,538.0
1,721.8
1,943.8

1980
1981"

2 1214
2,343.7

1827
189.0

1798
215.0

2037
238.9

-0
.0

2838
321.3

2563
308.6

544
61.3

105
11.6

21602
2,403.6

1,903.6
1,932.0
1,986.2
2,031.3

201.9
196.6
199.5
189.4

133.4
136.9
146.8
156.5

182.3
185.3
188.5
192.2

.1
-.9
-.1
.2

226.3
232.0
248.3
253.3

195.8
202.6
214.3
225.7

47.5
48.3
48.6
50.1

9.1
9.3
9.6
9.8

1,864.6
1,906.3
1,972.3
2,032.0

2,088.5
2,070.0
2,122.4
2,204.8

200.2
169.3
177.9
183.3

165.4
175.3
185.3
193.3

198.8
199.5
204.1
212.3

— .2
'.Q
.5
_.5

261.6
270.3
300.1
303.1

239.9
253.6
261.8
269.7

52.4
54.2
55.1
56.1

10.1
10.3
10.6
10.9

2,088.2
2,114.5
2,182.1
2,256.2

2,291 1
2,320.9
23776

2030
190.3
1957

2008
211.0
2202
228.1

233.7
236.3
2406
244.9

0
0
.2
— 1

3084
312.7
3304
333.6

2887
3009
3157
329.0

580
60.2
630
64.1

112
11.5
118
12.1

23198
2,368.5
24417
2,484.4

1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.
1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

.

-1.7

1979:

1
II
Ill
IV

1980:

1
II
Ill
IV

1981:

1
II
Ill

IV

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




255

TABLE B-21.—National income by type of income, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Proprietors' income with inventory valuation and capital consumption
adjustments

Compensation
of employees
Year or
quarter

National
income l

Total

Wages
and
salaries

Supplements
to
wages
and
salaries 2

Farm
Total

Total

Nonfarm

Capital
Propri- consumpetors'
tion
in- 3 adjustcome
ment

Total

Inven- Capital
Propri- tory consumpetors' valuation
intion
come4 adjust- adjustment
ment

1929

84.8

51.1

50.5

0.6

15.0

6.1

6.3

-0.2

8.9

8.8

0.1

1933

39.9

29.5

29.0

.5

5.9

2.5

2.6

-.0

3.3

3.9

-.5

.0

1939

71.4

48.1

46.0

2.1

11.8

4.4

4.5

-.1

7.4

7.6

-.2

-.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

79.7
102.7
135.9
169.3
182.1
180.7
178.6
194.9
219.9
213.6

52.1
64.8
85.3
109.5
121.2
123.1
118.1
129.2
141.4
141.3

49.9
62.1
82.1
105.8
116.7
117.5
112.0
123.1
135.5
134.7

2.3
2.7
3.2
3.8
4.5
5.6
6.0
6.1
5.9
6.6

13.0
17.5
24.2
29.1
30.4
31.8
36.7
35.9
40.9
36.4

4.4
6.4
10.1
12.0
12.0
12.4
14.9
15.1
17.6
12.8

4.5
6.5
10.3
12.2
12.2
12.7
15.2
15.7
18.2
13.5

-.1
— 2
-.2
-.2
-.3
-.3

8.6
11.7
14.4
17.1
18.3
19.3
23.3
21.8
23.1
22.2

-.0
-.6
-.4
-.2
-.1
-.1
-1.7
-1.5
-.4
.5

.0
.0
.1
.2
.2

-^5
-.6
-.7

8.6
11.1
14.1
17.1
18.4
19.4
21.8
20.8
23.3
23.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

237.6
274.1
287.9
302.1
301.1
330.5
349.4
365.2
366.9
400.8

154.8
181.0
195.7
209.6
208.4
224.9
243.5
256.5
258.2
279.6

147.0
171.3
185.3
198.5
196.8
211.7
228.3
239.3
240.5
258.9

7.8
9.7
10.4
11.0
11.6
13.2
15.2
17.2
17.7
20.6

38.7
43.2
43.4
41.8
41.2
42.9
43.9
45.3
47.7
47.6

13.7
16.1
15.1
13.1
12.5
11.5
11.2
11.1
13.2
10.9

14.4
16.9
16.0
13.9
13.3
12.2
12.1
12.1
14.1
11.9

-.7
-.8
-.8
-.8
-.8
-.8
-.9
-.9
-.9
-1.0

25.0
27.2
28.2
28.6
28.7
31.4
32.7
34.2
34.5
36.7

25.1
26.4
26.9
27.6
27.6
30.5
31.8
33.1
33.2
35.3

-1.1
-.3
.2
-.2
-.0
-.2
-.5
-il
-.0

1.0
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964 ..
1965
1966
1967
1968 .
1969

415.7
428.8
462.0
488.5
524.9
572.4
628.1
662.2
722.5
779.3

294.9
303.6
325.1
342.9
368.0
396.5
439.3
471.4
519.9
572.9

271.9
279.5
298.0
313.4
336.1
362.0
398.4
427.0
469.6
515.7

23.0
24.1
27.1
29.5
31.8
34.5
40.9
44.4
50.3
57.2

47.2
48.6
49.9
50.5
52.5
56.9
60.5
61.2
64.0
67.0

11.7
12.1
12.3
12.0
10.8
13.1
14.1
12.6
12.7
14.6

12.6
12.9
13.0
12.8
11.5
13.8
14.9
13.5
13.7
15.7

-.9
-.8
-.8
-.7
-.7
-.7
-.8
-.9
-1.0
-1.2

35.5
36.5
37.6
38.5
41.7
43.8
46.4
48.6
51.3
52.5

34.2
35.3
36.4
37.2
40.2
42.7
45.3
47.5
50.6
51.9

.0
.0
-.0
-.0
-.1
-.2
-.2
-.2
-.4
-.5

1.3
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.1
1.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

810.7
871.5
963.6
1,086.2
1,160.7
1,239.4
1,379.2
1,546.5
1,745.4
1,963.3

612.0
652.2
718.0
801.3
877.5
931.4
1,036.3
1,152.3
1,299.7
1,460.9

548.7
581.5
635.2
702.6
765.2
806.4
889.9
983.8
1,105.4
1,235.9

63.2
70.7
82.8
98.7
112.3
125.0
146.4
168.5
194.3
225.0

66.2
69.4
76.9
93.8
88.7
90.0
94.1
103.5
117.1
131.6

14.3
15.0
18.7
32.8
26.5
24.6
19.1
18.4
26.1
30.8

15.6
16.4
20.4
34.6
29.0
28.0
22.8
22.6
31.0
36.6

-1.3
-1.4
-1.6
-1.8
-2.5
-3.4
-3.7
-4.3
-4.9
-5.8

51.9
54.4
58.1
61.0
62.2
65.4
75.0
85.1
91.0
100.7

51.7
54.5
58.1
62.3
65.8
67.4
77.1
87.1
93.8
105.2

-.5
^.6
-.7
-2.0
-3.7
-1.2
-1.2
-1.3
-2.2
-3.4

.8
.4
.8
.6
.1
-.8
-.9
7
-.6
-1.0

1980
1981 ».

2,121.4
2,343.7

1,596.5
1,771.7

1,343.6
1,482.9

252.9
288.8

130.6
134.4

23.4
22.0

30.3
29.7

-6.9
-7.7

107.2
112.4

112.7
116.0

-3.7
-1.6

-1.9
-2.1

1979:
|
II. .
Ill
IV

1,903.6
1,932.0
1,986.2
2,031.3

1,409.9
1,439.0
1,476.7
1,518.1

1,194.9
1,217.8
1,248.5
1,282.4

215.0
221.2
228.2
235.7

127.8
129.4
132.9
136.3

30.9
32.6
30.2
29.5

36.3
38.3
36.2
35.7

-5.4
-5.7
-5.9
-6.2

96.8
96.8
102.7
106.8

100.5
100.6
107.3
112.2

30
-3.1
-3.5
-4.0

-.7
-.8
-1.2
-1.5

1
II
III
IV

2,088.5
2,070.0
2,122.4
2,204.8

1,558.0
1,569.0
1,597.4
1,661.8

1,314.5
1,320.4
1,342.3
1,397.3

243.5
248.6
255.0
264.5

133.7
124.9
129.7
134.0

25.7
23.3
22.1
22.5

32.3
30.2
29.0
29.6

-6.5
-6.9
-6.9
-7.2

107.9
101.6
107.6
111.6

114.8
105.5
113.1
117.5

-5.3
-2.0
-3.5
-4.0

-1.6
-1.9
-2.0
-2.0

1981:
1
||
III
IV "

2,291.1
2,320.9
2,377.6

1,722.4
1,752.0
1,790.7
1,821.7

1,442.9
1,467.0
1,498.7
1,522.9

279.5
285.1
292.0
298.9

132.1
134.1
137.1
134.1

18.9
21.7
24.7
22.7

26.1
29.3
32.6
30.9

-7.2
-7.6
-7.9
-8.2

113.2
112.5
112.4
111.5

117.4
115.7
115.9
115.2

-2.5
-1.2
-1.4
-1.3

-1.7
-2.0
22
-2.4

-0.1

'.2
.5
.6
.9

1980:

See next page for continuation of table.




256

TABLE B-21.—National income by type of income, 1929-81—Continued
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Rental income of persons
with capital consumption
adjustment
Year or quarter
Total

Rental Capital
conincome sumption
:
of
persons adjust
ment

Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments
Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without
capital consumption adjustment
Prnfitc
rTOlllS

Total
Total

Profits Profits
tax
before
taxes liability

Inventory
valuation
Undis- adjustDividends tributed ment
profits

Profits after tax
Total

Capital
Not
roei
consumption interest
adjustment

4.9
2.2
2.6
2.7
3.1
4.0
4.4
4.5
4.6
5.5
5.3
5.7
6.1
7.1
7.7
8.8
10.0
11.0
11.3
11.6
12.2
12.9
13.6
14.5
15.0
15.8
16.5
17.1
18.0
18.7
19.7
19.5
19.6
19.7
20.2
21.0
22.6
23.5
23.0
23.5
25.1
27.4
30.5

5.7
2.3
3.1
3.3
3.9
5.0
5.6
5.9
6.2
7.3
7.7
8.5
8.9
10.0
11.0
12.2
13.4
14.4
14.8
15.2
15.9
16.7
17.4
18.0
18.4
19.1
19.7
20.2
21.2
22.3
23.6
24.0
25.2
25.8
27.1
29.0
32.1
35.3
36.8
39.2
44.2
50.8
58.9

-0.8
-.1
-.6
-.6
-.8
-1.0
-1.2
-1.4
-1.6
-1.8
-2.5
-2.8
-2.8
-2.9
-3.3
-3.4
-3.4
-3.3
-3.5
-3.6
-3.6
-3.8
-3.8
-3.5
-3.4
-3.4
-3.2
-3.2
-3.3
-3.6
-3.9
-4.5
-5.6
-6.1
-6.9
-8.0
-9.5
-11.8
-13.8
-15.6
-19.1
-23.4
-28.3

9.0
-1.7
5.3
8.6
14.1
19.3
23.5
23.6
19.0
16.6
22.3
29.4
27.1
33.9
38.7
36.1
36.3
35.2
45.5
43.7
43.3
38.5
49.6
47.6
48.6
56.6
62.1
69.2
80.0
85.1
82.4
89.1
85.1
71.4
83.2
96.6
108.3
94.9
110.5
138.1
164.7
185.5
196.8

10.5
-1.2
6.5
9.8
15.4
20.5
24.5
24.0
19.3
19.6
25.9
33.4
31.1
37.9
43.3
40.6
40.2
38.4
47.5
46.9
46.6
41.6
52.3
49.7
50.0
55.1
59.7
66.0
76.0
80.9
78.1
84.9
80.8
68.9
82.0
94.0
105.6
96.7
120.6
151.6
176.7
199.0
212.7

10.0
1.0
7.2
10.0
17.9
21.7
25.3
24.2
19.8
24.8
31.8
35.6
29.2
42.9
44.5
39.6
41.2
38.7
49.2
49.6
48.1
41.9
52.6
49.8
49.7
55.0
59.6
66.5
77.2
83.0
79.7
88.5
86.7
75.4
86.6
100.6
125.6
136.7
132.1
166.3
192.6
223.3
255.4

1.4
.5
1.4
2.8
7.6
11.4
14.1
12.9
10.7
9.1
11.3
12.4
1€.2
17.9
22.6
19.4
20.3
17.6
22.0
22.0
21.4
19.0
23.6
22.7
22.8
24.0
26.2
28.0
30.9
33.7
32.5
39.2
39.5
34.2
37.5
41.6
49.0
51.6
50.6
63.8
72.6
83.0
87.6

8.6
.4
5.7
7.2
10.3
10.3
11.2
11.3
9.1
15.7
20.5
23.2
19.0
25.0
21.9
20.2
20.9
21.1
27.2
27.6
26.7
22.9
28.9
27.1
26.9
31.1
33.4
38.5
46.3
49.4
47.2
49.4
47.2
41.3
49.0
58.9
76.6
85.1
81.5
102.5
120.0
140.3
167.8

5.8
2.0
3.8
4.0
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.6
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2
8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1
10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2
12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3
19.1
19.4
20.2
22.0
22.5
22.5
22.9
24.4
27.0
29.9
30.8
37.4
39.9
44.6
50.2

2.8
-1.6
2.0
3.2
5.8
6.0
6.7
6.7
4.5
10.2
14.2
16.2
11.8
16.2
13.4
11.8
12.1
11.9
16.9
16.6
15.2
11.6
16.7
14.3
13.6
16.6
17.9
21.2
27.2
29.9
27.0
27.3
24.7
18.8
26.1
34.5
49.6
55.2
50.7
65.1
80.1
95.7
117.6

0.5
-2.1
-.7
-.2
-2.5
-1.2
-.8
-.3
-.6
-5.3
-5.9
-2.2
1.9
-5.0
-1.2
1.0
-1.0
-.3
-1.7
-2.7
-1.5
-.3
-.3
-.2
.3
.0
.1
-.5
-1.2
-2.1
-1.6
-3.7
-5.9
-6.6
-4.6
-6.6
-20.0
-40.0
-11.6
-14.7
-15.8
-24.3
-42.6

-1.4
-.6
-1.1
-1.2
-1.3
-1.2
-1.0
-.3
-.2
-3.0
-3.6
-4.0
-3.9
-4.0
-4.6
-4.5
-3.9
-3.2
-2.0
-3.2
-3.4
-3.2
-2.7
-2.0
-1.4
1.5
2.5
3.1
4.0
4.2
4.3
4.3
4.3
2.5
1.3
2.7
2.7
-1.8
-10.1
-13.5
-12.0
-13.5
-15.9

4.7
4.1
3.6
3.3
3.3
3.1
2.7
2.4
2.2
1.8
2.3
2.4
2.7
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.4
5.3
5.9
6.6
7.9
9.6
10.3
11.4
13.0
14.7
16.4
18.3
21.0
24.4
27.6
30.0
34.8
41.4
46.5
51.2
60.2
76.1
84.5
87.2
100.9
115.8
143.4

31.8
33.6

64.9
69.8

-33.1
-36.2

182.7
189.0

199.8
202.9

245.5
230.2

82.3
76.4

163.2
153.9

56.0
63.1

107.2
90.7

-45.7
-27.3

-17.2
-13.9

179.8
215.0

1979
1
II.
Ill
IV

30.7
30.1
30.3
31.0

56.7
57.6
59-.7
61.4

-26.0
-27.5
-29.4
-30.4

201.9
196.6
199.5
189.4

217.8
213.0
215.6
204.5

253.1
250.9
262.0
255.4

88.5
86.4
88.4
87.2

164.6
164.6
173.6
168.2

49.0
49.8
50.2
51.6

115.5
114.8
123.5
116.6

-35.3
-37.9
-46.5
-50.8

-15.9
-16.4
-16.1
-15.1

133.4
136.9
146.8
156.5

1980
1
II
III
IV

31.2
31.5
32.0
32.4

62.9
64.5
65.9
66.4

-31.6
-33.0
-33.9
-33.9

200.2
169.3
177.9
183.3

215.6
186.9
195.9
201.0

277.1
217.9
237.6
249.5

94.2
71.5
78.5
85.2

182.9
146,5
159.1
164.3

53.9
55.7
56.7
57.7

128.9
90.7
102.4
106.6

-61.4
-31.1
-41.7
-48.4

-15.4
-17.6
-17.9
-17.8

165.4
175.3
185.3
193.3

1981
1
II.
Ill
IV P.

32.7
33.3
339
34.5

68.2
69.3
705
71.2

-35.5
-35.9
-366
-36.7

203.0
190.3
1957

217.7
205.1
2091

257.0
229.0
2344

87.7
76.4
781

169.2
152.7
1563

59.6
62.0
648
66.0

109.6
90.6
915

-39.2
-24.0
-253
-20.9

-14.7
-14.7
-134
-12.8

200.8
211.0
2202
228.1

1929.
1933.
1939.
1940
1941.
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947.
1948.
1949.
1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.
1955. .
1956
1957.
1958
1959.
1960.
1961.
1962.
1963.
1964.
1965
1966
1967.
1968
1969.
1970
1971.
1972.
1973
1974.
1975
1976
1977.
1978
1979 -

1980
1981 * ..

.

1
National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes
depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business
taxes. See Table B-19.
2
Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension, health, and welfare funds; workmen's compensation; directors'
fees; and a few other minor items.
3
With inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment.
4
Without inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




257

TABLE B-22.—Sources of personal income, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Wage and salary disbursements1

Year or quarter

Personal
income

Commodityproducing
industries
Total
Total

Manufacturing

Distributive
industries

Service
industries

G vern
ment
and
government
enterprises

Other
labor
income l

Proprietors' income
with inventory
valuation and
capital
consumption
adjustments
Farm

Nonfarm

1929

85.0

50.5

21.5

16.1

15.6

8.4

5.0

0.5

6.1

8.9

1933

47.0

29.0

9.8

7.8

8.8

5.2

5.2

.4

2.5

3.3

1939..

72.4

46.0

17.4

13.6

13.3

7.1

8.2

.6

4.4

7.4

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

77.9
95.4
122.6
150.8
164.5
170.0
177.6
190.1
209.0
206.4

49.9
62.1
82.1
105.6
116.9
117.5
112.0
123.1
135.5
134.8

19.7
27.5
39.1
49.0
50.4
45.9
46.0
54.2
61.1
57.8

15.6
21.7
30.9
40.9
42.9
38.2
36.5
42.5
47.1
44.6

14.2
16.3
18.0
20.1
22.7
24.8
31.0
35.2
37.5
37.7

7.5
8.1
9.0
9.9

8.5

4.4
6.4

10.9
11.9
14.3
16.1
17.9
18.5

10.2
16.0
26.6
33.0
34.9
20.7
17.5
19.0
20.8

.6
.7
.9
1.1
1.5
1.8
2.0
2.4
2.7
2.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

227.2
254.9
271.8
287.7
289.6
310.3
332.6
351.0
361.1
384.4

147.0
171.3
185.4
198.6
196.8
211.7
228.3
239.3
240.5
258.9

64.8
76.3
82.0
89.6
85.7
93.1
100.6
104.2
100.0
109.6

50.3
59.3
64.1
71.2
67.5
73.8
79.4
82.4
78.6
86.8

39.8
44.3
46.9
49.7
50.1
53.4
57.7
60.5
60.8
64.8

19.8
21.5
23.1
24.9
26.1
28.6
31.3
33.6
35.6
38.5

22.6
29.2
33.3
34.4
34.9
36.6
38.8
41.0
44.1
46.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

402.3
417.8
443.6
466.2
499.2
540.7
588.2
630.0
690.6
754.7

271.9
279.5
298.0
313.4
336.1
362.0
398.4
427.0
469.6
515.7

113.1
113.7
121.8
126.9
135.4
146.0
161.0
168.3
183.4
199.6

89.7
89.8
96.7
100.6
107.1
115.5
128.0
134.1
145.8
157.5

68.2
69.3
72.8
76.3
81.4
87.2
94.4
100.9
110.0
120.8

41.4
44.1
47.2
50.2
54.4
58.9
64.7
71.3
79.6
89.7

49.2
52.4
56.3
60.0
64.9
69.9
78.3
86.4
96.6
105.5

1970
1971.
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

811.1
868.4
951.4
1,065.2
1,168.6
1,265.0
1,391.2
1,538.0
1,721.8
1,943.8

5487
580.9
635.2
702.7
765.7
806.4
889.9
983.8
1,105.2
1,236.1

2030
208.3
227.3
254.3
274.7
275.0
307.3
343.5
389.1
437.9

1582
160.3
175.4
196.2
211.4
211.0
237.4
266.0
299.2
333.4

1303
139.4
152.1
168.3
184.6
195.6
216.6
239.4
270.5
303.0

983
106.7
118.2
131.3
145.6
159.7
177.4
198.6
226.1
259.2

117 1
126.5
137.5
148.7
160.9
176.1
188.7
202.3
219.4
236.1

1980
1981 »..

2,160.2
2,403.6

1,343.7
1,482.8

465.4
512.7

350.7
387.4

328.9
361.1

295.7
335.1

253.6
273.9

1,864.6
1,906.3
1,972.3
2,032.0

1,194.8
1,218.6
1,248.6
1,282.2

425.1
434.3
441.6
450.4

326.1
331.7
335.5
340.4

292.8
297.5
306.5
315.0

247.0
252.6
263.4
273.7

2,088.2
2,114.5
2,182.1
2,256.2

1,314.7
1,320.4
1,341.8
1,397.8

461.7
456.0
460.1
484.0

347.9
343.2
346.7
364.9

322.6
323.2
329.2
340.6

2,319.8
2,368.5
2441.7
2,484.4

14429
1,467.0
14985
1,522.9

5013
508.1
5202
521.2

3774
3867
3939
391.4

3519
357'8
3653
369.5

8.6

10.1
12.0
12.0
12.4
14.9
15.1
17.6
12.8

11.1
14.1
17.1
18.4
19.4
21.8
20.8
23.3
23.6

10.6

13.7
16.1
15.1
13.1
12.5
11.5
11.2
11.1
13.2
10.9

25.0
27.2
28.2
28.6
28.7
31.4
32.7
34.2
34.5
36.7

11.2
11.8
13.0
14.0
15.7
17.8
19.9
21.7
25.2
28.5

11.7
12.1
12.3
12.0
10.8
13.1
14.1
12.6
12.7
14.6

35.5
36.5
37.6
38.5
41.7
43.8
46.4
48.6
51.3
52.5

325

143

519

36.7
43.0
48.8
55.8
64.5
75.9
89.0
102.2
118.6

15.0
18.7
32.8
26.5
24.6
19.1
18.4
26.1
30.8

54.4
58.1
61.0
62.2
65.4
75.0
85.1
91.0
100.7

137.1
154.2

23.4
22.0

107.2
112.4

229.8
234.2
237.1
243.1

111.6
115.9
120.9
126.0

30.9
32.6
30.2
29.5

96.8
96.8
102.7
106.8

283.6
290.8
298.7
310.0

246.8
250.5
253.9
263.3

130.9
135.1
139.1
143.5

25.7
23.3
22.1
22.5

107.9
101.6
107.6
111.6

3225
330'.5
3385
348^8

267 1
270!5
2745
283'.4

148.0
1518
1563
160^5

217
247
22J

18.9

113 2
112*5
112 4
lll'.S

3.7
4.6
5.2
5.9
6.1
7.0
8.0
9.0
9.4

1979:

1.
II
III
IV

1980:

1,
II
III
IV

1981:

1

II
Ill
IV

See next page for continuation of table.




258

TABLE B-22.—Sources of personal income, 1929-81—Continued
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Year or quarter

Rental
income
of
persons Personal Personal
with
capital dividend interest
income income
consumption
adjustment

Transfer payments

Total

Old-age, GovernGovern- Aid to
survivors,
ment
ment families
disabilunem- Veterans employwith
ity, and ployment
ee
benefits retire- dependhealth
insurent
insurance
ment children
ance
benefits (AFDC)
benefits
benefits

Other

Less:
Personal
contributions for
social
insurance

Nonfarm
personal
income 2

1929

4.9

5.8

6.9

1.5

0.6

0.1

0. 8

0.1

1933

2.2

2.0

5.5

2.1

.6

.2

1. 4

.2

1939

2.6

3.8

5.4

3.0

0.0

0.4

.5

.3

1.7

.6

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

2.7
3.1
4.0
4.4
4.5
4.6
5.5
5.3
5.7
6.1

4.0
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.6
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2

5.3
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.2
5.9
6.6
7.6
8.1
8.7

3.1
3.1
3.1
3.0
3.6
6.2
11.3
11.7
11.3
12.5

.0
.1
.1
.2
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7

.5
.4
.4
.1
.1
.4
1.1
.8
.9
1.9

.5
.5
.5
.5
1.0
3.0
7.0
7.0
5.9
5.3

.3
.3
.3
.4
.4
.5
.7
.7
.7
.9

1. 7
1. 8
1.8
1. 8
2. 0
2. 0
21
.3
.4
.5

2.5
2.9
3.3

.7
.8
1.2
1.8
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.2

159.9
171.9
188.2
190.4

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

7.1
7.7
8.8
10.0
11.0
11.3
11.6
12.2
12.9
13.6

8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1
10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

9.7
10.5
11.2
12.5
13.7
14.9
16.7
18.8
20.3
22.5

15.2
12.6
13.1
14.1
16.2
17.5
18.7
21.6
25.9
27.0

1.0
1.9
2.2
3.0
3.6
4.9
5.7
7.3
8.5
10.2

1.5
.9
1.1
1.0
2.2
1.5
1.5
1.9
4.1
2.8

7.7
4.6
4.3
4.1
4.2
4.4
4.4
4.5
4.7
4.6

1.0
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.2
2.5
2.8

.6
.6
.7
.8
.9

3.5
3.6
3.8
4.1
4.1
4.3
4.5
4.9
5.3
5.8

2.9
3.4
3.8
4.0
4.6
5.2
5.8
6.7
6.9
7.9

210.2
235.4
253.1
271.3
273.9
295.5
318.0
336.6
344.4
369.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

14.5
15.0
15.8
16.5
17.1
18.0
18.7
19.7
19.5
19.6

12.9
13.3
14.4
15.5
17.3
19.1
19.4
20.2
21.9
22.4

25.0
26.4
29.0
32.2
35.6
39.7
44.4
48.3
53.4
61.1

28.9
32.8
33.8
35.8
37.4
40.4
44.7
52.6
59.8
66.7

11.1
12.6
14.3
15.2
16.0
18.1
20.8
25.5
30.2
32.9

3.0
4.3
3.1
3.0
2.7
2.3
1.9
2.2
2.1
2.2

4.6
5.0
4.7
4.8
4.7
4.9
4.9
5.6
5.9
6.7

3.1
3.4
3.7
4.2
4.7
5.2
6.1
6.9
7.6
8.7

1.0
1.1
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.3
2.8
3.5

6.2
6.4
6.7
7.3
7.8
8.3
9.2
10.2
11.1
12.5

9.3
9.7
10.3
11.8
12.6
13.3
17.8
20.6
22.9
26.2

386.7
401.6
427.1
449.7
483.7
522.6
568.9
611.9
672.1
733.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

19.7
20.2
21.0
22.6
23.5
23.0
23.5
25.1
27.4
30.5

22.2
22.6
24.1
26.5
29.1
29.9
36.5
38.7
43.1
48.6

69.4
74.8
80.9
93.9
112.4
123.2
132.5
151.6
173.2
209.6

80.1
94.4
104.7
119.5
141.2
178.3
194.3
207.5
223.3
249.4

38.5
44.5
49.6
60.4
70.1
81.4
92.9
104.9
116.2
131.8

4.0
5.8
5.7
4.4
6.8
17.6
15.8
12.7
9.7
9.8

7.7
8.8
9.7
10.4
11.8
14.5
14.4
13.8
13.9
14.4

10.2
11.8
13.8
16.0
19.0
22.7
26.1
29.0
32.7
37.0

4.8
6.2
6.9
7.2
7.9
9.2
10.1
10.6
10.7
11.0

15.0
17.4
19.0
21.1
25.6
32.8
35.1
36.5
40.1
45.4

27.9
30.7
34.5
42.6
47.9
50.4
55.5
61.1
69.6
80.6

790.0
846.5
925.3
1,023.7
1,131.8
1,229.1
1,359.3
1,505.0
1,679.2
1,892.9

1980
1981 *

31.8
33.6

54.4
61.3

256.3
308.6

294.2
332.9

153.8
180.3

16.0
15.4

15.0
16.0

42.8
48.6

12.4
13.2

54.3
59.4

30.7
30.1
30.3
31.0

47.5
48.3
48.6
50.1

195.8
202.6
214.3
225.7

235.4
241.3
257.8
263.1

123.6
126.5
137.8
139.3

9.2
9.4
9.8
10.6

14.4
14.2
14.4
14.6

35.0
36.4
37.3
39.2

10.7
10.8
11.1
11.5

42.5
44.1
47.3
47.8

79.0
80.0
81.2
82.4

1,814.8
1,853.9
1,921.5
1,981.2

31.2
31.5
32.0
32.4

52.4
54.2
55.1
56.1

239.9
253.6
261.8
269.7

271.7
280.7
310.7
313.9

142.0
144.7
163.2
165.3

11.4
16.0
19.0
17.5

14.8
14.6
14.9
15.5

40.2
42.3
43.1
45.7

11.7
12.0
12.8
13.1

51.6
51.0
57.7
56.8

86.2
85.9
88.1
91.2

2,039.6
2,067.3
2,135.3
2,208.3

32.7
33.3
33.9
34.5

58.0
60.2
63.0
64.1

288.7
300.9
315.7
329.0

319.6
324.2
342.2
345.7

169.8
172.0
188.5
191.1

15.6
15.6
14.8
15.7

15.9
15.9
15.9
16.4

46.7
48.5
48.9
50.1

13.3
13.6
13.4
12.4

58.3
58.7
60.5
60.1

102.3
103.1
105.0
106.5

2,274.5
2,319.2
2,388.2
2,431.4

.6
.6
.5

!e

87.9
104.2

2,112.6
2,353.3

1979:

1
II
Ill
IV

1980:

1.
II
III
IV
1981:

1
II
III.

IV "

1
The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-21 in that
it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements.
2
Personal income exclusive of farm proprietors' income, farm wages, farm other labor income, and agricultural net interest.
Note.—The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors' income is on an establishment basis and is
based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) beginning 1948 and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




259

TABLE B-23.—Disposition of personal income, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars, except as noted; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Less: Personal outlays

Year or quarter

Personal
income

Less:
Personal
tax and
nontax
payments

Equals:
Disposable
personal
income

Total

Percent of disposable
personal income

Personal
Interest
Personal paid by transfer
payconsumption consum- ments
to
expendi- ers to
busitures
forness
eigners
(net)

1929

85.0

2.6

82.4

79.1

77.3

1.5

0.3

1933

47.0

1.4

45.6

46.5

45.8

.5

.2

1939

72.4

2.4

70.0

67.8

67.0

.7

.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

77.9
95.4
122.6
150.8
164.5
170.0
177.6
190.1
209.0
206.4

2.6
3.3
5.9
17.8
18.9
20.8
18.7
21.4
21.0
18.5

75.3
92.2
116.6
133.0
145.6
149.1
158.9
168.7
188.0
187.9

72.0
81.8
89.4
100.1
109.0
120.4
145.2
163.5
176.9
180.4

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

.8
.9
.7
.5
.5
.5
.7
1.0
1.4
1.7

.2
.2
.1
.2
.4
.5
.7
.7
.7
.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

227.2
254.9
271.8
287.7
289.6
310.3
332.6
351.0
361.1
384.4

20.6
28.9
34.0
35.5
32.5
35.4
39.7
42.4
42.1
46.0

206.6
226.0
237.7
252.2
257.1
275.0
292.9
308.6
319.0
338.4

194.7
210.0
220.4
233.7
240.1
258.5
271.6
286.4
295.4
317.3

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

2.3
2.5
2.9
3.6
3.8
4.4
5.1
5.5
5.6
6.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968. .
1969

402.3
417.8
443.6
466.2
499.2
540.7
588.2
630.0
690.6
754.7

50.4
52.1
56.8
60.3
58.6
64.9
74.5
82.1
97.2
115.7

352.0
365.8
386.8
405.9
440.6
475.8
513.7
547.9
593.4
638.9

332.3
342.7
363.5
384.0
411.0
442.1
477.7
503.6
551.5
598.3

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.5
430.4
465.1
490.3
536.9
581.8

1970.
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

811.1
868.4
951.4
1,065.2
1,168.6
1,265.0
1,391.2
1,538.0
1,721.8
1,943.8

115.8
116.7
141.0
150.7
170.2
168.9
196.8
226.5
258.8
302.0

695.3
751.8
810.3
914.5
998.3
1,096.1
1,194.4
1,311.5
1,462.9
1,641.7

639.5
691.1
757.7
835.5
913.2
1,001.8
1,111.9
1,237.5
1,386.6
1,555.5

1980
1981 "

2,160.2
2,403.6

338.5
388.2

1,821.7
2,015.4

1,864.6
1,906.3
1,972.3
2,032.0

284.4
293.5
308.4
321.8

2,088.2
2,114.5
2,182.1
2,256.2
2,319.8
2,368.5
2,441.7
2,484.4

1979:
1

||

III
IV

Personal outlays
Equals:
Personal
saving
Total

Consump- Personal
tion
saving
expenditures

96.0

93.8

102.0

100.5

2.2

96.9

95.6

3.1

3.4
10.3
27.2
32.9
36.6
28.7
13.7
5.2
11.1
7.5

95.5
88.8
76.7
75.3
74.8
80.8
91.4
96.9
94.1
96.0

94.2
87.6
76.0
74.7
74.3
80.1
90.5
95.9
93.0
94.8

4.5
11.2
23.3
24.7
25.2
19.2
8.6
3.1
5.9
4.0

.4
.4
.4
.5
.5
.4
.5
.5
.4
.4

11.9
16.1
17.4
18.5
17.0
16.4
21.3
22.3
23.6
21.1

94.2
92.9
92.7
92.7
93.4
94.0
92.7
92.8
92.6
93.8

92.9
91.6
91.3
91.1
91.7
92.3
90.8
90.9
90.7
91.8

5.8
7.1
7.3
7.3
6.6
6.0
7.3
7.2
7.4
6.2

7.0
7.3
7.8
8.8
9.9
11.1
12.0
12.5
13.8
15.6

.4
.4
.5
.6
.6
.7
.7
.9
.8
.9

19.7
23.0
23.3
21.9
29.6
33.7
36.0
44.3
41.9
40.6

94.4
93.7
94.0
94.6
93.3
92.9
93.0
91.9
92.9
93.6

92.3
91.6
91.8
92.3
90.9
90.5
90.5
89.5
90.5
91.1

5.6
6.3
6.0
5.4
6.7
7.1
7.0
8.1
7.1
6.4

621.7
672.2
737.1
812.0
888.1
976.4
1,084.3
1,205.5
1,348.7
1,510.9

16.7
17.7
19.5
22.3
24.1
24.4
26.7
31.1
37.1
43.7

1.1
1.1
1.1
1.3
1.0
.9
.9
.9
.8
1.0

55.8
60.7
52.6
79.0
85.1
94.3
82.5
74.1
76.3
86.2

92.0
91.9
93.5
91.4
91.5
91.4
93.1
94.4
94.8
94.8

89.4
89.4
91.0
88.8
89.0
89.1
90.8
91.9
92.2
92.0

8.0
8.1
6.5
8.6
8.5
8.6
6.9
5.6
5.2
5.2

1,720.4
1,908.8

1,672.8
1,858.1

46.4
49.5

1.2
1.2

101.3
106.6

94.4
94.7

91.8
92.2

5.6
5.3

1,580.2
1,612.8
1,663.8
1,710.1

1,496.3
1,521.9
1,574.5
1,629.4

1,454.1
1,478.0
1,529.1
1,582.3

41.4
43.1
44.5
45.8

.8
.8
.9
1.3

83.8
90.9
89.3
80.7

94.7
94.4
94.6
95.3

92.0
91.6
91.9
92.5

5.3
5.6
5.4
4.7

323.1
330.3
341.5
359.2

1,765.1
1,784.1
1,840.6
1,897.0

1,678.7
1,674.1
1,729.2
1,799.4

1,631.0
1,626.8
1,682.2
1,751.0

46.7
46.3
46.0
46.8

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.6

86.4
110.0
111.4
97.6

95.1
93.8
93.9
94.9

92.4
91.2
91.4
92.3

4.9
6.2
6.1
5.1

372.0
382.9
399.8
398.0

1,947.8
1,985.6
2,042.0
2,086.4

1,858.9
1,879.0
1,935.1
1,962.3

1,810.1
1,829.1
1,883.9
1,909.5

47.8
48.9
50.3
51.1

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.6

88.9
106.6
106.9
124.1

95.4
94.6
94.8
94.0

92.9
92.1
92.3
91.5

4.6
5.4
5.2
6.0

3.3

-0.9

4.0

-2.0

1980:

1

II
Ill

IV
1981:

1
II
Ill

IV *

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




260

TABLE B-24.—Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in
current and 1972 dollars, 1929-81
[Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates, except as noted]
Disposable personal income
Year or quarter

Total (billions of
dollars)
Current
dollars

1972
dollars

1929

82.4

1933

45.6

1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

Personal consumption expenditures

Per capita
(dollars)
Current
dollars

1972
dollars

229.5

676

169.6

363

70.0

229.8

75.3
92.2
116.6
133.0
145.6
149.1
158.9
168.7
188.0
187.9

244.0
277.9
317.5
332.1
343.6
338.1
332.7
318.8
335.8
336.8

206.6
226.0
237.7
252.2
257.1
275.0
292.9
308.6
319.0
338.4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

Total (billions of
dollars)

Per capita
(dollars)

Population
(thousands) 1

1972
dollars

Current
dollars

1972
dollars

1,883

77.3

215.1

634

1,765

121,878

1,349

45.8

170.5

364

1,356

125,690

534

1,754

67.0

219.8

511

1,678

131,028

570
691
865
973
1,052
1,066
1,124
1,170
1,282
1,259

1,847
2,083
2,354
2,429
2,483
2,416
2,353
2,212
2,290
2,257

71.0
80.8
88.6
99.4
108.2
119.5
143.8
161.7
174.7
178.1

229.9
243.6
241.1
248.2
255.2
270.9
301.0
305.8
312.2
319.3

537
605
657
727
781
854
1,017
1,122
1,192
1,194

1,740
1,826
1,788
1,815
1,844
1,936
2,129
2,122
2,129
2,140

132,122
133,402
134,860
136,739
138,397
139,928
141,389
144,126
146,631
149,188

362.8
372.6
383.2
399.1
403.2
426.8
446.2
455.5
460.7
479.7

1,362
1,465
1,515
1,581
1,583
1,664
1,741
1,802
1,832
1,903

2,392
2,415
2,441
2,501
2,483
2,582
2,653
2,660
2,645
2,697

192.0
207.1
217.1
229.7
235.8
253.7
266.0
280.4
289.5
310.8

337.3
341.6
350.1
363.4
370.0
394.1
405.4
413.8
418.0
440.4

1,266
1,342
1,383
1,439
1,452
1,535
1,581
1,637
1,662
1,747

2,224
2,214
2,230
2,277
2,278
2,384
2,410
2,416
2,400
2,476

151,684
154,287
156,954
159,565
162,391
165,275
168,221
171,274
174,141
177,888

352.0
365.8
386.8
405.9
440.6
475.8
513.7
547.9
593.4
638.9

489.7
503.8
524.9
542.3
580.8
616.3
646.8
673.5
701.3
722.5

1,947
1,991
2,073
2,144
2,296
2,448
2,613
2,757
2,956
3,152

2,709
2,742
2,813
2,865
3,026
3,171
3,290
3,389
3,493
3,564

324.9
335.0
355.2
374.6
400.5
430.4
465.1
490.3
536.9
581.8

452.0
461.4
482.0
500.5
528.0
557.5
585.7
602.7
634.4
657.9

1,797
1,823
1,904
1,979
2,087
2,214
2,366
2,467
2,674
2,870

2,501
2,511
2,583
2,644
2,751
2,868
2,979
3,032
3,160
3,245

180,760
183,742
186,590
189,300
191,927
194,347
196,599
198,752
200,745
202,736

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

695.3
751.8
810.3
914.5
998.3
1,096.1
1,194.4
1,311.5
1,462.9
1,641.7

751.6
779.2
810.3
865.3
858.4
875.8
907.4
939.8
981.5
1,011.5

3,390
3,620
3,860
4,315
4,667
5,075
5,477
5,954
6,571
7,293

3,665
3,752
3,860
4,083
4,013
4,055
4,161
4,266
4,409
4,493

621.7
672.2
737.1
812.0
888.1
976.4
1,084.3
1,205.5
1,348.7
1,510.9

672.1
696.8
737.1
768.5
763.6
780.2
823.7
863.9
904.8
930.9

3,031
3,237
3,511
3,831
4,152
4,521
4,972
5,472
6,058
6,712

3,277
3,355
3,511
3,626
3,570
3,612
3,777
3,922
4,064
4,135

205,089
207,692
209,924
211,939
213,898
215,981
218,086
220,289
222,629
225,106

1980 p
1981

1,821.7
2,015.4

1,0184
1,040.2

8,002
8,768

4,473
4,525

1 672.8
1,858.1

9351
959.1

7,348
8,084

4108
4,172

227,654
229,868

1,580.2
16128
1,663.8
1,710.1

1,005 7
10069
1,015.7
1,017.7

7,049
7 176
7i381
7,563

4,487
4480
4,506
4,501

1,454.1
14780
1,529.1
1,582.3

9255
9228
933.4
941.6

6487
6577
6,783
6,998

4129
4106
4,141
4,164

224,152
224 737
225,418
226,117

1,765.1
1,784.1
1,840 6
1,897.0

1,021.0
1,008.2
1,0185
1,025.8

7,785
7,848
8074
8,299

4,503
4,435
4468
4,488

1,631.0
1,626.8
1,682.2
1,751.0

943.4
919.3
9308
946.8

7,194
7,156
7,379
7,660

4,161
4,044
4,083
4,142

226,727
227,332
227 977
228,578

1,947.8
1,985.6
2,042 0
2,086.4

1,033 3
1,036.8
10436
1,047,1

8,504
8,651
8873
9,042

4,511
4,517
4,535
4,538

1,810.1
1,829.1
18839
1,909.5

9602
955.1
9628
958.3

7,903
7,969
8,186
8,276

4,192
4,161
4183
4,153

229,051
229,537
230 142
230,741

Current
dollars

1979:

I
|
|
III
IV

1980:

1
II
Ill
IV
1981:

1
Ill

II

IV.

1
Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning 1959. Annual data are for
July 1 through 1958 and are averages of quarterly data beginning 1959. Quarterly data are average for the period. Data beginning 1970
reflect results of the 1980 census of population.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census).




261

TABLE B-25.—Gross saving and investment, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Gross investment

Gross saving
Year or
quarter

Capital
Government surplus or
deficit ( - , national income grants
Gross private saving
and product accounts
received
by the
State United
Gross
and States2
Federal
Total Personal business Total
saving saving l
local (net)

Total

-.2
_1

17.0

16.2

0.8

-1.3

1.6

1.4

.2

.7

-2.2

.0

10.3

9.3

1.0

1.4

-3.8
-31.4
-44.1
-51.8
-39.5
5.4
14.4
8.4
-3.4

-1.3
-5.1
331
-46.6
-54.5
-42.1
3.5
13.4
8.3
-2.6

.6
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.7
2.6
1.9
1.0
.1

14.7
19.2
9.8
3.7
5.2
9.3
35.6
43.2
48.3
36.2

13.1
17.9
9.9
5.8
7.2
10.6
30.7
34.0
45.9
35.3

1.5
1.3
-.1
-2.1
-2.0
-1.3
4.9
9.3
2.4
.9

1.1
.6
-.8
-1.8
2.7
4.1
.5
1.5
-1.6
.6

30.7
34.8
37.4
38.2
41.1
47.9
49.4
52.0
51.7
58.7

8.0
6.1
-3.8
-6.9
-7.1
3.1
5.2
.9
-12.6
-1.6

9.2
6.5
-3.7
-7.1
-6.0
4.4
6.1
2.3
-10.3
-1.1

-1.2
-.4
-.0
.1
-1.1
-1.3
-.9
-1.4
-2.4
-.4

52.0
60.1
52.7
52.1
52.9
68.8
73.8
74.0
62.8
77.0

53.8
59.2
52.1
53.3
52.7
68.4
71.0
69.2
61.9
78.1

-1.8
.9
.6
-1.3
.2
.4
2.8
4.8
.9
-1.2

1.3
3.2
1.7
2.3
2.0
1.3
-2.1
-1.2

19.7
23.0
23.3
21.9
29.6
33.7
36.0
44.3
41.9
40.6

58.3
60.0
67.2
71.0
76.7
86.0
92.7
95.6
100.0
103.0

3.1
-4.3
-3.8

3.0
-3.9
-4.2

.1
—4
'.5

-2.3

-3^3

-L3
-14.2
-6.0
9.9

-L8
-13.2
-6.0
8.4

LO
-.0
.5
-1.1

78.7
78.6
88.8
95.3
104.2
119.0
128.7
125.4
133.9
149.7

75.9
74.8
85.4
90.9
97.4
113.5
125.7
122.8
133.3
149.3

2.8
3.8
3.4
4.4
6.8
5.4
3.0
2.6
.6
.4

-L3
24
-.1
2.1
1.7
.1
-1.2
1.4
-.3
-2.1
-3.9

158.6
180.3
189.2
227.7
234.5
282.7
294.4
322.4
355.4
398.9

55.8
60.7
52.6
79.0
85.1
94.3
82.5
74.1
76.3
86.2

102.8
119.7
136.6
148.7
149.4
188.4
211.9
248.3
279.1
312.7

106
-19.4
-3.3
7.8
-4.7
-63.8
-36.5
-18.3
-.2
11.9

-12.4
-22.0
168
-5.6
-11.5
-69.3
-53.1
-46.4
-29.2
148

1.9
2.6
13.5
13.4
6.8
5.5
16.6
28.1
29.0
26.7

0.9
.7
.7
.0
4
-2.0
.0
.0
.0
.0
1.1

147.4
165.7
189.9
236.3
231.5
224.4
263.0
308.4
361.6
414.1

144.2
3.2
166.4
-.7
195.0
51
229.8
6.5
228.7
2.9
206.1
18.3
257.9
5.1
322.3 -13.9
375.3 -13.8
415.8 -1.7

-1.5
4.1
3.3
.8
3.7
5.5
5.1
4.4
6.4
2.2

401.9
453.6

432.9
477.6

101.3
106.6

331.6
371.0

32 1
-25.1

-61.2
-61.6

29.1
36.5

1.1
1.1

401.2
452.9

395.3
450.6

5.9
2.3

— 7
-'.8

407.4
416.2
422.3
402.0

388.2
401.2
409.8
396.4

83.8
90.9
89.3
80.7

304.4
310.3
320.5
315.7

18.1
13.9
11.3
4.4

-11.5
-8.1
-15.2
-24.5

29.5
21.9
26.5
28.9

1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1

413.2
416.9
425.1
401.3

408.3
423.2
421.7
410.0

4.9
-6.3
3.4
-8.7

5.8
.7
2.8
-.7

404.5
394.5
402.0
406.7

413.0
435.9
446.5
436.4

86.4
110.0
111.4
97.6

326.7
325.8
335.1
338.8

-9.6
-42.5
-45.6
-30.8

-36.3
665
-74.2
679

26.6
23.9
28.6
37.1

1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1

407.3
392.5
405.0
400.1

415.6
390.9
377.1
397.7

83
1.7
27.8
2.3

2.8
-1.9
3.0
-6.6

442.6
465.3
469.4

451.1
475.3
486.2

88.9
106.6
106.9
124.1

362.2
368.7
379.3

-9.7
112
-17.9

-46.6
-47.2
-55.7

36.9
36.1
37.8

1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1

446.0
458.3
469.6
437.6

437.1
458.6
463.0
443.6

8.8
2
6.5
-6.1

3.4
-6.9
.2

1929

15.9

14.9

3.3

11.6

1933

.9

2.2

-.9

3.1

1939

8.8

11.0

2.2

8.8

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

13.5
18.6
10.7
5.4
2.4
5.2
35.1
41.7
49.8
35.6

14.2
22.4
42.0
49.6
54.3
44.7
29.6
27.3
41.4
39.0

3.4
10.3
27.2
32.9
36.6
28.7
13.7
5.2
11.1
7.5

10.8
12.1
14.8
16.7
17.6
16.0
15.9
22.1
30.2
31.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954..!!
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

50.7
56.9
51.0
49.8
50.9
67.5
75.9
75.2
62.6
78.3

42.7
50.8
54.8
56.7
58.1
64.4
70.7
74.3
75.3
79.9

11.9
16.1
17.4
18.5
17.0
16.4
21.3
22.3
23.6
21.1

81.1
78.7
86.7
93.6
104.0
120.2
127.3
125.7
136.0
153.6

78.0
83.0
90.5
92.9
106.3
119.7
128.6
139.9
142.0
143.6

148.9
161.6
186.6
235.5
227.8
218.9
257.9
304.0
355.2
411.9

1980
1981 *
1979:
II
III
IV

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970..
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1980:

II.
Ill
IV
1981:

1
II
III

IV '

.

1.0
-1.4
-2.2
7

Total

StatisGross
tical
Net
private foreign discrepdomestic invest- ancy
invest- ment 3
ment

1.2

L5

1.1

1
Undistributed corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, corporate and noncorporate capital
consumption allowances with capital consumption adjustment, and private wage accruals less disbursements.
2
Allocations of special drawing rights (SDRs), except as noted in footnote 4.
3
Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners and interest paid by government to foreigners plus capital grants
receivedbytheUnitedStates.net.
4
In February 1974, the U.S. Government paid to India $2,010 million in rupees under provisions of the Agricultural Trade
Development and Assistance Act. This transaction is being treated as capital grants paid to foreigners, i.e., a -$2.0 billion entry in
capital grants received by the United States, net.
Source-. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




262

TABLE B-26.—Saving by individuals, 1946-81l
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net investment 7

Increase in financial assets
Checkable
deposTotal
its
and
currency

Time
and
savings
deposits

24.6
20.1
24.3
20.9

18.8
5.6
.1
13.2
9.1 -2.9
99 -2.0

6.3
3.4
2.2
26

-1.5
1.6
1.3
1.8

30.6
34.7
31.3
325
28.2

13.7
19.1
23.2
228
22.2

2.6
4.6
1.6
10
2.2

2.4
4.7
78
81
9.1

-.1
-.6
2.5
2.5
1.0

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

34.1
37.2
36.5
34.1
38.0

28.0
30.2
28.6
31.6
37.4

1.2 8.6
1.8 9.4 III
-.4 11.9
3.8 13.9
1.0 11.0

5.8
3.9
2.3
-2.5
10.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

36.7
359
42.0
467
57.8

32.1
1.0
9
354
40.1 -1.2
466 4 2
55.7
5.3

12.0
183
26.1
262
26.1

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

66.7
74.4
79.4
844
77.7

7.6
58.8
2.4
57.9
9.9
69.8
756 11 1
65.2 -2.5

27.8
19.0 III
35.3
31 1
9.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

92.2
104.0
123.5
147.9
140.8

81.5
102.1
131.5
148.9
144.5

8.9
12.2
13.9
14.1
7.4

43.6
67.7
74.4
63.6
55.7

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

164.0
175.5
182.1
204.2
213.9

171.7
211.2
234.3
270.5
286.0

6.9
15.7
21.3
22.3
23.4

83.4
107.5
107.5
100.1
79.2

1980

251.2

303.8

I
II
Ill
IV

196.8
229.3
215.9
213.9

265.7
317.5
289.8
271.2

1980:
1
II
Ill
IV

248.8
247.9
255.4
253.0

Year or
quarter

1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

..

1979:

1981:

1
II
Ill

Total

Money
market
fund
shares

Less: Net increase in
debt

Consumer
durables

Noncorporate
business
assets8

3.6 6.1
6.7 9.0
9.1 9.8
8.4 10.6

2.3
1.8
6.9
1.8

3.6
4.7
4.6
4.4

3.1
3.7
3.2
3.2

-0.4
2.2
2.8
2.2

Securities

InsurMiscel- Ownerance
laneous occuGovern- Corpo- Other and
ment rate securi- pension financial pied
reassets 6 homes
securi- equi- ties 4
serves5
ties 2 ties 3

Mortgage
debt Con- Other
89
on sumer
non- credit debt
farm
homes

1.1 -0.9
1.1 -.8
1.0
.0
.7 -.4

5.3
5.4
5.3
5.6

2.8
2.4
2.2
1.6

.7
1.8
1.6
1.0
.8

-.7
.3
.0
.3
-.9

6.9
6.3
7.7
7.9
7.8

1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.1

11.8
11.7
11.3
12.3
12.7

14.8
11.3
8.6
10.1
7.1

6.8
4.5
2.3
1.0
1.9

6.7
6.6
6.2
7.6
8.7

4.8
1.6
5.3
4.2
1.5

5.0
3.7
2.7
1.9
5.5

1.0
2.0
1.5
1.5
.5

.8
1.2
1.0
1.1
-.3

8.5
9.5
9.5
10.4
11.9

2.1
2.5
2.8
3.5
3.3

16.7
15.6
13.2
12.3
16.3

12.2
8.5
7.7
3.6
7.3

2.9
11.2
2.7
2.6
5.0

12.2
1.2
8.9
9.5
12.8

7.2
3.9
2.9
.5
8.0

6.4
3.2
3.8
6.0
7.2

2.2 -.6
1.4
.3
1.3 -2.1
.6 -2.6
4.8 -.2

2.4
.1
.1
1.4
.4

11.5
12.1
12.7
13.9
16.1

3.6
4.3
3.2
2.9
3.2

14.8
12.7
13.5
14.3
15.0

7.0
4.3
8.5
11.8
15.0

3.6
4.7
7.5
9.8
9.2

11.7
12.2
14.1
16.2
17.5

4.4
2.5
6.3
8.9
9.8

4.9
6.5
7.2
10.7
9.8

3.7
11.3
-1.2
5.2
25.9

-2.1
-.7
-4.7
-7.5
-2.8

1.3
2.4
5.2
7.9
10.0

16.9
19.2
18.6
19.8
21.5

3.7
4.4
6.7
8.1
4.0

14.5
13.5
11.7
15.7
16.3

20.2
23.1
21.1
27.0
26.3

13.3
10.8
10.2
10.0
12.7

17.0
13.8
12.5
16.9
18.6

10.6
6.5
5.7
11.5
10.8

12.6
10.6
15,1
15.4
13.3

-5.4
-12.2
2.7
23.8
28.1
2.4

-1.7
-5.5
-5.1
-5.8
-.6

6.9
6.5
4.9
11.1
6.8

23.9
27.4
29.4
33.0
36.2

5.4
5.8
11.4
9.1
8.5

13.6
20.7
28.0
31.0
25.2

20.0
26.6
34.6
40.4
28.4

11.5
17.5
20.6
26.6
10.6

14.1
26.2
41.4
47.3
35.4

5.4
14.7
19.8
24.3
9.9

14.9
21.9
30.0
27.6
22.6

1.3
-.0
.2
6.9
34.4

24.9
12.3
15.4
32.5
54.2

-3.8
-4.6
-4.3
-5.8
-16.8

4.4
8.6
5.9
13.4
17.8

43.5
52.4
66.1
73.8
66.9

11.1
19.3
22.0
27.3
26.9

23.5
36.1
52.1
63.6
67.5

26.5
40.0
50.2
56.3
52.4

5.8
3.3
14.7
17.1
18.8

38.0
61.5
93.0
107.6
114.6

9.6
25.4
40.2
47.6
46.3

15.8
28.2
36.0
48.0
49.8

11.0 131.2

29.2

23.5 -1.9 -4.0

89.0

25.7

48.2

33.8

7.5

83.4

2.3

56.4

15.4 74.4
37.2 67.2
28.0 107.2
12.9 68.0

28.8
31.6
33.1
44.1

58.9
88.1
22.1
47.9

18.7
12.1
25.8
14.6

58.2
70.7
65.5
73.2

22.3
29.4
27.6
28.5

68.1
68.8
67.0
66.1

58.9
49.9
51.4
49.5

19.1
20.3
20.0
15.7

113.2
124.5
115.9
104.9

57.8
44.1
40.0
43.2

44.0
58.6
56.3
40.4

4.6 85.5 61.3
315.1
1.1
55.0 _ 7
248.8 -3.8 100.8 62.5 -14.5
2!e -14.3
321.8 46.4 114.7
.1
5.1
29.8 -4.1
329.8 -3.2 224.0 -11.9
23.7 -5.3 -3.1

83.6
93.0
101.5
78.1

24.7
22.4
28.4
27.5

59.9
50.4
39.5
43.2

49.8
19.0
28.5
37.7

13.1 104.2 23.2
2.1 64.7 -33.4
3.6 80.9
8.3
11.0 83.8 11.1

61.7
41.1
48.8
73.8

79.1
104.9
100.2

24.0
24.6
26.5

49.0
50.4
43.6

48.2
32.0
37.8

12.8
10.2
10.1

65.2
68.0
52.7

232.0 292.1 58.1
2.8 148.4
6.3 93.2 59.9
222.0 305.1
249.3 315.1 -22.1 47.7 137.3

-11.0
-18.6
-19.4
-18.1

-2.1 -9.5 -8.5
66.6 -41.2 -9.2
99.7 -46.0 -28.4

1
Saving
2

77.5
76.8
67.4

27.5
30.9
37.3

by households, personal trust funds, nonprofit institutions, farms, and other noncorporate business.
Consists of U.S. savings bonds, other U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. Government agency securities and sponsored agency securities,
mortgage pool securities, and State and local obligations.
3
Includes mutual fund shares.
4
Corporate and foreign bonds and open market paper.
5
Private life insurance reserves, private insured and noninsured pension reserves, and government insurance and pension reserves.
6
Other assets consists of security credit, mortgages, accident and health insurance reserves, and nonlife insurance claims for
households and consumer credit, equity in sponsored agencies, and nonlife insurance claims for noncorporate business.
7
Purchases of physical assets less depreciation.
8
Includes data for corporate farms.
9
Other debt consists of security credit, policy loans, and noncorporate business debt.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




263

TABLE B-27.—Money income (in 1980 dollars) and poverty status of families and unrelated individuals by
race of householder, 1952-80
Total
Year

Total
number
(millions)

FAMILIES 1
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973 4
1974 .
1975
1976
1977
1978 s
1979 .
1980«.

Median
income

408 $12,076
412 13,070
420 12775
42.9 13,596
435 14493
43.7 14,539
442 14497
45.1 15,314
3
45.5 15,637
3
46.4 15,797
M7.1
3
47.5
3
48.0
3
48.5
3
49.2
3
50.1
3
50.8
3
51.6
3
52.2
53.3
54.4
55.1
55.7
56.2
56.7
57.2
57.8
58.4
60.3

16,225
16,818
17,451
18,169
19,124
19,579
20,445
21,203
20,939
20,926
21,895
22,346
21,559
21,004
21,652
21,769
22,280
22,320
21,023

1952 . . . .
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973 4
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

Below $25,000
and
poverty
over
level

Total
number
(millions)

84
10.5
10.6
11.9
14.3
13.5

382
39.0
39.5
39.7

143
18.5
18.1
18.1
17.2
15.9
15.0
13.9
11.8
11.4
10.0

97

10.1
10.0

9.3
8.8
8.8
9.7
9.4
9.3
9.1
9.1

10.3

402

17.2
18.9
20.2
21.6
23.7
26.1
27.7
31.4
33.0
35.6
37.9
37.5
37.4
40.7
41.9
40.7
38.7
40.4
41.6
43.1
42.6
39.3

40.9
41.1
41.9
42.4
42.7
43.1
43.5
44.1
44.8
45.4
46.0
46.5
47.6
48.5
48.9
49.4
49.9
50.1
50.5
50.9
51.4
52.7

Median
income

$12,772
13,551
13,300
14,196
15,166
15,130
15,104
15,953
16,235
16,474
16,990
17,623
18,219
18,937
19,868
20,322
21,167
22,014
21,722
21,714
22,748
23,354
22,404
21,845
22,490
22,763
23,200
23,275
21,904

9.7
9.5
9.7
9.9
9.8
10.4
10.9
10.9
3
11.1
3
11.2
3
11.0
3
11.2
3
12.1
3
12.2
3
12.5
3
13.2
3
13.9
3
14.6
3
15.5
16.3
16.8
18.3
18.9
20.2
21.5
23.1
24.6
25.6
27.1

4,374
4,301
3,746
4,053
4,324
4,371
4,235
4,402
4,786
4,831
4,775
4,844
5,268
5,623
5,815
5,871
6,599
6,588
6,657
6,747
6,935
7,665
7,691
7,474
7,780
8,032
8,469
8,585
8,296

46.1
45.2
45.9
45.4
44.2
42.7
39.8
38.3
38.1
34.0
34.0
32.9
31.6
29.0
25.6
24.1
25.1
24.9
22.6
22.1
21.8
22.9

56
5.7
5.9
6.4
7.5
9.0
9.5
9.8
10.8
12.3
13.4
14.2
15.4
16.6
16.4
17.8
20.2
20.3
21.1
20.8
22.0
23.6
22.6
21.9
23.0
24.0
25.3
24.8
24.5

Percent with
incomes—
Below $25,000
poverty and
level
over

Total
number
(millions)

"".'"!!!!"!!
15.2'
14.9
14.8
13.9
12.8
12.2
11.1

9.3
9.0
8.0
7.7
8.0
7.9
7.1
6.6
6.8
7.7
7.1
7.0
6.9
6.8
8.0

8.3

8.5
8.5
8.9
9.2
9.3
9.6
9.6
9.5
9.7
10.4
10.5
10.7
11.3
12.0
12.5
13.4
14.2
14.5
15.8
16.3
17.5
18.6
19.9
21.3
22.1
23.4

4,716
4,539
4,032
4,308
4,439
4,678
4,537
4,704
5,175
5,192
5,110
5,079
5,547
5,863
6,114
6,096
6,992
6,918
6,967
7,050
7,242
7,918
7,969
7,807
8,115
8,337
8,879
8,895
8,763

60
6.8
7.0
73
8.3

$7,258
7, 598
7,407
2
7,829
2
7,980
2
8,089
2
7,737
2
8,241
2
8,987
2
8,789
2
9,066
2
9,326
2
10,196
2
10,428
2
11,911
12,032
12,695
13,484
13,325
13,103
13,520
13,479
13,378
13,441
13,378
13,004
13,741
13,219
12,674

3.8
2
3.9
2
4.0
2
4.0
2
2

40

4.2
4.3
4.5
2
4.6
2
4.8
2
4.8
2
4.8
2
5.0
2

2

4.6
4.6
4.8
4.9
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.8
5.8
5.9
6.0
6.3

2

1.5
2.4
2.1
2
1.8
2
2.6
2
2.8
2
3.7
2
4.2
2
6.7
2
7.2
2
6.5
2
6.8
2
9.9
2
10.3
2
12.9
13.6
16.4
16.9
18.5
17.9
20.7
19.7
19.8
19.4
20.6
20.9
22.6
22.1
19.8
2

2

2

48.1
49.0
49.0
2
48.0
2
43.7
2
40.0
2
39.7
35.5
33.9
29.4
27.9
29.5
28.8
29.0
28.1
26.9
27.1
27.9
28.2
27.5
27.6
28.9
2

2

Below $15,000
poverty
and
over
level
2

i'Df
2
2

14

1.3
1.5
2
2

10.8
11.7
13.5
14.8
15.5
16.4
17.8
17.8
19.2
21.6
21.7
22.5
22.2
23.0
24.4
23.7
22.8
24.0
25.1
26.5
25.6
25.8

2

105

and

over

2

2

2

10.3
44.1
43.0
43.2
42.7
42.0
40.7
38.1
36.1
36.5
32.2
32.1
30.8
29.6
27.1
23.7
21.8
22.7
22.7
20.4
19.8
19.6
20.4

Below $25,000

poverty
level

2

9.2
11.3
11.4
13.0
15.4
14.6
15.4
18.7
20.3
21.7
23.4
25.6
27.8
29.7
33.4
34.9
37.5
40.1
39.6
39.5
42.9
44.4
42.8
40.7
42.7
44.0
45.4
45.0
41.6

Percent with
incomes—
Median
income

Below $15,000
poverty
and
level
over

Below $15,000
and
poverty
level
over

UNRELATED 6
INDIVIDUALS

Black

White
Percent with
incomes—

16

1.6
1.5
2
1.6
2
1.5
2
1.5
2
1.6
2
1.7
2
1.6
2

1.6
1.7
1.8
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.4
2.6
2.9
2.9
3.1
3.2

2

2
2

2
0.5
2

3 263
3,568
2,676
2
2 877
2
3,296
2
2,972
2
3 078
2
3,039
2
2,972
2
3,187
2
3,411
2
3,485
2
3,802
2
4,275
2
3,844
4,344
4,652
4,734
4,492
4,578
5,060
5,850
5,375
5,032
5,456
6,032
5,571
6,188
5,394

31

0.5
2
2

13

2.7
1.5

2
2

57.0
59.3
2
62.7
2
62.1
2
58.3
2
55.0
2
50.7
54.4
49.3
46.3
46.7
48.3
46.0
42.9
37.9
39.3
42.1
39.8
37.0
38.6
36.9
41.0
2

225
2

3.5
4.5
5.5
2
5.2
2
5.1
2
8.2
2
8.6
2
6.9
2

2

8.7

11.0
10.9
11.0
11.0
14.4
18.0
15.0
14.2
15.6
16.3
16.5
17.5
14.2

1
The term "family" refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption and residing together; all such
persons are considered members of the same family.
2
Data for "black" include "other" races.
3
Revised using population controls based on the 1970 census. Such controls are not available by race.
4
Based on revised methodology; comparable with succeeding years.
5
Based on householder concept. Restricted to primary families.
6
The term "unrelated individuals" refers to persons 15 years old and over as of March 1980 and 1981 and 14 years old and over for
previous years (other than inmates of institutions) who are not living with any relatives.
Note.—The poverty level is based on the poverty index adopted by a Federal interagency committee in 1969. That index reflects
different consumption requirements for families based on size and composition, sex and age of family householder, and farm-nonfarm
residence. The poverty thresholds are updated every year to reflect changes in the consumer price index. For further details see
"Current Population Reports," Series P-60, Nos. 127, 129, and 130.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




264

POPULATION, EMPLOYMENT, WAGES, AND PRODUCTIVITY
TABLE B-28.—Population by age groups, 1929-80
[Thousands of persons]
Age (years)
July 1

Total

Under 5

5-15

16-19

20-24

25-44

45-64

65 and
over

1929

121,767

11,734

26,800

9,127

10,694

35,862

21,076

6,474

1933

125,579

10,612

26,897

9,302

11,152

37,319

22,933

7,363

1939

130,880

10,418

25,179

9,822

11,519

39,354

25,823

8,764

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

132,122
133,402
134,860
136,739
138,397

10,579
10,850
11,301
12,016
12,524

24,811
24,516
24,231
24,093
23,949

9,895
9,840
9,730
9,607
9,561

11,690
11,807
11,955
12,064
12,062

39,868
40,383
40,861
41,420
42,016

26,249
26,718
27,196
27,671
28,138

9,031
9,288
9,584
9,867
10,147

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

139,928
141,389
144,126
146,631
149,188

12,979
13,244
14,406
14,919
15,607

23,907
24,103
24,468
25,209
25,852

9,361
9,119
9,097
8,952
8,788

12,036
12,004
11,814
11,794
11,700

42,521
43,027
43,657
44,288
44,916

28,630
29,064
29,498
29,931
30,405

10,494
10,828
11,185
11,538
11,921

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

152,271
154,878
157,553
160,184
163,026

16,410
17,333
17,312
17,638
18,057

26,721
27,279
28,894
30,227
31,480

8,542
8,446
8,414
8,460
8,637

11,680
11,552
11,350
11,062
10,832

45,672
46,103
46,495
46,786
47,001

30,849
31,362
31,884
32,394
32,942

12,397
12,803
13,203
13,617
14,076

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

165,931
168,903
171,984
174,882
177,830

18,566
19,003
19,494
19,887
20,175

32,682
33,994
35,272
36,445
37,368

8,744
8,916
9,195
9,543
10,215

10,714
10,616
10,603
10,756
10,969

47,194
47,379
47,440
47,337
47,192

33,506
34,057
34,591
35,109
35,663

14,525
14,938
15,388
15,806
16,248

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

180,671
183,691
186,538
189,242
191,889

20,341
20,522
20,469
20,342
20,165

38,494
39,765
41,205
41,626
42,297

10,683
11,025
11,180
12,007
12,736

11,134
11,483
11,959
12,714
13,263

47,140
47,084
47,013
46,994
46,958

36,203
36,722
37,255
37,782
38,338

16,675
17,089
17,457
17,778
18,127

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

194,303
196,560
198,712
200,706
202,677

19,824
19,208
18,563
17,913
17,376

42,938
43,702
44,244
44,622
44,840

13,516
14,311
14,200
14,452
14,800

13,746
14,050
15,248
15,786
16,480

46,912
47,001
47,194
47,721
48,064

38,916
39,534
40,193
40,846
41,437

18,451
18,755
19,071
19,365
19,680

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

204,878
207,053
208,846
210,410
211,901

17,148
17,177
16,990
16,694
16,288

44,774
44,441
43,948
43,227
42,538

15,275
15,635
15,946
16,310
16,590

17,184
18,089
18,032
18,345
18,741

48,435
48,811
50,254
51,411
52,593

41,975
42,413
42,785
43,077
43,319

20,087
20,488
20,892
21,346
21,833

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

213,559
215,152
216,880
218,717
220,584

15,879
15,345
15,248
15,378
15,649

41,956
41,459
40,575
39,623
38,643

16,793
16,928
16,966
16,935
16,838

19,229
19,630
20,077
20,461
20,726

53,735
55,129
56,706
58,380
60,161

43,546
43,707
43,795
43,876
43,910

22,420
22,954
23,513
24,064
24,658

1980
19802

222,807
227,020

16,344

(>)
38,997

1.
7U

0)
21,523

«£}

«£i

()
'
25,544

1

Not available.
As of April 1; based on 1980 census.
Note.—includes Armed Forces overseas beginning 1940. Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning 1950. Data for 1970-79 have not yet
been revised to be consistent with the results of the 1980 census.
2

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




265

TABLE B-29.—Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-81
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Civilian labor force
Year or month

Noninstitutional
population 1

Armed
Forces *

Employment
Total
Total

Agricultural

Nonagricultural

Unemployment

Unemployment rate
(percent
of civilian
labor
force)

Civilian labor force
participation rate 2

Total

Males Females

Percent

Thousands of persons 14 years of age and over
47,630

10,450

37,180

1,550

3.2

51,590

38,760

10,090

28,670

12,830

24.9

55,230

45,750

9,610

36,140

9,480

17.2

1929

260

49,180

1933

250

1939

370

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

100,380
101,520
102,610
103,660
104,630

540
1,620
3,970
9,020
11,410

55,640
55,910
56,410
55,540
54,630

47,520
50,350
53,750
54,470
53,960

9,540
9,100
9,250
9,080
8,950

37,980
41,250
44,500
45,390
45,010

8,120
5,560
2,660
1,070
670

14.6
9.9
4.7
1.9
1.2

55.7
56.0
57.2
58.7
58.6

83.7
84.3
85.6
86.4
87.0

28.2
28.7
31.3
36.0
36.5

1945
1946
1947

105,530
106,520
107r608

11,440
3,450
1,590

53,860
57,520
60,168

52,820
55,250
57,812

8,580
8,320
8,256

44,240
46,930
49,557

1,040
2,270
2,356

1.9
3.9
3.9

57.2
55.8
56.8

84.8
82.6
84.0

35.9
31.2
31.0

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over
103,418
104,527
105,611

1,591
1,459
1,617

59,350
60,621
61,286

57,038
58,343
57,651

7,890
7,629
7,658

49,148
50,714
49,993

2,311
2,276
3,637

3.9
3.8
5.9

58.3
58.8
58.9

86.4
86.6
86.4

31.8
32.7
33.1

1950
1951
1952
1953 3
1954

106,645
107,721
108,823
110,601
111,671

1,650
3,100
3,592
3,545
3,350

62,208
62,017
62,138
63,015
63,643

58,918
59,961
60,250
61,179
60,109

7,160
6,726
6,500
6,260
6,205

51,758
53,235
53,749
54,919
53,904

3,288
2,055
1,883
1,834
3,532

5.3
3.3
3.0
2.9
5.5

59.2
59.3
59.0
58.9
58.8

86.4
86.5
86.3
86.0
85.5

33.9
34.6
34.7
34.4
34.6

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

112,732
113,811
115,065
116,363
117,881

3,049
2,857
2,800
2,636
2,552

65,023
66,552
66,929
67,639
68,369

62,170
63,799
64,071
63,036
64,630

6,450
6,283
5,947
5,586
5,565

55,722
57,514
58,123
57,450
59,065

2,852
2,750
2,859
4,602
3,740

4.4
4.1
4.3
6.8
5.5

59.3
60.0
59.6
59.5
59.3

85.3
85.5
84.8
84.2
83.7

35.7
36.9
36.9
37.1
37.1

I9603
1961
1962 3
1963
1964

119,759
121,343
122,981
125,154
127,224

2,514
2,572
2,828
2,738
2,739

69,628
70,459
70,614
71,833
73,091

65,778
65,746
66,702
67,762
69,305

5,458
5,200
4,944
4,687
4,523

60,318
60,546
61,759
63,076
64,782

3,852
4,714
3,911
4,070
3,786

5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7
5.2

59.4
59.3
58.8
58.7
58.7

83.3
82.9
82.0
81.4
81.0

37.7
38.1
37.9
38.3
38.7

1965
1966
1967 ..
1968
1969

129,236
131,180
133,319
135,562
137,841

2,723
3,123
3,446
3,535
3,506

74,455
75,770
77,347
78,737
80,734

71,088
72,895
74,372
75,920
77,902

4,361
3,979
3,844
3,817
3,606

66,726
68,915
70,527
72,103
74,296

3,366
2,875
2,975
2,817
2,832

4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

58.9
59.2
59.6
59.6
60.1

80.7
80.4
80.4
80.1
79.8

39.3
40.3
41.1
41.6
42.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

140,273
143,032
146,575
149,422
152,349

3,188
2,816
2,449
2,326
2,229

82,771
84,382
87,034
89,429
91,949

78,678
79,367
82,153
85,064
86,794

3,463
3,394
3,484
3,470
3,515

75,215
75,972
78,669
81,594
83,279

4,093
5,016
4,882
4,365
5,156

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6

60.4
60.2
60.4
60.8
61.3

79.7
79.1
78.9
78.8
78.7

43.3
43.4
43.9
44.7
45.7

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

155.333
158,294
161,166
164,027
166,951

2,180
2,144
2,133
2,117
2,088

93,775
96,158
99,009
102,251
104,962

85,846
88,752
92,017
96,048
98,824

3,408
3,331
3,283
3,387
3,347

82,438
85,421
88,734
92,661
95,477

7,929
7,406
6,991
6,202
6,137

8.5
7.7
7.1
6.1
5.8

61.2
61.6
62.3
63.2
63.7

77.9
77.5
77.7
77.9
77.8

46.3
47.3
48.4
50.0
50.9

1980
1981

169,847
172,272

2,102
2,142

106,940
108,670

99,303
100,397

3,364
3,368

95,938
97,030

7,637
8,273

7.1
7.6

63.8
63.9

77.4
77.0

51.5
52.1

1947 .
1948
1949

...

See next page for continuation of table.




266

TABLE B-29.—Noninstitutional population and the labor force, 1929-81—Continued
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Civilian labor force
participation rate 2

Civilian labor force

Year or month

Noninstitutional
population1

Armed
Forces l

Employment
Unemployment

Total
Total

Agricultural

Unemployment rate
(percent
of civilian
labor
force)

Total

Males

Females

Nonagricultural

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over

Percent

1979:

Jan
Feb
Mar

&::::::=
June

165,610
165,820
166,117
166,244
166,537
166,797

2,094
2,094
2,090
2,082
2,078
2,076

104,036
104,421
104,524
104,114
104,237
104.597

97,930
98,273
98,416
98,038
98,324
98,684

3,313
3,367
3,359
3,261
3,286
3,334

94,617
94,906
95,057
94,777
95,038
95,350

6,106
6,148
6,108
6,076
5,913
5.913

5.9
5.9
5.8
5.8
5.7
5.7

63.6
63.8
63.7
63.4
63.4
63.5

78.2
78.3
78.0
77.8
77.6
77.8

50.5
50.8
50.9
50.5
50.6
50.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

167,052
167,288
167,523
167,906
168,143
168,389

2,082
2,090
2,092
2,093
2,092
2,089

105,039
105,151
105,601
105,724
105,825
106,366

99,054
98,853
99,428
99,431
99,570
99,957

3,348
3,385
3,379
3,326
3,410
3,396

95,706
95,468
96,049
96,105
96,160
96,561

5,985
6,298
6,173
6,293
6,255
6,409

5.7
6.0
5.8
6.0
5.9
6.0

63.7
63.7
63.8
63.8
63.7
64.0

77.9
77.7
78.0
77.7
77.6
77.7

50.9
51.1
51.1
51.3
51.3
51.6

June

168,625
168,845
169,074
169,289
169,495
169,735

2,081
2,086
2,090
2,092
2,088
2,092

106,493
106,548
106,321
106,482
107,022
106,809

99,833
99,913
99,607
99,112
98,963
98,785

3,327
3,392
3,402
3,280
3,411
3,302

96,506
96,521
96,205
95,832
95,552
95,483

6,660
6,635
6,714
7,370
8,059
8,024

6.3
6.2
6.3
6.9
7.5
7.5

63.9
63.9
63.7
63.7
63.9
63.7

77.7
77.8
77.5
77.4
77.8
77.4

51.6
51.4
51.3
51.4
51.5
51.4

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

170,031
170,217
170,418
170,624
170,814
171,007

2,099
2,114
2,121
2,121
2,119
2,124

107,221
107,159
107,232
107,437
107,600
107,531

98,891
98,920
99,208
99,328
99,534
99,632

3,345
3,253
3,449
3,363
3,370
3,486

95,546
95,667
95,759
95,965
96,164
96,146

8,330
8,239
8,024
8,109
8,066
7,899

7.8
7.7
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.3

63.8
63.7
63.7
63.8
63.8
63.7

77.5
77.3
77.3
77.4
77.3
77.2

51.6
51.6
51.5
51.5
51.6
51.6

171,229
171,400
171,581
171,770
171,956
172,172

2,125
2,121
2,128
2,129
2,127
2,131

107,923
108,034
108,364
108,777
109,293
108,434

99,901
100,069
100,406
100,878
101,045
100,430

3,445
3,346
3,343
3,470
3,405
3,348

96,456
96,723
97,063
97,408
97,640
97,082

8,022
7,965
7,958
7,899
8,248
8,004

7.4
7.4
7.3
7.3
7.5
7.4

63.8
63.8
63.9
64.1
64.4
63.8

77.2
77.1
77.2
77.3
77.6
76.7

51.8
51.9
52.0
52.2
52.5
52.2

172,385
172,559
172,758
172,966
173,155
173,330

2,139
2,160
2,165
2,158
2,158
2,164

108,688
108,818
108,494
109,012
109,272
109,184

100,864
100,840
100,258
100,343
100,172
99,613

3,342
3,404
3,358
3,378
3,372
3,209

97,522
97,436
96,900
96,965
96,800
96,404

7,824
7,978
8,236
8,669
9,100
9,571

7.2
7.3
7.6
8.0
8.3
8.8

63.8
63.9
63.6
63.8
63.9
63.8

76.7
76.8
76.8
76.8
76.8
76.9

52.3
52.2
51.8
52.2
52.3
52.0

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar

1981:
Jan
Feb
Mar

May
June
July
Aug
Oct
Nov

Dec
1

Not seasonally adjusted.
Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population.
Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments as follows: Beginning 1953, introduction of 1950 census
data added about 600,000 to population and about 350,000 to labor force, total employment, and agricultural employment. Beginning
1960, inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii added about 500,000 to population, , about 300,000 to labor force,, and about 240,000 to
,
,
,
nonagricultural employment. Beginning 1962, introduction of 1960 census data reduced population by about 50,000 and labor force and
employment by about 200,000. Beginning 1972, introduction of 1970 census data added about 800,000 to civilian noninstitutional
population and about 333,000 to labor force and employment. A subsequent adjustment based on 1970 census in March 1973 added
60,000 to labor force and to employment. Beginning 1978, changes in sampling and estimation procedures introduced into the
household survey added about 250,000 to labor force and to employment. Unemployment levels and rates were not significantly
affected.
Note.—Data for 1970-81 revised based on 1980 census of population.
Labor force data in Tables B-29 through B-35 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th
of the month. For definitions of terms, area samples used, historic comparability of the data, comparability with other series, etc., see
"Employment and Earnings."
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2

3




267

TABLE B-30.—Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age, 1947-81
[Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Employment

Unemployment

Females

Males
Year or
month

Total

' Total 16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total

Females

Males

20
16-19, years
years
and
over

Total
Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

Total

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

1947
1948
1949

57,038 40,995
58,343 41,725
57,651 40,925

2,218 38,776 16,045
2,345 39,382 16,617
2,124 38,803 16,723

1,691
1,683
1,588

14,3.54
14,937
15,137

2,311
2,276
3,637

1,692
1,559
2,572

270
255
352

1,422
1,305
2,219

619
717
1,065

144
152
223

475
564
841

1950
1951
1952
1953 »
1954

58,918
59,961
60,250
61,179
60,109

41,578
41,780
41,682
42,430
41,619

2,186
2,156
2,106
2,135
1,985

39,394
39,626
39,578
40,296
39,634

17,340
18,181
18,568
18,749
18,490

1,517
1,611
1,612
1,584
1,490

15,824
16,570
16,958
17,164
17,000

3,288
2,055
1,883
1,834
3,532

2,239
1,221
1,185
1,202
2,344

318
191
205
184
310

1,922
1,029
980
1,019
2,035

1,049
834
698
632
1,188

195
145
140
123
191

854
689
559
510
997

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

62,170
63,799
64,071
63,036
64,630

42,621
43,379
43,357
42,423
43,466

2,095
2,164
2,117
2,012
2,198

40,526
41,216
41,239
40,411
41,267

19,551
20,419
20,714
20,613
21,164

1,548
1,654
1,663
1,570
1,640

18,002
18,767
19,052
19,043
19,524

2,852
2,750
2,859
4,602
3,740

1,854
1,711
1,841
3,098
2,420

274
269
299
416
398

1,580
1,442
1,541
2,681
2,022

998
1,039
1,018
1,504
1,320

176 823
209 832
197 821
262 1,242
256 1,063

I9601 . . 65,778 43,904
65,746 43,656
1961
66,702 44,177
1962 »
1963
67,762 44,657
1964
69,305 45,474

2,360
2,314
2,362
2,406
2,587

41,543
41,342
41,815
42,251
42,886

21,874
22,090
22,525
23,105
23,831

1,769
1,793
1,833
1,849
1,929

20,105
20,296
20,693
21,257
21,903

3,852
4,714
3,911
4,070
3,786

2,486
2,997
2,423
2,472
2,205

425
479
407
500
487

2,060
2,518
2,016
1,971
1,718

1,366
1,717
1,488
1,598
1,581

286
349
313
383
386

1,080
1,368
1,175
1,216
1,195

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971 l
1972
1973 »
1974

46,340
46,919
47,479
48,114
48,818
48,990
49,390
50,896
52,349
53,024

2,918
3,252
3,186
3,255
3,430
3,409
3,478
3,765
4,039
4,103

43,422
43,668
44,293
44,859
45,388
45,581
45,912
47,130
48,310
48,922

24,748
25,976
26,893
27,807
29,084
29,688
29,976
31,257
32,715
33,769

2,118
2,469
2,497
2,525
2,686
2,735
2,730
2,980
3,231
3,345

22,630
23,510
24,397
25,281
26,397
26,952
27,246
28,276
29,484
30,424

3,366
2,875
2,975
2,817
2,832
4,093
5,016
4,882
4,365
5,156

1,914
1,551
1,508
1,419
1,403
2,238
2,789
2,659
2,275
2,714

479
432
448
427
441
599
693
711
653
757

1,435
1,120
1,060
993
963
1,638
2,097
1,948
1,624
1,957

1,452
1,324
1,468
1,397
1,429
1,855
2,227
2,222
2,089
2,441

395
404
391
412
412
506
568
598
583
665

1,056
921
1,078
985
1,016
1,349
1,658
1,625
1,507
1,777

1975 . . . 85,846 51,857
1976
88,752 53,138
1977
92,017 54,728
1978 »
96,048 56,479
98,824 57,607
1979

3,839
3,947
4,174
4,336
4,300

48,018
49,190
50,555
52,143
53,308

33,989
35,615
37,289
39,569
41,217

3,263
3,389
3,514
3,734
3,783

30,726
32,226
33,775
35,836
37,434

7,929
7,406
6,991
6,202
6,137

4,442
4,036
3,667
3,142
3,120

966
939
874
813
811

3,476
3,098
2,794
2,328
2,308

3,486
3,369
3,324
3,061
3,018

802
780
789
769
743

2,684
2,588
2,535
2,292
2,276

1980
1981

4,085 53,101 42,117
3,815 53,582 43,000

3,625 38,492
3,411 39,590

7,637
8,273

4,267
4,577

913
962

3,353
3,615

3,370
3,696

755 2,615
800 2,895

71,088
72,895
74,372
75,920
77,902
78,678
79,367
82,153
85,064
86,794

99,303 57,186
100,397 57,397

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar

%
June

99,833
99,913
99,607
99,112
98,963
98,785

57,711
57,888
57,631
57,149
57,015
56,824

4,250
4,243
4,303
4,159
4,091
4,076

53,461
53,645
53,328
52,990
52,924
52,748

42,122
42,025
41,976
41,963
41,948
41,961

3,760
3,674
3,635
3,596
3,622
3,607

38,362
38,351
38,341
38,367
38,326
38,354

6,660
6,635
6,714
7,370
8,059
8,024

3,538
3,483
3,612
4,098
4,606
4,608

816
801
786
822
976
964

2,722
2,682
2,826
3,276
3,630
3,644

3,122
3,152
3,102
3,272
3,453
3,416

752
769
751
694
813
763

2,370
2,383
2,351
2,578
2,640
2,653

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

98,891
98,920
99,208
99,328
99,534
99,632

56,828
56,772
56,906
57,091
57,185
57,285

4,059
3,904
3,995
3,986
3,970
3,973

52,769
52,868
52,911
53,105
53,215
53,312

42,063
42,148
42,302
42,237
42,349
42,347

3,625
3,551
3,645
3,619
3,574
3,597

38,438
38,597
38,657
38,618
38,775
38,750

8,330
8,239
8,024
8,109
8,066
7,899

4,774
4,708
4,698
4,607
4,564
4,384

1,002
977
942
1,000
969
908

3,772
3,731
3,756
3,607
3,595
3,476

3,556
3,531
3,326
3,502
3,502
3,515

817
780
738
718
735
732

2,739
2,751
2,588
2,784
2,767
2,783

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

99,901
100,069
100,406
100,878
101,045
100,430

57,323
57,331
57,531
57,792
57,793
57,279

3,981
3,948
3,913
3,972
3,909
3,682

53,342
53,383
53,618
53,820
53,884
53,597

42,578
42,738
42,875
43,086
43,252
43,151

3,549
3,527
3,510
3,550
3,515
3,394

39,029
39,211
39,365
39,536
39,737
39,757

8,022
7,965
7,958
7,899
8,248
8,004

4,456
4,419
4,375
4,300
4,571
4,415

995
986
965
963
976
918

3,461
3,433
3,410
3,337
3,595
3,497

3,566
3,546
3,583
3,599
3,677
3,589

762
783
796
803
806
765

2,804
2,763
2,787
2,796
2,871
2,824

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

100,864
100,840
100,258
100,343
100,172
99,613

57,640
57,551
57,471
57,266
57,051
56,725

3,766
3,760
3,778
3,672
3,697
3,603

53,874
53,791
53,693
53,504
53,354
53,122

43,224
43,289
42,787
43,077
43,121
42,888

3,414
3,448
3,361
3,263
3,243
3,175

39,810
39,841
39,426
39,814
39,878
39,713

7,824
7,978
8,236
8,669
9,100
9,571

4,171
4,385
4,506
4,798
5,133
5,578

873
926
937
947
1,028
1,035

3,298
3,459
3,569
3,851
4,105
4,543

3,653
3,593
3,730
3,871
3,967
3,993

781
768
812
854
858
818

2,872
2,825
2,918
3,107
3,109
3,175

1981:

1
See footnote 3, Table B-29.
Note.—Data for 1970-81 revised based on 1980 census of population.
See Note, Table B-29.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




268

TABLE B-31.—Selected employment and unemployment data, 1948-81
[Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Unemployment rate 2

Employment as percent of population 1
By sex and age

Both Males
FeBlack
Year or month
sexes 20
males
White and
Total 16- years
20
and
other
19
years
years over and over

All
workers

By selected groups

Both
sexes
1619
years

Males
20
years
and
over

Females
20
years
and
over

Experienced
wage
and
salary
workers

Married
men,
spouse
present 3

Women
who
maintain
families

Fulltime
workers4

558
546

455
43.0

839
81 6

307
30.6

3.8
5.9

9.2
13.4

3.2
5.4

3.6
5.3

4.3
6.8

3.5

5.4

55?
557
55.4
55.3
53.8
55.1
56.1
55.7
54.2
54.8

43.8
449
44.1
43.9
40.1
41.3
42.7
41.1
37.6
38.1

81 9
816
80.8
80.6
78.8
80.0
80.8
80.2
78.0
79.0

31.6
32.6
33.0
32.9
32.3
33.8
34.9
35.0
34.6
35.1

5.3
3.3
3.0
29
5.5
4.4
41
4.3
6.8
5.5

12.2
8.2
8.5
76
12.6
11 0
11 1
11.6
15.9
14.6

4.7
2.5
2.4
25
4.9
3.8
34
3.6
6.2
4.7

5.1
4.0
3.2
29
5.5
4.4
42
4.1
6.1
5.2

6.0
3.7
3.3
32
6.2
4.8
44
4.6
7.2
5.7

4.6
1.5
1.4
17
4.0
2.8
26
2.8
5.1
3.6

5.0
2.6
2.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

54.9
54.2
54.2
54.1
54.5
55.0
55.6
55.8
56.0
56.5

39.0
37.5
37.6
35.8
35.8
37.7
40.7
40.4
40.6
42.1

78.7
77.6
77.4
77.3
77.7
77.9
77.6
77.4
77.1
76.9

35.7
35.5
35.8
36.2
36.9
37.6
38.6
39.3
40.0
41.1

54.0
54.3
54.8
55.4
55.7
55.9
56.5

55.2
56.1
56.8
57.2
56.9
56.6
56.7

5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7
5.2
4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

14.7
16.8
14.7
17.2
16.2
14.8
12.8
12.9
12.7
12.2

4.7
5.7
4.6
4.5
3.9
3.2
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.1

5.1
6.3
5.4
5.4
5.2
4.5
3.8
4.2
3.8
3.7

5.7
6.8
5.6
5.5
5.0
4.3
3.5
3.6
3.4
3.3

3.7
4.6
3.6
3.4
2.8
2.4
1.9
1.8
1.6
1.5

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

56.1
55.5
56.0
56.9
57.0
55.3
56.1
57.1
58.6
59.2

41.2
40.4
42.6
44.8
45.0
42.3
43.2
45.1
47.4
47.7

76.1
75.3
75.8
76.3
75.7
72.9
73.2
73.7
74.5
74.7

41.2
40.8
41.3
42.2
42.7
42.3
43.5
44.7
46.5
47.6

56.2
55.7
56.4
57.3
57.5
55.9
56.8
57.9
59.3
60.0

55.5
53.8
53.2
54.0
53.3
50.4
51.0
51.5
53.7
54.0

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6
8.5
7.7
7.1
6.1
5.8

15.3
16.9
16.2
14.5
16.0
19.9
19.0
17.8
16.4
16.1

3.5
4.4
4.0
3.3
3.8
6.8
5.9
5.2
4.3
4.2

4.8
5.7
5.4
4.9
5.5
8.0
7.4
7.0
6.0
5.7

4.8
5.7
5.3
4.5
5.3
8.2
7.3
6.6
5.6
5.5

1980
1981

58.5
58.3

45.8
43.7

72.9
72.3

48.0
48.5

59.4
59.3

52.4
51.4

7.1
7.6

17.8
19.6

5.9
6.3

6.4
6.8

1980Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

59.2
59.2
58.9
58.5
58.4
58.2

47.3
46.8
46.9
45.9
45.7
45.5

74.1
74.2
73.7
73.1
72.9
72.5

48.2
48.2
48.1
48.0
47.9
47.9

60.1
60.1
59.8
59.5
59.3
59.1

53.2
53.1
52.6
52.2
52.2
52.1

6.3
6.2
6.3
6.9
7.5
7.5

16.4
16.5
16.2
16.4
18.8
18.4

4.8
4.8
5.0
5.8
6.4
6.5

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

58.2
58.1
58.2
58.2
58.3
58.3

45.6
44.3
45.5
45.3
45.0
45.3

72.4
72.4
72.4
72.5
72.6
72.6

47.9
48.0
48.0
47.9
48.0
47.9

59.0
58.9
59.1
59.1
59.2
59.2

52.4
52.5
52.3
52.3
52.3
52.0

7.8
7.7
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.3

19.1
19.1
18.0
18.4
18.4
17.8

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

58.3
58.4
58.5
58.7
58.8
58.3

45.0
44.8
44.6
45.3
44.8
42.8

72.6
72.5
72.7
72.9
72.9
72.4

48.2
48.3
48.5
48.6
48.8
48.7

59.3
59.4
59.5
59.7
59.8
59.4

52.1
51.7
51.9
52.3
52.0
51.2

7.4
7.4
7.3
7.3
7.5
7.4

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

58.5
58.4
58.0
58.0
57.9
57.5

43.5
43.8
43.5
42.9
42.4
41.6

72.6
72.4
72.2
71.8
71.5
71.1

48.7
48.7
48.1
48.5
48.5
48.3

59.6
59.6
59.1
59.1
58.9
58.5

51.3
51.1
51.1
51.0
51.0
50.7

1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1981:

.

:::::::

5.2
3.8
3.7
4.0
7.2

Bluecollar
workers5
4.2
8.0
7.2
3.9
3.6
3.4
7.2
5.8
5.1
6.2
10.2
7.6

4.9"
4.4
4.4

5.5"
4.9
4.2
3.5
3.4
3.1
3.1

7.8
9.2
7.4
7.3
6.3
5.3
4.2
4.4
4.1
3.9

2.6
3.2
2.8
2.3
2.7
5.1
4.2
3.6
2.8
2.8

5.4
7.3
7.2
7.1
7.0
10.0
10.1
9.4
8.5
8.3

4.5
5.5
5.1
4.4
5.1
8.1
7.3
6.6
5.6
5.3

6.2
7.4
6.5
5.4
6.7
11.7
9.4
8.1
6.9
7.0

6.9
7.3

4.2
4.3

9.2
10.4

6.9
7.3

10.0
10.3

5.8
5.9
5.8
6.3
6.4
6.5

5.9
5.9
6.1
6.7
7.3
7.3

3.5
3.2
3.5
4.1
4.5
4.6

8.9
8.6
8.8
9.1
8.4
8.6

5.8
5.8
6.0
6.6
7.2
7.3

8.2
8.0
8.3
9.7
10.8
11.0

6.7
6.6
6.6
6.4
6.3
6.1

6.7
6.7
6.3
6.7
6.7
6.7

7.4
7.4
7.3
7.3
7.2
7.1

4.9
4.9
4.7
4.6
4.4
4.3

8.8
9.3
9.1
10.2
9.8
10.2

7.6
7.5
7.3
7.3
7.3
7.2

11.4
11.2
10.8
10.8
10.6
10.4

18.9
19.1
19.2
19.0
19.4
19.2

6.1
6.0
6.0
5.8
6.3
6.1

6.7
6.6
6.6
6.6
6.7
6.6

7.1
7.1
7.0
6.9
7.2
7.0

4.2
4.1
5.1
3.8
4.0
4.2

10.3
9.8
9.6
9.9
10.4
10.7

7.2
7.1
7.1
6.9
7.1
7.1

10.2
10.2
10.0
9.7
9.9
9.8

7.2 18.7
7.3 19.0
7.6 19.7
8.0 20.4
8.3 21.4
8.8 21.5

5.8
6.0
6.2
6.7
7.1
7.9

6.7
6.6
6.9
7.0
7.2
7.4

6.8
6.9
7.3
7.6
8.0
8.5

3.9
4.0
4.4
4.8
5.2
5.7

11.2
10.1
10.7
10.6
10.8
10.5

6.8
6.9
7.3
7.7
8.1
8.7

9.5
9.5
10.2
10.9
11.8
12.7

1

67"

Civilian employment as percent of total noninstitutional population.
Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified.
Data for 1949 and 1951-54 are for April; 1950, for March.
4
Data for 1949-61 are for May.
5
Includes craft and kindred workers, operatives, and nonfarm laborers. Data for 1948-57 are based on data for January, April, July,
and October.
Note.—Data revised for 1970-81 based on 1980 census of population. See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-29.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2
3

358-691 0 - 82 - 18 : QL3




269

TABLE B-32.—Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic, 1954-81
[Percent 1 , monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Black and other

White
Year or month

All
workers Total

Females

Males
Total

16-19
years

20
years Total
and
over

16-19
years

Males

20
years Total Total
and
over

16-19
years

Females

20
years Total
and
over

16-19
years

20
years
and
over

1954

58.8

58.2

85.6

57.6

87.8

33.3

40.6

32.7

64.3

85.2

61.2

87.1

46.1

31.0

47.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

59.3
60.0
59.6
59.5
59.3

58.7
59.4
59.1
58.9
58.7

85.4
85.6
84.8
84.3
83.8

58.6
60.4
59.2
56.5
55.9

87.5
87.6
86.9
86.6
86.3

34.5
35.7
35.7
35.8
36.0

40.7
43.1
42.2
40.1
39.6

34.0
35.1
35.2
35.5
35.6

64.2
64.9
64.4
64.8
64.3

85.0
85.1
84.3
84.0
83.4

60.8
61.5
58.8
57.3
55.5

87.8
87.8
87.0
87.1
86.7

46.1
47.3
47.2
48.0
47.7

32.7
36.3
33.2
31.9
28.2

47.5
48.4
48.6
49.8
49.8

1960
1961
1962 . .
1963
1964 .. .

59.4
59.3
58.8
58.7
58.7

58.8
58.8
58.3
58.2
58.2

83.4
83.0
82.1
81.5
81.1

55.9
54.5
53.8
53.1
52.7

86.0
85.7
84.9
84.4
84.2

36.5
36.9
36.7
37.2
37.5

40.3
40.6
39.8
38.7
37.8

36.2
36.6
36.5
37.0
37.5

64.5
64.1
63.2
63.0
63.1

83.0
82.2
80.8
80.2
80.0

57.6
55.8
53.5
51.5
49.9

86.2
85.5
84.2
83.9
84.1

48.2
48.3
48.0
48.1
48.5

32.9
32.8
33.1
32.6
31.7

499
50.1
49.6
49.9
50.7

1965
1966
1967
1968 .
1969

58.9
59.2
59.6
59.6
60.1

58.4
58.7
59.2
59.3
59.9

80.8
80.6
80.7
80.4
80.2

54.1
55.9
56.3
55.9
56.8

83.9 38.1
83.6 39.2
83.5 40.1
83.2 40.7
83.0 41.8

39.2
42.6
42.5
43.0
44.6

38.0
38.8
39.8
40.4
41.5

62.9
63.0
62.8
62.2
62.1

79.6
79.0
78.5
77.6
76.9

51.3
51.4
51.1
49.7
49.6

83.7
83.3
82.9
82.2
81.4

48.6
49.3
49.5
49.3
49.8

29.5
33.5
35.2
34.8
34.6

51.1
51.6
51.6
51.4
52.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

60.4
60.2
60.4
60.8
61.3

60.2
60.1
60.4
60.8
61.4

80.0
79.6
79.6
79.4
79.4

57.5
57.9
60.1
62.0
62.9

82.8
82.3
82.0
81.6
81.4

42.6
42.6
43.2
44.1
45.2

45.6
45.5
48.1
50.1
51.7

42.2
42.3
42.7
43.5
44.4

61.8
60.9
60.2
60.5
60.3

76.5
74.9
73.9
74.0
73.5

47.4
44.7
46.0
46.3
47.2

81.4
80.0
78.6
78.6
78.0

49.5
49.2
48.8
49.3
49.3

34.1
31.2
32.3
34.4
34.1

51.8
51.8
51.2
51.4
51.5

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

61.2
61.6
62.3
63.2
63.7

61.5 78.7
61.8 78.4
62.5 78.5
63.3 78.6
63.9 78.6

61.9
62.3
64.0
65.0
64.8

80.7
80.3
80.2
80.1
80.1

45.9
46.9
48.0
49.4
50.5

51.5
52.8
54.5
56.7
57.4

45.3
46.2
47.3
48.7
49.8

59.6
59.8
60.4
62.2
62.2

71.9
71.2
71.6
72.6
72.5

42.9
42.3
43.6
45.4
44.0

76.8
76.1
76.2
77.1
77.1

49.4
50.4
51.2
53.5
53.7

35.6
33.6
33.6
38.0
37.8

51.4
52.8
53.6
55.6
55.8

1980
1981

63.8
63.9

64.1
64.3

78.2
77.9

63.7
62.4

79.8
79.5

51.2
51.9

56.2
55.4

50.6
51.5

61.7
61.3

71.5
70.6

43.5
41.7

75.9
75.0

53.6
53.6

35.9
34.5

55.9
56.1

63.9
63.9
63.7
63.7
63.9
63.7

64.3
64.3
64.0
64.1
64.3
64.1

78.5
78.7
78.5
78.4
78.7
78.3

64.7
64.5
65.2
63.7
64.5
64.3

80.1
80.3
79.9
80.0
80.3
79.9

51.3
51.1
50.9
51.1
51.1
51.1

57.6
56.3
55.8
55.2
56.6
56.1

50.6
50.6
50.5
50.7
50.6
50.6

61.7
61.5
61.0
61.1
61.8
61.5

71.4
71.3
70.5
70.8
71.0
71.4

42.7
42.3
41.3
40.6
43.6
43.7

75.9
75.9
75.1
75.6
75.3
75.8

53.7
53.5
53.1
53.2
54.2
53.3

37.6
39.6
36.7
34.3
36.8
35.5

55.9
55.3
55.3
55.6
56.4
55.6

63.8 64.1
637 64.0
63.7 64.0
63.8 64.0
63.8 64.1
63.7 63.9

78.3
78.1
78.0
78.1
78.1
77.9

64.4
62.9
62.2
63.4
62.8
62.3

79.8
79.8
79.7
79.7
79.8
79.6

51.2
51.1
51.2
51.2
51.3
51.2

56.8
55.3
56.4
56.5
56.2
56.3

50.6
50.7
50.7
50.7
50.8
50.7

62.3
62.0
62.0
62.1
61.9
61.5

72.3
71.8
72.4
72.2
72.0
71.3

44.9
40.9
46.5
46.1
45.8
44.1

76.6
76.6
76.4
76.2
76.1
75.4

54.0
54.0
53.5
53.9
53.7
53.5

37.3
35.2
36.3
33.8
33.6
34.2

56.2
56.4
55.8
56.5
56.3
56.0

May
June

63.8 64.2
63.8 64.3
63.9 64.3
64.1 64.5
64.4 64.8
63.8 64.2

78.1
78.1
78.2
78.3
78.5
77.7

63.7
64.2
63.5
63.6
63.4
60.2

79.6
79.6
79.7
79.9
80.1
79.5

51.6
51.7
51.7
52.0
52.3
51.9

55.9
56.4
55.9
56.9
56.7
54.4

51.1
51.2
51.3
51.5
51.9
51.7

61.1
60.8
61.4
61.7
61.6
61.0

70.6
70.2
70.4
70.9
71.2
69.9

45.6
41.8
41.2
44.0
44.0
40.2

74.5
74.6
74.9
75.0
75.3
74.5

53.3
53.1
54.0
54.1
53.7
53.7

36.0
33.4
35.6
36.2
34.7
34.1

55.5
55.6
56.3
56.4
56.1
56.1

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

63.8
63.9
63.6
63.8
63.9
63.8

77.7
77.7
77.6
77.7
77.8
77.6

60.7
61.7
61.9
62.3
62.7
61.4

79.5
79.4
79.3
79.3
79.3
79.3

52.1
52.0
51.5
51.9
52.0
51.7

55.2
55.8
55.1
54.1
54.4
53.4

51.8
51.6
51.2
51.7
51.8
51.6

60.8
61.3
61.3
61.6
61.5
61.5

69.9
71.0
70.8
70.8
70.7
70.8

40.0
41.7
39.8
39.5
40.8
41.5

74.5
75.5
75.5
75.5
75.1
75.2

53.3
53.3
53.5
54.0
54.0
53.8

33.1
31.5
33.8
37.4
35.0
33.1

55.9
56.0
56.0
56.1
56.4
56.4

1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar
May
June
July

AuL:::::::
Sept....
Oct
Nov
Dec.
1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar

64.3
64.2
64.0
64.2
64.3
64.1

1

Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified.
Note.—Data for 1970-81 revised based on 1980 census of population.
See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-29.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




270

TABLE B-33.—Unemployment rate by demographic characteristic, 1948-81
[Percent;1 monthly data seasonally adjusted]
White
Year or month

All
workers Total

Black and other

Males

Females

Total

20
16-19 years Total
and
years
over

20
16-19 years Total Total
and
years
over

Females

Males

16-19
years

20
years Total
and
over

20
16-19 years
years
and
over

1948
1949

3.8
5.9

3.5
5.6

3.4
5.6

3.8
5.7

5.9
8.9

5.8
9.6

6.1
7.9

1950.
1951
1952
1953
1954

4.9
3.1
2.8
2.7
5.0

4.7
2.6
2.5
2.5
4.8

13.4

4.4

5.3
4.2
3.3
3.1
5.5

10.4

5.1

9.0
5.3
5.4
4.5
9.9

9.4
4.9
5.2
4.8
10.3

14.4

99

8.4
6.1
5.7
4.1
9.2

20.6

8.4

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

5.3
3.3
3.0
2.9
5 5
-,
4.4
4.1
4.3
6.8
5.5

3.9
3.6
3.8
6.1
4.8

3.7
3.4
3.6
6.1
4.6

11.3
10.5
11.5
15.7
14.0

3.3
3.0
3.2
5.5
4.1

4.3
4.2
4.3
6.2
5.3

9.1
9.7
9.5
12.7
12.0

3.9
3.7
3.8
5.6
4.7

8.7
8.3
7.9
12.6
10.7

8.8
7.9
8.3
13.7
11.5

13.4
15.0
18.4
26.8
25.2

8.4
7.4
7.6
12.7
10.5

8.5
8.9
7.3
10.8
9.4

19.2
22.8
20.2
28.4
27.7

7.7
7.8
6.4
9.5
8.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7
5.2

4.9
6.0
4.9
5.0
4.6

4.8
5.7
4.6
4.7
4.1

14.0
15.7
13.7
15.9
14.7

4.2
5.1
4.0
3.9
3.4

5.3
6.5
5.5
5.8
5.5

12.7
14.8
12.8
15.1
14.9

4.6
5.7
4.7
4.8
4.6

10.2
12.4
10.9
10.8
9.6

10.7
12.8
10.9
10.5
8.9

24.0
26.8
22.0
27.3
24.3

9.6
11.7
10.0
9.2
7.7

9.4
11.9
11.0
11.2
10.7

24.8
29.2
30.2
34.7
31.6

8.3
10.6
9.6
9.4
9.0

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

4.1
3.3
3.4
3.2
3.1

3.6
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5

12.9
10.5
10.7
10.1
10.0

2.9
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.9

5.0
4.3
4.6
4.3
4.2

14.0
12.1
11.5
12.1
11.5

4.0
3.3
3.8
3.4
3.4

8.1
7.3
7.4
6.7
6.4

7.4
6.3
6.1
5.6
5.3

23.3
21.3
23.9
22.1
21.4

6.0
4.9
4.3
3.9
3.7

9.2
8.7
9.1
8.3
7.8

31.7
31.3
29.6
28.7
27.6

7.5
6.6
7.1
6.3
5.8

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6

4.5
5.4
5.1
4.3
5.0

4.0
4.9
4.5
3.8
4.4

13.7
15.1
14.2
12.3
13.5

3.2
4.0
3.6
3.0
3.5

5.4
6.3
5.9
5.3
6.1

13.4
15.1
14.2
13.0
14.5

4.4
5.3
4.9
4.3
5.1

8.2
9.9
10.0
9.0
9.9

7.3
9.1
8.9
7.7
9.2

25.0
28.8
29.7
26.9
31.5

5.6
7.3
6.9
5.8
6.9

9.3
10.9
11.4
10.6
10.8

34.5
35.4
38.4
34.4
34.5

6.9
8.7
8.8
8.2
8.5

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

8.5
7.7
7.1
6.1
5.8

7.8
7.0
6.2
5.2
5.1

7.2
6.4
5.5
4.6
4.5

18.3
17.3
15.0
13.5
13.9

6.2
5.4
4.7
3.7
3.6

8.6
7.9
7.3
6.2
5.9

17.4
16.4
15.9
14.4
14.0

7.5
6.8
6.2
5.2
5.0

13.8
13.1
13.1
11.9
11.3

13.6
12.7
12.3
11.0
10.4

35.2
35.1
36.6
34.0
31.3

11.6
10.6
10.0
8.7
8.5

13.9
13.6
13.9
13.0
12.3

38.3
38.8
39.6
38.1
35.6

11.5
11.3
11.7
10.6
10.2

1980
1981

7.1
7.6

6.3
6.7

6.1
6.5

16.2
17.9

5.3
5.6

6.5
6.9

14.8
16.6

5.6
5.9

13.1
14.2

13.2
14.1

34.4
37.5

11.3
12.1

13.1
14.3

36.5
38.3

11.1
12.4

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

6.3
6.2
6.3
6.9
7.5
7.5

5.4
5.4
5.5
6.1
6.7
6.7

5.0
4.9
5.2
6.0
6.7
6.7

14.2
13.6
13.3
15.0
17.4
17.7

4.2
4.1
4.4
5.2
5.8
5.7

6.0
6.2
6.0
6.3
6.7
6.6

14.0
14.3
14.8
14.1
16.0
15.0

5.1
5.2
5.0
5.5
5.6
5.7

11.9
11.8
11.9
12.7
13.6
13.4

11.4
11.7
11.4
12.4
13.4
13.8

31.9
34.3
31.5
28.8
33.1
32.7

9.6
9.7
9.6
11.0
11.6
12.1

12.4
11.9
12.4
13.0
13.9
13.0

36.6
39.4
35.1
34.6
38.6
36.1

10.2
9.4
10.4
11.2
11.8
11.1

July
Aug
Sept. ..
Oct
Nov
Dec

7.8
7.7
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.3

6.9
6.8
6.6
6.7
6.6
6.4

6.9
6.8
6.7
6.7
6.6
6.2

17.9
18.0
16.2
17.7
17.6
15.8

5.9
5.9
5.9
5.7
5.7
5.4

6.8
6.9
6.5
6.7
6.6
6.6

15.5
15.9
14.0
14.6
14.8
14.6

5.8
5.9
5.7
5.8
5.7
5.8

14.0
13.5
13.8
13.9
13.8
13.6

14.3
14.2
15.0
14.0
13.7
13.5

34.7
36.9
37.4
37.3
34.9
38.3

12.4
12.3
12.9
11.8
11.7
11.3

13.7
12.7
12.5
13.7
13.8
13.8

38.7
34.8
37.6
34.8
36.3
35.3

11.5
10.9
10.4
12.1
12.1
12.1

J&I~Z"
June

7.4
7.4
7.3
7.3
7.5
7.4

6.6
6.5
6.4
6.4
6.7
6.4

6.4
6.4
6.3
6.2
6.5
6.2

17.5
18.0
111
17.3
17.9
17.7

5.5
5.4
5.3
5.2
5.6
5.3

6.8
6.7
6.6
6.8
7.0
6.7

15.5
16.3
15.7
16.6
17.0
15.9

5.9
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.9
5.7

12.8
13.2
13.6
13.2
13.7
14.2

12.8
12.9
12.8
12.9
13.6
14.3

38.6
35.7
33.6
36.5
34.6
38.8

10.4
11.0
11.0
10.8
11.7
12.3

12.8
13.5
14.4
13.6
13.8
14.0

33.5
35.2
40.1
34.6
34.0
37.6

11.1
11.8
12.4
11.9
12.2
12.2

July
Aug
Sept
Oct. .
Nov
Dec . .

7.2
7.3
7.6
8.0
8.3
8.8

6.3
6.2
6.6
7.0
7.4
7.7

5.9
6.1
6.4
6.9
7.4
7.9

16.6
16.7
17.5
17.9
19.6
20.2

5.0
5.2
5.5
5.9
6.4
6.9

6.8
6.4
6.9
7.1
7.4
7.4

16.2
15.4
16.8
17.5
18.3
17.7

5.8
5.5
5.9
6.1
6.3
6.4

13.8
14.7
14.8
15.2
15.2
15.7

13.7
14.8
14.5
15.0
15.6
16.3

37.4
43.5
36.8
38.4
39.0
37.4

11.8
12.4
12.8
13.1
13.7
14.6

13.9
14.7
15.0
15.5
14.9
15.0

35.8
41.8
38.8
45.0
41.3
40.8

12.2
12.7
13.2
13.0
12.8
13.1

.

..

1980:

1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar

1
Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force in group specified.
Note.—Data for 1970-81 revised based on 1980 census of population.
See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-29.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




271

TABLE B-34.—Unemployment by duration, 1947-81
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted1]
Year or month

Total
unemployment

Less than
5 weeks

Duration of unemployment
5-14
15-26
weeks
weeks

27 weeks
and over

Average
(mean)
duration
in weeks

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over
2,311
2,276
3,637

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

234
193
428

164
116
256

425
166
148
132
495

357
137
84
78
317

8.6
10.0
12.1
9.7
8.4
8.0
11.8

366
301
321
785
469

336
232
239
667
571

13.0
11.3
10.5
13.9
14.4

1,176
1,376
1,134
1,231
1,117

503
728
534
535
491

454
804
585
553
482

12.8
15.6
14.7
14.0
13.3

983
779
893
810
827

404
287
271
256
242

351
239
177
156
133

1981Jan.
Feb
Mar.

t

: :: i.:::.":"
.:.:::::.

1,628
1,573
1,634
1,594
1,629
2,139
2,245
2,242
2,224
2,604
2,940
2,844
2,919
2,865
2,950
3,295
3,449

1,290
1,585
1,472
1,314
1,597

428
668
601
483
574

235
519
566
343
381

11.8
10.4
8.8
8.5
7.9
8.6
11.3
12.0
10.0
9.8

2,484
2,196
2,132
1,923
1,946
2,470
2,539

1,303
1,018
913
766
706
1,052
1,122

1,203
1,348
1,028
648
535
820
1,162

14.2
15.8
14.3
11.9
10.8
11.9
13.7

6,660
6,635
6,714
7,370
8,059
8,024
8,330
8,239
8,024
8,109
8,066
7,899

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1980
Jan.
Feb
Mar.
May
June.
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

oct

704
669
1,194
1,055
574
516
482
1,116
815
805
891
1,396
1,114

3,288
2,055
1,883
1,834
3,532
2,852
2,750
2,859
4,602
3,740
3,852
4,714
3,911
4,070
3,786
3,366
2,875
2,975
2,817
2,832
4,093
5,016
4,882
4,365
5,156
7,929
7,406
6,991
6,202
6,137
7,637
8,273

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
I960
1961
1962
1963
1964

June
July
Aug
Sept .
Nov
Dec

1,210
1,300
1,756
1,450
1,177
1,135
1,142
1,605

3,206
3,121
3,069
3,373
3,732
3,388
3,457
3,422
3,175
3,265
3,176
3,148

2,053
2,181
2,255
2,399
2,620
2,888
2,748
2,654
2,654
2,562
2,555
2,247

803
841
832
972
1,017
1,048

549
511
620
695
726
778
876
917
958
1,056
1,130
1,152

10.5
10.6
11.0
11.3
10.7
11.7

8,022
7,965
7,958
7,899
8,248
8,004
7,824
7,978
8,236
8,669
9,100
9,571

3,290
3,267
3,277
3,189
3,378
3,303
3,323
3,326
3,529
3,707
3,852
4,037

2,324
2,379
2,408
2,472
2,606
2,423
2,312
2,469
2,585
2,686
2,882
3,016

1,123
1,072
1,057
1,048
1,061
1,227

1,268
1,250
1,212
1,139
1,170
1,136
1,074
1,139
1,102
1,126
1,135
1,183

14.4
14.1
13.9
13.7
13.3
14.3

1,335
1,412
1,408
1,753
1,585
1,719
1,806
1,663
1,751
1,697

1,118
1,232
1,338
1,244
1,211
1,249

1,096
1,078
1,146
1,166
1,229
1,189

1
Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series, detail will not add to totals.
Note.—Data for 1970-81 revised based on 1980 census of population.
See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-29.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




272

11.9
12.4
13.0
13.2
13.5
13.6

14.1
14.3
13.7
13.6
13.1
12.8

TABLE B-35.—Unemployment by reason, 1967-81
[Monthly data seasonally adjusted1]
Total
unemployment

Year or month

Job losers

Job leavers

Reentrants

New
entrants

Thousands of persons 16 years of age and over

1967
1968
1969

2,975
2,817
2,832

1,229
1,070
1,017

438
431
436

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

4,093
5,016
4,882
4,365
5,156

1,811
2,323
2,108
1,694
2,242

550
590
641
683
768

1,228
1,472
1,456
1,340
1,463

504
630
677
649
681

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7,929
7,406
6,991
6,202
6,137

4,386
3,679
3,166
2,585
2,635

827
903
909
874
880

1,892
1,928
1,963
1,857
1,806

823
895
953
885
817

7,637
8,273

3,947
4,267

891
923

1,927
2,102

872
981

May
June.

8,022
7,965
7,958
7,899
8,248
8,004

3,982
4,050
3,989
3,958
4,032
4,173

923
911
901
903
1,004
896

2,051
2,020
2,069
2,044
2,106
2,039

1,015
943
988
988
956
973

July
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

7,824
7,978
8,236
8,669
9,100
9,571

3,867
4,106
4,426
4,573
4,905
5,343

926
879
921
976
916
923

2,078
2,034
2,058
2,178
2,339
2,244

940
971
977
1,002
996
1,021

1967
1968 ....
1969.
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1981
Jan
Feb
Mar.

3.8
3.6
3.5

1.6
1.3
1.2

0.6
.5
.5

1.2
1.2
1.2

0.5
.5
.5

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6
8.5
7.7
7.1
6.1
5.8
7.1
7.6

2.2
2.8
2.4
1.9
2.4

.7
.7

'.S
.8

1.5
1.7
1.7
1.5
1.6

.6
.7
.8
.7
.7

4.7
3.8
3.2
2.5
2.5

.9
.9
.9
.9
.8

2.0
2.0
2.0
1.8
1.7

.9
.9
1.0
.9
.8

3.7
3.9

.8
.8

1.8
1.9

.8
.9

7.4
7.4
7.3
7.3
7.5
7.4

3.7
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.7
3.8

.9
.8
.8
.8
.9
.8

1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9

.9
.9
.9
.9
.9
.9

7.2
7.3
7.6
8.0
8.3
8.8

3.6
3.8
4.1
4.2
4.5
4.9

.9
.8
.8
.9
.8
.8

1.9
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.1

.9
.9
.9
.9
.9
.9

.

1980 ...
1981
1981:

Jan
Feb..
Mar.

....

945
909
965

396
407
413

Percent of civilian labor force

£

June,
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1
Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series, detail will not add to totals.
Note.—Data for 1970-81 revised based on 1980 census of population.
See footnote 3 and Note, Table B-29.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




273

TABLE B-36.—Unemployment insurance programs, selected data, 1946-81
All programs

Year or month

Covered
employment 1

State programs

Insured
Total
unemploy- benefits
ment
paid
(weekly
(millions
of
average) « » dollars) 2 4

Thousands

1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 8.
1980:
Jan
Feb.
Mar
May
June.
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar

£
June.
July
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

31,856
33,876
34,646
33,098
34,308
36,334
37,006
38,072
36,622
40,018
42,751
43,436
44,411
45,728
46,334
46,266
47,776
48,434
49,637
51,580
54,739
56,342
57,977
59,999
59,526
59,375
66,458
69,897
72,451
71,037
73,459
76,419
88,804
92,062
92,659

2,804
1,793
1,446
2,474
1,605
1,000
1,069
1,067
2,051
1,399
1,323
1,571
2,773
1,860
2,071
2,994
1,946
7
1,973
1,753
1,450
1,129
1,270
1,187
1,177
2,070
2,608
2,192
1,793
2,558
4,937
3,846
3,308
2,645
2,592
3,837

2,878.5
1,785.5
1,328.7
2,269.8
1,467.6
862.9
1,043.5
1,050.6
2,291.6
1,560.2
1,540.6
1,913.0
4,290.6
2,854.3
3,022.8
4,358.1
3,145.1
3,025.9
2,749.2
2,360.4
1,890.9
2,221.5
2,191.0
2,298.6
4,209.3
6,154.0
5,491.1
4,517.3
6,933.9
16,802.4
12,344.8
10,998.9
9,006.9
9,401.3
17,252.5

3,740
3,730
3,652
3,629
3,680
3,790
4,140
3,911
3,961
3,661
3,726
4,085

1,368.2
1,307.0
1,323.8
1,378.3
1,338.3
1,592.6
1,579.5
1,441.8
1,503.0
1,432.0
1,516.6
1,618.1

4,621
4,264
3,948
3,453
3,111
2,949
3,012
2,874
2,680
2,753
3,220

1,762.9
1,565.9
1,662.6
1,420.7
1,192.8
1,191.3
1,190.7
1,081.0
1,088.2
1,063.9
1,130.5

Insured
unemployment

Initial
claims

Exhaustions 5

Weekly average; thousands
1,295
189
997
187
980
200
1,973
340
1,513
236
969
208
1,044
215
218
990
304
1,870
1,265
226
227
1,215
270
1,446
2,510
369
1,684
277
331
1,908
350
2,290
302
1,783
7
7
1,806
298
1,605
268
1,328
232
1,061
203
1,205
226
201
1,111
1,101
200
1,805
296
2,150
295
261
1,848
247
1,632
2,262
363
3,986
478
2,991
386
2,655
375
2,359
346
2,434
388
3,350
489
**
**
2,801
419
2,793
401
2,928
466
3,239
539
3,623
624
3,881
579
3,737
511
3,648
504
3,675
488
3,540
452
3,351
430
3,167
423
3,053
2,920
2,954
2,949
2,904
2,897
2,767
2,844
2,961
3,159
3,428
3,583

424
415
435
405
408
407
397
435
482
522
541
567

38
24
20
37
36
16
18
15
34
25
20
23
50
33
31
46
32
30
26
21
15
17
16
16
25
39
35
29
37
81
63
55
39
39
59
47
48
52
59
57
59
65
62
58
66
65
70
70
69
66
66
57
56
54
51
47
46
48

Benefits paid
Insured
unemployment as
Average
Total
percent
of
weekly
(millions
check
covered
of 4
employ- dollars) (dollars) «
ment

4.3 1,094.9
3.1
775.1
3.0
789.9
6.2 1,736.0
4.6 1,373.1
2.8
840.4
2.9
998.2
2.8
962.2
5.2 2,026.9
3.5 1,350.3
3.2 1,380.7
3.6 1,733.9
6.4 3,512.7
4.4 2,279.0
4.8 2,726.7
5.6 3,422.7
4.4 2,675.4
4.3 2,774.7
3.8 2,522.1
3.0 2,166.0
2.3 1,771.3
2.5 2,092.3
2.2 2,031.6
2.1 2,127.9
3.4 3,848.5
4.1 4,957.0
3.5 4,471.0
2.7 4,007.6
3.5 5,974.9
6.0 11,754.7
4.6 8,974.5
3.9 8,357.2
3.3 7,717.2
2.9 8,612.9
3.9 14,590.3
**
3.3 1,283.9
3.3 1,229.9
3.4 1,218.2
3.8 1,232.2
4.2 1,196.8
4.5 1,213.6
4.3 1,397.5
4.2 1,244.4
4.3 1,144.9
4.1 1,125.6
3.9
934.4
3.6 1,244.0
3.5
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.3
3.3
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.6
3.9
41

1,416.5
1,313.5
1,393.6
1,226.8
1,006.3
1,009.8
1,061.9
1,004.9
1,001.2
997.2

18.50
17.83
19.03
20.48
20.76
21.09
22.79
23.58
24.93
25.04
27.C2
28.17
30.58
30.41
32.87
33.80
34.56
35.27
35.92
37.19
39.75
41.25
43.43
46.17
50.34
54.02
56.76
59.00
64.25
70.23
75.16
78.79
83,67
89.67
98.92
96.41
98.39
99.19
99.52
99.55
99.88
98.75
99.68
99.86
92.32
101.96
101.43
102.34
101.89
105.63
105.98
105.49
101.69
103.47
105.94
107.39
108.87
110.44

"Monthly data are seasonally adjusted.
1
Includes persons under the State, UCFE (Federal employee, effective January 1955), and RRB (Railroad Retirement Board)
programs. Beginning October 1958, also includes the UCX program (unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen).
2
Includes State, UCFE, RR, UCX, UCV (unemployment compensation for veterans, October 1952-January 1960), and SRA
(Servicemen's Readjustment Act, September 1944-September 1951) programs. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit
programs. Does not include FSB (Federal supplemental benefits) and SUA (special unemployment assistance) programs.
3
Covered workers who have completed at least 1 week of unemployment.
4
Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts.
5
Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year.
6
For total unemployment only.
7
Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July 1963.
8
Latest data available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about 97 percent of wage and
salary earners.
Source: Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration.




274

TABLE B-37.— Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-81
[Thousands of persons; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Year or
month

Total
wage
and
salary
workers

Manufacturing
Total

Durable
goods

Non- Mining Construction
durable
goods

Transpor- Wholetation
sale
and
and
public
retail
trade
utilities

Finance,
insurance, Services
and
real
estate

Government
Federal

State
and
local

1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

31,324
23699
30,603
32,361
36,539
40,106
42,434
41,864
40,374
41,652
43,857
44,866
43,754
45,197
47,819
48,793
50,202
48,990
50,641
52,369
52,853
51,324
53,268
54,189
53,999
55,549
56,653
58,283
60,765
63,901
65,803
67,897
70,384
70,880
71,214
73,675
76,790
78,265
76,945
79,382
82,471
86,697
89,823

10,702
7,397
10,278
10,985
13,192
15,280
17,602
17,328
15,524
14,703
15,545
15,582
14,441
15,241
16,393
16,632
17,549
16,314
16,882
17,243
17,174
15,945
16,675
16,796
16,326
16,853
16,995
17,274
18,062
19,214
19,447
19,781
20,167
19,367
18,623
19,151
20,154
20,077
18,323
18,997
19,682
20,505
21,040

4,715
5,363
6,968
8,823
11,084
10,856
9,074
7,742
8,385
8,326
7,489
8,094
9,089
9,349
10,110
9,129
9,541
9,833
9,855
8,829
9,373
9,459
9,070
9,480
9,616
9,816
10,405
11,282
11,439
11,626
11,895
11,208
10,636
11,049
11,891
11,925
10,688
11,077
11,597
12,274
12,760

5,564
5,622
6,225
6,458
6,518
6,472
6,450
6,962
7,159
7,256
6,953
7,147
7,304
7,284
7,438
7,185
7,341
7,411
7,321
7,116
7,303
7,337
7,256
7,373
7,380
7,458
7,656
7,930
8,007
8,155
8,272
8,158
7,987
8,102
8,262
8,152
7,635
7,920
8,086
8,231
8,280

1,087
744
854
925
957
992
925
892
836
862
955
994
930
901
929
898
866
791
792
822
828
751
732
712
672
650
635
634
632
627
613
606
619
623
609
628
642
697
752
779
813
851
958

1512
824
1,165
1,311
1,814
2,198
1,587
1,108
1,147
1,683
2,009
2,198
2,194
2,364
2,637
2,668
2,659
2,646
2,839
3,039
2,962
2,817
3,004
2,926
2,859
2,948
3,010
3,097
3,232
3,317
3,248
3,350
3,575
3,588
3,704
3,889
4,097
4,020
3,525
3,576
3,851
4,229
4,463

3916
2672
2,936
3,038
3,274
3,460
3,647
3,829
3,906
4,061
4,166
4,189
4,001
4,034
4,226
4,248
4,290
4,084
4,141
4,244
4,241
3,976
4,011
4,004
3,903
3,906
3,903
3,951
4,036
4,158
4,268
4,318
4,442
4,515
4,476
4,541
4,656
4,725
4,542
4,582
4,713
4,923
5,136

6,123
4,755
6,426
6,750
7,210
7,118
6,982
7,058
7,314
8,376
8,955
9,272
9,264
9,386
9,742
10,004
10,247
10,235
10,535
10,858
10,886
10,750
11,127
11,391
11,337
11,566
11,778
12,160
12,716
13,245
13,606
14,099
14,705
15,040
15,352
15,949
16,607
16,987
17,060
17,755
18,516
19,542
20,192

1494
1280
1,447
1,485
1,525
1,509
1,481
1,461
1,481
1,675
1,728
1,800
1,828
1,888
1,956
2,035
2,111
2,200
2,298
2,389
2,438
2,481
2,549
2,629
2,688
2,754
2,830
2,911
2,977
3,058
3,185
3,337
3,512
3,645
3,772
3,908
4,046
4,148
4,165
4,271
4,467
4,724
4,975

3,425
2861
3,502
3,665
3,905
4,066
4,130
4,145
4,222
4,697
5,025
5,181
5,240
5,357
5,547
5,699
5,835
5,969
6,240
6,497
6,708
6,765
7,087
7,378
7,620
7,982
8,277
8,660
9,036
9,498
10,045
10,567
11,169
11,548
11,797
12,276
12,857
13,441
13,892
14,551
15,303
16,252
17,112

533
565
905
996
1,340
2,213
2,905
2,928
2,808
2,254
1,892
1,863
1,908
1,928
2,302
2,420
2,305
2,188
2,187
2,209
2,217
2,191
2,233
2,270
2,279
2,340
2,358
2,348
2,378
2,564
2,719
2,737
2,758
2,731
2,696
2,684
2,663
2,724
2,748
2,733
2,727
2,753
2,773

2,532
2,601
3,090
3,206
3,320
3,270
3,175
3,116
3,137
3,341
3,582
3,787
3,948
408
,9
4,087
4,188
4,340
4,563
4,727
5,069
5,399
5,648
5,850
6,083
6,315
6,550
6,868
7,248
7,696
8,220
8,672
9,102
9,437
9,823
10,185
10,649
11,068
11,446
11,937
12,138
12,399
12,919
13,174

1980
1981 *

90,564
91,542

20,300
20,262

12,181
12,137

8,118
8,125

1,020
1,104

4,399
4,307

5,143
5,150

20,386
20,737

5,168
5,331

17,901
18,597

2,866
2,772

13,383
13,282

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

90,687
90,865
90,871
90,817
90,446
90,087

20,836
20,801
20,773
20,545
20,262
20,033

12,591
12,614
12,603
12,387
12,136
11,973

8,245
8,187
8,170
8,158
8,126
8,060

993
1,000
1,003
1,009
1,018
1,024

4,556
4,562
4,462
4,417
4,382
4,345

5,185
5,176
5,174
5,173
5,156
5,129

20,337
20,400
20,374
20,328
20,316
20,266

5,090
5,102
5,119
5,128
5,143
5,156

17,582
17,667
17,720
17,760
17,813
17,816

2,790
2,824
2,882
3,100
2,960
2,951

13,318
13,333
13,364
13,357
13,396
13,367

July
Aug

89,960
90,219
90,461
90,668
90,844
90,949

19,877
19,990
20,060
20,110
20,188
20,175

11,859
11,907
11,968
12,013
12,090
12,077

8,018
8,083
8,092
8,097
8,098
8,098

1,004
1,008
1,023
1,032
1,052
1,069

4,270
4,324
4,362
4,379
4,389
4,387

5,119
5,126
5,124
5,129
5,114
5,118

20,355
20,413
20,450
20,461
20,464
20,470

5,173
5,188
5,206
5,221
5,235
5,254

17,940
17,981
18,043
18,087
18,160
18,240

2,893
2,808
2,784
2,795
2,796
2,800

13,329
13,381
13,409
13,454
13,446
13,436

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

91,091
91,258
91,347
91,458
91,564
91,615

20,174
20,177
20,191
20,332
20,414
20,424

12,084
12,074
12,099
12,207
12,254
12,278

8,090
8,103
8,092
8,125
8,160
8,146

1,083
1,091
1,098
950
957
1,110

4,390
4,389
4,416
4,418
4,334
4,284

5,124
5,135
5,139
5,161
5,148
5,149

20,529
20,600
20,635
20,636
20,714
20,717

5,268
5,283
5,293
5,316
5,326
5,331

18,300
18,343
18,371
18,475
18,540
18,560

2,799
2,795
2,781
2,767
2,779
2,781

13,424
13,445
13,423
13,403
13,352
13,259

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Decp

91,880
91,901
92,033
91,798
91,522
91,096

20,535
20,505
20,496
20,227
20,017
19,750

12,333
12,332
12,311
12,108
11,932
11,727

8,202
8,173
8,185
8,119
8,085
8,023

1,132
1,151
1,162
1,164
1,172
1,176

4,272
4,275
4,272
4,260
4,229
4,191

5,167
5,170
5,186
5,164
5,147
5,109

20,796
20,862
20,872
20,910
20,838
20,725

5,344
5,354
5,366
5,359
5,355
5,367

18,642
18,667
18,774
18,782
18,838
18,848

2,777
2,770
2,765
2,756
2,748
2,738

13,215
13,147
13,140
13,176
13,178
13,192

1980:

1'::
1.::
Nov
Dec
1981:

Note.—Data in Tables B-37 through B-39 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage
and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes
the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data (Tables B-29 through B-35), which include proprietors, self-employed
persons, domestic servants, and unpaid family workers; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of
industrial disputes, bad weather, etc., even if they are not paid for the time off; and which are based on a sample of the working-age
population. For description and details of the various establishment data, see "Employment and Earnings."
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




275

TABLE B-38.—Average weekly hours and hourly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries,
1947-81
[For production or nonsupervisory workers; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Average gross hourly earnings,
current dollars

Average weekly hours

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Total
private
nonagricultural »

Manufacturing

38.2
38.1
37.7

40.5
40.4
40.5

$1.131
1.225
1.275

$1.216
1.327
1.376

$1.540
1.712
1.792

40.5
40.6
40.7
40.5
39.6

37.4
38.1
38.9
37.9
37.2

40.5
40.5
40.0
39.5
39.5

1.335
1.45
1.52
1.61
1.65

1.439
1.56
1.64
1.74
1.78

39.6
39.3
38.8
38.5
39.0

40.7
40.4
39.8
39.2
40.3

37.1
37.5
37.0
36.8
37.0

39.4
39.1
38.7
38.6
38.8

1.71
1.80
1.89
1.95
2.02

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

38.6
38.6
38.7
38.8
38.7

39.7
39.8
40.4
40.5
40.7

36.7
36.9
37.0
37.3
37.2

38.6
38.3
38.2
38.1
37.9

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

38.8
38.6
38.0
37.8
37.7

41.2
41.4
40.6
40.7
40.6

37.4
37.6
37.7
37.3
37.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

37.1
36.9
37.0
36.9
36.5

39.8
39.9
40.5
40.7
40.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979.

36.1
36.1
36.0
35.8
35.7

Year or
month

Total
private
nonagricultural*

Manufacturing

1947
1948
1949

40.3
40.0
39.4

40.4
40.0
39.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

39.8
39.9
39.9
39.6
39.1

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

Construction

Construction

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Adjusted hourly earnings, total
private nonagricultural 2
Index,
1977 = 100

Percent change
from a year
earlier 4

Current
dollars

1977
dollars 3

Current
dollars

1977
dollars

$0.940
1.010
1.060

21.6
23.4
24.5

58.5
58.9
62.3

8.3
4.7

0.7
5.8

1.863
2.02
2.13
2.28
2.38

1.100
1.18
1.23
1.30
1.35

25.4
27.3
28.7
30.3
31.3

64.0
63.6
65.5
68.7
70.5

3.7
7.5
5.1
5.6
3.3

2.7
-.6
3.0
4.9
2.6

1.85
1.95
2.04
2.10
2.19

2.45
2.57
2.71
2.82
2.93

1.40
1.47
1.54
1.60
1.66

32.4
34.0
35.7
37.2
38.5

73.3
75.9
76.9
78.0
80.0

3.5
4.9
5.0
4.2
3.5

4.0
3.5
1.3
1.4
2.6

2.09
2.14
2.22
2.28
2.36

2.26
2.32
2.39
2.45
2.53

3.07
3.20
3.31
3.41
3.55

1.71
1.76
1.83
1.89
1.97

39.8
41.0
42.4
43.6
44.8

81.4
83.0
85.0
86.3
87.5

3.4
3.0
3.4
2.8
2.8

1.8
2.0
2.4
1.5
1.4

37.7
37.1
36.6
36.1
35.7

2.46
2.56
2.68
2.85
3.04

2.61
2.71
2.82
3.01
3.19

3.70
3.89
4.11
4.41
4.79

2.04
2.14
2.25
2.41
2.56

46.4
48.4
50.8
53.9
57.5

89.0
90.3
92.2
94.0
95.0

3.6
4.3
5.0
6.1
6.7

1.7
1.5
2.1
2.0
1.1

37.3
37.2
36.5
36.8
36.6

35.3
35.1
34.9
34.6
34.2

3.23
3.45
3.70
3.94
4.24

3.35
3.57
3.82
4.09
4.42

5.24
5.69
6.06
6.41
6.81

2.72
2.88
3.05
3.23
3.48

61.3
65.7
69.8
74.1
80.0

95.7
98.3
101.2
101.1
98.3

6.6
7.2
6.2
6.2
8.0

.7
2.7
3.0
-.1
-2.8

39.5
40.1
40.3
40.4
40.2

36.4
36.8
36.5
36.8
37.0

33.9
33.7
33.3
32.9
32.6

4.53
4.86
5.25
5.69
6.16

4.83
5.22
5.68
6.17
6.70

7.31
7.71
8.10
8.66
9.27

3.73
3.97
4.28
4.67
5.06

86.7
92.9
100.0
108.1
116.8

97.6
99.0
100.0
100.5
97.4

8.4
7.2
7.6
8.1
8.0

-.7
1.4
1.0
.5
-3.1

35.3
35.2

39.7
39.8

37.0
36.8

32.2
32.1

6.66
7.25

7.27
7.98

9.92
10.75

5.48
5.92

127.3

93.5

9.0

-4.0

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

35.4
35.4
35.3
35.3
35.2
35.2

40.1
40.0
39.7
39.8
39.5
39.3

37.2
37.1
36.4
36.9
36.8
37.0

32.5
32.4
32.3
32.1
32.1
32.0

6.39
6.44
6.51
6.54
6.57
6.64

6.94
6.99
7.07
7.11
7.16
7.22

9.44
9.63
9.71
9.76
9.80
9.87

5.28
5.30
5.37
5.39
5.42
5.46

121.7
122.8
124.1
124.7
125.8
127.0

94.3
93.9
93.7
93.3
93.4
93.4

7.9
8.2
8.8
8.5
9.0
9.4

-5.3
-5.3
-5.1
-5.3
-4.6
-4.3

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

35.1
35.2
35.3
35.3
35.3
35.3

39.2
39.5
39.6
39.7
39.8
39.9

36.8
36.6
37.3
37.1
37.2
37.1

32.0
32.1
32.1
32.1
32.2
32.1

6.66
6.72
6.76
6.83
6.90
6.94

7.29
7.36
7.41
7.49
7.59
7.63

9.93
10.02
10.05
10.15
10.21
10.30

5.50
5.54
5.57
5.61
5.66
5.69

127.6
128.7
129.4
130.6
132.1
132.6

93.8
93.9
93.3
93.2
93.3
92.7

9.2
9.3
8.9
9.7
9.9
9.3

-3.4
-3.0
-3.2
-2.6
-2.5
-2.8

35.3
35.2
35.3
35.4
35.3
35.2

40.1
39.8
39.9
40.2
40.3
40.1

38.3
36.4
37.4
37.1
36.8
36.3

32.2
32.2
32.2
32.3
32.1
32.1

6.99
7.04
7.09
7.14
7.18
7.23

7.69
7.74
7.80
7.90
7.95
7.99

10.39
10.44
10.49
10.52
10.57
10.69

5.72
5.78
5.81
5.84
5.89
5.91

133.8
135.0
135.8
136.7
137.7
138.4

92.8
92.7
92.8
93.0
93.1
92.9

10.0
9.9
9.5
9.6
9.5
9.0

-1.6
-1.3
-.9

35.3
35.2
34.9
35.0
35.0
34.9

40.0
40.0
39.3
39.5
39.3
39.0

36.9
36.6
35.0
36.5
37.4
37.0

32.2
32.1
32.1
31.9
32.0
31.9

7.26
7.34
7.37
7.39
7.45
7.44

8.02
8.08
8.14
8.14
8.18
8.18

10.77
10.85
10.88
10.99
11.09
11.16

5.93
5.99
6.05
6.02
6.05
6.07

139.0
140.7
141.5
141.9
143.2
143.3

92.2
92.7
92.1
92.0
92.4
92.1

8.9
9.3
9.3
8.6
8.4
8.1

-1.7
-1.3
-1.3
-1.3
-.8
-.6

1980
1981p

...

1980:

1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar

fc=
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

:.

1
Also includes other private industry groups shown in Table B-37.
2
Adjusted for overtime (in manufacturing only) and for interindustry
3

-'.5

employment shifts.
Current-dollar earnings index divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a 1977=
base.
4
Monthly data are computed from indexes to two decimal places and are based on data not seasonally adjusted.
Note.—See Note, Table B-37.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




276

100

TABLE B-39.—Average weekly earnings in selected private nonagricultural industries, 1947-81
[For production or nonsupervisory workers; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Average gross weekly earnings
Total private
nonagricultural1

Construction
(current
dollars)

Wholesale
and retail
trade
(current
dollars)

Percent change from
a year earlier, total
private
nonagricultural3

Current
dollars

1977
dollars2

Manufacturing
(current
dollars)

$45.58
49.00
50.24

123.52
123.43
127.84

$49.13
53.08
53.80

$58.83
65.23
67.56

$38.07
40.80
42.93

7.5
2.5

-0.1
3.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

53.13
57.86
60.65
63.76
64.52

133.83
134.87
138.47
144.58
145.32

58.28
63.34
66.75
70.47
70.49

69.68
76.96
82.86
86.41
88.54

44.55
47.79
49.20
51.35
53.33

5.8
8.9
4.8
5.1
1.2

4.7
.8
2.7
4.4
.5

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

67.72
70.74
73.33
75.08
78.78

153.21
157.90
158.04
157.40
163.78

75.30
78.78
81.19
82.32
88.26

90.90
96.38
100.27
103.78
108.41

55.16
57.48
59.60
61.76
64.41

5.0
4.5
3.7
2.4
4.9

5.4
3.1
.1
-.4
4.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

80.67
82.60
85.91
88.46
91.33

164.97
167.21
172.16
175.17
178.38

89.72
92.34
96.56
99.23
102.97

112.67
118.08
122.47
127.19
132.06

66.01
67.41
69.91
72.01
74.66

2.4
2.4
4.0
3.0
3.2

.7
1.4
3.0
1.7
1.8

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

95.45
98.82
101.84
107.73
114.61

183.21
184.37
184.83
187.68
189.44

107.53
112.19
114.49
122.51
129.51

138.38
146.26
154.95
164.49
181.54

76.91
79.39
82.35
87.00
91.39

4.5
3.5
3.1
5.8
6.4

2.7
.6
.2
1.5
.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

119.83
127.31
136.90
145.39
154.76

186.94
190.58
198.41
198.35
190.12

133.33
142.44
154.71
166.46
176.80

195.45
211.67
221.19
235.89
249.25

96.02
101.09
106.45
111.76
119.02

4.6
6.2
7.5
6.2
6.4

-1.3
1.9
4.1
-.0
-4.1

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

163.53
175.45
189.00
203.70
219.91

184.16
186.85
189.00
189.31
183.41

190.79
209.32
228.90
249.27
269.34

266.08
283.73
295.65
318.69
342.99

126.45
133.79
142.52
153.64
164.96

5.7
7.3
7.7
7.8
8.0

-3.1
1.5
1.2
.2
-3.1

1980
1981"

235.10
255.20

172.74
170.13

288.62
317.60

367.04
395.60

176.46
190.03

6.9
8.6

-5.8
-1.5

1980
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June.

226.21
227.98
229.80
230.86
231.26
233.73

175.36
174.43
173.56
172.80
171.69
171.99

278.29
279.60
280.68
282.98
282.82
283.75

351.17
357.27
353.44
360.14
360.64
365.19

171.60
171.72
173.45
173.02
173.98
174.72

6.9
6.6
6.5
8.3
6.4
6.4

-6.1
-6.7
-7.1
-5.5
-6.9
-6.9

July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

233.77
236.54
238.63
241.10
243.57
244.98

171.89
172.53
172.05
172.09
171.89
171.19

285.77
290.72
293.44
297.35
302.08
304.44

365.42
366.73
374.87
376.57
379.81
382.13

176.00
177.83
178.80
180.08
182.25
182.65

5.7
6.4
6.3
7.3
8.2
7.9

-6.4
-5.6
-5.6
-4.7
-3.9
-4.1

Jan
Feb.
Mar
Apr
May
June.

246.75
247.81
250.28
252.76
253.45
254.50

171.12
170.20
170.96
172.06
171.37
170.92

308.37
308.05
311.22
317.58
320.39
320.40

397.94
380.02
392.33
390.29
388.98
388.05

184.18
186.12
187.08
188.63
189.07
189.71

9.5
9.1
9.2
9.5
9.9
9.2

-2.0
-2.1
-1.2
-.4
.1
-.3

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov p
Dec

256.28
258.37
257.21
258.65
260.75
259.66

170.06
170.20
167.45
167.74
168.23
166.98

320.80
323.20
319.90
321.53
321.47
319.02

397.41
397.11
380.80
401.14
414.77
412.92

190.95
192.28
194.21
192.04
193.60
193.63

10.0
9.8
8.1
7.7
6.7
6.0

-.7
-.9
-2.5
-2.1
-2.0
-2.5

Year or month

1947.,
1948
1949

Current
dollars

1977
dollars

1981:

1
Also includes other
2
Earnings in current
3

private industry groups shown in Table B-37.
dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a 1977=100 base.
Based on unadjusted data.
Note.—See Note, Table B-37.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




277

TABLE B-40.—Productivity and related data, private business sector, 1947-81
[1977=100]
Hours of 2all
persons

Output 1
Year

Output per hour
of all persons

Compensation per
hour 3

Unit labor cost

Implicit price
deflator 4

Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm
business business business business business business business business business business business business
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector

1947.
1948.
1949

35.1
37.2
36.5

34.0
36.1
35.4

80.4
80.9
78.3

68.3
69.4
66.8

43.6
46.0
46.7

49.8
51.9
53.0

17.0
18.4
18.7

18.5
20.0
20.6

38.9
40.0
40.1

37.1
38.6
38.9

38.2
40.8
40.4

36.6
39.1
39.5

1950.
1951.
1952
1953.
1954.

39.9
42.2
43.6
45.4
44.6

38.7
41.2
42.6
44.4
43.5

79.2
81.5
81.6
82.4
79.7

68.8
72.0
72.8
74.6
72.1

50.3
51.7
53.4
55.1
56.0

56.2
57.2
58.5
59.5
60.3

20.0
22.0
23.4
24.9
25.7

21.8
23.7
25.0
26.4
27.3

39.8
42.5
43.8
45.2
45.9

38.8
41.5
42.8
44.5
45.2

41.0
44.1
44.6
45.0
45.4

40.2
42.8
43.6
44.4
45.0

1955,
1956,
1957
1958,
1959

48.2
49.4
49.9
49.1
52.7

47.1
48.4
49.0
48.0
51.9

82.7
84.0
82.7
79.0
82.1

75.1
77.0
76.6
73.4
76.6

58.2
58.8
60.3
62.2
64.2

62.7
62.8
63.9
65.5
67.6

26.3
28.1
29.9
31.2
32.5

28.3
29.9
31.7
32.9
34.2

45.2
47.7
49.6
50.2
50.7

45.1
47.7
49.5
50.2
50.5

46.1
47.6
49.3
49.9
50.9

46.0
47.6
49.3
49.8
50.9

1960,
1961.
1962.
1963.
1964,

53.6
54.5
57.5
60.0
63.6

52.6
53.6
56.7
59.2
62.9

82.3
81.0
82.3
82.8
84.2

77.1
76.3
78.0
78.9
80.7

65.1
67.2
69.8
72.4
75.5

68.2
70.2
72.7
75.0
78.0

33.9
35.2
36.8
38.1
40.1

35.6
36.8
38.3
39.6
41.4

52.1
52.3
52.7
52.7
53.1

52.3
52.4
52.6
52.8
53.1

51.7
51.9
52.7
53.3
53.8

51.7
52.0
52.7
53.4
54.0

1965,
1966,
1967.
1968.
1969,

67.9
71.6
73.2
76.9
79.2

67.3
71.3
72.8
76.7
78.9

86.8
88.9
88.8
90.3
92.7

83.7
86.5
86.7
88.5
91.3

78.2
80.6
82.4
85.2
85.4

80.4
82.4
83.9
86.7
86.4

41.7
44.6
47.0
50.6
54.2

42.8
45.4
47.8
51.4
54.8

53.3
55.3
57.0
59.5
63.5

53.2
55.1
57.0
59.3
63.4

54.8
56.5
58.0
60.3
63.3

54.9
56.4
58.2
60.5
63.4

1970.
1971.
1972.
1973.
1974.

78.5
80.9
86.2
92.0
90.2

78.1
80.4
85.9
91.9
90.1

91.2
90.7
93.4
97.0
97.4

90.0
89.7
92.5
96.4
96.8

86.1
89.2
92.4
94.8
92.7

86.7
89.6
93.0
95.3
93.1

58.2
62.0
66.0
71.3
78.0

58.6
62.5
66.6
71.7
78.4

67.6
69.5
71.5
75.2
84.2

67.6
69.7
71.7
75.2
84.3

66.2
69.1
71.5
75.3
82.4

66.4
69.4
71.4
74.1
81.6

1975.
1976.
1977.
1978.
1979.

88.5
94.1
100.0
104.7
107.7

88.1
94.0
100.0
104.9
107.7

93.4
96.1
100.0
104.9
108.2

92.7
95.9
100.0
105.1
108.7

94.8
97.9
100.0
99.8
99.5

95.0
98.1
100.0
99.8
99.1

85.5
92.9
100.0
108.4
119.3

86.0
93.0
100.0
108.5
119.0

90.2
94.8
100.0
108.6
119.9

90.5
94.8
100.0
108.7
120.0

90.4
94.7
100.0
107.4
116.9

89.9
94.5
100.0
107.0
116.2

106.8
108.9

106.8
108.7

107.5
108.5

108.1
109.1

99.3
100.4

98.8
99.7

131.5
144.6

130.8
143.9

132.4
144.1

132.4
144.4

127.6
139.3

127.4
139.6

107.7
107.1
107.7
108.2

107.9
107.1
107.8
108.2

108.1
107.4
108.4
109.1

108.4
108.0
109.0
109.4

99.7
99.7
99.4
99.1

99.5
99.1
98.9
98.8

115.0
118.1
120.7
123.2

114.9
117.7
120.2
123.0

115.4
118.5
121.4
124.3

115.4
118.7
121.5
124.4

113.4
115.8
118.1
120.2

112.6
115.1
117.4
119.7

108.7
105.4
105.7
107.5

108.5
105.1
105.8
107.7

109.2
106.4
106.3
108.4

109.7
107.0
106.9
108.8

99.5
99.1
99.4
99.1

98.9
98.2
99.0
99.0

126.4
130.1
133.1
135.9

126.0
129.4
132.3
135.4

127.0
131.3
133.9
137.1

127.4
131.8
133.6
136.8

123.0
126.1
129.1
132.2

122.9
126.3
128.8
131.9

109.5
109.5
109.4
107.3

109.7
109.4
109.0
106.7

109.2
108.2
108.4
108.4

109.7
109.0
109.1
108.8

100.3
101.2
100.9
99.0

100.0
100.4
99.9
98.0

139.8
143.3
146.5
148.5

139.2
142.4
145.7
148.0

139.4
141.6
145.2
150.0

139.1
141.9
145.8
151.0

135.4
137.5
140.9
143.5

135.3
137.5
141.2
144.3

.

1980.

198F..
1979:

1.
II.

III.

IV,
1980:

1
II.
Ill
IV

1981:

1.
II
III
IV
1
Output
2

refers to gross domestic product originating in the sector in 1972 dollars.
Hours of all persons engaged in the sector, including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on
establishment data.
3
Wages and salaries of employees plus employers' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an
estimate of wages, salaries, and supplemental payments for the self-employed.
4
Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross domestic product.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




278

TABLE B-41.—Changes in productivity and related data, private business sector, 1948-81
[Percent change from preceding period]

1948.
1949

1950
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.
1955
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.

6.1
-1.9

9.1
5.8
3.3
4.3
-1.8

7.9
2.6
1.0
-1.6

7.3

6.0
-1.9

9.4
6.5
3.4
4.2
-2.0

8.2
2.8
1.2
-1.9

7.9

1.6
1.7
5.5
4.3
6.0

1.5
1.8
5.8
4.4
6.4

1965.
1966
1967.
1968.
1969.

6.8
5.5
2.2
5.1
2.9

6.9
5.9
2.1
5.3
2.9

1970.
1971.
1972
1973.
1974.

-.8
3.0
6.6
6.6

1980.
1981'..

1979

1
II
III
IV

IV

-1.0

2.9
6.9
6.9

-1.9

-1.9

-1.9

-2.2

6.3
6.3
4.7
2.8

-.8
1.9
4.0
-2.2

2.4
1.7

1980

1
II
III

Compensation per
hour 3

Unit labor cost

Implicit price
deflator*

Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm Private Nonfarm
business business business business business business business business business business business business
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector
sector

1960
1961.
1962
1963.
1964.

1975.
1976
1977.
1978
1979.

Output per hour
of all persons

Hours of all
persons 2

Output 1
Year

1.8
-11.5
11

6.9

6.7
6.4
4.9
2.7
g
L8
4.1

-3.0

2.6
1.5
1.4
-12.1

29
7.1

5.3
1.5

4.3
2.0

8.5
1.6

8.6
2.9

3.0
.1

4.1
.9

7.9
2.8
3.2
3.2
1.6

6.0
1.7
2.3
1.7
1.4

7.1
9.8
6.4
6.4
3.2

5.8
8.8
5.5
5.6
3.2

-.8
6.9
3.0
3.1
1.6

-.2
6.9
3.1
3.9
1.7

1.6
7.4
1.1
.9
1.0

1.7
6.6
1.8
2.0
1.4

4.0
1.0
2.5
3.1
3.2

3.9
.3
1.7
2.4
3.4

2.5
6.5
6.5
4.4
4.3

3.6
6.0
5.7
3.8
4.0

5.5
3.9
1.3
1.0

-.3
5.7
3.9
1.4
.6

1.6
3.3
3.5
1.3
2.0

2.2
3.5
3.6
.9
2.3

1.6
.6
1.6

2.2
1.1
2.4

1.5
3.3
3.8
3.7
4.3

.8
2.9
3.6
3.2
3.9

4.2
3.8
4.6
3.7
5.2

4.3
3.2
4.0
3.5
4.5

2.7
.5
.7
.0
.8

3.5
.3
.4
.2
.6

1.4
.6
1.5
1.1
1.0

1.5
.6
1.5
1.2
1.2

3.2
2.3
.0
1.7
2.6

3.7
3.4
.3
2.0
3.2

3.5
3.1
2.2
3.3
.2

3.1
2.5
1.9
3.3
-.3

3.9
7.0
5.3
7.8
7.0

3.4
6.0
5.5
7.5
6.5

.3
3.8
3.0
4.4
6.7

.3
3.5
3.5
4.1
6.8

1.9
3.0
2.7
4.0
4.9

1.6
2.8
3.2
4.0
4.7

.9
3.6
3.5
2.7

.3
3.3
3.7
2.5

7.4
6.6
6.5
8.0
9.4

7.0
6.6
6.7
7.6
9.4

6.4
2.9
2.9
5.2

6.6
3.1
2.8
4.9

4.8
4.5
3.0
3.7

11.9

12.1

4.5
4.4
3.4
5.4
9.4

9.6
8.6
7.7
8.4

9.6
8.1
7.6
8.5
9.7

7.2
5.1
5.5
8.6

7.4
4.7
5.5
8.7

10.4

10.4

9.9

10.4

10.3

0.7
-3.3

1.1
2.9
.1
1.0
-3.3

3.8
1.5
-1.5
-4.5

3.9
.2

-1.5

-1.7
— 5

3!o

3.9
.4

1.6
-3.8

3.1
4.6
1.0
2.5
-3.4

4.1
2.5
-.5
-4.2

4.4
.6

-1.1

-1.4

-.4
3.1
4.2
.4

-2.3

2.9
4.0
4.9
3.1

3.4
4.3
5.1
3.4

-.6
.9

-.6
.9

-2.4

2.1
3.2
2.0
2
-7

4.8
-2.3

3.6
2.8

5.0
-1.5

3.7
1.8

-.8
.1
-1.2
-1.0

.2

1.1

-9.9
_ 2

-9.5
_ 7

-1.8

8.1

7.3

10.1

8.9

11.6
11.3

10.9
10.4

8.9
8.6

8.6
9.7

12.4
11.2
10.2

10.8
12.3

10.3
11.3

-1.6
-1.1

-.2
.3

-1.1

1.6
13

10.2
10.0

-.9

-.2
1.0

-4.2

10.1

-.3
.9

2.3
3.3
2.1
-.2
-.3

-4.1

-1.4

-2.9

36
-.2

95
8.6

90

9.S

9.8

9.1
11.9
12.1

9.7
9.9

7.0
-1.0

10.3

9.2
9.2

9.7
9.5

8.8
8.4
8.2
7.4

8.1
8.9
8.5
7.8
11.3
11.3

9.0

9.9

9.7

14.6

10.5

9.8

10.1

10.1

9.7
4.7
5.6
7.4
8.8

14.4
81

53

6.8
.9

5.1
5.8
7.0
8.6

98
9.9

10.0

82

1981:

1.
II
III
IV

7.9
-.1
-.3
-7.5

7.9
-1.1
-1.4
-8.4

3.0
-3.6

.8
-.2

3.4
-2.5

.4
-.9

4.7
3.5
-1.1
-7.2

1
Output
2

4.4
1.4
-1.8
-7.6

11.9
10.4

9.3
5.7

11.7

9.6
9.5
6.5

6.9
6.6

7.0
8.1

10.0

11.0

10.6
14.0

11.5
15.2

10.4

7.5

11.4

6.2

6.5
8.9

refers to gross domestic product originatini in the sector in 1972 dollars,
Hours of all persons engaged in the sector, includ I g hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on
establishment data.
3
Wages and salaries of employees plus employers' contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an
estimate of wages, salaries, and supplemental payments for the self-employed.
4
Current dollar gross domestic product divided by constant dollar gross don
domestic product.
Note.—Percent changes are based on original data and therefore may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table
B-40.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




279

PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY
TABLE B-42.—Industrial production indexes, major industry divisions, 1929-81
[1967=100; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Year or month

Total
industrial
production

Manufacturing

mining

lltrli
Ullll-

35.97
23.2
19.9
26.1
27.5
33.3
34.6
37.1
38.6
38.5
39.7
41.3
42.7
42.0
46.7
48.3
49.2
51.2
51.6
57.2
60.1
61.1
61.6
67.7
69.3
71.5
75.8
80.0
85.2
90.9
96.7
100.0
106.2
111.5
112.3
116.6
126.5
133.8
134.6
126.4
141.8
150.5
156.9
164.0
161.2
164.8

6.36
43.1
30.6
42.1
46.8
49.7
51.3
52.5
56.2
55.1
54.2
61.3
64.4
57.1
63.8
70.0
69.4
71.2
69.9
77.9
82.0
82.1
75.3
78.7
80.3
80.8
83.1
86.4
89.9
93.2
98.2
100.0
104.2
108.3
112.2
109.8
113.1
114.7
115.3
112.8
114.2
118.2
124.0
125.5
132.7
142.4

5.69
7.4
6.7
10.7
11.8
13.3
14.9
16.5
17.5
17.8
18.6
20.1
22.4
23.9
27.2
31.0
33.7
36.5
39.3
43.9
48.2
51.5
53.9
59.3
63.4
67.0
72.0
77.0
83.6
88.7
95.5
100.0
108.4
117.3
124.5
130.5
139.4
145.4
143.7
146.0
151.7
156.5
161.4
166.0
168.3
169.0

144.8
144.4
143.5
138.5
133.3
129.9
128.7
129.9
132.1
135.7
139.2
140.3

166.0
165.8
164.3
161.6
158.1
155.1
154.6
157.6
161.0
162.1
163.0
165.0

133.2
132.9
133.1
132.7
132.7
132.6
130.6
129.6
130.7
132.1
135.1
138.6

163.4
166.3
171.1
167.2
165.2
167.1
169.6
172.6
170.6
167.7
169.9
167.9

151.1
151.2
151.6
152.0
152.8
152.4

141.0
140.8
142.1
142.5
143.5
143.2

165.6
166.2
165.3
165.9
166.4
165.8

140.4
143.1
143.2
135.2
135.4
141.7

167.6
166.4
167.8
167.6
170.7
172.7

153.2
153.2
151.1
148.2
145.1
141.7

143.6
143.4
140.9
137.9
134.4
131.0

167.1
167.3
165.9
163.2
160.5
157.2

146.5
146.0
145.0
145.7
144.0
143.8

173.1
171.9
167.8
168.4
167.9
167.0

Min

Total

Durable

Nondurable

100.00
216
13.7
21.7
25.0
31.6
36.3
44.0
47.4
40.7
35.0
39.4
41.1
38.8
44.9
48.7
50.6
54.8
51.9
58.5
61.1
61.9
57.9
64.8
66.2
66.7
72.2
76.5
81.7
89.8
97.8
100.0
106.3
111.1
107.8
109.6
119.7
129.8
129.3
117.8
130.5
138.2
146.1
152.5
147.0
151.0

87.95
22.8
14.0
21.5
25.4
32.4
37.8
47.0
50.9
42.6
35.3
39.4
40.9
38.7
45.0
48.6
50.6
55.2
51.5
58.2
60.5
61.2
57.0
64.2
65.4
65.6
71.5
75.8
81.0
89.7
97.9
100.0
106.4
111.0
106.4
108.2
118.9
129.8
129.4
116.3
130.3
138.4
146.8
153.6
146.7
150.4

51.98
22.5
9.1
17.7
23.5
31.4
39.9
54.2
59.9
45.2
31.6
37.7
39.3
35.7
43.5
48.9
51.9
58.7
51.8
59.2
61.1
61.6
53.9
61.9
62.9
61.8
68.6
73.1
78.3
89.0
98.9
100.0
106.5
110.6
102.3
102.4
113.7
127.1
125.7
109.3
122.3
130.0
139.7
146.4
136.7
140.5

153.0
152.8
152.1
148.2
143.8
141.4
140.3
142.2
144.4
146.6
149.2
150.4

153.5
153.1
152.0
148.0
143.5
140.2
139.3
141.2
143.9
146.5
148.9
150.4

May
June.

151.4
151.8
152.1
151.9
152.7
152.9

July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov "..
Dec "..

153.9
153.6
151.6
149.2
146.4
143.3

1967 proportion
1929
1933.
1939.
1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.
1945.
1946.
1947.
1948. .
1949.
1950.
1951.
1952.
1953.
1954.
1955.
1956.
1957.
1958.
1959.
1960.
1961.
1962.
1963.
1964.
1965.
1966.
1967.
1968.
1969.
1970.
.
1971,
1972.
1973.
1974.
1975.
1976.
1977.
1978.
1979.
1980.
19811

ties

1980:

Jan.
Feb..
Mar.
Apr
May..
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov.
Dec.
1981
Jan.
Feb.,
Mar.

1
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




280

TABLE B-43.—Industrial production indexes, market groupings, 1947-81
[1967=100; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Materials3

Final products
Year or month

1967 proportion

Total
industrial
production

Total

Automotive
products

Intermediate
products
Business

Equipment

Consumer goods '
Total

Home
goods

Total

2

Total

Dura- Nonble durable
goods goods

100.00

47.82

27.68

2.83

5.06

20.14

12.63

12.89

39.29 20.35

10.47

39.4
41.1
38.8
44.9
48.7
50.6
54.8
51.9
58.5
61.1
61.9
57.9
64.8
66.2
66.7
72.2
765
81.7
89.8
97.8
100.0
106.3
111.1
107.8
109.6
119.7
129.8
129.3
117.8
130.5
138.2
146.1
152.5
147.0
151.0

38.6
40.0
38.8
43.7
47.2
50.7
54.1
51.3
55.4
58.6
60.3
57.6
63.2
65.3
65.8
71.4
75.5
79.7
87.6
95.9
100.0
106.2
109.6
105.3
106.3
115.7
124.4
125.1
118.2
127.6
135.9
142.2
147.2
145.3
149.5

42.4
43.7
43.4
49.6
49.1
50.2
53.2
52.9
59.0
61.2
62.6
62.1
68.1
70.7
72.2
77.1
81.3
85.9
92.6
97.3
100.0
105.9
109.8
109.0
114.7
124.4
131.5
128.9
124.0
137.1
145.3
149.1
150.8
145.4
148.0

45.3
47.4
47.0
59.1
52.3
47.1
59.5
55.4
73.6
60.6
63.5
50.5
63.3
72.5
66.1
80.1
87.7
91.9
113.3
112.8
100.0
119.4
118.1
98.8
124.4
141.4
153.0
132.8
125.8
155.7
175.6
179.9
167.7
132.8
138.1

37.5
39.1
36.2
49.9
43.0
43.0
48.6
44.9
53.0
55.7
54.5
51.4
59.0
59.4
61.3
66.5
71.8
78.4
88.9
97.9
100.0
106.4
113.2
110.2
115.6
129.5
142.5
136.8
118.8
134.1
141.9
147.7
149.2
138.9
142.0

30.6
32.2
28.7
31.1
43.3
51.9
56.3
49.3
50.4
55.3
57.5
51.5
56.5
58.1
57.3
63.7
67.5
71.4
80.7
94.0
100.0
106.5
109.3
100.1
94.7
103.8
114.5
120.0
110.2
114.6
123.0
132.8
142.2
145.2
151.6

38.0
39.5
34.5
37.0
45.2
51.2
53.3
46.8
50.8
58.8
61.1
51.5
57.9
59.4
57.7
62.7
65.8
73.7
84.4
97.7
100.0
105.5
112.5
107.0
104.1
118.0
134.2
142.4
128.2
135.4
147.8
160.3
171.3
173.2
180.8

41.9
44.3
42.0
48.8
51.3
50.9
54.5
54.3
61.7
64.4
64.4
63.0
69.5
70.0
71.4
75.7
79.9
85.2
90.6
96.2
100.0
106.3
112.9
112.9
116.7
126.5
137.2
135.3
123.1
137.2
145.1
154.1
160.5
151.9
154.6

39.5
41.2
37.6
45.0
49.8
50.5
56.1
51.8
61.3
62.8
62.8
56.5
65.2
66.1
66.2
72.1
76.7
82.9
92.4
100.7
100.0
106.5
112.5
109.2
111.3
122.3
133.9
132.4
115.5
131.7
138.6
148.3
156.4
147.6
151.5

38.3
39.4
35.3
44.4
50.5
51.6
60.3
52.0
63.7
63.9
63.8
53.7
64.0
64.8
63.3
70.4
75.1
81.9
93.8
103.3
100.0
106.2
112.1
103.8
104.9
117.7
134.6
132.7
109.1
128.0
136.1
149.0
157.8
143.0
149.2

45.9
52.5
54.9
54.7
54.4
62.1
63.2
65.8
71.3
75.6
82.2
90.3
97.5
100.0
108.8
115.7
115.4
120.2
132.9
142.2
142.6
126.6
147.8
155.6
165.6
175.9
171.5
174.6

153.0
152.8
152.1
148.2
143.8
141.4
140.3
142.2
144.4
146.6
149.2
150.4

147.2
147.7
147.5
145.4
142.9
142.2
142.4
143.3
144.1
145.7
147.4
147.8

147.9
148.2
148.0
145.2
142.1
141.8
142.1
142.9
144.5
146.3
148.1
147.1

132.6
143.2
140.9
126.9
118.6
121.3
127.5
120.7
131.2
140.9
146.1
139.0

148.8
146.2
146.2
141.8
134.5
131.8
128.3
132.6
134.7
137.8
141.8
142.6

146.1
147.1
146.8
145.8
144.0
142.8
142.8
143.7
143.6
144.8
146.5
148.8

175.2
176.5
176.2
174.5
171.8
169.7
169.5
171.1
170.7
171.9
173.9
177.1

160.9
159.2
158.5
150.3
145.5
143.7
144.6
148.9
151.2
152.4
153.4
155.4

157.6
156.9
155.7
150.9
144.2
139.8
136.4
138.8
142.5
145.9
150.1
152.2

156.3
155.2
154.6
147.9
140.0
134.2
129.0
131.3
133.9
139.5
146.1
147.4

182.2
180.8
177.7
173.3
165.4
159.5
157.1
161.3
171.3
174.3
175.1
179.6

151.4
151.8
152.1
151.9
152.7
152.9
153.9
153.6
151.6
149.2
146.4
143.3

147.8
148.2
149.0
149.9
151.3
151.4
152.1
151.5
150.0
149.1
147.5
145.5

146.9
147.8
148.3
148.9
150.7
150.3
150.7
149.6
147.8
146.9
145.0
142.3

130.4
133.9
139.2
142.9
151.8
153.1
147.6
137.6
139.1
132.8
122.4
120.4

145.6
145.2
146.1
145.0
144.8
145.0
145.8
145.3
141.1
138.2
133.9
126.7

149.1
148.7
150.0
151.4
152.1
153.0
154.1
154.0
152.9
152.2
151.0
149.9

177.7
177.5
179.3
181.0
182.0
183.6
184.8
184.4
182.7
180.5
178.4
176.3

157.5
157.7
157.1
156.3
156.1
154.9
156.2
156.8
154.6
151.4
149.2
147.0

153.8
154.3
154.4
152.9
153.4
154.0
155.3
155.2
152.5
148.5
144.1
139.5

150.0
150.6
152.2
151.8
152.8
152.4
153.6
154.3
150.4
145.6
140.4
134.9

180.2
179.9
177.5
179.3
179.0
176.9
176.5
175.4
175.5
170.6
164.4
158.5

1947.
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 4
1981 .
1980
Jan
Feb
Mar.
Apr
May
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov.
Dec.
1981
Jan
Feb
Mar.
Apr
May
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept.
Oct
Nov..
Dec "..
1

Also includes clothing and consumer staples, not shown separately.
Also includes defense and space equipment, not shown separately.
Also includes energy materials, not shown separately.
4
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
2

3




281

TABLE B-44.—Industrial production indexes, selected manufactures, 1947-81
[1967 = 100; monthly data seasonally adjusted]

Durable manufactures

Year or month

Primary
metals

Total

Iron
and
steel

Fabricated
metal
products

NonElectrielecral
Cdl
trical machinmachinery
ery

Nondurable manufactures
Transportation
equipment

Total

Motor
vehicles
and
parts

Lumber Apparel Printing Chemicals
and
dilU
and
prod- publishand
products
proding
ucts
ucts

Foods

1.64

3.31

4.72

7.74

8.75

58.9

4.50

57.8

43.3

19.7

55.8

1967 proportion

6.57

5.93

9.15

8.05

9.27

1947
1948
1949

63.3

49.9

39.0

31.8

658

508

392

22.2

230

348

613

603

454

213

55.4

45.8

33.4

21.6

34.9

54.1

59.7

46.6

21.0

55.9

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

69.7

56.1

477

29.6

41.8

65.7

64.3

48.9

26.2

758

599

37.5

57.9

69.2
78.5
63.5

70.1

58.5
66.0
59.4

51.9
54.0
46.1

34.0
39.0
34.7

54.2
68.0
59.2

60.5

64.7
68.4
68.0

66.3
67.2
66.4

49.7
52.0
54.1

31.1
33.6
34.1

60.2
61.4
62.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

82.5
82.0
78.5
62.3
72.7

93.2
91.5
88.2
66.5
76.5

67.8
68.8
70.6
63.3
71.0

50.6
58.0
57.9
48.6
56.7

39.9
43.1
42.8
39.2
47.6

68.0
66.0
70.7
55.8
63.2

81.2
65.8
69.0
51.0
66.2

75.9
75.0
68.8
69.9
79.3

73.3
75.0
74.9
72.8
80.1

59.5
63.2
65.4
63.9
68.2

39.8
42.7
45.2
46.6
54.3

66.3
70.1
71.1
72.9
76.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

72.4
71.1
76.3
82.3
92.8

77.7
74.2
77.3
84.3
95.9

71.1
69.4
75.4
77.8
82.6

56.9
55.4
62.1
66.3
75.6

51.6
54.8
62.9
64.7
68.4

65.4
61.5
71.1
78.0
80.0

74.7
65.5
79.8
88.3
90.7

74.7
78.2
82.5
86.3
92.7

81.7
82.2
85.5
89.1
92.2

71.0
71.3
73.9
77.8
82.6

56.4
59.2
65.7
71.8
78.8

78.6
80.9
83.4
86.4
90.4

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

102.1
108.4
100.0
104.3
113.8

105.2
108.4
100.0
103.2
112.6

90.8
97.2
100.0
105.6
107.9

85.0
98.8
100.0
101.8
109.3

81.7
97.9
100.0
105.5
111.9

95.1
102.0
100.0
111.1
108.4

115.9
113.9
100.0
120.3
116.5

96.3
100.0
100.0
105.5
107.9

97.4
99.9
100.0
102.9
106.7

87.9
94.6
100.0
103.2
107.4

87.8
95.7
100.0
109.5
118.4

92.4
96.0
100.0
102.6
106.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

106.6
100.2
112.1
126.7
123.1

104.7
96.1
107.1
122.3
119.8

102.4
103.5
112.1
124.7
124.2

104.4
100.2
116.0
133.7
140.1

108.1
107.7
122.2
143.1
143.8

89.5
97.9
108.2
118.3
108.7

92.3
118.6
135.8
148.8
128.2

105.6
113.8
120.8
126.0
116.2

101.4
104.7
109.4
117.3
114.3

107.0
107.1
112.7
118.2
118.2

120.4
125.9
143.6
154.5
159.4

108.9
112.8
116.8
120.9
124.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

96.4
109.7
111.1
119.9
121.3

95.8
104.8
103.8
113.2
1132

109.9
123.9
131.0
141.6
148.5

125.1
134.5
143.6
153.6
163.7

116.5
134.8
145.4
159.4
175.0

97.4
111.1
122.2
132.5
135.4

111.1
142.0
161.1
169.9
159.9

107.6
123.2
131.2
136.3
136.9

107.6
125.7
134.2
134.2
134.4

113.3
122.5
127.6
131.5
136.9

147.2
170.9
185.7
197.4
211.8

123.4
133.0
138.8
142.7
147.5

1980
1981 *.

102.3
107.9

92.4

134.1
136.2

162.8
171.0

172.8
178.3

116.9
116.0

119.0
122.2

119.3

127.0

139.6
1441

207.1

149.6

117.7
113.6
115.2
107.0
96.8
91.3

108.9
105.6
108.1
97.8
85.1
76.4

144.8
145.3
144.8
140.6
132.2
125.0

167.1
167.0
166.5
163.2
162.1
158.3

181.3
179.5
179.9
177.4
171.1
166.2

122.0
126.0
123.9
116.0
110.0
110.0

127.0
134.6
130.1
116.2
106.7
106.8

131.7
130.9
126.6
104.4
104.9
110.2

131.7
130.7
133.5
130.0
128.7
126.1

138.5
139.9
139.1
136.7
135.6
135.3

218.2
217.3
212.9
208.7
198.9
191.5

149.9
149.4
148.6
148.1
148.6
149.3

83.3
86.9
90.6
99.6
113.2
111.5

68.7
76.0
80.4
92.0
107.6
103.0

122.6
124.8
128.8
131.7
132.3
135.7

159.1
159.6
159.5
160.9
162.9
166.9

165.8
166.8
167.4
169.8
173.0
175.1

110.3
108.5
113.3
118.3
121.8
120.4

107.0
104.1
113.7
123.2
129.2
125.7

113.8
120.2
121.6
121.4
123.7
123.6

123.6
125.5
123.5
121.7
125.7
122.7

139.2
141.7
140.9
142.5
142.1
143.0

190.8
198.2
208.2
209.4
211.7
220.5

149.1
148.7
149.9
151.1
151.6
151.0

114.1
114.5
114.9
110.6
111.9
107.4

108.7
108.4
108.0
103.4
105.6
98.5

135.8
137.6
139.2
139.5
138.4
139.3

167.3
168.3
169.2
169.7
172.1
174.1

177.6
174.9
177.4
178.8
179.9
180.1

117.4
116.1
119.5
121.3
123.7
123.4

120.0
119.9
127.1
130.7
136.4
137.5

127.4
126.2
125.6
126.3
126.2
122.5

123.8
121.6
120.2
121.6
122.6
121.1

143.9
144.8
142.7
141.6
141.3
143.1

218.9
219.8
218.5
219.8
220.6
218.4

151.9
152.5
152.4
151.9
152.2
151.3

109.4
113.1
108.6
102.0
96.3
89.9

99.7
105.1
99.2
91.8
86.8

140.1
140.0
136.8
133.7
129.0
125.1

176.7
176.4
173.9
170.2
168.1
164.3

180.9
182.6
180.0
179.6
175.7
170.2

119.8
115.4
114.2
110.6
105.4
103.9

130.5
123.1
120.4
113.8
104.3
100.9

122.9
119.1
113.2
109.6
1062

122.6
122.6
122.5
118.4

144.4
146.1
145.9
145.9
1435
144.0

221.5
219.2
216.3
209.7
2037

151.6
151.9
150.7
151.6
1524

1980
Jan.

Feb

Mar.

Apr
May

June.
July.

Aug

Sept

Oct
Nov.

Dec
1981Jan.

Feb
Mar
Apr
May

June.
July.

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov "..
Dec "..

4.21

298

1
Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




282

466

655

631

497

297

552
590

TABLE B-45.—Capacity utilization rate in manufacturing, 1948-81
[Percent; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]

Year or quarter

1948
1949..
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981",
1976
1
II
III
IV.
1977
1
II
III.
IV.
1978
1
II
III.
IV.

Wharton series3

Commerce series2

FRB series '

AdPrimary- AdvancedTotal
NonTotal
NonTotal Primary vanced
manufac- process- process- manufac- Durable durable processed processed manufac- Durable durable
ing
turing goods goods
.goods
goods
turing goods goods
turing
ing

82.5
74.2
82.8
85.8
85.4
89.2
80.3
87.1
86.4
83.7
75.2
81.9
80.2
77.4
81.6
83.5
85.6
89.6
91.1
86.9
87.1
86.2
79.3
78.4
83.5
87.6
83.8
72.9
79.5
81.9
84.4
85.7
79.1
78.5

87.2
76.2
88.5
90.2
84.9
89.4
80.6
92.1
89.7
84.7
75.4
83.4
79.8
77.9
81.6
83.8
87.8
91.1
91.4
85.7
87.7
88.5
82.9
82.3
88.2
92.5
87.8
73.7
81.9
84.0
86.9
88.1
78.5
78.4

80.0
73.3
79.8
83.4
85.9
89.3
80.1
84.3
84.5
83.1
75.1
81.1
80.4
77.2
81.7
83.4
84.6
88.9
91.2
87.6
86.8
85.0
77.4
76.3
81.0
85.0
81.5
72.5
78.2
80.8
83.0
84.3
79.4
78.5

78.4
79.5
80.0
80.0

81.0
81.9
82.6
82.1

80.7
82.1
82.4
82.6

85.3
88.3
85.3
81.6
68.0
73.7
71.9
67.7
71.8
73.4
75.5
82.3
88.0
86.2
88.8
89.4
80.5
78.0
84.0
91.3
88.4
75.5
81.4
84.2
88.5
90.7
83.5

92.4
93.8
91.6
87.4
83.0
86.2
84.0
82.4
83.2
83.7
85.1
86.8
88.4
87.8
89.6
90.9
88.5
88.7
92.5
94.5
91.9
83.8
90.1
92.1
92.6
93.1
89.1

78
78
82
85
82
76
81
84
84
83
77

85
86
85
86
86
83
83
85
86
84
79
82
82
83
82
79

89
88
87
86
87
83
82
85
89
85
76
82
83
84
84
77

85
85
83
84
84
79
80
82
84
82
77
81
83
84
82
78

88.2
90.6
87.9
84.0
74.1
78.9
76.8
73.7
76.5
77.6
79.5
84.2
88.2
86.9
89.1
90.0
83.8
82.3
87.5
92.6
89.8
78.9
84.9
87.4
90.1
91.7
85.8

82
82
80
81

81
83
79
81

82
81
82
82

83
83
82
80

81
82
79
82

84.2
85.0
85.3
85.3

79.9
81.5
82.2
81.9

90.3
90.1
89.7
90.3

79.8
80.8
81.3
81.3

83
84
82
82

84
86
82
82

82
82
82
82

83
84
82
82

84
84
82
83

86.2
87.6
87.8
88.1

82.4
84.3
84.8
85.3

91.8
92.4
92.3
92.1

84.0
86.3
87.9
89.5

80.9
82.7
83.7
84.6

84
84
83
84

84
85
83
85

83
82
82
83

83
84
84
85

84
84
82
84

87.7
89.7
90.8
92.3

85.1
87.7
89.4
91.6

91.5
92.6
92.8
93.4

86.9
85.9
85.3
84.4

89.0
88.2
88.3
86.9

85.7
84.7
83.7
83.0

84
83
82
81

85
84
82
80

83
82
82
82

85
84
83
83

84
83
81
80

92.9
91.8
91.4
90.8

92.3
91.0
90.1
89.6

93.7
93.0
93.2
92.4

1980
1
It
III.
IV.

83.4
77.9
75.9
79.1

85.5
76.4
73.1
79.3

82.5
78.7
77.4
78.8

80
76
76
78

80
74
75
78

81
78
78
78

81
75
74
78

80
76
77
78

90.2
84.3
82.5
86.1

88.8
82.1
79.3
84.0

92.3
87.6
87.2
89.2

1981
1
II
III
IV"

79.9
79.8
79.3
74.8

81.3
80.3
79.4
72.8

79.1
79.6
79.2
75.8

78
78
76

77
77
74

79
80
78

78
78
76

78
78
76

87.1
86.6
86.5

85.5
85.4
84.9

89.6
88.5
88.8

86
86
84
85
85
81
80
83
86
83
77
81
83
84
83
78

88
87
83
84
84

77.0
78.1
78.5
78.8

82.2
84.4
84.5
84.7

82.0
83.9
85.2
86.4

1979:
1
II
III
IV.

1
2

For description of the series, see "Federal Reserve Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization," February 1978.
Quarterly data are for last month in quarter. Annual data are averages of the four indexes, except for 1965 (December
index) and 1966-67 (averages of June and December indexes). For description of the series, see "Survey of Current Business,"
July 1974.
3
Annual data are averages of quarterly indexes. For description of the series, see F. Gerard Adams and Robert Summers, "The
Wharton Index of Capacity Utilization: A Ten Year Perspective," 1973 Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics
Section, American Statistical Association.
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), and
Wharton School of Finance.




283

TABLE B-46.—New construction activity, 1929-81
[Value put in place, billions of dollars; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Public construction

Private construction

Year or month

Total
new
construction

Nonresidential buildings and other
construction 1

Residential
buildings '
Total
Total 2

New
housing
units

Total
Total

Commercial 3

Industrial

Federal

State and
local 5

2.3

Other 4

1929

10.8

8.3

3.6

3.0

4.7

1.1

0.9

2.6

2.5

0.2

1933

2.9

1.2

.5

.3

.8

.1

.2

.5

1.6

.5

1.1

1939

8.2

4.4

2.7

2.3

1.7

.3

.3

1.2

3.8

.8

3.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

8.7
12.0
14.1

5.1
6.2
3.4
2.0
2.2

3.0
3.5
1.7
.9
.8

2.6
3.0
1.4
.7
.6

2.1
2.7
1.7
1.1
1.4

.3
.4
.2
.0
.1

.4
.8
.3
.2
.2

1.3
1.5
1.2
.9
1.1

3.6
5.8
10.7

6.3
3.1

1.2
3.8
9.3
5.6
2.5

2.4
2.0
1.3
.7
.6

.7
4.8

2.1
5.8

.2
1.2

.6
1.7

1.3
3.0

2.4
2.2

1.7
.9

.7
1.4

8.3
5.3
5.8

3.4

14.3

12.1

1.3
6.2

1947
1948
1949

20.0
26.1
26.7

16.7
21.4
20.5

9.9

7.8

13.1
12.4

10.5
10.0

6.9
8.2
8.0

1.0
1.4
1.2

1.7
1.4
1.0

4.2
5.5
5.9

3.3
4.7
6.3

.8
1.2
1.5

2.5
3.5
4.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

33.6
35.4
36.8
39.1
41.4

26.7
26.2
26.0
27.9
29.7

18.1
15.9
15.8
16.6
18.2

15.6
13.2
12.9
13.4
14.9

8.6
10.3
10.2
11.3
11.5

1.4
1.5
1.1
1.8
2.2

1.1
2.1
2.3
2.2
2.0

6.1
6.7
6.8
7.3
7.2

6.9
9.3
10.8
11.2
11.7

1.6
3.0
4.2
4.1
3.4

5.2
6.3
6.6
7.1
8.3

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

46.5
47.6
49.1
50.0
55.4

34.8
34.9
35.1
34.6
39.3

21.9
20.2
19.0
19.8
24.3

18.2
16.1
14.7
15.4
19.2

12.9
14.7
16.1
14.8
15.1

3.2
3.6
3.6
3.6
3.9

2.4
3.1
3.6
2.4
2.1

7.3
8.0
9.0
8.8
9.0

11.7
12.7
14.1
15.5
16.1

2.8
2.7
3.0
3.4
3.7

10.0
11.1
12.1
12.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

54.7
56.4
60.2
64.8
68.0

38.9
39.3
42.3
45.5
47.7

23.0
23.1
25.2
27.9
28.0

17.3
17.1
19.4
21.7
21.8

15.9
16.2
17.2
17.6
19.7

4.2
4.7
5.1
5.0
5.4

2.9
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.6

8.9
8.7
9.2
9.7

15.9
17.1
17.9
19.4
20.4

3.6
3.9
3.9
4.0
3.9

12.2
13.3
14.0
15.4
16.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

74.1
76.8
78.5
87.5
94.3

52.0
52.8
52.9
59.9
66.3

27.9
25.7
25.6
30.6
33.2

217
19.4
19.0
24.0
25.9

24.1
27.1
27.3
29.3
33.1

22 1
24.0

7.8
9.4

6.0
6.8

180
200
221

15.5
16.9

27.6
28.0

40
4.0
35
3.4
3.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

95.2
110.3
124.4
138.4
139.2

67.1
80.4
94.2
105.9
100.9

31.9
43.3
54.3
59.7
50.4

24.3
35.1
44.9
50.1
40.6

35.3
37.2
40.0
46.2
50.5

9.8
11.6
13.5
15.5
15.9

6.5
5.4
4.7
6.2
7.9

19.0
20.1
21.8
24.5
26.7

28.1
29.9
30.2
32.5
38.3

3.3
4.0
4.4
4.9
5.3

24.8
25.9
25.8
27.6
33.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

135.9
151.1
173.8
205.6
230.8

95.1
112.0
135.7
159.7
181.7

46.5
60.5
81.0
93.4
99.0

34.4
47.3
65.7
75.8
78.6

48.6
51.4
54.7
66.2
82.7

12.8
12.8
14.8
18.6
24.9

8.0
7.2
7.7
11.0
15.0

27.8
31.5
32.2
36.7
42.8

40.9
39.1
38.2
45.9
49.1

6.3
7.0
7.3
8.4
8.9

34.6
32.1
30.9
37.5
40.2

1980
1981"

230.3
236.3

174.9
182.8

87.3
85.7

63.1
61.9

87.6
97.1

29.9
33.3

13.8
16.8

43.9
46.9

55.4
53.5

10.0
10.7

45.4
42.8

1945
1946
New series

See next page for continuation of table.




284

10.7

255

8.9

24.2
24.6

TABLE B-46.—New construction activity, 1929-81—Continued
[Value put in place, billions of dollars; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Private construction

Year or month

Total
new
construction

Residential
buildings1
Total

Public construction

Nonresidential buildings and other
construction l
Total

Total 2

New
housing
units

Total

Commercial 3

Industrial

Federal

State and
local5

Other 4

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

257.5
248.3
240.8
228.6
221.6
218.5

196.9
191.4
183.0
173.5
167.0
163.1

103.5
99.2
93.9
85.3
78.8
75.0

79.0
73.7
68.7
62.3
56.8
53.3

93.4
92.2
89.1
88.2
88.2
88.1

32.0
31.2
30.8
30.3
30.5
29.4

15.6
15.7
13.9
14.0
14.2
14.8

45.9
45.3
44.4
43.8
43.6
43.9

60.6
57.0
57.8
55.1
54.6
55.4

9.9
9.5
10.6
10.0
9.9
9.7

50.7
47.4
47.2
45.1
44.7
45.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

216.4
217.9
224.6
228.9
234.3
245.4

161.5
163.5
169.1
174.9
180.9
187.9

75.6
79.3
84.5
89.8
95.6
98.9

53.1
56.3
60.7
64.2
68.1
70.4

85.9
84.2
84.7
85.1
85.3
89.0

29.1
29.0
28.7
29.1
29.6
30.8

13.3
12.8
12.9
12.4
12.9
14.3

43.6
42.3
43.1
43.6
42.8
43.9

54.9
54.4
55.5
54.0
53.4
57.6

10.9
9.7
10.2
9.5
9.7
10.6

44.0
44.7
45.2
44.5
43.7
47.0

1981:
Jan
Feb.
Mar
Apr
May.
June

259.0
254.5
250.3
246.5
235.9
234.0

193.9
193.2
189.6
189.9
184.1
181.8

100.7
99.7
96.3
95.2
89.7
86.0

74.2
75.1
73.0
72.9
67.7
64.3

93.2
93.5
93.4
94.7
94.4
95.8

33.0
33.4
33.3
33.4
32.4
32.4

15.3
15.1
15.4
15.5
15.5
16.2

44.9
45.0
44.7
45.8
46.5
47.2

65.2
61.3
60.6
56.6
51.8
52.2

11.4
11.4
10.3
10.9
10.5
10.7

53.8
49.9
50.4
45.7
41.3
41.5

233.9
229.8
230.9
229.9
231.6
229.3

182.3
180.6
178.6
178.2
179.2
177.3

82.9
80.5
78.5
78.2
78.1
78.9

60.5
58.1
55.9
52.8
51.0
50.4

99.4
100.0
100.1
100.0
101.1
98.4

34.0
33.7
33.4
33.0
34.5
33.8

17.2
18.3
18.3
18.6
18.4
17.2

48.2
48.0
48.4
48.4
48.2
47.4

51.6
49.3
52.2
51.6
52.4
52.0

10.8
9.5
10.7
11.2
10.4
10.8

40.8
39.8
41.6
40.4
42.0
41.2

July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct
Nov
Dec "

1
Beginning 1960, farm residential buildings included in residential buildings; prior to 1960, included in nonresidential
buildings and other construction.
2
Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units, not shown separately.
3
Office buildings, warehouses, stores, restaurants, garages, etc.
4
Religious, educational, hospital and institutional, miscellaneous nonresidential, farm (see also footnote 1), public utilities,
and all other private.
5
Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

358-691 0 - 82 - 19 : QL3



285

TABLE B-47.—New housing units started and authorized, 7959-87
[Thousands of units]
New private housing units authorized 2

New housing units started
Private and public 1
Year or month

Private (farm and nonfarm) l

Total
(farm and Nonfarm
nonfarm)

Type of structure
Total

1 unit

2to4
units

Type of structure
Total

5 units
or more

28:J.O

1959 .

1,553.7

1,53 1.3

1,517.0

1,234.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

1,296.1
1,365.0
1,492.5
1,634.9
1,561.0

1,27 4.0
1,32 6.8
1,46 8.7
1,61 4.8
1,52 4.0

1,252.2
1,313.0
1,462.9
1,603.2
1,528.8

994.7
974.3
991.4
1,012.4
970.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1,509.7
1,195.8
1,321.9
1,545.4
1,499.5

1,48 7.5
Ul 2.8
1,2S 8.8
1,52 1.4
1,48 2.3

1,472.8
1,164.9
1,291.6
1,507.6
1,466.8

963.7
778.6
843.9
899.4
810.6

86.6
61.1
71.6
80.9
85.0

1,433.6
2,052.2
2,356.6
2,045.3
1,337.7

812.9
1,151.0
1,309.2
1,132.0
888.1

1,171.4
1,547.6
2,001.7
2,036.1
1,760.0

1,160.4
1,537.5
1,987.1
2,020.3
1,745.1

892.2
1,162.4
1,450.9
1,433.3
1,194.1

1,312.6
1,102.8

1,292.2
1,086.6

852.2
706.1

1,389
1,273
1,040
1,044
938
1,184

965
111
628
650
651
760

119
98
89
99
87
77

305
398
323
295
200
347

1,277
1,411
1,482
1,519
1,550
1,535

867
971
1,032
1,009
1,019
974

83
133
140
121
143
131

1,660
1,215
1,297
1,332
1,158
1,039

993
791
838
897
764
688

1,047
941
916
867
863
978

704
606
645
510
569
579

. .

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

1,469.0
2,084.5
2,378.5
2,057.5
1,352.5
1

1980
1981"
1980:

3
3
3
3
3

:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

73.8
80.8
86.8
96.8
93.0
117.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

121.6
131.7
147.0
153.7
113.5
96.3

3

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

85.2
72.5
108.9
124.0
110.6
107.0

3
3

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

101.0
87.3
90.9
88.2
64.4
62.7

3

1981:

*
3
3

3
3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

3
3
3

)

3}

1 unit

2 to 4
units

5 units
or more

1,208.3

938.3

77.1

192.9

998.0
1,064.2
1,186.6
1,334.7
1,285.8

746.1
722.8
716.2
750.2
720.1

64.6
67.6
87.1
118.9
100.8

187.4
273.8
383.3
465.6
464.9

422.5
325.1
376.1
527.3
571.2

1,239.8
971.9
1,141.0
1,353.4
1,323.7

709.9
563.2
650.6
694.7
625.9

84.8
61.0
73.0
84.3
85.2

445.1
347.7
417.5
574.4
612.7

84.8
120.3
141.3
118.3
68.1

535.9
780.9
906.2
795.0
381.6

1,351.5
1,924.6
2,218.9
1,819.5
1,074.4

646.8
906.1
1,033.1
882.1
643.8

88.1
616.7
132.9 885.7
148.6 1,037.2
117.0
820.5
64.3
366.2

64.0
85.9
121.7
125.0
122.0

204.3
289.2
414.4
462.0
429.0

939.2
1,296.2
1,690.0
1,800.5
1,551.8

675.5
893.6
1,126.1
1,182.6
981.5

63.9
93.1
121.3
130.6
125.4

199.8
309.5
442.7
487.3
444.8

710.4
561.2

114.5
100.0

365.7
319.5

1,302
1,196
998
824
864
1,094

798
727
579
485
508
641

110
108
97
69
87
101

394
361
322
270
269
352

327
307
310
389
388
430

1,232
1,355
1,518
1,351
1,366
1,249

763
840
884
820
809
753

114
133
144
135
142
130

355
382
490
396
415
366

149
112
105
92
106
88

518
312
354
343
288
263

1,214
1,165
1,153
1,186
1,167
963

715
677
678
689
654
567

132
113
108
122
110
101

367
375
367
375
403
295

86
76
60
81
82
88

257
259
211
276
212
311

913
865
850
722
723
807

528
494
453
398
401
458

97
88
80
84
75
92

288
283
317
240
247
257

25-r.4
33!*.7
47] .5
59().8
108.4 450.0

109.5 330.5
1,190.6
91.6
288.9
980.8
Seasonally adjusted annual rates

1
Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the
Department of Housing and Urban Development "Turnkey" program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts,
including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section 803 of the National Housing Act, are included in publicly
owned starts and excluded from total private starts.
2
Authorized by issuance of local building permit: in 16,000 permit-issuing places beginning 1978; in 14,000 places for 197277;3 in 13,000 places for 1967-71; in 12,000 places for 1963-66; and in 10,000 places prior to 1963.
Not available separately beginning January 1970.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




286

TABLE B-48.—Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1947-82
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Plant and equipment
Year or
quarter

Total

Plant

Equipment

Manufacturing
Total

Nonmanufacturing

DuraNonble durable
goods goods

Total

Mining

Transpor- Public
utilitation
ties

Trade
and
services1

Communication
and
other 2

1947
1948
1949

21.80
25.46
23.54

8.45
10.35
10.20

13.35
15.11
13.34

8.73
9.25
7.32

3.39
3.54
2.67

5.34
5.71
4.64

13.07
16.21
16.22

0.69
.93
.88

2.21
2.66
2.30

1.64
2.67
3.28

6.13
6.92
7.13

2.40
3.04
2.63

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

25.32
30.83
31.59
33.58
33.13

10.94
13.08
13.14
13.82
14.09

14.37
17.74
18.45
19.76
19.03

7.73
11.07
12.12
12.43
12.00

3.22
5.12
5.75
5.71
5.49

4.51
5.95
6.37
6.72
6.51

17.59
19.76
19.47
21.16
21.13

.84
1.11
1.21
1.25
1.29

2.38
3.05
2.99
2.97
2.42

3.42
3.75
3.96
4.61
4.23

8.37
8.83
8.05
8.94
9.59

2.58
3.03
3.25
3.38
3.60

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

36.58
44.76
48.12
42.17
44.78

15.97
19.34
20.94
19.41
19.89

20.60
25.42
27.19
22.76
24.89

12.50
16.33
17.50
12.98
13.76

5.87
8.19
8.59
6.21
6.72

6.62
8.15
8.91
6.77
7.04

24.08
28.43
30.62
29.19
31.02

1.31
1.64
1.69
1.43
1.35

2.60
3.07
3.35
2.34
3.17

4.26
4.78
5.95
5.74
5.46

11.49
13.64
13.68
14.11
15.40

4.42
5.30
5.96
5.58
5.63

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

48.63
47.82
51.28
53.25
61.66

20.94
21.12
22.12
22.23
24.96

27.70
26.70
29.16
31.03
36.70

16.36
15.53
16.03
17.27
21.23

8.28
7.43
7.81
8.64
10.98

8.08
8.10
8.22
8.63
10.25

32.28
32.29
35.25
35.99
40.43

1.29
1.26
1.41
1.26
1.33

3.19
2.82
3.26
3.36
4.46

5.40
5.20
5.12
5.33
5.80

16.15
16.53
18.27
18.57
20.38

6.25
6.48
7.19
7.47
8.46

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

70.43
82.22
83.42
88.45
99.52

27.24
32.21
32.22
35.51
40.54

43.19
50.01
51.20
52.94
58.99

25.41
31.37
32.25
32.34
36.27

13.49
17.23
17.83
17.93
19.97

11.92
14.15
14.42
14.40
16.31

45.02
50.84
51.18
56.11
63.25

1.36
1.42
1.38
1.44
1.77

5.46
6.43
6.34
6.79
7.04

6.49 22.13
7.82 24.69
9.33 23.02
10.52 25.31
11.70 28.31

9.58
10.49
11.11
12.06
14.43

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

105.61
108.53
120.25
137.70
156.98

44.24
46.60
49.35
56.66
64.29

61.36
61.93
70.89
81.04
92.69

36.99
33.60
35.42
42.37
53.21

19.80
16.78
18.22
22.75
27.44

17.19
16.82
17.20
19.62
25.76

68.62
74.93
84.82
95.33
103.78

2.02
2.67
2.88
3.31
4.62

6.95
5.93
6.72
7.41
8.23

13.03 29.77
14.70 34.20
16.26 40.00
17.97 45.53
19.83 47.79

16.85
17.43
18.96
21.12
23.30

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

157.71
171.45
198.08
231.24
270.46

65.21
71.20
80.31
92.70
105.73

92.50
100.25
117.77
138.54
164.73

54.92
59.95
69.22
79.72
98.68

26.33
28.47
34.04
40.43
51.07

28.59
31.47
35.18
39.29
47.61

102.79
111.50
128.87
151.52
171.77

6.10
7.44
9.24
10.21
11.38

8.68
8.89
9.40
10.68
12.35

19.98
22.37
26.79
29.95
33.96

46.23
49.30
56.54
68.66
79.26

21.80
23.51
26.90
32.02
34.83

1980 3
19813
1982

295.63
322.61
346.42

117.55

178.08

115.81
128.26
139.34

58.91
62.94
67.81

56.90
65.32
71.53

179.81
194.35
207.08

13.51
16.80
18.79

12.09
12.07
13.39

35.44
37.94
39.86

81.79
86.27
91.16

36.99
41.27
43.88

291.89
294.36
296.23
299.58

115.96
116.50
117.59
120.27

175.93
177.86
178.64
179.32

111.77
115.69
116.40
118.63

58.28
59.38
58.19
59.77

53.49
56.32
58.21
58.86

180.13
178.66
179.83
180.95

11.89
12.81
13.86
15.28

12.47
12.09
12.23
11.70

36.26
35.03
35.58
34.96

82.17
81.07
81.19
82.91

37.34
37.66
36.97
36.11

312.24
316.73
328.25
332.06

128.57
131.05
136.40

183.67
185.68
191.85

124.50
125.49
130.11
132.22

61.24
63.10
62.58
64.73

63.27
62.40
67.53
67.50

187.74
191.24
198.13
199.84

16.20
16.80
17.55
16.59

11.74
11.70
11.61
13.20

36.05
37.84
39.55
38.09

83.43
85.88
87.55
88.27

40.32
39.02
41.89
43.69

136.47
140.58

66.26
68.34

70.21
72.24

208.98
214.25

17.23
17.81

11.79 40.14
13.89 40.29

95.12
96.29

44.71
45.97

1980:

1
tl
III
IV

1981:

1
II
Ill 3
IV ... .

1982:
I 33
II

345.46
35483

'Wholesale and retail trade; finance, insurance, and real estate; and personal, business, and professional services.
2
"Other" consists of construction; social services and membership organizations; and forestry, fisheries, and agricultural
services.
3
Planned capital expenditures reported by business in late October-December 1981, corrected for biases.
Source.- Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




287

TABLE B-49.—Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade 1947-81
[Amounts in millions of dollars-, monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Total manufacturing and
trade

Manufacturing

Merchant wholesalers

Retail trade

Year or month
InvenSales ' tories2

Ratio3

Sales'

Inventories2

Ratio3 Sales'

3
Inventories2 Ratio Sales'

Inventories2

Ratio3

1947
1948..
1949

35,260
33,788

52,507
49,497

1.42
1.53

15513
17,316
16,126

25,897
28,543
26,321

158
1.57
1.75

6,808
6,514

7,957
7,706

1.13
1.19

10,200
11,135
11,149

14241
16,007
15,470

126
1.39
1.41

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

38,596
43,356
44,840
47,987
46,443

59,822
70,242
72,377
76,122
73,175

1.36
1.55
1.58
1.58
1.60

18,634
21,714
22,529
24,843
23,355

31,078
39,306
41,136
43,948
41,612

1.48
1.66
1.78
1.76
1.81

7,695
8,597
8,782
9,052
8,993

9,284
9,886
10,210
10,686
10,637

1.07
1.16
1.12
1.17
1.18

12,268
13,046
13,529
14,091
14,095

19,460
21,050
21,031
21,488
20,926

1.38
1.64
1.52
1.53
1.51

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

51,694
54,063
55,879
54,201
59,729

79,516
87,304
89,052
87,093
92,129

1.47
1.55
1.59
1.60
1.50

26,480
27,740
28,736
27,247
30,286

45,069
50,642
51,871
50,241
52,945

1.62
1.73
1.80
1.84
1.70

9,893
10,513
10,475
10,257
11,491

11,678
13,260
12,730
12,739
13,879

1.13
1.19
1.23
1.24
1.15

15,321
15,811
16,667
16,696
17,951

22,769
23,402
24,451
24,113
25,305

1.43
1.47
1.44
1.43
1.40

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

60,827
61,159
65,662
68,995
73,682

94,713
95,594
101,063
105,480
111,503

1.56
1.54
1.50
1.49
1.47

30,879
30,923
33,357
35,058
37,331

53,780
54,885
58,186
60,046
63,409

1.75
1.74
1.70
1.69
1.64

11,656
11,988
12,674
13,382
14,529

14,120
14,488
14,936
16,048
17,000

1.22
1.20
1.16
1.15
1.14

18,294
18,249
19,630
20,556
21,823

26,813
26,221
27,941
29,386
31,094

1.45
1.43
1.38
1.39
1.40

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

80,283
87,187
90,348
98,104
105,003

120,907
136,790
145,340
156,167
169,833

1.45
1.47
1.56
1.54
1.55

40,995
44,870
46,487
50,228
53,501

68,185
77,952
84,664
90,618
98,202

1.60
1.62
1.76
1.74
1.77

15,611
16,987
19,448
20,846
22,609

18,317
20,765
25,377
26,604
29,114

1.15
1.15
1.25
1.25
1.23

23,677
25,330
24,413
27,030
28,893

34,405
38,073
35,299
38,945
42,517

1.39
1.44
1.43
1.38
1.41

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

107,448
116,017
130,030
153,412
177,625

178,321
188,544
203,103
233,237
285,807

1.62
1.58
1.50
1.41
1.45

52,805
55,906
63,023
72,937
84,794

101,651
102,658
108,238
124,628
157,792

1.90
1.83
1.67
1.58
1.65

23,943
26,257
29,584
38,014
47,748

32,803
35,823
39,786
45,372
56,948

1.29
1.30
1.27
1.11
1.07

30,700
33,853
37,422
42,462
45,082

43,867
50,063
55,079
63,237
71,067

1.41
1.41
1.40
1.40
1.48

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

182,230
204,277
229,623
258,724
294,733

288,375
318,544
350,678
395,252
444,224

1.57
1.48
1.46
1.44
1.43

86,595
98,802
113,201
126,953
143,941

159,934
175,193
189,157
210,079
241,572

1.84
1.69
1.61
1.57
1.57

46,623
50,694
55,987
64,715
76,264

56,697
64,078
72,311
83,492
93,817

1.21
1.19
1.21
1.21
1.17

49,012 71,744
54,781 79,273
60,435 89,210
67,057 101,681
74,529 108,835

1.44
1.38
1.39
1.42
1.43

1980
1981"

320,540

475,202

1.45

153,828
166,515

257,979
277,172

1.65
1.62

86,991 105,529

1.14

79,721 111,694
87,126

1.38

Jan.
Feb
Mar.
Apr
May
June.

318,101
317,901
312,469
305,440
302,071
305,326

448,535
452,803
455,920
461,445
462,979
464,187

1.41
1.42
1.46
1.51
1.53
1.52

154,409
155,396
152,250
147,791
145,625
145,768

245,669
248,198
251,485
255,047
256,129
256,421

1.59
1.60
1.65
1.73
1.76
1.76

84,131
83,606
82,616
81,245
80,471
81,714

94,719
95,813
95,594
96,654
97,351
98,328

1.13
1.15
1.16
1.19
1.21
1.20

79,561
78,899
77,603
76,404
75,975
77,843

108,147
108,792
108,841
109,744
109,499
109,438

1.36
1.38
1.40
1.44
1.44
1.41

July.
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

315,633
317,906
327,758
335,873
339,049
343,752

466,828
468,943
471,500
473,617
474,884
475,202

1.48
1.48
1.44
1.41
1.40
1.38

150,332
151,188
156,915
161,038
162,384
163,719

257,207
256,740
256,837
256,218
257,042
257,979

1.71
1.70
1.64
1.59
1.58
1.58

85,810
86,889
90,223
93,282
93,901
96,591

99,618
101,920
102,953
104,293
105,203
105,529

1.16
1.17
1.14
1.12
1.12
1.09

79,491
79,829
80,620
81,552
82,764
83,443

110,003
110,283
111,710
113,106
112,639
111,694

1.38
1.38
1.39
1.39
1.36
1.34

349,018
350,334
349,898
350,923
349,245
354,442

478,451
484,069
485,467
487,060
490,254
494,226

1.37
1.38
1.39
1.39
1.40
1.39

164,588
165,508
165,804
167,491
167,527
171,494

261,752
264,496
266,524
267,506
269,260
269,709

1.59
1.60
1.61
1.60
1.61
1.57

98,967
98,016
96,486
97,577
96,217
95,564

104,909
106,066
105,539
105,591
105,568
107,210

1.06
1.08
1.09
1.08
1.10
1.12

85,463
86,810
87,608
85,855
85,501
87,385

111,790
113,507
113,404
113,963
115,426
117,307

1.31
1.31
1.29
1.33
1.35
1.34

354,759
352 783
353,717
345,287
344,683

498,098
502 458
508,132
511,682
515,138

1.40
142
144
1.48
1.49

170,324
169 518
168 581
164,085
161,979
161,629

271,872
273 361
276*616
278,440
279,544
277,172

1.60
161
l'64
1.70
1.73
1.71

97,085
94674
96437
94,542
95,471

106,402
107,820
109297
109,757
111,697

1.10
1.14
1 13
U6
1.17

87,356
88,593
88'699
86*660
87,233
87541

119,824
121,277
122*219
123*485
123,897

1.37
1.37
138
l'.42
1.42

v

1980:

1981
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

1
Monthly average for
2
Seasonally adjusted,
3

year and t9tal for month.
end of period.
Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods, ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales; for monthly data, ratio of
inventories at end of month to sales for month.
Note.—Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning 1958 for manufacturing and beginning 1967 for wholesale and
retail trade.
The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national
product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business, and show inventories in terms of current book
value without adjustment for revaluation.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysts and Bureau of the Census).




288

TABLE B-50.—Manufacturers' shipments and inventories, 1947-81
[Millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
1

Inventories2

Shipments
Year or
month

Total

Durable
goods
industries

Nondurable
goods
industries

Durable goods industries
Total
Total

Materials
and
supplies

Work
in
process

Nondurable goods industries

Finished
goods

Total

Materials
and
supplies

Work
in
process

Finished
goods

1947
1948
1949

15,513
17,316
16,126

6,694
7,579
7,191

8,819
9,738
8,935

25,897
28,543
26,321

13,061
14,662
13,060

12,836
13,881
13,261

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

18,634
21,714
22,529
24,843
23,355

8,845
10,493
11,313
13,349
11,828

9,789
11,221
11,216
11,494
11,527

31,078
39,306
41,136
43,948
41,612

15,539
20,991
23,731
25,878
23,710

8,966
7,894

10,720
9,721

6,206
6,040

15,539
18,315
17,405
18,070
17,902

8,317
8,167

2,472
2,440

7,409
7,415

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

26,480
27,740
28,736
27,247
30,286

14,071
14,715
15,237
13,563
15,609

12,409
13,025
13,499
13,684
14,677

45,069
50,642
51,871
50,241
52,945

26,405
30,447
31,728
30,258
32,077

9,194
10,417
10,608
10,032
10,776

10,756
12,317
12,837
12,387
13,063

6,348
7,565
8,125
7,839
8,239

18,664
20,195
20,143
19,983
20,868

8,556
8,971
8,775
8,662
9,080

2,571
2,721
2,864
2,828
2,944

7,666
8,622
8,624
8,491
8,845

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

30,879
30,923
33,357
35,058
37,331

15,883
15,616
17,262
18,280
19,637

14,996
15,307
16,095
16,778
17,694

53,780
54,885
58,186
60,046
63,409

32,371
32,544
34,632
35,866
38,506

10,353
10,279
10,810
11,068
11,970

12,772
13,203
14,159
14,871
16,191

9,245
9,063
9,662
9,925
10,344

21,409
22,341
23,554
24,180
24,903

9,082
9,493
9,813
9,978
10,131

2,946
3,110
3,296
3,406
3,511

9,380
9,738
10,444
10,796
11,261

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

40,995
44,870
46,487
50,228
53,501

22,221
24,649
25,267
27,659
29,437

18,774
20,220
21,220
22,570
24,064

68,185
77,952
84,664
90,618
98,202

42,257
49,920
55,005
58,875
64,739

13,325
15,489
16,455
17,376
18,693

18,075
21,939
25,005
27,336
30,408

10,854
12,491
13,547
14,163
15,639

25,928
28,032
29,659
31,743
33,463

10,448
11,155
11,715
12,289
12,724

3,806
4,204
4,421
4,848
5,122

11,674
12,673
13,523
14,606
15,617

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974..

52,805
55,906
63,023
72,937
84,794

28,188
29,954
34,024
39,686
44,228

24,617
25,952
29,000
33,250
40,567

101,651
102,658
108,238
124,628
157,792

66,780
66,289
70,250
81,398
101,739

19,182 29,848
19,759 28,650
20,860 30,788
26,028 35,545
35,151 42,603

17,751
17,880
18,601
19,823
23,985

34,871
36,368
37,988
43,230
56,053

13,150
13,683
14,676
18,132
23,699

5,274
5,665
5,982
6,707
8,175

16,448
17,019
17,330
18,391
24,179

1975
1976
1977
1978.
1979

86,595 43,656
98,802 50,689
113,201 59,267
126,953 67,848
143,941 75,803

42,939
48,113
53,934
59,104
68,138

159,934
175,193
189,157
210,079
241,572

102,874
112,581
121,646
137,712
161,390

33,920 43,369
37,548 46,345
40,274 50,619
45,181 58,554
53,496 70,462

25,586
28,690
30,752
33,977
37,434

57,060
62,612
67,511
72,367
80,182

23,542
25,833
27,429
29,357
33,362

8,837
9,933
10,966
11,842
12,871

24,681
26,846
29,116
31,168
33,949

1980
1981 "

153,828 78,003 75,825
166,515 84,995 81,520

257,979
277,172

171,603
185,789

53,808
56,830

77,935
84,912

39,860
44,047

86,376
91,383

35,572
37,285

14,108
14,328

36,696
39,770

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

154,409 79,670 74,739
155,396 80,649 74,747
152,250 77,508 74,742
147,791 74,720 73,071
145,625 72,302 73,323
145,768 71,908 73,861

245,669
248,198
251,485
255,047
256,129
256,421

163,618
164,917
166,715
169,235
169,818
169,769

54,376
54,836
54,954
55,551
55,022
54,624

71,501
72,037
73,329
74,348
75,105
75,512

37,741
38,044
38,431
39,336
39,690
39,634

82,051
83,281
84,770
85,812
86,311
86,652

34,077
34,433
34,850
35,238
35,405
35,339

13,281
13,469
13,829
13,919
13,923
13,848

34,693
35,379
36,091
36,655
36,983
37,465

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

150,332 75,554
151,188 75,485
156,915 79,735
161,038 82,518
162,384 83,229
163,719 83,482

257,207
256,740
256,837
256,218
257,042
257,979

170,391
170,540
170,163
169,781
170,275
171,603

54,427
53,734
53,587
53,338
53,181
53,808

75,952
76,705
76,691
76,588
77,298
77,935

40,013
40,101
39,885
39,855
39,797
39,860

86,816
86,200
86,674
86,437
86,767
86,376

35,393
34,683
35,114
35,222
35,294
35,572

13,835
13,892
13,957
13,825
13,832
14,108

37,588
37,625
37,603
37,390
37,641
36,696

1980:

74,778
75,703
77,180
78,521
79,155
80,236

1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

164,588
165,508
165,804
167,491
167,527
171,494

83,329
84,215
85,058
86,327
86,664
88,770

81,259 261,752
81,293 264,496
80,746 266,524
81,164 267,506
80,863 269,260
82,724 269,709

174,223
175,620
176,229
177,123
177,635
178,676

55,293
55,870
55,495
55,857
55,282
55,816

79,743
80,090
80,584
81,000
81,933
81,769

39,188
39,660
40,149
40,265
40,420
41,091

87,529
88,876
90,295
90,383
91,625
91,033

36,113
36,381
36,412
36,656
36,673
36,311

14,401
14,682
14,782
14,799
14,979
14,607

37,014
37,813
39,103
38,927
39,973
40,115

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec*

170,324
169,518
168,581
164,085
161,979
161,629

87,319
86,841
86,179
82,583
81,641
81,275

83,005
82,677
82,402
81,502
80,338
80,354

180,855
182,221
185,140
186,718
187,275
185,789

56,867
56,594
57,495
57,648
57,740
56,830

82,431
82,996
84,083
84,986
85,574
84,912

41,557
42,631
43,562
44,084
43,961
44,047

91,017
91,140
91,476
91,722
92,269
91,383

36,786
36,421
36,692
36,716
37,022
37,285

14,573
14,772
14,568
14,222
14,063
14,328

39,658
39,947
40,216
40,784
41,184
39,770

271,872
273,361
276,616
278,440
279,544
277,172

1
Monthly
2

average for year and total for month.
Book value, seasonally adjusted, end of period.
Note.—Data beginning 1958 are not strictly comparable with earlier data.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




289

TABLE B-51.—Manufacturers' new and unfilled orders, 1947-81
[Amounts in millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
New orders1

Unfilled orders— shipments
ratio3

Unfilled orders2

Durable goods
industries
Year or
month
Total
Total

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966... .
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981"

NonCapital durable
goods
goods
indus- industries
tries,
nondefense

Total

NonDurable
durable
goods
goods
industries industries

Total

NonDurable durable
goods
goods
industries industries

6,903
7,660
6,738
7,444
8,622
10,971
12,673
11,011
12,799
15,276
19,450
22,510
22,548
23,490

8,868
9,566
8,981
9,945
11,066
11,143
11,439
11,566
12,469
13,003
13,448
13,712
14,720
14,932
15,345
16,061
16,815
17,705
18,823
20,225
21,231
22,571
24,079
24,650
25,986
29,104
33,330
40,415
43,130
48,145
53,951
59,254
68,223
75,795
81,462

34,473
30,736
24,045
41,456
67,266
75,857
61,178
48,266
60,004
67,375
53,183
47,370
52,732
45,080
47,407
48,577
54,327
66,882
80,071
98,401
104,547
109,926
115,422
106,158
107,147
121,061
161,256
191,102
173,829
182,499
204,814
261,082
304,963
319,729
320,123

28,579
26,619
19,622
35,435
63,394
72,680
58,637
45,250
56,241
63,880
50,352
44,559
49,373
42,514
44,375
45,965
51,270
63,691
76,298
94,575
100,576
105,950
111,250
101,566
102,119
114,725
153,876
185,560
165,930
174,211
196,356
250,825
293,668
308,815
309,900

5,894
4,117
4,423
6,021
3,872
3,177
2,541
3,016
3,763
3,495
2,831
2,811
3,359
2,566
3,032
2,612
3,057
3,191
3,773
3,826
3,971
3,976
4,172
4,592
5,027
6,336
7,380
5,542
7,898
8,288
8,458
10,257
11,295
10,913
10,223

3.42
3.63
3.87
3.35
3.09
3.01
2.78
2.63
2.69
2.80
3.10
3.33
3.81
3.70
3.85
3.75
3.65
3.38
3.31
3.91
4.19
3.80
3.34
3.29
3.61
3.92
3.74
3.73

4.12
4.27
4.55
4.00
3.69
3.54
3.37
3.13
3.24
3.37
3.72
3.95
4.55
4.40
4.65
4.50
4.39
4.06
3.90
4.63
5.03
4.57
3.99
3.92
4.24
4.66
4,45
4.51

0.96
1.12
1.04
.85
.86
.94
.72
.79
.68
.73
.72
.80
.76
.73
.69
.69
.77
.77
.88
.93
.64
.84
.76
.70
.78
.77
.68
.60

83,585
83,152
79,387
73,379
69,005
70,331
80,209
76,785
82,162
83,364
83,971
86,577

24,835
21,976
23,089
22,443
20,233
21,105
23,524
21,283
22,518
21,625
23,350
24,664

74,907
74,792
74,898
72,872
72,957
73,506
74,605
75,872
77,334
78,560
79,049
80,323

309,045
311,592
313,627
312,087
308,426
306,494
310,977
312,446
315,027
315,912
316,547
319,729

297,583
300,085
301,963
300,623
297,327
295,750
300,405
301,705
304,133
304,978
305,720
308,815

11,463
11,507
11,663
11,465
11,099
10,744
10,572
10,740
10,895
10,933
10,827
10,913

3.80
3.80
3.90
3.98
4.04
4.04
3.98
4.01
3.81
3.76
3.73
3.74

4.50
4.50
4.64
4.76
4.83
4.87
4.78
4.80
4.55
4.46
4.42
4.45

.75
.76
.77
.76
.75
.71
.69
.71
.69
.70
.69
.68

84,208
85,446
86,729
87,180
88,164
88,303
89,696
87,350
86,278
77,804
79,956
80,184

24,823
21,185
24,460
24,723
23,865
23,230
24,226
24,700
23,026
20,996
23,813
22,807

81,216
81,541
80,632
81,404
81,176
82,610
82,915
82,713
82,166
81,201
79,967
80,093

320,566
322,045
323,602
324,694
326,508
325,918
328,206
328,757
328,613
323,538
321,478
320,123

309,695
310,926
312,598
313,450
314,954
314,477
316,853
317,369
317,460
312,681
310,995
309,900

10,870
11,119
11,005
11,244
11,554
11,441
11,353
11,388
11,153
10,857
10,483
10,223

3.74
3.70
3.68
3.69
3.69
3.62
3.65
3.67
3.68
3.74
3.72
3.73

4.45
4.42
4.39
4.41
4.40
4.30
4.36
4.37
4.41
4.49
4.49
4.51

.67
.67
.66
.67
.69
.68
.66
.67
.65
.64
.62
.60

15,256
17,693
15,614
20,110
23,907
23,204
23,586
22,335
27,465
28,368
27,559
27,002
30,724
30,235
31,104
33,436
35,524
38,357
42,100
46,402
47,056
50,687
53,950
52,038
55,983
64,167
76,259
87,268
85,149
99,543
115,027
131,612
147,576
155,059
166,556

6,388
8,126
6,633
10,165
12,841
12,061
12,147
10,768
14,996
15,365
14,111
13,290
16,003
15,303
15,759
17,374
18,709
20,652
23,278
26,177
25,825
28,116
29,871
27,388
29,998
35,064
42,930
46,853
42,019
51,398
61,076
72,358
79,353
79,264
85,094

158,492
157,944
154,285
146,251
141,962
143,837
154,815
152,657
159,496
161,924
163,020
166,900
165,423
166,987
167,361
168,584
169,340
170,913
172,611
170,063
168,444
159,005
159,923
160,277

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec "

1
Monthly average for
2
Seasonally adjusted,
3

year and total for month.
end of period.
Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period; excludes industries with no unfilled orders. Annual figures
relate to seasonally adjusted data for December.
Note.—Data beginning 1958 are not strictly comparable with earlier data.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




290

TABLE B-52.—Consumer price indexes, major expenditure classes, 1929-81
[1967=100]

Year or month

All
items

Housing

Food and
beverages
Total »

Food

Total

2

Rent,
residential

Other
Apparel
Trans- Medical Entergoods
and
Home Fuel and
care tainment
and
portation
upkeep
other
ownerservices
ship utilities3

Ener-

gy 4

1929
1933
1939

51.3
38.8
41.6

483
30.6
34.6

52.2"

76.0
54.1
56.0

48.5
36.9
42.4

43.0

36.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

42.0
44.1
48.8
51.8
52.7
53.9
58.5
66.9
72.1
71.4

35.2
38.4
45.1
50.3
49.6
50.7
58.1
70.6
76.6
73.5

52.4
53.7
56.2
56.8
58.1
59.1
60.6
65.2
69.8
70.9

56.2
57.2
58.5
58.5
58.6
58.8
59.2
61.1
65.1
68.0

42.8
44.8
52.3
54.6
58.5
61.5
67.5
78.2
83.3
80.1

42.7
44.2
48.1
47.9
47.9
47.8
50.3
55.5
61.8
66.4

36.8
37.0
38.0
39.9
41.1
42.1
44.4
48.1
51.1
52.7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

72.1
77.8
79.5
80.1
80.5
80.2
81.4
84.3
86.6
87.3

74.5
82.8
84.3
83.0
82.8
81.6
82.2
84.9
88.5
87.1

72.8
77.2
78.7
80.8
81.7
82.3
83.6
86.2
87.7
88.6

70.4
73.2
76.2
80.3
83.2
84.3
85.9
87.5
89.1
90.4

75.0
76.3
77.0
78.3
81.7
83.5
84.4

83.0
83.5
85.1
87.3
89.9
91.7
93.8

79.0
86.1
85.3
84.6
84.5
84.1
85.8
87.3
87.5
88.2

68.2
72.5
77.3
79.5
78.3
77.4
78.8
83.3
86.0
89.6

53.7
56.3
59.3
61.4
63.4
64.8
67.2
69.9
73.2
76.4

90.1
90.3
91.8

88.7
89.6
90.6
91.7
92.9
945
97.2
100.0
104.2
109.8

103.6
108.8

88.0
89.1
89.9
91.2
92.4
94.4
99.1
100.0
103.6
108.9

90.2
90.9
91.7
92.7
93.8
94.9
97.2
100.0
104.0
110.4

91.7
92.9
94.0
95.0
95.9
96.9
98.2
100.0
102.4
105.7

86.3
86.9
87.9
89.0
90.8
92.7
96.3
100.0
105.7
116.0

95.9
97.1
97.3
98.2
98.4
98.3
98.8
100.0
101.3
103.6

89.6
90.4
90.9
91.9
92.7
93.7
96.1
100.0
105.4
111.5

89.6
90.6
92.5
93.0
94.3
95.9
97.2
100.0
103.2
107.2

79.1
81.4
83.5
85.6
87.3
89.5
93.4
100.0
106.1
113.4

100.0
105.7
111.0

100.0
105.2
110.4

94.2
94.4
94.7
95.0
94.6
96.3
97.8
100.0
101.5
104.2

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

116.3
121.3
125.3
133.1
147.7
161.2
170.5
181.5
195.4
217.4

114.7
118.3
123.2
139.5
158.7
172.1
177.4
188.0
206.3
228.5

114.9
118.4
123.5
141.4
161.7
175.4
180.8
192.2
211.4
234.5

118.2
123.4
128.1
133.7
148.8
164.5
174.6
186.5
202.8
227.6

110.1
115.2
119.2
124.3
130.6
137.3
144.7
153.5
164.0
176.0

128.5
133.7
140.1
146.7
163.2
181.7
191.7
204.9
227.2
262.4

107.6
115.0
120.1
126.9
150.2
167.8
182.7
202.2
216.0
239.3

116.1
119.8
122.3
126.8
136.2
142.3
147.6
154.2
159.6
166.6

112.7
118.6
119.9
123.8
137.7
150.6
165.5
177.2
185.5
212.0

120.6
128.4
132.5
137.7
150.5
168.6
184.7
202.4
219.4
239.7

116.7
122.9
126.5
130.0
139.8
152.2
159.8
167.7
176.6
188.5

116.8
122.4
127.5
132.5
142.0
153.9
162.7
172.2
183.3
196.7

107.0
111.2
114.3
123.5
159.7
176.6
189.3
207.3
220.4
275.9

1980
1981

246.8
272.4

248.0
267.3

254.6
274.6

263.3
293.5

191.6

314.0

278.6

352.7

319.2

178.4
186.9

249.7
280.0

265.9
294.5

205.3

208.2

214.5
235.7

361.1
410.0

233.2
236.4
239.8
242.5
244.9
247.6

237.5
238.6

243.8
244.9
247.3

247.3
250.5
254.5
257.9

292.5
296.3
302.0
307.7

266.7

184.1
185.6
186.6
187.0
188.9
191.1

312.9
320.4

258.6
263.8
268.0
270.5
275.9
282.2

171.0
171.9
176.0
177.3
177.5
177.2

233.5
239.6
243.7
246.8
249.0
249.7

253.9
257.9
260.2
262.0
263.4
264.7

206.3
208.1
208.9
209.8
211.2
212.5

327.9
344.6
355.0
358.8
363.2
367.8

247.8
249.4

248.3
252.0
254.2
255.5
257.4
259.3

254.8
258.7

265.1
265.8
267.7
271.1
273.8
276.9

192.1
193.2
195.1
197.1
198.3
199.6

315.4
315.4
317.6
323.8
329.4
334.2

285.5
286.8
288.2
287.6
285.7
289.9

176.2
178.6
182.2
183.9
184.8
183.9

251.0
252.7
254.7
256.1
259.0
261.1

266.6
268.4
270.6
272.8
274.5
275.8

206.6
208.0
209.8

210.9
211.2
212.0

213.5
214.5
220.6
221.5
222.8
224.6

370.4
370.7

261.1
262.4
264.5
266.4

261.4
263.7
265.0
265.7
265.4
266.5

268.6
270.8
272.2
272.9
272.5
273.6

279.1
280.9
282.6
284.8
288.5
292.2

200.9

201.9
203.0
204.2
205.9
206.8

335.8
335.8
336.8
339.3
345.0
350.4

296.7
304.5
308.4

310.5
314.9
320.2

181.1
182.0
185.1
186.4
186.4
185.8

264.7
270.9
273.5
275.3
277.8
279.9

279.5
282.6
284.7
287.0
289.0

214.4
216.7
218.2
219.2
220.3
220.8

226.2
227.4
228.7
229.9
232.2
233.4

381.7
401.1
409.3
409.8
411.3
414.0

268.9

276.2
277.4
278.0
277.6

297.0
299.7
303.7
303.5
304.2
305.2

207.8

358.0

361.8
367.8
366.7
367.2
367.8

184.7
187.4
190.7
191.5
191.3
190.5

282.6
283.7
285.2
287.2

295.6
299.3

221.1

210.3
211.9
213.6
215.0
216.5

325.1
327.8
331.1
330.1
329.8
331.8

234.4
235.6
243.0
245.2
245.9
246.7

415.7
416.1
417.1
414.9
414.1
414.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964 ..
1965
1966
1967
1968 .
1969

.

zzz

ioo.o"

221.4

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar
April
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1981:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July

Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

251.7
253.9
256.2
258.4
260.5
263.2

265.1
266.8
269.0
271.3
274.4
276.5
279.3
279.9
280.7

281.5

241.0
242.8
244.1
245.7

270.1
270.7
270.3
269.9
270.5

249.1
250.4
252.0

277.1
277.8

261.7

1

289.1
289.8

291.5

301.7
304.8
308.2
310.2

195.3
197.8
200.6
202.5
204.0
205.3

222.3
224.0
225.5
226.8
227.3

370.1
368.0
366.1
370.4

Includes alcoholic beverages, not shown separately.
Includes other items not shown separately. Series beginning 1967 not comparable with series for earlier years.
Fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; gas (piped) and electricity; and other utilities and public services.
4
Fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; gas (piped) and electricity; and motor fuel, motor oil, coolant, etc.
Note.—Data beginning 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2
3




291

TABLE B-53.—Consumer price indexes, selected expenditure classes, 1939-81
[1967=100]
Homeownership

Food and beverages

Fuel and other utilities
Household fuels

Food
Year or month

Total

1

Total

At
home

Away
from
home

Total

Home
purchase

Financing,
taxes,
and
insurance

Maintenance
and
repair

Total

Total

Other
Fuel
utilioil,
Gas
ties
coal, (piped) and
and
and
public
bot- electric- servtled
ity
ices
gas

1939..

34.6

37.1

82.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

35.2
38.4
45.1
50.3
49.6
50.7
58.1
70.6
76.6
73.5

73.5
79.8
76.7

38.2
40.5
43.1
45.2
47.1
48.0
51.3
58.4
68.6
70.3

82.1
81.4
81.0
80.6
80.3
79.6
77.4
77.1
79.1
81.0

1950
1951
1952
1953,
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

74.5
82.8
84.3
83.0
82.8
81.6
82.2
84.9
88.5
87.1

77.6
86.3
87.8
86.2
85.8
84.1
84.4
87.2
91.0
88.8

68.9
70.1
70.8
72.2
74.9
77.2
79.3

750
76.3
77.0
78.3
81.7
83.5
84.4

865
87.1
87.3
87.6
90.0
91.3
91.3

71.2
72.4
74.1
77.2
80.5
81.8
83.2

72.7
76.5
78.0
81.5
81.2
82.3
85.9
903
88.7
89.8

81.2
81.5
82.6
84.2
85.3
87.5
88.4
893
92.4
94.7

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

100.0
103.6
108.8

88.0
89.1
89.9
91.2
92.4
94.4
99.1
100.0
103.6
108.9

89.6
90.4
91.0
92.2
93.2
95.5
100.3
100.0
103.2
108.2

81.4
83.2
85.4
87.3
88.9
90.9
95.1
100.0
105.2
111.6

86.3
86.9
87.9
89.0
90.8
92.7
96.3
100.0
105.7
116.0

91.8
92.3
93.2
94.2
95.7
97,0
98.6
100.0
102.8
109.5

l6o.o"
108.3
123.7

84.6
85.9
86.5
87.7
89.5
91.3
95.2
100.0
106.1
115.0

95.9
89.2
97.1
91.0
97.3
91.5
98.2
93.2
98.4
92.7
98.3
94.6
98.8 ............... 97.0
100.0
100.0
101.3 101.4 103.1
103.6 103.4 105.6

98.6
99.4
99.4
99.4
99.4
99.4
99.6
100.0
100.9
102.8

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

114.7 114.9 113.7 119.9 128.5 118.3
118.3 118.4 116.4 126.1 133.7 124.8
123.2 123.5 121.6 131.1 140.1 130.0
139.5 141.4 141.4 141.4 146.7 132.7
158.7 161.7 162.4 159.4 163.2 142.7
172.1 175.4 175.8 174.3 181.7 160.3
177.4 180.8 179.5 186.1 191.7 168.4
188.0 192.2 190.2 200.3 204.9 179.5
206.3 211.4 210.2 218.4 227.2 196.7
228.5 234.5 232.9 242.9 262.4 223.1

142.3
143.5
150.8
160.6
181.1
201.9
212.8
227.2
257.8
308.9

124.0 107.6 107.9 110.1
133.7 115.0 115.3 117.5
140.7 120.1 120.1 118.5
151.0 126.9 128.4 136.0
171.6 150.2 160.7 214.6
187.6 167.8 183.8 235.3
199.6 182.7 202.3 250.8
214.7 202.2 228.6 283.4
233.0 216.0 247.4 298.3
256.4 239.3 286.4 403.1

107.3
114.7
120.5
126.4
145.8
169.6
189.0
213.4
232.6
257.8

107.4
114.7
120.6
124.1
130.3
137.1
145.4
152.0
158.3
159.5

1980
1981

248.0 254.6 251.5 267.0 314.0
267.3 274.6 269.9 291.0 352.7

254.3
267.7

396.0
472.5

285.7
314.4

278.6 349.4
319.2 407.0

556.0
675.9

301.8
345.9

165.2
181.0

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

237.5
238.6
241.0
242.8
244.1
245.7

243.8
244.9
247.3
249.1
250.4
252.0

240.6
241.3
243.6
245.3
246.5
248.0

256.1
258.3
260.9
263.0
264.6
266.6

292.5
296.3
302.0
307.7
312.9
320.4

242.1
243.0
244.0
246.5
249.7
252.6

359.8
367.7
379.9
390.6
399.7
416.1

270.6
273.7
278.8
282.9
284.9
285.9

258.6
263.8
268.0
270.5
275.9
282.2

318.0
327.1
333.9
337.8
346.4
355.8

514.0
539.1
553.4
556.4
556.0
558.7

273.0
278.8
284.0
288.0
298.2
308.8

161.5
161.3
161.9
162.3
163.1
164.9

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

248.3
252.0
254.2
255.5
257.4
259.3

254.8
258.7
261.1
262.4
264.5
266.4

251.5
256.3
258.9
260.0
262.1
263.9

267.8
269.5
271.4
273.1
275.3
277.7

315.4
315.4
317.6
323.8
329.4
334.2

253.9
258.1
261.5
265.5
267.3
267.2

399.6
393.6
393.5
404.7
416.9
429.4

287.6
288.5
291.6
292.8
294.2
296.8

285.5 360.8
286.8 362.5
288.2 364.5
287.6 362.8
285.7 358.7
289.9 364.7

560.4
561.5
561.5
558.7
567.0
585.3

314.3
316.1
318.4
317.1
310.5
313.9

165.9
166.5
167.1
167.8
169.0
170.6

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

261.4
263.7
265.0
265.7
265.4
266.5

268.6
270.8
272.2
272.9
272.5
273.6

265.6
267.3
268.6
268.7
267.7
268.7

280.9
284.7
286.1
288.2
289.3
290.6

335.8
335.8
336.8
339.3
345.0
350.4

266.2
263.0
261.1
260.7
263.0
266.6

435.2
437.1
441.1
447.1
458.3
467.2

296.8
302.8
306.1
309.3
312.9
315.5

296.7
304.5
308.4
310.5
314.9
320.2

375.4
387.4
393.7
396.5
403.3
411.7

625.9
675.6
693.4
690.6
685.8
682.0

318.5
322.9
326.7
330.6
339.6
350.2

171.9
173.6
174.0
175.1
176.2
177.1

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

268.9
270.1
270.7
270.3
269.9
270.5

276.2
277.4
278.0
277.6
277.1
277.8

271.6
272.8
273.2
272.1
271.0
271.7

292.4
293.7
294.8
296.2
297.2
297.7

358.0 271.4
361.8 272.6
367.8 274.5
366.7 272.5
367.2 270.2
367.8 270.5

480.0
488.3
501.8
501.8
505.6
506.3

319.3
320.5
321.6
320.8
322.8
324.1

325.1
327.8
331.1
330.1
329.8
331.8

417.2
419.5
422.4
419.0
417.6
420.0

677.9
674.6
673.4
672.7
676.1
682.5

357.6
360.8
364.5
360.6
358.3
359.9

180.8
183.7
187.4
189.4
190.7
191.9

1980:

1981:

See next page for continuation of table.




292

83.0
83.5
85.1
87.3
89.9
91.7
93.8

iiz

...._
101.2
104.0

TABLE B-53.—Consumer price indexes, selected expenditure classes, 1939-81—Continued
[1967=100]
Transportation

Medical care

Private transportation
Year or month

1939
1940..
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1980
Jan.
Feb
Mar.
Apr
May
June.
July
Aug.
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec.
1981Jan.
Feb
Mar.
Apr.
May
June.
July.
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov
Dec
1
2
3

Total

Total

New
cars

Used
cars

Motor
fuel 2

Automobile
maintenance
and
repair

89.2"
75.9
71.8
69.1
77.4
80.2
89.5
83.6
86.9
94.8
96.0
100.1
99.4
97.0
100.0
(3)
103.1
104.3
110.2
110.5
117.6
122.6
146.4
167.9
182.8
186.5
201.0
208.1
256.9

49.0
48.1
50.5
534
54.0
54.2
53.8
54.9
62.2
70.4
72.3
71.8
73.9
75.8
80.3
82.5
83.6
86.5
90.0
88.8
89.9
92.5
91.4
91.9
91.8
91.4
94.9
97.0
100.0
101.4
104.7
105.6
106.3
107.6
118.1
159.9
170.8
177.9
188.2
196.3
265.6
369.1
410.9

43.1
43.0
44.9
488
49.4
50.0
50.4
52.0
56.4
59.6
61.1
62.3
67.0
68.6
72.3
74.8
76.5
79.5
82.4
83.7
85.5
87.2
89.3
90.4
91.6
92.8
94.5
96.2
100.0
105.5
112.2
120.6
129.2
135.1
142.2
156.8
176.6
189.7
203.7
220.6
242.6
268.3
293.6

173.9
175.3
175.0
177.0
178.9
178.5
179.2
181.1
181.7
181.9
184.3
184.5

197.2
195.3
195.2
196.7
199.3
200.7
203.4
206.4
214.6
222.7
230.8
234.4

334.6
357.6
370.9
374.7
375.4
376.2
376.7
375.9
373.0
370.5
370.5
373.3

185.3
184.8
182.9
186.1
190.9
192.2
192.5
191.9
191.3
192.5
195.3
197.0

234.0
385.2
234.3 410.8
235.4
420.7
239.1
419.3
245.2 416.5
252.9 414.4
260.3 412.9
266.9 411.7
272.8 Mll.l
278.2 409.9
281.4
409.5
281.9
408.4

43.0
42.7
44.2
48.1
47.9
47.9
47.8
50.3
55.5
61.8
66.4
68.2
72.5
77.3
79.5
78.3
77.4
78.8
83.3
86.0
89.6
89.6
90.6
92.5
93.0
94.3
95.9
97.2
100.0
103.2
107.2
112.7
118.6
119.9
123.8
137.7
150.6
165.5
177.2
185.5
212.0
249.7
280.0

44.2
43.6
45.9
52.3
51.4
51.4
51.3
54.3
61.5
68.2
72.3
72.5
75.8
80.8
82.4
80.3
78.9
80.1
84.7
87.4
91.1
90.6
91.3
93.0
93.4
94.7
96.3
97.5
100.0
103.0
106.5
111.1
116.6
117.5
121.5
136.6
149.8
164.6
176.6
185.0
212.3
249.2
277.5

43.2
43.3
46.6

69.2"
75.6
82.8
83.4
87.4
94.9
95.8
94.3
90.9
93.5
98.4
101.5
105.9
104.5
104.5
104.1
103.5
103.2
100.9
99.1
100.0
102.8
104.4
107.6
112.0
111.0
111.1
117.5
127.6
135.7
142.9
153.8
166.0
179.3
190.2

233.5
239.6
243.7
246.8
249.0
249.7
251.0
252.7
254.7
256.1
259.0
261.1

233.5
239.8
244.0
247.0
249.2
249.7
250.5
251.6
253.2
254.5
257.4
259.4

264.7
270.9
273.5
275.3
277.8
279.9
282.6
283.7
285.2
287.2
289.1
289.8

262.9
269.4
271.7
273.4
276.0
277.9
279.6
280.5
281.9
283.9
285.8
286.5

Other

Public
transportation

Total

Medical
care
commodities

Medical
care
services

100.0
103.4
109.7
119.2
128.4
129.1
127.8
132.4
141.2
163.1
177.3
184.6
198.6
222.6
241.3

33.1
33.1
33.1
33.3
33.4
33.5
33.5
34.4
36.0
40.7
45.2
48.9
54.0
57.5
61.3
65.5
67.4
70.0
72.7
76.1
78.3
81.0
84.6
87.4
88.5
90.1
91.9
95.2
100.0
104.6
112.7
128.5
137.7
143.4
144.8
148.0
158.6
174.2
182.4
187.8
200.3
251.6
312.0

36.7
36.8
37.0
38.0
39.9
41.1
42.1
44.4
48.1
51.1
52.7
53.7
56.3
59.3
61.4
63.4
64.8
67.2
69.9
73.2
76.4
79.1
81.4
83.5
85.6
87.3
89.5
93.4
100.0
106.1
113.4
120.6
128.4
132.5
137.7
150.5
168.6
184.7
202.4
219.4
239.7
265.9
294.5

71.1
70.8
71.4
73.0
73.5
74.3
74.8
76.2
81.8
86.1
87.4
88.5
91.0
91.8
92.6
93.7
94.7
96.7
99.3
102.8
104.4
104.5
103.3
101.7
100.8
100.5
100.2
100.5
100.0
100.2
101.3
103.6
105.4
105.6
105.9
109.6
118.8
126.0
134.1
143.5
153.8
168.1
186.5

32.5
32.5
32.7
33.7
35.4
36.9
37.9
40.1
43.5
46.4
48.1
49.2
51.7
55.0
57.0
58.7
60.4
62.8
65.5
68.7
72.0
74.9
77.7
80.2
82.6
84.6
87.3
92.0
100.0
107.3
116.0
124.2
133.3
138.2
144.3
159.1
179.1
197.1
216.7
235.4
258.3
287.4
318.2

255.1
258.2
260.9
264.1
266.1
267.3
269.0
271.1
273.8
276.0
278.4
280.1

209.8
212.6
216.5
221.3
224.5
225.0
224.5
224.7
226.0
226.5
228.8
231.0

226.8
229.5
232.1
235.9
239.5
242.2
250.5
261.5
271.0
273.6
277.0
280.1

253.9
257.9
260.2
262.0
263.4
264.7
266.6
268.4
270.6
272.8
274.5
275.8

160.5
162.1
163.5
164.9
166.4
167.9
169.1
170.2
171.3
172.5
173.8
175.1

274.4
279.0
281.5
283.4
284.7
285.9
288.0
289.8
292.3
294.8
296.6
297.9

282.7
285.4
287.7
289.0
290.8
291.9
293.5
295.5
298.7
301.3
302.8
304.1

232.4
234.2
234.7
236.3
238.9
241.0
242.9
243.0
244.2
247.5
249.5
250.6

286.4
288.1
293.9
297.2
297.7
303.9
323.1
326.5
329.1
330.8
333.2
333.8

279.5
282.6
284.7
287.0
289.0
291.5
295.6
299.3
301.7
304.8
308.2
310.2

176.7
179.2
180.7
182.4
184.7
186.3
187.7
189.4
190.8
192.1
193.1
194.9

302.1
305.2
307.5
309.8
311.7
314.4
319.2
323.4
326.1
329.7
333.7
335.7

Includes alcoholic beverages, not shown separately.
Includes direct pricing of diesel and gasohol beginning September 1981.
Not available.

Note.—Data beginning 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




293

TABLE B-54.—Consumer price indexes, commodities, services, and special groups, 1939-81
[1967=100]
Services

Commodities

Special indexes

Commodities less food
Year or
month

All
All
comitems modities

Food

All

All
NonDurable durable services

Rent

Services
less
rent

All
items
less
food

All
items
All
less Eneritems food
1
less
and gy
energy energy

1939

41.6

40.2

34.6

47.7

48.5

44.3

43.5

56.0

38.1

47.2

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

42.0
44.1
48.8
51.8
52.7
53.9
58.5
66.9
72.1
71.4

40.6
43.3
49.6
54.0
54.7
56.3
62.4
75.0
80.4
78.3

35.2
38.4
45.1
50.3
49.6
50.7
58.1
70.6
76.6
73.5

48.0
50.4
56.0
58.4
61.6
64.1
68.1
76.8
82.7
81.5

48.1
51.4
58.4
60.3
65.9
70.9
74.1
80.3
86.2
87.4

44.7
46.7
51.6
53.8
56.6
58.6
62.9
72.2
77.8
76.3

43.6
44.2
45.6
46.4
47.5
48.2
49.1
51.1
54.3
56.9

56.2
57.2
58.5
58.5
58.6
58.8
59.2
61.1
65.1
68.0

38.1
38.6
40.3
42.1
44.2
45.1
46.7
49.0
51.9
54.5

47.3
48.7
52.1
53.6
55.7
56.9
59.4
64.9
69.6
70.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

72.1
77.8
79.5
80.1
80.5
80.2
81.4
84.3
86.6
87.3

78.8
85.9
87.0
86.7
85.9
85.1
85.9
88.6
90.6
90.7

74.5
82.8
84.3
83.0
82.8
81.6
82.2
84.9
88.5
87.1

81.4
87.5
88.3
88.5
87.5
86.9
87.8
90.5
91.5
92.7

88.4
95.1
96.4
95.7
93.3
91.5
91.5
94.4
95.9
97.3

76.2
82.0
82.4
83.1
83.5
83.5
85.3
87.6
88.2
89.3

58.7
61.8
64.5
67.3
69.5
70.9
72.7
75.6
78.5
80.8

70.4
73.2
76.2
80.3
83.2
84.3
85.9
87.5
89.1
90.4

56.0
59.3
62.2
64.8
66.7
68.2
70.1
73.3
76.4
79.0

71.1
75.7
77.5
79.0
79.5
79.7
81.1
83.8
85.7
87.3

88.7
89.6
90.6
91.7
92.9
94.5
97.2
100.0
104.2
109.8

91.5
92.0
92.8
93.6
94.6
95.7
98.2
100.0
103.7
108.4

88.0
89.1
89.9
91.2
92.4
94.4
99.1
100.0
103.6
108.9

93.1
93.4
94.1
94.8
95.6
96.2
97.5
100.0
103.7
108.1

96.7
96.6
97.6
97.9
98.8
98.4
98.5
100.0
103.1
107.0

90.7
91.2
91.8
92.7
93.5
94.8
97.0
100.0
104.1
108.8

83.5
85.2
86.8
88.5
90.2
92.2
95.8
100.0
105.2
112.5

91.7
92.9
94.0
95.0
95.9
96.9
98.2
100.0
102.4
105.7

81.9
83.9
85.5
87.3
89.2
91.5
95.3
100.0
105.7
113.8

88.8
89.7
90.8
92.0
93.2
94.5
96.7
100.0
104.4
110.1

88.3 88.3 94.2
89.3 89.3 94.4
90.4 90.5 94.7
91.6 91.6 95.0
92.9 93.0 94.6
94.3 94.3 96.3
97.3 96.6 97.8
100.0 100.0 100.0
104.4 104.6 101.5
110.3 110.7 104.2

116.3
121.3
125.3
133.1
147.7
161.2
170.5
181.5
195.4
217.4

113.5
117.4
120.9
129.9
145.5
158.4
165.2
174.7
187.1
208.4

114.9
118.4
123.5
141.4
161.7
175.4
180.8
192.2
211.4
234.5

112.5
116.8
119.4
123.5
136.6
149.1
156.6
165.1
174.7
195.1

111.8
116.5
118.9
121.9
130.6
145.5
154.3
163.2
173.9
191.1

113.1
117.0
119.8
124.8
140.9
151.7
158.3
166.5
174.3
198.7

121.6
128.4
133.3
139.1
152.1
166.6
180.4
194.3
210.9
234.2

110.1
115.2
119.2
124.3
130.6
137.3
144.7
153.5
164.0
176.0

123.7
130.8
135.9
141.8
156.0
171.9
186.8
201.6
219.4
244.9

116.7
122.1
125.8
130.7
143.7
157.1
167.5
178.4
191.2
213.0

117.0
122.0
126.1
133.8
146.9
160.2
169.2
179.8
193.8
213.1

246.8
272.4

233.9
253.6

254.6
274.6

222.0
241.2

210.4
227.1

235.2
257.5

270.3
305.7

191.6
208.2

285.1
324.3

244.0
270.6

238.0 232.8 361.1
261.7 257.1 410.0

Jan
Feb ....
Mar
Apr
May
June

233.2
236.4
239.8
242.5
244.9
247.6

222.4
225.2
228.0
229.9
231.4
232.8

243.8
244.9
247.3
249.1
250.4
252.0

210.4
213.8
216.7
218.6
220.2
221.4

201.3
202.1
203.0
204.9
207.1
208.6

220.5
227.3
232.6
234.6
235.5
236.3

253.1
256.8
261.3
265.3
269.2
274.2

184.1
185.6
186.6
187.0
188.9
191.1

266.1
270.2
275.4
280.0
284.4
290.0

229.9
233.5
237.1
239.9
242.6
245.5

225.9
228.0
230.8
233.4
235.7
238.3

220.6
222.8
225.7
228.5
231.0
233.7

327.9
344.6
355.0
358.8
363.2
367.8

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

247.8
249.4
251.7
253.9
256.2
258.4

234.1
236.7
239.0
240.7
242.5
243.8

254.8
258.7
261.1
262.4
264.5
266.4

222.2
224.2
226.6
228.3
230.0
231.0

209.8
212.4
215.3
218.1
220.6
221.1

236.6
237.8
239.3
239.6
240.5
242.0

272.4
272.5
274.8
277.9
280.9
284.7

192.1
193.2
195.1
197.1
198.3
199.6

287.6
287.4
289.8
293.2
296.4
300.7

245.1
246.3
248.6
250.9
253.2
255.5

238.3
240.0
242.5
245.1
247.7
249.7

233.1
234.3
236.9
239.7
242.4
244.5

370.4
370.7
370.1
368.0
366.1
370.4

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

260.5
263.2
265.1
266.8
269.0
271.3

245.4
248.3
249.8
250.8
251.9
253.2

268.6
270.8
272.2
272.9
272.5
273.6

232.4
235.4
237.0
238.0
239.6
241.1

221.0
220.3
219.8
221.1
223.9
226.6

245.3
253.2
257.5
258.1
258.2
258.0

287.7
290.1
292.5
295.4
299.6
303.5

200.9
201.9
203.0
204.2
205.9
206.8

304.2
306.9
309.5
312.8
317.4
321.9

257.6
260.4
262.3
264.2
267.0
269.5

251.2
252.5
253.8
255.6
257.9
260.2

245.7
246.8
248.1
250.1
253.0
255.6

381.7
401.1
409.3
409.8
411.3
414.0

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

274.4
276.5
279.3
279.9
280.7
281.5

255.0
256.2
257.7
257.9
258.0
258.4

276.2
277.4
278.0
277.6
277.1
277.8

242.6
243.8
245.5
245.9
246.2
246.5

229.6
230.9
232.6
232.9
233.2
233.7

257.5
258.4
260.3
260.7
261.1
261.1

308.8
312.2
317.3
318.6
320.6
321.8

207.8
210.3
211.9
213.6
215.0
216.5

328.1
331.7
337.5
338.7
340.8
342.0

272.7
274.9
278.2
279.0
280.1
280.8

263.5
265.6
268.6
269.4
270.4
271.1

259.0
261.3
264.8
265.9
267.2
267.9

415.7
416.1
417.1
414.9
414.1
414.6

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

... .
.

.
...

....

...
.

1980
1981
1980:

1981:

83.9
86.3
87.0

83.3
85.2
87.0

117.6
123.1
126.9
131.3
142.2
155.3
165.5
175.8
188.7
207.0

90.1
90.3
91.8

107.0
111.2
114.3
123.5
159.7
176.6
189.3
207.3
220.4
275.9

1
Fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; gas (piped) and electricity; and motor fuel, motor oil, coolant, etc.
Note.—Data beginning 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




294

TABLE B-55.—Changes in consumer brice indexes, commodities and services, 1948-81
[Percent change]

All items
Year or month

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

1.7
7.2 -0.8
2.7
7.8
-1.8 -1.0 -4.1 -2.6 -3.7

1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

5.8
5.9
.9
.6
-.5

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

.4
2.9
3.0
1.8
1.5

7.7
1.0
5.9
7.9
2.2 -.7
.8 -.6
.5 -1.4
_ 4 -.4
2.6
L5
3.6
2.6
2.7
1.3
.8
.6

Commodities
less food

Food

Total

Year
to
year

Energy 2

Services

Commodities

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

5.3
7.7
8.5
-4.0 -4.8 -1.5

6.1
3.6
3.6
5.2
4.6
4.2
1.9

Year
to
year

6.3
4.8

1.4
.6
9.6
5.7 -.1
9.0
7.4 11.1
4.6
7.5
.9
1.3 -1.1
1.8 -.5
-.3 -1.3 -1.5
.2
.2
-.9 -1.6
-.2 -1.4 -1.1

Dec.
to
Dec.1

3.2
5.3
4.4
4.3
3.3

—9
!9
3.1
2.3
.1

-.9 -1.4
3.1
.7
2.8
3.3
2.2
4.2
-.8 -1.6

0
2.5
2.2
.8
1.5

-.7
1.0
3.1
1.1
1.3

2.3
3.1
4.5
2.7
3.7

2.0
2.5
4.0 ..............
3.8
4.3
2.9

0.2
1.7

1.5
.7
1.2
1.6
1.2

1.6
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.1
0
1.0
1.4
.8

.9
.5
.9
.9
1.1

3.1
-.9
1.5
1.9
1.4

1.0
1.3
.9
1.4
1.3

—3
.7
1.2
.4

.4
.3
.7
.7
.8

2.7
1.9
1.7
2.3
1.8

3.3
2.0
1.9
2.0
1.9

1.5
-1.1
2.1
-.8
-.2

'.3
-A

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1.9
3.4
3.0
4.7
6.1

1.7
2.9
2.9
4.2
5.4

1.6
2.5
2.5
3.8
5.5

1.2
2.6
1.8
3.7
4.5

3.4
3.9
1.2
4.3
7.2

2.2
5.0
.9
3.6
5.1

.7
1.9
3.1
3.7
4.5

.6
1.4
2.6
3.7
4.2

2.6
4.9
4.0
6.1
7.4

2.2
3.9
4.4
5.2
6.9

2.0
1.8
1.4
1.7
3.1

1.8
1.6
2.2
1.5
2.7

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

5.5
3.4
3.4
8.8
12.2

5.9
4.3
3.3
6.2
11.0

4.0
2.9
3.4
10.4
12.7

4.7
3.4
3.0
7.4
12.0

2.2
4.3
4.7
20.1
12.2

5.5
3.0
4.3
14.5
14.4

4.8
2.3
2.5
5.0
13.2

4.1
3.8
2.2
3.4
10.6

8.2
4.1
3.6
6.2
11.3

8.1
5.6
3.8
4.4
9.3

4.5
3.1
2.8
16.8
21.6

2.7
3.9
2.8
8.0
29.3

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7.0
4.8
6.8
9.0
13.3

9.1
5.8
6.5
7.7
11.3

6.3
3.3
6.1
8.9
13.0

8.9
4.3
5.8
7.1
11.4

6.5
.6
8.0
11.8
10.2

8.5
3.1
6.3
10.0
10.9

6.2
5.1
4.9
7.7
14.3

9.2
5.0
5.4
5.8
11.7

8.1
7.3
7.9
9.3
13.7

9.5
8.3
7.7
8.5
11.0

11.6
6.9
7.2
8.0
37.4

10.6
7.2
9.5
6.3
25.2

1980
1981

12.4
8.9

13.5
10.4

11.1
6.0

12.2
8.4

10.2
4.3

8.6
7.9

11.5
6.7

13.8
8.6

14.2
13.0

15.4
13.1

18.1
11.9

30.9
13.5

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

.

!e

2.6
.2

Change from preceding month

SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally Unad- sonally
justed ad- justed ad- justed ad- justed ad- justed ad- justed adjusted
justed
justed
justed
justed
justed
1980:

i!o

.7
.5
.6

0.1
-.2
.9
.5
.4
.5

1.5
1.6
1.4
.9
.7
.5

1.8
1.7
1.2
.5
.5
.4

1.5
1.5
1.8
1.5
1.5
1.9

1.5
1.4
1.7
1.5
1.5
1.7

4.5
5.1
3.0
1.1
1.2
1.3

.6
1.2
1.3
.9
1.0
.7

1.1
1.5
.9
.5
.8
.7

1.0
1.9
1.7
.9
1.2
1.0

.4
.9
1.1
.8
.7
.4

.5
.9
1.1
.9
.9
.6

-.7
.0
.8
1.1
1.1
1.4

-.6
.1
.7
1.2
1.3
1.4

.7
.1
-.2
-.6
-.5
1.2

.7
1.2
.6
.4
.4
.5

.6
1.1
.5
0
.2
.4

.8
.8
.5
.3
-.1
.4

-.1
.3
.4
0
-.2
.2

.6
1.3
.7
.4
.7
.6

1.0
1.4
.5
0
.4
.4

1.1
.8
.8
1.0
1.4
1.3

.9
.8
.8
1.0
1.4
1.2

3.1
5.1
2.0
.1
.4
.7

.7
.5
.6
.1
.0
.2

.8
.6
.9
.3
.2

1.0
.4
.2
-.1
_2

.8
.8
1.0
.3
.2
.4

.6
.5
.7
.2
.1
.1

.7
.5
.8
.4
.2

1.7
1.1
1.6
.4
.6
.4

1.8
1.2
1.5
.4
.8
.5

.4
.1
.2
-.5
-.2
.1

Jan
Feb..
Mar.
Apr
May
June.

1.4
1.4
1.4
1.1
1.0
1.1

1.4
1.3
1.3
.9
.9
1.0

1.4
1.3
1.2
.8
.7
.6

1.4
1.1
1.1
.5
.4
.4

0.9

July.
Aug.
Sept.
Oct
Nov.
Dec

.1
.6
.9
.9
.9
.9

.1
.8
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.0

.6
1.1
1.0
.7
.7
.5

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June.

.8
1.0
.7
.6
.8
.9

.7
1.0
.6
.4
.7
.7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1.1
.8
1.0
.2
.3
.3

1.2
.8
1.2
.4
.5
.4

1981:

1

Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes.
Fuel oil, coal, and bottled gas; gas (piped) and electricity; and motor fuel, motor oil, coolant, etc.
Note.—Data beginning 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
2




295

TABLE B-56.—Changes in special consumer price indexes, 1958-81
[Percent change]
All items less
food

All items

All items less
energy

All items
less food
and energy

All items less
food, energy,
and home
purchase and
finance 2

Year or month
Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
Year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
Year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
Year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
Year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
Year

All items
X-l3
Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
Year

1958
1959

18
1.5

27
.8

16
2.3

23
1.9

19
1.4

2.9
.8

1.8
2.2

23
2.1

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

1.5
.7
1.2
1.6
1.2

1.6
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.0
1.1
1.2
1.6
1.0

1.7
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.3

1.4
.8
1.2
1.8
1.3

1.5
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

.8
1.5
1.1
1.8
1.2

1.5
1.1
1.3
1.2
1.5

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1.9
3.4
3.0
4.7
6.1

1.7
2.9
2.9
4.2
5.4

1.6
3.3
3.5
4.9
5.7

1.4
2.3
3.4
4.4
5.5

1.9
3.5
3.1
4.9
6.4

1.5
3.2
2.8
4.4
5.7

1.5
3.3
3.9
5.1
6.1

1.4
2.4
3.5
4.6
5.8

4.6
5.2

4.5
4.9

3.9
5.2

3.7
4.4

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

5.5
3.4
3.4
8.8
12.2

5.9
4.3
3.3
6.2
11.0

6.5
3.1
3.0
5.6
12.2

6.0
4.6
3.0
3.9
9.9

5.6
3.3
3.5
8.3
11.5

6.1
4.3
3.4
6.1
9.8

6.6
3.1
3.0
4.7
11.3

6.2
4.7
3.1
3.5
8.3

5.7
3.4
2.9
4.0
11.1

5.2
5.0
2.7
3.3
7.8

4.5
3.5
3.3
8.5
11.1

4.9
4.3
3.1
6.2
10.1

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

7.0
4.8
6.8
9.0
13.3

9.1
5.8
6.5
7.7
11.3

7.1
6.2
6.3
8.5
14.0

9.3
6.6
6.5
7.2
11.4

6.7
4.6
6.8
9.2
11.1

9.1
5.6
6.3
7.8
10.0

6.7
6.1
6.4
8.5
11.3

9.2
6.6
6.2
7.3
9.7

6.3
6.8
5.5
6.9
7.5

8.7
6.8
6.1
6.0
7.3

6.6
5.1
6.3
7.9
10.8

8.3
5.7
6.4
6.8
9.6

1980
1981

12.4
8.9

13.5
10.4

12.9
9.9

14.6
10.9

11.7
8.6

11.7
10.0

12.1
9.6

12.5
10.4

9.9
9.4

9.0
9.5

10.8
8.5

11.2
9.5

Unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted

0.7
.9
1.1
.9
.7
.5

0.8
.9
1.0
.7
.6
.6

1.2
1.3
1.2
.7
.9
.7

1.2
1.0
1.2
.5
.7
.7

1.0

!e
1.1
11
1.1

.5
.8
1.3
.7
8
.5

.7
.7
1.2
.8
8
.8

.6
.8
1.0
.6
6
.6

.6
1.0
1.0
.7
.8
.8

Change from preceding month
Unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted

Unadjusted

Seasonally adjusted

Unadjusted

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

1.4
1.4
1.4
1.1
1.0
1.1

1.4
1.3
1.3
.9
.9
1.0

1.5
1.6
1.5
1.2
1.1
1.2

1.7
1.5
1.5
1.0
1.0
1.0

1.0
.9
1.2
1.1
1.0
1.1

1.0
.8
1.1
1.0
.9
1.1

1.1
1.0
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.2

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

.1
.6
.9
.9
9
.9

.1
.8
1.0
1.0
11
1.0

-.2
.5
.9
.9
9
.9

-.1
.5
.9
1.0
11
1.0

.0
.7
1.0
1.1
11
.8

.1
.8
1.2
1.1
12
1.0

-.3
.5
1.1
1.2
11
.9

June.

fc

.8
1.0
.7
.6
.8
.9

.7
1.0
.6
.4
.7
.7

.8
1.1
.7
.7
1.1
.9

1.0
1.1
.7
.5
.9
.8

.6
.5
.5
.7
.9
.9

.6
.3
.4
.5
.8
.9

.5
.4
.5
.8
1.2
1.0

.6
.4
.4
.6
1.1
1.0

.5
.8
.7
.9
.8
.7

.5
.8
.6
.8
.6
.7

.9
1.3
.8
.6
.6
.6

.8
1.0
.8
.4
.4
.6

July.
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1.1
.8
1.0
.2
.3
.3

1.2
.8
1.2
.4
.5
.4

1.2
.8
1.2
.3
.4
.2

1.3
.8
1.2
.4
.5
.4

1.3
.8
1.1
.3
.4
.3

1.4
.9
1.2
.4
.4
.5

1.3
.9
1.3
.4
.5
.3

1.4
.9
1.2
.4
.5
.5

.9
.8
1.1
.7
.7
.4

1.2
.7
1.0
.7
.5
.7

.8
.7
.8
.4
.4
.4

.8
.9
.8
.7
.5
.5

1980:

1981:

Jan
Feb.
Mar.

1

Seasonally adjusted
1.3
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.1
1.2
1

Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes.
All items less food, energy, and home purchase and financing, taxes, and insurance; estimated series.
An experimental measure using a rental equivalence approach for homeownership costs. Effective with data for January
1983, the consumer price index for all urban consumers will incorporate a rental equivalence measure.
Note.—Data beginning 1978 are for all urban consumers; earlier data are for urban wage earners and clerical workers.
2

3

Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




296

TABLE B-57.—Producer price indexes by stage of processing, 1947-81
[1967=100]
Finished goods
Finished goods excluding consumer foods

Consumer foods
Year or month

Total
finished
goods

Total

Crude

Processed

Consumer goods
Total

Total

Capital
equipment

Total
finished
consumer
goods
80.5
86.5
82.5
83.9
91.8
90.7
89.2
89.1
88.5
89.8
92.4
94.4
93.6
94.5
94.3
94.6
94.1
94.3
96.1
99.4
100.0
102.7
106.6
109.9
112.9
116.6
129.2
149.3
163.6
169.7
180.7
194.9
217.9
248.9
271.2

Durable

Nondurable

74.6
79.7
81.8
82.7
88.2
88.9
89.6
90.3
91.2
94.3
97.1
98.4
99.6
99.2
98.8
98.3
97.8
98.2
97.9
98.5
100.0
102.2
104.0
106.9
110.8
113.3
115.4
125.9
138.2
144.5
152.8
166.9
183.2
206.2
218.5

80.7
85.8
82.3
83.6
90.0
87.8
88.6
88.9
91."f
93.2
92.6
94.0
94.7
94.7
94.8
95.1
94.8
95.9
97.8
100.0
102.2
105.0
108.3
111.7
113.6
120.5
146.8
163.0
174.8
189.3
200.0
231.3
283.9
319.4

55.4
60.4
63.4
64.9
71.2
72.4
73.6
74.5
76.7
82.4
87.5
89.8
91.5
91.7
91.8
92.2
92.4
93.3
94.4
96.8
100.0
103.5
106.9
112.0
116.6
119.5
123.5
141.0
162.5
173.4
184.6
199.2
216.5
239.8
264.3

74.0
79.9
77.6
79.0
86.5
86.0
85.1
85.3
85.5
87.9
91.1
93.2
93.0
93.7
93.7
94.0
93.7
94.1
95.7
98.8
100.0
102.8
106.6
110.3
113.7
117.2
127.9
147.5
163.4
170.6
181.7
195.9
217.7
247.0
269.8

82.8
90.4
83.1
84.7
95.2
94.3
89.4
88.7
86.5
86.3
89.3
94.5
90.1
92.1
91.7
92.5
91.4
91.9
95.4
101.6
100.0
103.6
110.0
113.5
115.3
121.7
146.4
166.9
181.0
180.4
189.9
207.2
226.2
239.5
253.5

99.4
107.1
101.3
92.2
105.9
112.8
105.2
94.7
98.8
98.7
97.4
103.5
94.3
100.6
96.1
97.0
95.5
98.2
98.6
104.8
100.0
107.5
116.0
116.3
115.8
121.2
160.7
180.8
181.2
193.9
201.0
216.8
233.1
237.2
263.6

80.2
87.6
80.1
83.4
93.2
91.3
86.7
87.6
84.4
84.3
87.9
93.1
89.5
90.7
90.9
91.7
90.7
90.8
94.9
101.0
100.0
103.0
108.9
113.1
115.1
121.7
143.9
164.6
181.3
177.8
187.3
204.6
223.8
237.8
250.6

100.0
102.6
105.4
109.1
113.1
115.4
120.1
139.3
156.2
166.1
177.7
190.7
213.3
247.8
273.2

79.0
84.0
82.2
83.5
89.5
88.3
89.1
89.4
90.1
92.3
94.6
94.7
95.9
96.3
96.2
96.0
96.0
95.9
96.6
98.1
100.0
102.1
104.6
107.7
111.4
113.5
118.6
138.6
153.1
162.6
174.3
186.7
211.5
250.8
276.3

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

234.4
237.7
240.0
242.1
243.4
244.9

231.8
232.1
233.6
230.1
231.9
233.0

225.9 .
221.2
230.6
224.1
229.1
224.5

230.4
231.2
232.0
228.8
230.3
231.8

233.7
238.0
240.6
244.5
245.6
247.3

235.2
240.8
243.8
247.7
249.0
250.9

200.1
202.6
200.8
202.3
201.9
204.1

260.4
268.6
275.6
281.5
284.2
285.9

229.1
230.5
232.2
236.2
236.7
237.8

235.8
239.7
242.2
243.7
245.2
246.8

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

249.3
251.4
251.4
255.4
256.2
257.2

241.6
246.5
247.4
248.0
248.9
249.3

240.9
247.0
259.8
237.8
250.5
254.8

239.7
244.4
244.3
246.9
246.7
246.7

250.2
251.4
251.1
256.2
257.0
258.2

253.9
255.0
254.6
258.7
259.5
260.9

207.5
208.1
206.2
214.0
213.1
213.5

288.4
290.0
290.9
291.7
293.9
296.2

240.6
241.9
241.8
249.2
250.2
250.9

251.7
254.1
254.1
257.0
257.9
258.9

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

260.9
263.3
266.0
268.5
269.6
270.5

251.0
251.3
252.6
251.9
252.8
253.8

257.9
265.6
279.7
279.3
263.1
258.9

248.4
247.9
248.1
247.4
249.8
251.3

262.4
265.5
268.7
272.1
273.3
274.1

265.1
268.5
272.5
276.1
277.0
277.7

214.9
215.1
214.0
216.6
218.1
218.2

302.7
308.4
316.0
320.4
321.0
322.0

254.6
256.7
258.1
260.8
262.5
263.8

262.5
265.0
268.2
270.6
271.5
272.3

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

271.8
271.5
271.1
274.0
274.5
275.3

257.6
256.3
255.5
253.7
252.7
253.0

262.7
256.9
253.0
253.3
259.5
273.4

255.0
254.2
253.7
251.7
250.0
249.1

274.7
274.6
274.4
278.7
279.7
280.6

277.9
277.7
277.4
281.3
282.0
282.8

218.1
218.3
215.6
224.3
224.3
225.0

322.5
322.1
323.5
323.8
325.0
325.9

265.4
265.8
265.6
271.4
272.9
274.1

273.5
273.0
272.6
274.7
274.9
275.6

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981 *
1980:

1981:i

See next page for continuation of table.




297

TABLE B-57.—Producer price indexes by stage of processing, 1947-81—Continued
[1967=100]
Crude materials for further processing

Intermediate materials, supplies, and components
Materials and
components

ProcFoodessed
fuels Con- Supplies Total stuffs
and
For
and tainers
For
feedmanufacconlubristuffs
turing struction cants

Other

Total

Foods
and Other
feeds «

1947.
1948
1949

72.4
78.3
75.2

70.0
76.1
74.2

72.1
77.8
74.5

66.0
73.1
73.2

85.5
96.9
88.2

66.8
69.8
70.1

77.5 101.2 111.7
81.0 110.9 120.8
76.3 96.0 100.3

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

78.6
88.1
85.5
86.0
86.5

77.7
87.0
84.3
85.3
85.7

78.1
88.5
84.8
86.2
86.3

77.0
84.3
83.7
85.1
85.5

89.9
93.9
92.8
93.4
93.3

72.0
84.5
79.9
80.0
81.5

78.9
88.8
88.8
84.3
86.3

107.6
124.5
117.2
104.9
104.9

77.9
79.4
79.9
82.7
79.0

104.7
120.7
104.6
100.1
98.2

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

88.1
92.0
94.1
94.3
95.6

88.3
92.6
95.0
94.8
96.4

88.4
92.6
94.8
95.2
96.5

88.9 93.3
93.5 96.2
94.0 101.9
96.0
94.0
96.6
95.6

82.6
88.6
92.5
94.7
94.2

84.8 97.1
95.1
87.1 97.6
93.1
88.0 99.8 97.2
90.0 102.0 103.0
99.4 96.2
91.2

78.8
84.4
89.2
90.3
91.9

103.8
107.6
106.2
102.2
105.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

95.6
95.0
94.9
95.2
95.5

96.8
95.5
95.3
95.0
95.6

96.5
95.3
94.7
94.9
95.9

95.9
94.6
94.2
94.5
95.4

98.2
99.4
99.0
98.1
96.0

95.5
94.7
95.9
94.7
94.0

90.7
91.8
93.8
95.2
94.3

97.0
96.5
97.5
95.4
94.5

92.8
92.6
92.1
93.2
92.8

101.4
102.5
102.0
100.7
102.4

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

96.8
96.9
99.2
98.9
100.0 100.0 100.0
102.3 99.4 102.5
105.8 102.7 106.1

97.4
99.3
100.0
102.2
105.8

96.2 97.4
98.8 99.2
100.0 100.0
105.0 97.6
110.8 98.5

95.8
98.4
100.0
102.4
106.3

95.2
99.4
100.0
101.0
102.8

99.3
105.7
100.0
101.6
108.4

97.1
93.5 104.5
105.9 .............. 96.3 106.7
100.0
100.0 100.0
101.3 102.2 102.3 102.1
109.3 106.8 106.6 106.9

1970
1971
1972
1973....
1974

109.9
114.1
118.7
131.6
162.9

109.1
111.7
118.5
168.4
200.2

109.9
114.3
118.9
128.1
159.5

110.0
112.8
117.0
127.7
162.2

112.6
119.7
126.2
136.7
161.6

105.0
115.2
118.9
131.5
199.1

111.4
116.6
121.9
129.2
152.2

108.0
111.0
115.6
140.6
154.5

112.3
115.1
127.6
174.0
196.1

112.0
114.2
127.5
180.0
189.4

112.7
117.0
128.0
162.5
208.9

122.6
139.0
148.7
164.5
219.4

109.8
110.7
121.9
161.5
205.4

1975
1976 .
1977
1978
1979

180.0
189.1
201.5
215.6
243.2

195.3
185.3
190.5
203.1
226.1

178.6
189.4
202.3
216.5
244.4

178.7
185.4
195.4
208.7
234.4

176.4
188.4
203.4
224.7
247.4

233.0
250.1
282.5
295.3
364.8

171.4
180.2
188.3
202.8
226.8

168.1
179.0
188.7
198.5
218.2

196.9
202.7
209.2
234.4
274.3

191.8
190.2
192.1
216.2
247.9

206.9
228.5
245.0
272.3
330.0

271.5
305.3
372.1
426.8
507.6

188.3
206.7
212.2
233.1
284.5

280.3 252.6 282.3
. . . 306.0 250.7 310.1

265.7
286.2

268.3 503.0
287.5 595.0

254.5
276.2

244.5 304.6 259.2 401.0 615.0 346.1
263.9 329.1 257.4 482.6 751.5 413.9

Year or month

1980 1
1981 - .
1980:

104.6
120.1
110.3
101.9
101.0

Total

Fuel

Other

66.6 90.6
78.7 100.7
78.3 91.6

95.1
93.8
95.7
92.9
90.8

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May.
June

266.2
271.9
274.3
275.7
277.0
278.8

228.3
239.3
235.3
229.5
239.7
242.0

268.9
274.2
277.1
279.1
279.6
281.5

255.3
259.6
259.6
260.6
262.5
264.3

258.0
262.5
265.9
265.5
265.2
266.9

450.0
471.1
489.8
496.6
498.2
502.0

244.8
245.7
247.4
253.2
254.4
256.2

230.9
237.3
239.4
239.7
240.0
241.2

287.8
298.5
293.6
286.2
289.3
288.4

243.6
253.1
246.5
235.8
243.0
243.0

381.6
394.7
393.8
393.4
387.5
384.6

559.0
579.8
579.8
591.4
600.0
604.0

334.9
346.0
344.9
342.0
333.3
328.9

July
Aug
Sept
Oct .
Nov
Dec

281.6
284.3
285.3
287.7
289.1
291.9

251.4
263.7
265.9
280.3
285.7
270.0

283.8
285.8
286.6
288.2
289.3
293.5

265.6
268.9
269.5
273.3
273.9
275.7

269.6
271.4
271.7
272.4
274.0
276.6

514.2
517.4
519.5
516.2
521.3
539.4

257.0
257.4
257.9
260.1
259.5
260.6

245.3
247.7
250.3
252.3
255.2
255.0

304.3
317.0
319.3
322.8
324.6
323.5

263.4
276.8
276.6
279.1
277.3
271.6

390.8
401.9
409.8
415.4
424.9
433.8

615.1
626.3
639.1
650.9
664.9
670.2

333.9
344.8
351.4
355.6
363.9
373.3

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

296.1
298.3
302.0
305.8
306.7
307.2

270.9
261.3
255.6
254.9
253.1
253.2

298.0
301.0
305.4
309.5
310.7
311.2

279.6
280.3
281.6
284.1
285.1
285.8

279.2
280.3
282.7
288.0
288.5
289.6

551.9
569.8
598.3
608.5
608.7
605.7

264.6
268.2
270.9
274.3
276.4
277.2

257.8
257.8
258.9
262.4
264.0
264.6

328.0
336.5
334.2
336.3
334.4
335.4

270.7
267.1
262.1
263.5
260.6
264.3

450.1
484.9
488.4
492.1
492.4
487.4

677.4
697.7
703.6
716.6
738.4
759.2

391.0
427.9
430.9
432.5
428.3
418.1

July
Aug
Sept
Oct.
Nov
Dec.

308.5
310.1
309.6
309.3
309.0
309.6

251.1
250.2
243.7
240.6
236.9
236.4

312.7
314.5
314.5
314.5
314.3
315.1

287.9
289.8
290.2
290.3
289.6
289.7

290.4
290.7
289.9
289.8
289.9
290.8

602.0
607.8
600.1
595.1
594.2
597.7

278.8
280.3
280.8
281.1
280.7
280.6

266.0
266.1
266.1
267.1
267.4
268.7

337.3
333.0
327.7
320.3
314.1
311.6

267.2
261.8
253.4
245.6
238.3
233.7

487.2
485.3
486.8
480.5
476.9
479.1

781.2
766.7
790.6
779.7
792.6
814.7

413.1
413.9
410.7
405.5
398.5
396.4

1981:1

1
Data have been revised through August 19131 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All
data are subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
2
Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




298

TABLE B-58.—Producer price indexes by stage of processing, special groups, 1974-81
[1967=100]
Intermediate materials,
supplies, and components

Finished goods

Crude materials for further
processing

Excluding food and
energy
Year or month
Total

1974
1975 .
1976 , ...
1977
1978
1979
1980 2
1981
1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar..
..
Apr
May
June
July
Aug. . .
Sept . . . .
Oct
Nov. ..
Dec
1981:2

Jan
Feb ..
Mar ..
Apr.. . .
May .
June,
July .
Aug
Sept
Oct. .
Nov.
Dec .

Food

Energy

147.5
163.4
170.6
181.7
1959
217.7
247.0
269.8

166.9
181.0
180.4
189.9
2072
226.2
239.5
253.5

252.4
282.3
326.7
347.7
469.9

234.4
237.7
240.0
242.1
243.4
244.9

231.8
232.1
233.6
230.1
231.9
233.0
241.6
246.5
247.4
248.0
248.9
249.3

249,3
251.4
251.4
255.4
256.2
257.2
260.9
263.3
266.0
268.5
269.6
270.5

271.8
271.5
271.1
274.0
274.5
. . . 275.3

251.0
251.3
252.6
251.9
252.8
253.8
257.6
256.3
255.5
253.7
252.7
253.0

215.2

FoodConstuffs
sumer
Foods
Capi- goods Total and 1 Energy Other Total and Energy Other
feedtal
feeds
Total equip- excludstuffs
ing
ment food
and
energy

133.3 141.0
162.5
173.4
184.6
1992
216.5
239.8
264.3

141.0
148.1
156.6
1680
183.3
204.2
220.0
196.6
199.0
198.9
200.8
201.2
203.1
205.7
206.6
206.0
210.4
210.7
211.2
214.4
215.4
215.8
218.3
219.3
219.7
220.3
220.9
220.1
224.6
225.3
225.7

701.3
835.5

148.5
156.8
166.3
178.7
194.7
216.4
235.0

601.0
640.9
676.8
701.3
712.4
714.3

207.9
209.9
210.4
213.0
213.4
215.1

720.1
724.3
726.1
724.9
731.4
741.8

217.8
218.8
218.3
223.7
224.2
224.8

229.1
230.5
232.2
236.2
236.7
237.8
240.6
241.9
241.8
249.2
250.2
250.9

758.1
790.2
838.7
853.9
854.2
857.3

228.2
229.5
230.2
232.8
234.0
234.7

254.6
256.7
258.1
260.8
262.5
263.8

852.4
842.0
848.0
841.5
842.0
847.9

235.5
236.1
235.5
240.4
241.3
241.9

265.4
265.8
265.6
271.4
272.9
274.1

129.1 162.9
180.0
189.1
201.5
2156
243.2
280.3
306.0

200.2 188.7 156.7 196.1 189.4

223.0 198.3

195.3
185.3
190.5
203.1
226.1
252.6
250.7

174.7
185.0
196.1
2104
234.2
484.9 261.8
573.3 283.4

196.9
202.7
209.2
2344
274.3
304.6
329.1

191.8
190.2
192.1
216.2
247.9
259.2
257.4

266.9
283.1
323.5
3625
439.9

266.2'
271.9
274.3
275.7
277.0
278.8

228.3
239.3
235.3
229.5
239.7
242.0

252.5
256.2
257.5
258.8
259.3
260.8

287.8
298.5
293.6
286.2
289.3
288.4

270.7
286.6
281.7
272.7
257.2
247.1

251.4
263.7
265.9
280.3
285.7
270.0

262.2
264.2
264.9
266.9
267.6
270.6

304.3
317.0
319.3
322.8
324.6
323.5

243.6
253.1
246.5
235.8
243.0
243.0
263.4
276.8
276.6
279.1
277.3
271.6

538.3
547.9
552.3
563.4
570.6
577.2

281.6
284.3
285.3
287.7
289.1
291.9

432.1
453.3
471.2
478.9
481.0
485.6
496.6
499.6
501.2
498.1
502,7
519,0

583.3
596.6
604.6
614.2
632.0
652.2

253.5
263.1
271.0
273.8
277.2
277.9

296.1
298.3
302.0
305.8
306.7
307.2
308.5
310.1
309.6
309.3
309.0
309.6

270.9
261.3
255.6
254.9
253.1
253.2

532.0
548.8
575.4
585.3
586.0
583.4

274.3
275.9
277.8
281.3
282.6
283.4

328.0
336.5
334.2
336.3
334.4
335.4

696.0
782.6
785.1
790.5
798.2
793.5

251.1
250.2
243.7
240.6
236.9
236.4

580.6
585.9
578.6
574.0
573.2
576.4

285.5
287.0
287.7
288.2
288.1
288.6

337.3
333.0
327.7
320.3
314.1
311.6

274.1
271.1
275.5
277.9
272.7
267.5
267.0
269.0
264.0
259.9
250.3
246.5

1
2

220.8
236.8
267.3
280.3
348.6

270.7
267.1
262.1
263.5
260.6
264.3
267.2
261.8
253.4
245.6
238.3
233.7

165.0
191.0
190.1
2092
253.0
586.1 269.4
783.5 266.3

793.6
786.4
796.6
787.2
791.3
801.4

:
Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds.
Data have been revised through August 1981 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All
data are subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




299

TABLE B-59.—Producer price indexes for major commodity groups, 1940-81
[1967-100]
Industrial commodities

Farm products and processed
foods and feeds
Year or month
Total

Farm
products

Processed
foods and
feeds

Total

Hides,
skins,
leather,
related
products

Fuels and
related
products,
and
power *

Chemicals
and allied
products »

139.1
137.9
148,2
154.0
159.8
168.7
183.5
199.6

45.2
48.4
52.8
52.7
52,2
52.9
61.1
83.3
84.2
79.9
86.3
99.1
80.1
81,3
77.6
77.3
81.9
82.0
82.9
94.2
90.8
91.7
92.7
90.0
90.3
94.3
103.4
100.0
103.2
108.9
110.3
114.1
131.3
143.1
145.1
148.5
167.8
179.3
200.0
252.4
248.9
261.5

51.4
54.6
56.2
57.8
59.5
60.1
64.4
76.9
90.5
86.2
87.1
90.3
90.1
92.6
91.3
91.2
94.0
99.1
95.3
95.3
96.1
97.2
96.7
96.3
93.7
95.5
97.8
100.0
98.9
100.9
106.2
115.2
118.6
134.3
208.3
245.1
265.6
302.2
322.5
408.1
574.0
694.4

52.4
57.0
63.3
64.1
64,8
65.2
70.5
93.7
95.9
87.6
88.9
101.7
96.5
97.7
98.9
98.5
99.1
101.2
102.0
101.6
101.8
100.7
99.1
97.9
98.3
99.0
99.4
100.0
99.8
99.9
102.2
104.1
104.2
110.0
146.8
181.3
187.2
192.8
198.8
222.3
260.3
287.8

Textile
products
and
apparel

and

414
50.3
64.8
75.0
75.5
78.5
90.9
109.4
94.3 '
117.5
101.5
101.6
89.6
106.7
93.9
124.2
106.9
117.2
102.7
106.2
96.0
104.7
95.7
98.2
91.2
96.9
90.6
99.5
93.7
. 103.9
98.1
97.5
93.5
97.2
93.7
96.3
93.7
98.0
94.7
96.0
93.8
94.6
93.2
97.1
98.7
105.9
103.5
100.0
100.0
102.5
102.4
109.1
108.0
111.0
111.7
112.9
113.9
125.0
122.4
176.3
159.1
187.7
177.4
186.7
184.2
191.0
183.1
192.5
188.8
212.5
206.6
241.4
229.8
249.4
244.7
254.9
251.5

82.9
88.7
80.6
83.4
92.7
91.6
87.4
88.9
85.0
84.9
87.4
91.8
89.4
89.5
91.0
91.9
92.5
92.3
95.5
101.2
100.0
102.2
107.3
112.1
114.5
120.8
148.1
170.9
182.6
178.0
186.1
202.6
222.5
241.2
248.7

44.0
47.3
50.7
51.5
523
53.0
58.0
70.8
76.9
75.3
78.0
86.1
84.1
84.8
85.0
86.9
90.8
93.3
93.6
95.3
95.3
94.8
94.8
94.7
95.2
96.4
98.5
100.0
102.5
106.0
110.0
114.1
117.9
125.9
153.8
171.5
182.4
195.1
209.4
236.5
274.8
304.1-

231.9
237.0
234.9
229.3
233.8
234.3
246.6
255.1
256.5
259.4
260.5
257.0

236.4
242.3
239.3
228.9
233.5
233,4
254.3
263.8
267.0
263.6
264.9
265.3

228.5
233.1
231.6
228.6
233.1
233.9
241.5
249.4
249.8
256.1
257.2
251.5

260.6
265.9
268.6
271.3
271.9
273.5
276.2
278.2
278.8
282.0
283.4
286.6

175.2
176.5
179.3
181.2
182.0
183.0
184.7
185.6
186.6
188.1
189.6
190.4

255.7
250.9
246.8
243.5
240.7
240.9
245.1
251,3
247.8
251.2
255.4
256.9

508.0
532.7
553.5
566.6
572.1
576.5
585.5
590.6
593.5
592.9
600.2
615.7

246.0
248.7
252.8
259.8
262.5
262.8
263.3
264.4
263.4
264,8
266.7
268.1

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

257.9
255.1
253.5
253.8
252.9
254.3

264,5
262.4
260.7
263.3
259.6
260,7

253.3
250.2
248.5
247.6
248.2
249.9

291.5
295.7
299.6
303.5
304.7
305.1

193.1
193.9
195.2
197.6
199.2
200.1

258.2
257.7
261.2
263.5
263.7
261.6

634.6
667.5
696.5
707.2
709.0
707.6

274.3
277.6
280.4
286.0
288.6
290.5

July
Aug.
Sept

256.8
254.2
250.0
246.1
242.7
241.2

263.3
257.9
251.0
243.3
237.4
234.5

252.2
251.2
248.4
246.6
244.7
244.0

306.2
307.2
307.2
308.8
309.1
310.1

201.3
202.4
202.5
203.0
203.2
203.1

261.1
261.3
263.0
262.7
261.7
262.7

704.9
704.3
703.2
697.2
697.5
702.7

291.3
293.3
293.3
292.8
292.5
292.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946...
... .
1947.
. .
1948
1949.
. . .
1950. .
1951 .. .
1952.. ..
. .
1953 . .
1954
1955
1956 .
. .
1957 .
1958
1959
1960
1961 .
1962
.
.. ..
1963... .
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 s
1981
1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar.
Apr
May... .,
June

July
Jug

Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1981:

1036
108.1
• 98.9
102.7
114.6
103.4
100.8
98.6
98.7
98.7
98.8
97.0
98.4
99.5
97.7
98,6
98.5
99.2
99.8
100.1
100.0
103.7
106.0
107.1
109.0
113.6
123;8

2

Oct.:::::::::::;::::::::::::::::.
Nov
Dec
1

Prices for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to 1 month earlier than the index month.
Data have been revised through August 1981 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents All
data are subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
2




300

TABLE B-59.—Producer price indexes for major commodity groups, 1940-81—-Continued
[1967=100]
Industrial commodities—Continued

Year or month

Transportation
equipRubber Lumber
Metals Machinery Furniture
Nonment:
and
and
and
and
metallic
and
and
Motor
plastic
metal
wood
mineral
allied products equipment household products vehicles
products products products
durables
and
equipment 3
Pulp,
paper,

Miscellaneous
products

57.1
61.5
71.6
73.6
72.7
70.5
70.8
70.5
72.8
70.5
85.9
105.4
95.5
89.1
90.4
102.4
103.8
103.4
103.3
102.9
103.1
99.2
96.3
96.8
95.5
95.9
97.8
100.0
103.4
105.3
108.3
109.1
109.3
112.4
136.2
150.2
159.2
167.6
174.8
194.3
217.4
232.8

27.4
32.7 '•"••"-'"""•
35.6
37.7
40.6
41.2
47.2
72.5"
73.4
75.7
84.0
72.4
77.7
74.3
89.3
88.0
97.2
85.7
94.4
85.5
94.3
85.5
92.6
87.8
97.1
93.6
98.5
95.4
93.5
92.4
96.4
97.3
98.8
98.1
95.3
95.2
91.0
96.3
91.6
95.6
93,5
95.4
95.4
96.2
95.9
98.8
100.2
100.0
100.0
113.3
101.1
104.0
125.3
108.2
113.6
110.1
127.3
113.4
144.3
122.1
177.2
151.7
183.6
170.4
176.9
179.4
205.6
186.4
236.3
195.6
276.0
219.0
300,4
288.9
249.2
273.7
292.8

37.8
38.5
39.1
39.0
39.0
39.6
44.3
54.9
62.5
63.0
66.3
73.8
73.9
76.3
76.9
82.1
89.2
91.0
90.4
92.3
92.4
91.9
91.2
91.3
93.8
96.4
98.8
100.0
102.6
108.5
116.6
118.7
123.5
132.8
171.9
185.6
195.9
209.0
227.1
259.3
286.4
300.4

41.4
42.1
42.8
42.4
42.1
42.2
46.4
53.7
58.2
61.0
63.1
70.5
70.6
72.2
73.4
75.7
81.8
87.6
89.4
91.3
92.0
91.9
92.0
92.2
92.8
93.9
96.8
100.0
103.2
106.5
111.4
115.5
117.9
121.7
139.4
161.4
171.0
181.7
196.1
213.9
239.8
263.1

53.8
57.2
61.8
61.4
63.1
63,2
67,1
77.0
81.6
82.9
84.7
91.8;
90.1
91.9
92.9
93.3
95.8
98.3
99.1
99.3
99,0
98.4
97.7
97.0
97.4
96.9
98,0
100,0..
102.8
104.9
107.5
110.0
111.4
115.2
127.9
139.7
145.6
151.5
160.4
171,3
187.7
198.4

49.1
50.2
52.3
52.4
53.5
55.7
59.3
66.3
71.6
73.5
75.4
80.1
80.1
83.3
85.1
87.5
91.3
94.8
95.8
97.0.
97.2
97.6
97.6
97.1
97.3
97.5
98.4
100.0
103.7
107.7
112.9
122.4
126.1
130.2
153.2
174.0
186.3
200.5
222.8
248.6
283.0
309.5

40.4
432
47.2
472
47.5
48.3
56.0
64.1
70.8
75.7
75.3
79.4
84.0
83.6
83.8
86.3
91.2
95.1
98.1
100.3
98.8
98.6
98.6
97.8
98.3
98.5
98.6
100.0
102.8
104,8
108,7
114.9
118.0
119.2
129.2
144.6
153.8
163.7
176.0
190.5
208.8
237.5

73.5
76.5
78.0
79.2
83.9
83.4
85.6
86.4
86.5
87.6
90.2
92.0
92.2
93.0
93.3
93.7
94.5
95.2
95.9
97.7
100.0
102,2
105.2
109.9
112.9
114.6
119.7
133.1
147.7
153.7
164.3
184.3
208.7
258.8
265.6

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June. .

207.8
210.7
212.7
214.1
215.0
217.3

290.0
294.7
294.9
275.6
272.1
279.8

237.4
239.2
242.6
247.8
249.2
251.1

284.6
288.9
286.8
284.4
281,8
281.9

227.6
230.2
232.5
236.4
237.6
239.2

183.4
185,6
185.7
184.4
185.4
186.5

268.4
274.0
276.5
283.7
284.0
283.4

200.7
200.1
200.7
205.4
204.5
205.2

242.9
262.9
256.1
252.8
251.7
258.0

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
.
Nov
Dec
1981: 2
Jan
. Feb....
Mar
Apr
May. ..
June

218.8
220.5
222.0
222.8
223.4
223.3

289.2
296.1
292.2
289.0
293.4
299.4

251.7
252.4
252.8
254.3*
255.0
256.7

282.5
285.1
287.3
291.9
291.1
290.6

241.5
242.6
244.7
246.8
248.3
249.8

188.0
188.9
189.5
190.9
191.5
193.1

284.8
286.0
286.8
288.6
288.7
291.2

208.6
211.7
205.6
218.2
218.6
226.2

261.7
260.1
265.1
266.0
263.6
265.3

224.8
226.4
228.4
230.8
231.8
233.4

296.5
294.7
294,4
299.4
298.4
298.1

264.4
267.2
269.0
271.4
272.1
272.9

294.0
294.0
296.4
298.8
299.1
298.4

253.3
255.3
257.5
259.6
260.7
262.1

194.0
195.2
195.8
196.4
197.4
197.3

296.6
297.9
300.9
310.8
312.0
313.6

229.0
230.9
229.5
233.9
236.0
236.7

264.3
264.9
264.0
266.0
266.9
266.3

July .
Aug
Sept
Oct.
.
Nov. ..
Dec.. ..

232.1
234.1
236.0
237.7
238.7
239.0

296.5
294,5
289,1
284.4
283.0
285.2

274.9
275.9
276.9
279.1
280.2
280.7

302.0
304.1
305.1
305.5
303.9
303.6

264.8
266.2
267.8
268.8
270.0
271.6

199.5
199.6
200.7
201.4
201.6
202.2

314.3
314.1
313.1
313.1
313.5
313.6

237.4
238.4
232.6
247.5
248.6
249.2

263.2
262.6
266.7
268.0
267,2
267.3

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 2
1981

. ..

...

. ,

1980:

.

2
Data have been revised through August 1981 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All
data are subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
'" 3 Index for total transportation equipment is'not shown but is available beginning December 1968.
Source: Department of labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




301

TABLE B-60.—Changes in producer &rice indexes for finished goods, 1950-81
[Percent change]
Finished
consumer
foods

Total
finished
goods

Total

Year or month

Dec.
to
Dec.'

Year Dec. Year
to
to
to
year Dec.1 year

Dec.
to
Dec.1

1.9
13.3
5.3 12.4
-5,9 — 9
.5 ~l!o = 2.2 -5^2
g
1
2
19

10.4
2.9
-2.2

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973... .
1974
1975
1976. ..
1977
1978
... .
1979
1980
19812

1.2
4.2
3.2
.5
-.4
1.8
-.5
.1
—2

!s

3.3
2.2
1.6
3.1
4.8
2.2
3.2
3.8
11.8
18.3
6.6
3.7
6.9
9.2
12.8
11.8
7.0

Consumer
goods

Year
to
year

1.8
9.5

.2 -2.9
3.6
2.8
5.3
3.6
2.3
— 2 -3.7
8
5.2
0 -1.8
— 3 -n
.4
!4
9.1
1.7
1.4
3.2
1.2 -.4
4.8
2.8
8.2
3.7
3.5 -2.5
5.9
3.1
8.0
3.1
9.1 22.5
15.3 13.0
5.5
10.8
4.4 = 2.5
6.5
6.9,
7.8 11.7
7.4
11.1
7,5
13.5
9.2
1.5

Finished
energy
goods

Finished goods excluding consumer foods

:::
::

-2.5
-=,2
3.5
5.8
-4.7
2.2
-.4
.9
....
-1.2
.5
3.8
6.5
-1.6
3.6 ' "2.4 ' 26
2.7
3.4
6.2
3.5
3.2
4.3
2.1
3.7
1.6
2.1
2.0
5.6
6.6
20.3
4.1
16.0
14.0 21.2
7.2 12.1
8.4
6.2
6.3
6,9
7.0
"£3
8.3
7.3
9.1
9.2 14.8 11.9
5,9 13.3 16.2
8.7 10.3
5.8

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Capital
equipment

Year
to
year

8.2
1.6
.9
7.2
-1.1 -1.3
.9
1.6
.3
.8
1.7
2.4
2.5
1.7
2.5
.2
.8
1.3
4
4
— 3 -.1
'l
2
,1
0
.1 -.1
.7
.9
1.6
1.7
2.1
1.9
2.1
2.0
2.4
2.9
3.0
3.9
3.4
2.0
2.0
1.9
4.5
7.4
20.5 16.9
6.7 10.5
6.2
6.0
7.2
6.7
7.1
8.5
17.5 13.3
14.2 18.6
8.4 10.2

Dec.
to
Dec.1

Year
to
year

10.3
3.4
.8
2.3
1.1
5.6
8.3
4.3
1.3
1.0
1
3
!9
1.5
3.9
3.1
3.0
4.6
4.9
2.4
2.0
5.3
22.6
8.2
6.4
7.3
7,9
8.8
11.4
9.2

2.4
9.7
1.7
1.7
1.2
3.0
7.4
6.2
2.6
1.9
2
.1
4
.2
1.0
1.2
2.5
3.3
3.5
3.3
4.8
4.1
2.5
3.3
14.2
15.2
6.7
6.5
7.9
8.7
10.8
10.2

Finished goods
excluding food
and energy

Dec. Year Dec. Year
to
to
to
to
Dec.1 year Dec.1 year

."."..:.:

.:"":.

16,4
11.5
12.1
8.5
58.0
27.8
14.3

'...'..".' '...'.".".

17.3
11.8
15.7
6.4
35.1
49.2
19.1

6.1
5.6
6.3
8.3
9.4
10.7
7.6

11.4
5.6
6.1
7.5
9.0
11.1
8.6

Percent change from preceding month

Sen
SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnad- son- Unad- son- Unad- son- Unad- son- Unad- son- Unad- sonally justed ally
justed
justed
justed 111' justed adjusted
justed
adjusted
justed
justed
justed
justed
justed
justed

SeaUnad- son-

S

1980:

Jan
Feb. .
Mar
Apr
May..
June.
July... .
Aug.
Sept .
Oct.. .
Nov
Dec. ...
1981: a
Jan
Feb..
Mar...,

[Jay"
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

.

!.

1.9
1.4
10
.9
.5
.6
1.8
8
0
1.6
.3
.4
1.4
.9
1.0
.9
.4
.3
.5
^
-1
1.1
.2
,3

3

»

1.6 -0.0 =0.6
=.6
1.3
1.0
'.6
l.i
.8 -1.5 -1.3
.4
.8
.5
.6
.8
3.7
3.7
1.7

2.6
1.8
l.i
1.6

1.2
.3
.9
.7
.4

2.0
.4
.2
.4
.2

2.7
.5
.7
.3
.0

.4
.7
1.2
.5
-.1
2.0
.3
.5

1.2
.8
1.2
.8
.4
.5
.4
.2
.1
.6
.5
.3

.7
.1

.1
-.6
1.0
=.1
.1
.5
1,4
.3
-.3
-.2
-.5
.1

1.6
1.2
1.2
1.3
.4
.3
.2
-.0
-.1
1.6
.4
.3

-!3
.4
.4
1.5

~'.3
-.7
-.4
.1

S

2.5
1.9
1.2
1.5
.5
.9
1.1
.7
.2
1.1
.8
.4

2.9
2.4
1,2
1.6
.5
.8
1.2
.4
= .2
1.6
.3
.5

2.9
2.4
1.3
1.4
.5
1.0
1.0
.6

1.7
.6
.7
1.7
.2
.5
1.2
.5
-.0
3.1
.4
.3

1.5
.8
,9
1,6
.3
.7
1.2
1.0
.1
1.7
.6
.4

1.5
1.2
1.3
1.1
.4
.5
.1
.2
.2
.8
.8
.3

1.6
1.3
1.5
1.3
.3
,3
.1
-.1
= .1
1.4
.2
.3

1.6
1.3
1.5
1.1

1.5
.8
.5
1.0
.7
.5
.6
.2
-.1
2.2
.6
.4

1.2
,9
.7
.9
.7
,7
.7
.6
.1
.9
.8
.6

1
a

.2
.8
.9
.4

'.4
-.1
.0
.2
.7
.8
.2

3.5
6.6
5.6
3.6
1.6
.3
.8
,6
.2
—2
'.9
1.4

4.0

6.8
5.6
3.3
1.0
.1
.3
.3
.2
,2
1.8
1.5

2.6
2.2
4.2
4.3
6.1
6.1
1.4
1.8
.0 =
.4
!2
-.6 -1.0
-1.2 -1.5
.7
.7
-.8 , , 4
.1
'.9
.7
.7

2,4
1.0
1.2
.2
.8
1.3
.5
-.2
2.5
.2
.3
1.5
.6
.3
1.1
!3
.3
.3
-=.3
2.1
.4
.2

2.2
1.1
.3
1.1
.3
1.1
1.3
.8
.2
1.2
.6
.3
1.2
.6
.3
1.0
.6
.6
.3
.5
.1
1.0
.8
.2

Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes.
Data have been revised through August 1981 to reflect the availability of late reports and corrections by respondents. All
data are subject to revision 4 months after original publication.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




302

MONEY STOCK, CREDIT, AND FINANCE
TABLE B-<$1.—Money stock measures and liquid assets, 1959—81
[Averages of daily figures; billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted]

. M3

L

Ml

Year and month

December:
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
..
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981".

.. . .

. .

1980:

Jan
. . . .
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct "
Nov
Dec

1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr.

A,..: ..:...:.: -...-..."T :.:.../

June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov . .
Dec*

M2

Sum of
currency,
demand
deposits,
travelers'
checks, and
other
checkable
deposits 1
(OCD)

Ml-B plus
overnight
RPs and
Eurodollars,
shares, and
savings and
small time
deposits 2

141.2
142.2
146.7
149.4
154.9
162.0
169.6
173.8
185.2
199.5
205.9
216.8
231.0
252.4
266.4
278.0
291.8
311.1
336.4
364.2
390.5
415.6
441.9

297.1
311.7
334.4
361.7
392.0
423.4
457.9
479.2
524.4
567.1
588.6
626.4
711.1
803.2
859,8
908.0
1,024.4
1,169.4
1,296.4
1,404.2
1,525.2
1,669.4
1,841.2

298.3
313.7
338.3
368.7
402.9
438.7
479.1
502.9
556.5
606.2
611.4
672.9
771.1
879.5
977.9
1,060.4
1,163.0
1,302.3
1,462.5
1,625.9
1,775.6
1,965.1
2,187.2

388.0
402.9
429.5
465.0
502.4
538.9
583.0
614.6
668.0
731.7
762.6
814.2
900.7
1,020.3
1,140.3
1,246.0
1,373.5
1,528.9
1,722.7
1,936.8
2,151.7
2,378.4

392.7
396.9
396.7
391.0
391.3
394.9
399.3
406.9
411.8
416.3
419.1
415.6

1,538.7
1,553.4
1,559.6
1,553.6
1,568.2
1,589.3
1,614.0
1,633.4
1,644.9
1,654.0
1,668.5
1,669.4

1,792.0
1,811.5
1,819.1
1,817.5
1,833.5
1,852.6
1,873.6
1,897.4
1,912.8
1,928.3
1,951.0
1,965.1

419.2
421.2
425.7
433.3
431.3
428.8
430.1
432.8
431.8
433.0
437.9
441.9

1,680.8
1,695.7
1,718.4
1,737.7
1,743.2
1,749.3
1,760.1
1,777.2
1,786.8
1,798.9
1,824.7
1,841.2

1,989.3
2,009.1
2,027.0
2,045.7
2,060.7
2,079.0
2,094.0
2,117.5
2,133.7
2,144.2
2,168.9
2,187.2

MWMF

M2 plus
large time
deposits
and term
RPs

M3 plus
other liquid
. assets

Percent change from
year or 6 months
earlier 3

Ml

M2

M3

0.7
3.2
1.8
3.7
4.6
4.7
2.5
6.6
7.7
3.2
5.3
6.5
9.3
5.5
4.4
5.0
6.6
8.1
8.3
7.2
6.4
6.3

4.9
7.3
8.2
8.4
8.0
8.1
4.7
9.4
8.1
3.8
6.4
13.5
13.0
7.0
5.6
12.8
14.2
10.9
8.3
8.6
9.5
10.3

5.2
7.8
9.0
9.3
8.9
9.2
5.0
10.7
8.9
.9
10.1
14.6
14.1
11.2
8,4
9.7
12.0
12.3
11,2
9.2
10.7
11.3

2,175.3
2,199.5
2,210.9
2,218.8
2,232.1
2,246.6
2,264.4
2,291.3
2,309.0
2,326.0
2,355.6
2,378.4

5.6
6.6
5.4
2.0
1.3
2.3
3.4
5.1
7.8
13.4
14.7
10.8

7.7
7.9
7.1
5.7
6.8
8.6
10.0
10.6
11.2
13.3
13.2
10.3

9.2
9.4
7.9
6.6
7.8
8.9
9.3
9.7
10.6
12.6
13.2
12.5

2,408.7
2,433.6
2,445.1
2,457.4
2,479.9
2,502.8
2,519.4
2,550.8
2,574.4

10.2
7.2
6.9
8.3
5.9
6.5
5.3
5,6
2.9
-.1
3.1
6.2

8.4
7.8
9.1
10.4
9.2
9.8
9.7
9.8
8.1
7.2
9.6
10.8

12.7
12.1
12.3
12.5
11.6
11.9
10.8
11.1
10.8
9.9
10.8
10.7

1
Net of demand deposits due to foreign commercial banks and official institutions. Ml differs from the sum of components
presented in Table B-62 by the amount of demand deposits held by thrift institutions at commercial banks that are estimated to be
used in servicing thrift OCD liabilities.
2
M2 differs From the sum of components presented in Table B-62 by the amount of demand deposits held by thrift institutions at
commercial banks.
3
Monthly percent changes are from 6 months earlier at a compound annual rate.
Note.—See Table B-62 for components.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




303

TABLE B-62.—- Components of money stock measures and Iiqt4id assets, 1959-81
[Averages of daily figures; billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted, except as noted]

Period

Other
Demand Travel- checkable
Currency depos- ers'
its1 checks deposits

Overnight
repurchase
agreements
(RPs)
(net)

Money
Term
Small Large repur- Term
Over- market
Shortnight mutual Savings denom- denom- chase Euro- Savterm Bankers CommerEurofund deposits ination ination agree- dollars ings Treasury accept- cial
time
time ments (net) bonds securi- ances paper
dollars (MMMF)
Ho
HP.
(HJircNSA shares
ties
posus 2 (RPs) NSA
pQSitS 2 nnclte *
NSA
NSA

December:
1959....

28.9

111.8

0.4

0.1

0.0

0.0

I960..,.
1961....
1962.,..
1963....
1964,..

29.0
29.6
30.6
32.5
34.2

112.7
116.6
118,2
121.7
127.0

.4
.4
.4

.2
.2
.2
.3
.3

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

.0
.0
.0
.0
•0.

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

157.8
173.9
193.1
212.6
233.3

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

36.3
38.3
40.4
43.5
46.1

132.4
134.5
143.7
154.9
158.6

.6
.6
.7
.8
.8

.3
.3
.3
.4
.4

.0
.5
1.1
1.6
2.5

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

49.0
52.6
56.9
61.6
67.8

166.4
176.8
193.6
202.5
207.4

1.0
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.8

.4
.5
.6
.8
.9

1.4
2.5
3.1
6.8
7.2

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

.0
.0
.0
.1
2.3

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

73.8
80.6
88.6
97.4
106.1

214.1
224.4
239.7
253.9
262.8

2.3
2.8
3.1
3.5
3.8

1.6 7.5
3.4 13.6
5.0 17.6
9.4 21.9
17.8 21.8

.0
.0
1.0
2.0
3.6

3.6
3.4
3.8
10.3
43.6

1980
116.1 267.4
1981"... 123.1 236.8

(j

Ij

4.2 28.1
4.5 77.9

27.9
27.5

4.5
6.7

3.6
5.1

11.5

1.2

0.0

0.7 46.1

38.7

0.5

12.6
14.8
20.2
25.7
29.3

2.0
4.0
7.1
10.9
15.3

.0
.0
.0
.0
.0

.8
1.4
1.6
1,9
2.4

45.7
46.5
46.9
48.1
49.0

36.8
37.1
39.9
40.7
38.5

.8
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.2

5.2
6.8
7.7
9.1

255.0 34.5
251.1 55.1
261.4 78.1
266.3 101.1
261.0 120.7

21.3
23.2
31.1
37.6
20.4

.0
.5
1.0
1.5
2.4

1.7
2.1
2.1
2.9
2.7

49.7
50.2
51.2
51.8
51.7

40.7
43.2
38.7
46.1
59.5

1.5
1.6
1.7
2.2
3.2

10.2
14.4
17.8
22.5
34.0

256.7
287.5
317.2
322.4
333.9

153.0
191.8
232.6
266.4
288.9

45.1
57.6
73.1
111.0
144.0

1.4
2.5
3.3
7.1
8.4

2.2
2.7
3.6
5.4
8.0

52.0
54.3
57.5
60.4
63.2

49.3
36.3
41.1
50.0
53.6

3.3
3.5
3.3
4.7
10.6

34.5
32.7
35.2
41.9
50.1

383,9
447.8
486.5
475.5
416.5

340.1
396.2
453.8
533.3
652.7

129.6
117.9
145.1
194.0
219.7

9.0
15.0
21.0
27.7
30.7

9.7
13.1
18.7
29.9
42.9

67.2 77.1
71.8 81.1
76.4 90.1
80.3 99.6
79.6 129.3

8.4
8.8
11.9
21.7
27.0

48.1
51.8
63.1
79.4
97.3

75.8 393.0 756.8 256.8
184.5 335.6 848.6 298.4

38.9
47.6

48.4 72.3 159.9

32.5 100.2

0.0 145.2

1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

107.3
108,1
108.9
109.1
110.4
111.1

263.3
265.2
263.8
257.1
256.1
258.7

3.8 18.4
3.8 19.9
3.8 20.3
3.8 21.1
3.8 21.0
3.8 21.4

23.1
24.3
22.9
19.5
20.6
22.3

4.4
3.5
3.4
2.5
2.8
3.0

49.1
56.7
60.9
60.4
66.8
74.2

412,6
406.4
396.0
381.9
377.7
384.6

660.4
669.2
683.5
702.2
712.9
714.1

222.8
227.5
230.2
234.4
235.9
233.3

30.5
30.6
29.2
29.5
29.4
30.0

45.6
49.4
49.1
50.1
50.2
48.9

79.2
78.2
77.0
75.4
74.2
73.7

132.4
134.2
138.3
146.3
148.6
145.1

27.6 98.6
27.1 99.0
28.1 99.3
28.9 100.6
29.2 96.5
29.6 96,7

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

112.1
113.4
113.8
114.9
115.7
116.1

260.7
265.4
268.6
271.2
271.6
267.4

3.8
3.9
4.0
4.0
4.1
4.2

22.8
24.2
25.5
26.3
27.9
28.1

26.0
27.9
29.3
28,3
28.1
27.9

3.6
3.8
3.7
4.4
4J
4.5

80.6
80.7
78.2
77.4
77.0
75.8

395.9
404.6
407.9
407.8
406.1
393.0

712.6
713.6
718.1
724.0
738.0
756.8

228.2
229.6
233.4
237.7
245,4
256.8

31.4
34.5
34.5
36.5
37.1
38.9

48.3
48.3
45.1
45.2
46.3
48.4

73.5
73.2
73.0
72.8
72.6
72.3

143.5
146.7
149.9
150.2
154.6
159.9

29.3 96.2
28.8 96.8
29.7 98.5
30.6 98.9
31.3 99.8
32.5 100.2

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

116.6
117.2
117.9
118.9
119.8
119.9

254.4
245.8
243.5
243.1
240.7
237.9

4.2 44.3
4.2 54.3
4.2 60.2
4.3 67.3
4.3 66.9
4.2 67.1

27.5
27.0
28.7
29.3
31.8
33.3

5.2
4.9
4.6
5.0
6.5
6.4

80.7
92.4
105.6
117.1
118.1
122.8

376.9
370.8
368.3
367.0
361.1
354.0

775.7
783.3
789.4
790.0
798.4
807.7

268.0
273.9
271.0
269.5
277.2
287.3

40.4
39.5
37.6
38.5
40.2
42.4

50.2
52.2
52.2
52.6
57.0
57.9

71.9
71.1
70.7
70.4
69.9
69.7

165.1
169.9
164.6
157.6
157.5
160.3

33.0
32.0
33.0
34.6
35.7
36.5

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

120.8
121.2
121.1
121.4
122.1
123.1

236.4
236.7
234.4
234.7
235.9
236.8

4.1
4.4
4.5
4,5
4.6
4.5

69.0
70.8
72.2
72.8
75.6
77.9

32.3
32.4
29.8
26.9
27.1
27.5

6.9
7.8
6.9
5.9
6.5
6.7

134.3
145.4
157.0
166.4
176.6
184.5

349.1
340.7
334.5
329.6
331.5
335.6

811.3
821.9
830.7
841.1
849.0
848.6

290.3
296.6
299.9
298.9
296.5
298.4

43.5 58.7 69.3 160.7
43.7 61.0 68.8 161.8
47.1 61.2 68.4 167.8
46.4
47.8
47.6

1981:

99.2
99.4
97.6
96.5
99.1
99.3

37.2 99.6
36.9 104.8
37.0 106.2

1
Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic banks, the U.S. Government, and foreign banks and
official institutions less cash items in the process of collection and Federal Reserve float.
2
Small denomination and large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $100,000 and more than $100,000,
respectively.
Note.—NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted.
See also Table B-61.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




304

TABLE B-63.—Commercial bank loans and investments, 1939-81
[Billions of dollars]
Total
loans
and
investments

Year and month

Loans
Total

Investments

Commercial
and
industrial

U.S.
Treasury
securities

Other
securities

Loans
plus
loans
sold to
bank
affiliates

End of month >

1939- Dec

40.7

17.2

16.3

7.1

43.9
50.7
67.4
85.1
105.5

18.8
21.7
19.2
19.1
21.6

17.8
21.8
41.4
59.8
77.6

7.4
7.2
6.8
6.1
6.3

1945: Dec
1946- Dec
1947: Dec
1948: Dec

124.0
114.0
116.3
114.3

26.1
31.1
38.1
42.5
Seasonally adjusted

90.6
74.8
69.2
62.6

7.3
8.1
9,0
9.2

1948: Dec
1949: Dec

113,0
118.7

41.5
42.0

62.3
66.4

9.2
10.3

1950: Dec
1951: Dec
1952- Dec
1953: Dec
1954: Dec

124.7
130.2
139.1
143.1
153.1

51.1
56.5
62.8
66.2
69.1

61.1
60.4
62.2
62.2
67.6

12.4
13.4
14.2
14.7
16.4

157.6
161.6
166.4
181.2
188.7

80.6
88.1
91.5
95.6
110.5

39.4

60.3
57.2
56.9
65.1
57.7

16.8
16.3
17.9
20.5
20.5

1960: Dec
1961- Dec . ..
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec

197.4
212,8
231.2
250.2
272.4

116.7
123.6
137.3
153.7
172.9

42.1
43.9
47.6
52.1
58.4

59.9
65.3
64.7
61.5
60.8

20.8
23.9
29.2
35.0
38.7

1965: Dec
1966- Dec
1967: Dec
1968- Dec
1969: Dec

300.1
316.1
352.0
390.2
401.7

198.2
213.9
231.3
258.2
279.4

69.5
78.6
86.2
95.9
105.7

57.1
53.5
59.4
60.7
51.2

44.8
48.7
61.3
71.3
71.1

283.3

1970; Dec
1971- Dec
1972: D e c . . .

435.5
485.7
558.0

292.0
320.9
378.9

110.0
116.2
130.4

57.8
60.6
62.6

85.7
104.2
116.5

' 294.7
323.7
381.5

1972: Dec
1973: Dec
1974: Dec

572.6
647.8
713.6

390.5
460.5
520.1

137.5
165.4
196.9

65.8
58.5
53.6

116.3
128.8
139.9

393.1
464.8
524.8

1975: Dec
1976: Dec
1977: Dec
1978: Dec
1979: Dec

745.2
804.6
891.5
1,013.5
1,135.9

517.4
555.0
632.5
747.0
849.9

189.6
190.9
210.9
245.9
291.2

82.2
100.8
99.8
93.8
94.5

145.6
148.8
159.3
172.8
191.5

521.8
558.7
637.1
750.7
852.9

1980: Dec 3
1981- Dec

1,239.6
1,317.7

915.1
974.9

326.8
357.9.

110.0
110.9

214.4
231.8

917.8
977.7

Jan . . . .
Feb
Mar
Apr
flfay.
June

1,251.4
1,255.7
1,261.0
1,267.9
1,285.1
1,295.4

921.6
924.4
928.8
934.5
948.5
957.1

330.0
330.0
331.4
332.8
339.4
345.1

113.2
113.4
112.9
113.9
116.0
116.7

216.6
217.9
219.4
219.5
220.6
221.6

924.3
927.2
931.5
937.2
951.3
960.0

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec.3

1,302.8
1,312.2
1,317.5
1,323.8
1,327.5
1,317.7

964.0
972.8
978.8
982.6
986.0
974.9

350.9
356.7
360.5
363.6
363.5
357.9

116.4
115.6
113.2
112.5
110.3
110.9

222.3
223.8
225.6
228.7
231.2
231.8

966.7
975.4
981.5
985.3
988.8
977.7

19401941:
1942:
1943:
1944:

Dec
Dec. .
Dec
Dec
Dec

1955- Dec
1956: Dec
1957: Dec
1958: Dec
1959: Dec

.
.

..

.

.

...

Average for month 2

1981:

1
Data are for December 31 call dates.
3
Data are prorated averages of Wednesday figures for domestically chartered banks and averages of current and previous month-end
data for foreign-related institutions. Lease financing receivables are included in total loans and investments and in total loans.
3
Shifts of foreign loans and securities from U.S. banking offices to international banking facilities reduced the December levels for
several items as follows: total loans and investments, $23.4 billion; total loans, $23.1 billion; commercial and industrial loans, $11.0
billion; and other securities, $0.3 billion.
Source.- Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




305

TABLE B-64.—Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors, 1973-81
[Billions of dollars]

1973

Item

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

371.9

2024

191.3

211.8

2736

336,6

395.6

387.0

U S Government

83

11.8

85.4

690

56.8

53.7

37.4

79.2

Foreign

61

14.8

11.5

19.6

13.9

33.2

21.0

29.3

188.0

164.8

114.9

185.0

266.0

308.7

328.6

263.4

79
180.1

4.1
160.7

9.9
105.0

10.5
174.5

27
263.2

-.1
308.8

-7.8
336.4

12.9
250.6

1051

98.0

98.4

123.7

172.2

193.7

200.1

179.4

14.7
9.2
81.2

16.5
19.7
61.9

16.1
27.2
55.0

15.7
22.8
85.2

21.9
21.0
129.3

26.1
20.1
147.5

21.8
21.2
157.2

26.9
30.4
122.1

46.4
10.4
18.9
5.5

34.8
6.9
15.1
5.0

39.5
-.0
11.0
4.6

64.0
3.9
11.6
5.7

96.3
7.4
18.5
7.1

108.5
9.4
22.1
7.5

113.7
7.8
24.4
11.3

81.7
8.5
22.4
9.5

115.1

Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors

Private domestic nonfinanclal sectors
Corporate equities
Debt instruments
Debt capital instruments
State and local government obligations..
Corporate bonds
Mortgages
Home
Multi-family residential
Commercial
Farm
Other debt instruments .

. . . .

Consumer credit
Bank loans n.e.c. .
Open-market paper
Other.
...
By borrowing sector: Total.
State and local governments
Households . . .
Nonfinancial business
Farm .
Nonfarm noncorporate
Corporate,.
Debt instruments
Equities

75.1

62.7

6.6

50.7

91.0

136.3

71.1

24.3
37.0
2.5
11.3

9.9
32.6
6.6
13.5

9.6
-10.5
-2.6
10.1

25.4
4.4
4.0
16.9

40.2
26.7
2.9
21.3

47.6
37.1
5,2
25.1

46.3
49.2
11.1
29.7

2.3
37.3
6.6
24.9

188.0

164.8

114.9

185,0

266.0

308.7

328.6

263.4

13.2
78.4
96.4

15.5
51.3
98.0

137
49.6
51.6

15.2
89.6
80.2

17.3
139.1
109.5

20.9
164.3
123.5

18.4
170.6
139.6

25.3
101.7
136.5

9.9
136
72.9

7.8
74
82.8

8.5
14
41.7

10.2
57
64.3

12.3
127
84.6

15.0
153
93.2

20.8
140
104.8

14.5
158
106.1

65.0
7.9

78.7
4.1

31.8
9.9

53.7
10.5

81.9
2.7

93.3

112.6
-7.8

93.2
12.9

202.4

191.3

211.8

273.6

336.6

395.6

387.0

371.9

140.3

1206

145.3

173.9

1864

213.3

245.1

235.5

1022

737

101.2

1334

1485

152.1

152.6

182.3

Checkable deposits and currency
Time and savings deposits
.
Money market fund shares

14.6
75.6

8.5
65.3

15.6
83.3

17.8
111.7

25.5
119.3

13

-0

2

25.6
110.1

6.9

27.2
82.9
34.4

14.5
131.2
29.2

Security repurchase agreements

11.0

6.5

Total funds supplied to nonfinancial sectors
Financed directly or indirectly by:
Private domestic nonfinancial sectors
Deposits and currency

Foreign deposits
Credit market instruments
Corporate equities .
Foreign funds
At banks
Credit and equity instruments
U.S. Government-related loans, net
U.S. Government cash balances
Private insurance and pension reserves
Other sources

24

.2

2.3

2.2

7.5

6.6

1.2

-.2

.8

1.7

1.3

2.0

1,5

.9

43.9

47.5

47.9

45.1

42.2

67.0

109.3

55.1

-58

-6

-38

-4.6

-43

64

218

21

132

435

467

212

31

31

101

-4.7
17.9

12

6.3

•42.3

40.5

25.6
-4.4

-22.3
25.4

17.6

27.2

31.8

-2.2

3.4

11.7

-8.7
10.8

123

191

23.2

19.5

28
397

30
477

9
595

14.2

-46
334
1.0

16.3

28.7

-15
307

See next page for continuation of table.




306

-1.3

-5.8

-16.8

-1.9

29.1

3.7
666

5
587

-36
802

38.1

29.6

27.7

TABLE B-64.—Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors, 1973-81—Continued
[Billions of dollars]
1981 unadjusted quarterly
flows

Item

1

II

1981 seasonally adjusted
annual rates

III

1

II

III

377.4

89.9

U.S. Government

91.3

105.3

433.5

400.2

35.8

Total funds raised by nonfinancial sectors

-2.6

18.5

127.0

50.9

59,7

10.7

32.3

38.2

34.7

5.6

Foreign

48.4

274.2

311.0

282.9

-2.5
87.8

-6.2
82.3

11.9

262.3

-10.0
321.1

-24.8
307.7

33.0

Debt capital instruments.

76.1

45.5

Corporate equities
Debt instruments

85.3

3.0

Private domestic nonfinancial sectors

41.5

36.3

174.9

149.6

117.4

31.0
28.5

24.6
12.6

4.5
6.3

6.9
1.8

29.3

27.6

13.9

18.8

18.7

115.3

15.4

5.3

112.4

96.8

79.9

72.4

61.4

20.7

24.6

9.7

17.6
12.3

46.0

87.5

171.5

190.3

12.0
20.0

27.5
12.5
19.4
28.2

30.9
80.2
14.4
46.0

37.3
78.3
34.6
40.2

85.3

76.1

274.2

311.0

282.9

4.0

6.5

6.3

29.4

21.2

18.3
26.1

..

30.9
47.9

35.6
34.2

1,3
4.3
2.7

.

Other debt instruments

12.5

Consumer credit
Bank loans n e e
Open-market paper

-2.5

1.6
5.4
8.0

By borrowing sector: Total

48.4

State and local governments
Households
Nonfinancial business

5.2
3.0

Farm
Nonfarm noncorporate
Corporate
Debt instruments
Equities

7.3
4.9

22.2

State and local government obligations
Corporate bonds
Mortgages
Home mortgages
Multi-family residential
Commercial
...
Farm.

8.6

1.3
6.0
3.2

46.3

9.3
18.4

5.8

12.9

8.6
5.0

1,4
4.7
2.8

8.1
5.9

6.1
2.3

5.1

9.7

5.7

123.6
121.3

130.0
159.8
22.2
14.2

5.6

12.7

124.3
146.0
24.1

17.9

23.8
19.4
78.1

123.5

9.8
112.0

3.0

36.8
-2.5

32.0
-6.2

66.2
11.9

133.5
-10.0

136.8
-24.8

89.9

Total funds supplied to nonfirtancial sectors

25.8

15.0

..

34.3

91.3

105.3

433.5

400.2

377.4

Financed directly or indirectly by:
Private domestic nonfinancial sectors

57.6

Checkable deposits and currencyTime and savings deposits
Money market fund shares

39.8

59.5

290.0

205.3

253.7

45.1

Deposits and currency

31.8

45.6

263.1

142.1

183.6

74.9
12.6

57

14.5
15.0

-3.7
16.4
34.3

148.4

-.4

-1.0

-8.0

9.2

37.1

Security repurchase agreements .

4.2

Foreign deposits

2.6

4.8

16.9

16

-.4

10.2

-8.1

-1.6

19.2

25.4

36.4

104.4

116.0

-11.6

-9.5

-41.2

-46.0

17.7

70.6

7.0

32.7
37.9

36.3

-29.3

21.9
-9.7
95.5
16.6

-16.8

13.1

Corporate equities

-.6

-11.2

6.4

8.0

At banks
Credit and equity instruments

10.8
-1.8

-43.0

3.3
17

11.1

11.8

18.4

U.S. Government-related loans net
U S Government cash balances
Private insurance and pension reserves
Other sources

23.5

20.7

25.1
24.1
75.2

5.9

Source.- Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




9.1

5.0
3.0

-4.8
11.2

307

-9.5
61.5

137.3

-2.0

Credit market instruments
Foreign funds

97.7
59.9

6.7
2.2

2.8
1.6

60.6

1.3

-4.1

49.1
81.0

3.4

TABLE B-65.—-Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves, 1929-81
[Averages of daily figures; millions of dollars]

Year and month

Total

Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Member bank
U.S.
borrowings
Government
and Federal
agency
Seasonal
Total
securities

Other1

Total

801
95
3

396
142
99

3
5
4
90
265
334
157
224
134
118

114
180
482
658
654
702
822
729
842
607

142
657
1,593
441
246
839
688
710
557
906
87
149
304
327
243
454
557
238
765
1,086

116
53

1,119
1,380
1,306
1,027
1,154
1,412
1,703
1,494
1,543
1,493
1,725
1,970
2,368
2,554
2,504
2,514
2,547
2,139
3,316
5,514
4,699
4,990
4,708
4,643
6,585
7,416
7,242
7,876
11,112
12,147
13,738
13,634

2,395
2,588
11,473
14,049
12,812
13,152
12,749
14,168
16,027
16,517
17,261
19,990
16,291
17,391
20,310
21,180
19,920
19,279
19,240
19,535
19,420
1B.899
18,932
19,283
20,118
20,040
20,746
21,609
22,719
23,830
25,260
27,221
28,031
29,265
31,329
31,353
35,068
36,941
34,989
35,136
36,471
41,572
43,972
« 40,097
42,013

120
148
197
161
259
291
248
220
222
152
79
53

13,240
13,847
13,066
13,522
13,236
13,551
13,705
12,177
11,682
12,614
13,509
13,634

41,514
39,650
39,752
40,153
40,344
40,648
41,057
41,024
40,579
40,555
40,906
42,013

446
2,432
2,510
2,188
2,219
5,549
11,166
18,693
23,708
23,767
21,905
23,002
18,287
20,345
23,409
24,400
25,639
24,917
24,602
24,765
23,982
26,312
27,036
27,248
29,098
30,546
33,729
37,126
40,885
43,760
48,891
52,529
57,500
61,688
69,158
71,094
79,701
86,679
92,108
100,328
107,948
117,344
126,276
127,895
137,796

321
107
1,049
1,298
703
127
62
558
874
1,473
1,617
642

41
32
13
12
54
134
82

1980: Dec
1981: Dec"

1,643
2,669
2,612
2,305
2,404
6,035
11,914
19,612
24,744
24,746
22,858
23,978
19,012
21,606
25,446
27,299
27,107
26,317
26,853
27,156
26,186
28,412
29,435
29,060
31,217
33,218
36,610
39,873
43,853
46,864
51,268
56,610
64,100
66,708
74,255
76,851
85,642
93,967
99,651
107,632
116,382
129,330
139,896
143,250
152,072

1381:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec."

142,819
140,373
140,919
143,648
144,065
144,999
147,405
146,892
145,511
145,960
148,339
152,072

128,174
125,248
126,849
128,783
128,675
129,410
131,949
133,307
132,356
132,197
134,135
137,796

1,405
1,278
1,004
1,343
2,154
2,038
1,751
1,408
1,473
1,149
695
642

1929: Dec,
1933: Dec
1939: Dec .
1940: Dec
1941: Dec
1942: Dec
1943: Dec
1944: Dec
1945: Dec
1946: Dec
1947: Dec
1948: Dec
1949; Dec
1950- Dec
1951: Dec
1952- Dec
1953; Dec
1954- Dec
1955- Dec
1956- Dec
1957: Dec
1958: «0ec
1959: Dec
I960- Dec.
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963; Dec
1964- Dec
1965: Dec
1966: Dec
1967: Dec
1968- Dec
1969: Dec
1970: Dec
1971- Dec
1972: Dec
1973- Dec
1974: Dec...
1975: Dec
1976: Dec
1977- Dec
1978: Dec
1979- Dec

Member bank reserves2

1
2

Required

Excess

2,347
1,822
6,462
7,403
9,422
10,776
11,701
12,884
14,536
15,617
16,275
19,193
15,488
16,364
19,484
20,457
19,227
18,576
18,646
18,883
18,843
18,383
18,450
18,514
19,550
19,468
20,210
21,198
22,267
23,438
24,915
26,766
27,774
28,993
31,164
31,134
34,806
36,602
34,727
34,964
36,297
41,447
43,578
40,067
41,614

48
3766
5,011

6,646
3,390
2,376
1,048
1,284
1,491
900
986
797
803
1,027
826
723
693
703
594
652
577
516
482
769
568
572
536
411
452
392
345
455
257
272
165
219
262
339
262
172
174
125
394
5
30
399

41,025
39,448
39,372
40,071
40,213
40,098
40,675
40,753
40,179
40,438
40,591
41,614

489
202
380
82
131
550
382
271
400
117
315
399

3

Mainly float.
Beginning December 1959, part of currency and cash held by member banks allowed as reserves; beginning November 1960 all
such currency and cash allowed.
Beginning November 1972, includes reserve deficiencies on which Federal Reserve Banks were allowed to waive penalties for a
transition period in connection with bank adaptation to Regulation J as amended effective November 9, 1972. Transition period ended
after second quarter 1974.
Effective November 1975, includes reserve deficiencies on which penalties are waived over a 24-month period when a nonmember
bank merges into an existing member bank, or when a nonmember bank joins the Federal Reserve System.
3
Data are for licensed banks only.
4
Includes all reserve balances of depository institutions plus vault cash at institutions with required reserve balances plus vault cash
equal to required reserves at other institutions.
•' Reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks plus vault cash used to satisfy reserve requirements less required reserves. (This
measure of excess reserves is comparable to the old excess reserves concept published historically.)
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




308

TABLE B-66.—Aggregate reserves and monetary base, 1959-81
[Averages of daily figures; billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted]
Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements
Seasonally adjusted
Year and month

.

Reserves of depository
institutions1
Total 2

Nonborrowed

Required

Not seasonally adjusted
Monetary
base^

Reserves of depository
institutions1
Total

2

Nonborrowed

Required

Monetary
base3

1959- Dec

15.19

14.25

14.68

44.6

15.48

14.54

14.97

45.5

I960- Dec
1961- Dec
1962- Dec
1963- Dec
1964: Dec

15.41
15.98
16.43
16.91
17.57

15.34
15.85
16.17
16.58
17.31

14.67
15.39
15.86
16.42
17.17

44.9
46.1
47.6
50.0
52.5

15.70
16.28
16.71
17.16
17.84

15.62
16.15
16.45
16.83
17.57

14.96
15.70
16.13
16.67
17.43

45.8
47.1
48.5
51.0
53.5

1965:
19661967:
19681969:

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

18.37
18.47
20.28
21.60
21.53

17.93
17.94
20.05
20.85
20.42

17.95
18.13
19.90
21.17
21.25

55.4
57.5
61.5
65.9
68.5

18.66
18.80
20.59
21.62
21.53

18.22
18.27
20.36
20.87
20.41

18.24
18.46
20.21
21.19
21.24

56.5
58.7
62.6
66.8
69.5

1970- Dec
1971: Dec
1972- Dec
1973: Dec
1974: Dec

23.08
24.72
27.66
29.35
31.22

22.75
24.60
26.61
28.05
30.49

22.83
24.54
27.38
29.04
30.96

73.1
78.4
85.8
92.3
100.6

23.10
24.78
27.69
29.47
31.40

22.77
24.65
26.64
28.17
30.67

22.86
24.60
27.41
29.17
31.14

74.1
79.5
86.9
93.6
102.0

1975:
197619771978:
1979:

31.28
31.82
33.27
35.21
36.58

31.15
31.77
32.70
34.34
35.11

31.02
31.55
33.08
34.98
36.25

106.8
114.3
123.8
134.9
145.3

31.58
32.13
33.71
35.66
36.97

31.45
32.07
33.14
34.80
35.50

31.31
31.85
33.52
35.43
36.65

108.4
116.2
126.0
137.4
147.9

1980: Dec*
1981: Dec"

39.19
40.80

37.50
40.17

38.72
40.49

158.2
166.0

39.66
41.25

37.97
40.61

39.19
40.94

161.0
169.0

1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

36.75
36.55
36.59
36.67
36.59
36.57

35.51
34.89
33.77
34.21
35.57
36.19

36.50
36.34
36.41
36.47
36.41
36.36

146.6
147.4
148.3
148.5
149.6
150.4

38.28
36.35
36.05
36.68
36.19
36.13

37.04
34.70
33.23
34.22
35.17
35.75

38.03
36.14
35.86
36.48
36.01
35.93

147.6
145.8
146.6
148.0
148.7
149.9

36.72
37.17
37.86
38.04
39.19
39.19

36.33
36.52
36.55
36.73
37.13
37.50

36.44
36.87
37.60
37.83
38.67
38.72

151.5
153.2
154.3
155.6
157.7
158.2

36.82
36.85
37.55
38.02
39.19
39.66

36.42
36.19
36.24
36.71
37.13
37.97

36.53
36.54
37.29
37.82
38.67
39.19

152.2
153.2
154.0
155.6
158.7
161.0

1981.
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

39.18
38.95
39.07
39.27
39.54
39.35

37.79
37.65
38.07
37.93
37.31
37.31

38.87
38.67
38.82
39.14
39.37
39.10

158.7
159.0
159.5
160.5
161.7
161.6

40.60
38.82
38.59
39.23
39.23
38.96

39.21
37.52
37.59
37.89
37.00
36.93

40.29
38.54
38.34
39.10
39.05
38.72

159.6
157.4
157.8
159.9
160.8
161.2

July
Aug .
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec"

39.61
39.88
40.62
40.27
40.26
40.80

37.93
38.46
39.16
39.09
39.60
40.17

39.36
39.68
40.29
40.08
40.01
40.49

162.7
163.4
164.0
163.9
164.7
166.0

39.55
39.39
40.00
40.13
40.25
41.25

37.87
37.97
38.54
38.95
39.58
40.61

39.30
39.19
39.67
39.94
39.99
40.94

163.3
163.2
163.3
163.8
165.6
169.0

Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec
Dec

July
Aug
Sept . . . .
Oct
Nov*
Dec

.

. . .

'Reserve aggregates include required reserves of member banks and Edge Act corporations and other depository institutions.
Discontinuities associated with the implementation of the Monetary Control Act, the inclusion of Edge Act corporation reserves, and
other changes in Regulation D have been removed. Beginning with the week ended December 23, 1981, reserves aggregates have been
reduced by shifts of reservable liabilities to international banking facilities (IBFS). An estimate of the size of this impact will be
published when available on the basis of reports of liabilities transferred to IBFS by U.S. commercial banks and U.S. agencies and
branches of foreign banks.
2
Reserve balances with Federal Reserve Banks (which exclude required clearing balances) plus vault cash at institutions with
required reserve balances plus vault cash equal to required reserves at other instititions.
3
Includes reserve balances and required clearing balances at Federal Reserve Banks in the current week plus vault cash held two
weeks earlier used to satisfy reserve requirements at all depository institutions plus currency outside the U.S. Treasury, Federal Reserve
Banks, the vaults of depository institutions, and surplus vault cash at depository institutions.
4
Reserve measures from November 1980 to date reflect a one-time increase—estimated at $550 to $600 million—in required
reserves associated with the reduction of week-end avoidance activities of a few large banks.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




309

TABLE B-67 .—Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-82
[Percent per annum]
Corporate
bonds
(Moody's)

U.S. Treasury securities
Year or month

Bills
(new
issues) 1

36month month

1929
1933
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

Constant
maturities 2

3
years

Aaa

Baa

10
years

Highgrade
Prime
Newmunici- hntnp
compal mortgage mercial
bonds
paper,
views
(Stand- (FHLBB)a 4-6
ard &
months
Poor's)

5.90

4.27

7.76

4.71

.023

4.73
4.49
3.01

4.96

.014
103
.326
.373
.375

2.84
2.77
2.83
2.73
2.72

4.75
4.33
4.28
3.91
3.61

375
375
.594
1.040
1.102

2.62
2.53
2.61
2.82
2.66

3.29
3.05
3.24
3.47
3.42

1.218
1.552
1.766
. 1.931
.953

3.24
3.41
3.52
3.74
3.51

2.76
2.50
2.10
2.36
2.06
1.86
1.67
1.64
2.01
2.40
2.21
1.98
2.00
2.19
2.72
2.37

0.515

..

..

"."".

I.:.".'.'. " •

2.47'
1.63

2.85
2.40

2.62
2.86
2.96
3.20
2.90

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1.753
2.658
3.267
1.839
3.405 ""1832"

2.47
3.19
3.98
2.84
4.46

2.82
3.18
3.65
3.32
4.33

3.06
3.36
3.89
3.79
4.38

3.53
3.88
4.71
4.73
5.05

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

2.928
2.378
2.778
3.157
3.549

3.247
2.605
2.908
3.253
3.686

3.98
3.54
3.47
3.67
4.03

4.12
3.88
3.95
4.00
4.19

4.41
4.35
4.33
4.26
4.40

5.19
5.08
5.02
4.86
4.83

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

3.954
4.881
4.321
5.339
6.677

4.055
5.082
4.630
5.470
6.853

4.22
5.23
5.03
5.68
7.02

4.28
4.92
5.07
5.65
6.67

4.49
5.13
5.51
6.18
7.03

4.87
5.67
6.23
6.94
7.81

1970
1971
1972 ,
1973
1974

6.458
4.348
4.071
7.041
7.886

6.562
4.511
4.466
7.178
7.926
6.122
5.266
5.510
7.572
10.017
11.374
13.811

7.29
5.65
5.72
6.95
7.82

7.35
6.16
6.21
6.84
7.56

8.04
7.39
7.21
7.44
8.57

9.11
8.56
8,16
8.24
9.50

7.49
6.77
6.69
8.29
9.72

7.99
7.61
7.42
8.41
9.44

8.83
8.43
8.02
8.73
9.63

10.61
9.75
8.97
9.49
10.69

11.55
14.44

11.46
13.91

11.94
14.17

13.67
16.04

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

5.838
4.989
5.265
7.221
10.041

1980
1981

11.506
14.077

See next page for continuation of table.




310

2.53
2.93
3.60
3.56
3.95
3.73
3.46
3.18
3.23
3.22
3.27
3.82
3.98
4.51
5.81
6.51
5.70
5.27
5.18
6.09
6.89
6.49
5.56
5.90
6.39
8.51
11.23

Prime rate
charged by
banks*

Discount
rate,
Federal Federal
funds
6
Reserve
Bank of 4 rate
New York

5.85
1.73
.59
.56
.53
.66
.69
.73

5Vfe-6

.75
.81
1.03
1.44
1.49
1.45
2.16
2.33
2.52
1.58

1.50
1.50
1V6-IV4
l%-2
2.00

2.18
3.31
3.81
2.46
3.97

3.16
3.77
4.20
3.83
4.48

1.89
2.77
3.12
2.15
3.36

1.78
2.73
3.11
1.57
3.30

3.85
2.97
3.26
5.89' 3.55
5.83
3.97
5.81
4.38
6.25
5.55
6.46
5.10
5.90
6.97
7,81
7.83
8.45
7.71
7.74
5.11
7.60
4.73
7.96
8.15
9.84
8.92
9.00
6.32
9.00
5.34
9.02
5.61
9.56 7 7.99
10.78 10.91
12.66 12.29
14.70 14.76

4.82
4.50
4.50
4.50
4.50

3.53
3.00
3.00
3.23
3.55
4.04
4.50
4.19
5.16
5.87

3.22
1.96
2.68
3.18
3.50

lVa-4

1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50

2.07
2.56
3.00
3.17
3.05

4.54
5.63
5.61
6.30
7.96
7.91
5.72
5.25
8.03
10.81
7.86
6.84
6.83
9.06
12.67
15.27
18.87

5.16
2.56
1.00
1.00
1.00
•1.00
•1.00
•1.00
•1.00
•1.00 Ill
1.00
1.34
1.50
1.59
1,75
1.75
1.99
1.60

5,95
4,88
4,50
6.44
7.83
6.25
5.50
5.46
7.46
10.28
11.77
13.41

4.07
5.11
4.22
5.66
8.20
7.18
4.66
4,43
8.73
10.50
5,82
5.04
5.54
7.93
11.19
13.36
16.38

TABLE B-67.—Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-81—Continued
[Percent per annum]
Corporate
bonds
(Moody's)

U.S. Treasury securities
Year or month

1979:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

1980:

Jan
Feb . . .
Mar.. .
Apr
May.. . .
June . . .
July
Aug
Sept . .. .
Oct....
Nov ... .
Dec

1981:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

Bills
(new
issues) l
36month month

Constant
maturities 2
3
10
years years

9.351
9.265
9.457
9.493
9.579
9.045
9.262
9.450
10.182
11.472
11.868
12.071

9.501
9.349
9.458
9.498
9.531
9.062
9.190
9.450
10.125
11.339
11.856
11.847

9.50
9.29
9.38
9.43
9.42
8.95
8.94
9.14
9.69
10.95
11.18
10.71

9.10
9.10
9.12
9.18
9.25
8.91
8.95
9.03
9.33
10.30
10.65
10.39

12.036
12.814
15.526
14.003
9.150
6.995
8.126
9.259
10.321
11.580
13.888
15.661

11.851
12.721
15.100
13.618
9.149
7.218
8.101
9.443
10.546
11.566
13.612
14.770

10.88
12.84
14.05
12.02
9.44
8.91
9.27
10.63
11.57
12.01
13.31
13.65

10.80
12.41
12.75
11.47
10.18
9.78
10.25
11.10
11.51
11.75
12.68
12.84

14.724
14.905
13.478
13.635
16.295
14.557
14.699
15.612
14.951
13.873
11.269
10.926

13.883
14.134
12.983
13.434
15.334
13.947
14.402
15.548

13.01
13.65
13.51
14.09
15.08
14.29
15.15
16.00
16,22
15.50
13.11
13.66

12.57
13.19
13.12
13.68
14.10
13.47
14.28
14.94
15.32
15.15
13.39
13.72

15.057
14.013
11.530
11.471

Aaa

9.25

Baa

9.26
9.37
9.38
9.50
9.29

10.13
10.08
10.26
10.33
10.47
10.38

9.20
9.23
9.44
10.13
10.76
10.74

10.29
10.35
10.54
11.40
11.99
12.06

11.09
12.38
12.96
12.04
10.99
10.58

12.42
13.57
14.45
14.19
13.17
12.71

11.07
11.64
12.02
12.31
12.97
13.21

12.65
13.15
13.70
14.23
14.64
15.14

12.81
13.35
13.33
13.88
14.32
13.75

15.03
15.37
15.34
15.56
15.95
15.80

14.38
14.89
15.49
15.40
14.22
14.23

16.17
16.34
16.92
17.11
16.39
16.55

1
Rate on new issues within period; bank-discount basis.
z
Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant
3

Highgrade
Prime
Discount
Mewmunici- home
com- Prime rate
rate,
pal mortgage mercial charged by
Federal Federal
4
6
bonds yields
Reserve funds
banks
(Stand- (FHLBB) 3
Bank of rate
_rj p
rrmntho
arc &
monins
New York 4
Poor's)

"&•

6.25
6.19
6.16
6.14
6.10
5.99
6.05
6.10
6.40
6.98
7.19
7.09

10.18
10.20
10.30
10.36
10.47
10.66
10.78
11.01
11.02
11.21
11.37
11.64

7.21
8.04
9.09
8.40
7.37
7.60
8.08
8.62
8.95
9.11
9.55
10.09

11.87
11.93
12.62
13.03
13.68
12.66
12.48
12.25
12.35
12.61
13.04
13.28

9.65
10.03
10.12
10.55
10.73
10.56
11.03
12.13
12.86
12.67
11.71
12.77

13.26
13.54
14.02
14.15
14.10
14.67
14.72
15.27
15.29
15.65
16.38
15.87

10.32
10.01
9.96
9.87
9.98
9.71

7

11%-11%
11%-11%
H /4-ll /4
11 ¥4-11%
11%-11%

9.82
10.39
11.60
13.23
13.26
12.80

llV2-ll 3 /4

12.66
13.60
16.50
14.93
9.29
8.03

3

3

im-im

n%-i2y4

12V4-13V2
13y2-15
15V4-15V2
15V2-15V4
15V4-15V4
15V4-16%

16%-19Vii
19V2-19V2
8
18V2-14
14 -12

9 ¥2
9V2
9V2
9Va
9V3

-9V2
-9V2
-9V2
-9y2
-9V6

9y2 -9y2

9*2-10
10 -lOVs
10V2-11

11
12
12

-12
-12
-12

12 -12
12 -13
13 -13
13 -13
13 -12
12 -11

8.29
9.61
11.04
12.32
14.73
16.49

12 -11
11 -11 Vz
11V2-13
13V2-14V2
14y2-173A
173/4-21V2

11
10
10
11
11
12

15.10
14.87
13.59
14.17
16.66
15.22

21V2-20
20 -19
19 -17 V2
17V2-18
18 -20y2
20V2-20

13 -13
13 -13
13 -13
13 -13
13 -14
14 -14

16.09
16.62
15.93
14.72
11.96
12.14

20 -20y2
20V2-20V2
20*2-19^
19V2-18
18 -16
15%-15%

14 =14
14 =14
14 =14
14 -14
14 -13
13 -12

-10
-10
-11
-11
-12
-13

10.07
10.06
10.09
10.01
10.24
10.29
10.47
10.94
11.43
13.77
13.18
13.78
13.82
14.13
17.19
17.61
10.98
9.47
9.03
9.61
10.87
12.81
15.85
18.90
19.08
15.93
14.70
15.72
18.52
19.10
19.04
17.82
15.87
15.08
13.31
12.37

maturities by the Treasury Department.
Effective rate (in the primary market) on conventional mortgages, reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and
assuming on the average, repayment at end of 10 years. Rates beginning January 1973 not strictly comparable with prior rates.
4
For monthly data, opening and closing rate. Prime rate for 1929-33 and 1947-48 are ranges of the rate in effect during the
period.
* Since July 19, 1975, the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at
these rates. Prior to that date, the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day's transactions, usually
the6 one at which most transactions occurred.
From October 30, 1942, to April 24, 1946, a preferential rate of 0.50 percent was in effect for advances secured by Government
securities maturing in 1 year or less.
7
Beginning November 1979, data are for 6-months paper.
8
On May 1, range of 18V2-19 was in effect.
Sources: Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB),
Moody's Investors Service, and Standard & Poor's Corporation.




311

TABLE B-68.—Consumer credit outstanding and net change, 1950-81
[Millions of dollars]
Amount outstanding (end of month)
Installment credit >
Year and month

Total

Total

Automobile

Revolv- Mobile3
ing 2 home

2,461
7,226
9,526
13,580
14,642
14,434
14,573
14,945
15,235
16,838
17,327

9,488
10,262
12,835
14,569
15,144
16,798
18,687
19,971
21,081
24,491
26,968
28,428
31,070
34,987
39,755
44,526
48,347
52,017
55,228
60,495
61,614
61,982
66,085
76,047
82,005
85,301
94,056
93,434
108,454
121,887
119,919

10,080
10,972
11,983
12,354
13,147
14,890
15,864
16,461
17,059
19,268
19,656
21,178
22,448
24,458
26,459
28,670
29,606
31,343
34,149
35,283
35,935
39,540
44,466
47,969
48,833
51,144
55,391
58,569
64,260
71,335
72,224

3,271
1,537
=-57
717
4,250 1,677
3,784 2,050
637
62
5,378 3,724
2,902 1,013
988
2,272
-104 -1,214
5,784 2,374
3,928 1,451
976 =484
4,967 2,325
6,835 2,918
7,743 2,975
8,309 3,538
5,458 1,637
3,809
139
8,533 3,217
9,480 2,598
4,367 =621
12,727 4,194
14,918 7,343
21,935 5,910
494
9,486
7,402 2,976
21,529 10,465
37,039 15,204
43,081 18,736
38,379 14,715
1,411
=35
Seasonally adjusted *

1,505
892
1,011
371
793
1,743
974
§97
598
2,209
388
1,522
1,270
2,010
2,001
2,211
936
1,737
2,806
1,134
652
3,605
4,926
3,503
864
2,311
4,247
3,178
5,691
7,075
889

116,719 56,256
117,202 55,269
117,642 54,269
117,502 53,690
117,058 53,225
116,456 53,042
116,125 53,036
116,868 53,771
116,781 54,406
116,657 54,598
116,517 55,304
116,327 59,862

16,832
16,875
16,944
16,974
16,912
16,988
17,004
17,068
17,113
17,276
17,293
17,327

121,205
120,803
120,272
119,665
118,593
117,913
117,688
118,056
118,626
118,691
118,937
119,919

70,215 2,878 2,727 1,538
69,966
2,403
982
1,685
70,395 1,532
654
513
69,966 -2,109 -1,671 =-643
69,369 -3,296 -2,677 = 1,041
69,163 -2,200 -2,045 -1,026
69,732 -154 -1,199 = 717
355
70,493 1,048
489
84
71,112 1,524
1,055
201
71,618
702
685
72,020 1,048
839
245
302
985 1,619
72,224

151
= 718
878
= 438
= 619
.455
1,045
559
469
= 17
209
= 634

115,262 58,985
115,677 57,566
117,517 56,831
118,479 57,322
118,932 57,524
119,685 58,470
121,002 58,976
123,219 59,745
125,646 60,415
126,235 60,651
125,929 61,166

17,244
17,189
17,273
17,422
17,626
17,724
17,784
17,988
18,157
18,329
18,385

119,063
118,756
119,145
120,196
121,383
122,580
123,124
123,701
124,078
123,611
123,464

71,570
71,486
72,409
73,138
73,503
73,998
74,426
74,931
75,476
75,688
76,862

338
297
256
980
447
686
1,014
215
471
= 331
1,055

25,583
27,192
32,453
36,608
38,038
45,159
49,035
51,904
52,398
60,391
64,707
67,205
73,442
82,287
92,031
102,551
108,945
114,491
125,830
136,444
141,463
157,795
177,639
203,077
213,427
223,140
248,916
289,133
337,905
383,359
385,659

15,503
6,015
16,220
5,958
7,635
20,470
9,685
24,254
9,747
24,891
13,471
30,269
33,171 14,484
35,443 15,472
35,339 14,258
41,123 16,632
45,051 18,083
46,027 17,599
19,924
50,994
57,829 22,842
65,572 25,817
73,881 29,355
79,339 30,992
83,148 31,131
91,681 34,348 2405
101,161 36,946 3,720
105,528 36,325 5,128
118,255 40,519 8,528
133,173 47,862 9,700
155,108 53,772 11,709
164,594 54,266 . 13,681
171,996 57,242 15,019
193,525 67,707 17,189
230,564 82,911 39,274
273,645 101,647 48,309
312,024 116,362 56,937
313,435 116,327 59,862

381,227
380,115
379,522
377,797
375,157
373,562
373,585
376,256
378,038
378,840
380,071
385,659

311,012
310,149
309,127
307,831
305,788
304,399
303,853
305,763
306,926
307,222
308,051
313,435

382,124 310,554
Jan
380,674 309,188
Feb
Mar
383,175 310,766
386,557 313,419
May,. ,. "
'.
388,968 315,465
June
392,457 318,459
July
395,312 320,886
399,584 324,653
Aug
Sept. .. , 403,772 328,296
Oct
404,514 328,826
Nov..
405,806 328,944

1950: Dec ..
1951: Dec
1952: Dec
1953: Dec
1954: Dec
1955: Dec
1956: Dec
1957: Dec
1958: Dec
1959: Dec
I960: Dec ..
1961: Dec
1962: Dec
1963: Dec
1964: Dec
1965: Dec
1966: Dec . . . .
1967: Dec
1968: Dec
1969: Dec
1970: Dec
1971: Dec
1972: Dec
1973: Dec
1974: Dec
1975: Dec
1976: Dec
1977: Dec
1978: Dec
1979: Dec
1980: Dec
1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar

ft-:.June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

Other

Net change from preceding period
Installment
NoninNonin*
credit »
stallment Total
stallment
Auto- credit4
credit*
Total mobile

•I:'.':.

4,776
1,609
5,261
4,155
1,430
7,121
3,876
2,869
494
7,993
4,316
2,498
6,237
8,845
9,744
10,520
6,394
5,546
11,339
10,614
5,019
16,332
19,844
25,438
10,350
9,713
25,776
40,217
48,772
45,454
2,300

1981:

1,207
2,293
3,364
3,311
1,793
2,616
2,968
3,074
3,290
683
1,397

869
1,996
3,108
2,331
1,346
1,930
1,954
2,859
2,819
1,014
342

=63
979
1,682
428
= 195
57
1,208
2,115
2,282
962
274

1
Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels,
usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes, and scheduled to be
repaid (or with the option of repayment) in two or more Installments.
2
Consists of credit cards at retailers, gasoline companies, and commercial banks, and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to
1968, included in "other," except gasoline companies, included in noninstallment credit prior to 1971. Beginning 1977, includes openend credit at retailers, previously included in "other. Also beginning 1977, some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into
consumer credit. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded.
3
Not reported separately prior to July 1970.
4
Because of inconsistencies in the data and infrequent benchmarking, series on noninstallment credit is no longer published by the
Federal Reserve Board on a regular basis. Data are shown here as a general indication of trends.
s
For installment credit, computed as the difference between extensions and liquidations (both seasonally adjusted); see also Table
B-69. For noninstallment credit, computed as the change from one month to another in the seasonally adjusted amount outstanding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




312

TABLE B-69.—Consumer installment credit extended and liquidated, 7950-87
[Millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Total
Year or month

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 . ..
1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
AUB

s

of... .••...::..:

Nov
Dec
1981Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
fay
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov

Automobile
ExLiquitended
dated

Revolving »
LiquiExtended
dated

Extended

Liquidated

22,130
24,583
30,616
32,579
32,265
40,263
40,886
43,101
40,956
49,134
50,827
50,598
57,562
64,660
72,445
79,918
83,821
89,058
101,426
109,422
115,007
138,046
152,275
173,035
172,765
180,083
210,740
257,600
297,668
324,777
305,887

18,861
23,867
26,355
28,794
31,625
34,882
37,899
40,759
41,290
43,395
47,022
49,735
52,601
57,822
64,616
71,616
78,365
85,194
92,075
99,945
110,352
127,789
136,787
152,817
163,276
172,675
189,179
222,138
254,589
286,396
304,477

8,445
8,951
11,610
12,740
11,741
16,732
15,572
16,554
14,287
18,008
18,112
16,477
20,164
22,617
24,792
27,913
27,844
27,623
32,228
33,686
30,857
36,706
43,702
49,606
46,514
52,420
63,743
75,641
87,981
93,901
83,002

27,923
27,581
25,881
23,220
22,093
22,349
23,997
26,176
27,064
27,365
25,991
27,149

25,196
25,178
25,227
24,891
24,770
24,394
25,196
25,687
26,009
26,663
25452
25,530

8,441
7,973
7,372
5,922
5,533
5,550
6,068
7,400
7,518
7,544
7,117
7,234

6,903
6,991
6,859
6,565
6,574
6,576
6,785
7,045
7,434
7,343
6,872
6,932

10,500
10,756
10,634
10,347
10,302
10,341
10,679
10,700
11,143
11,124
10,953
11,614

27,059
28,706
29,822
28,878
28,149
29,005
28,750
28,399
29,428
26,952
27,499

26,190
26,710
26,714
26,547
26,803
27,075
26,796
26,040
26,609
25,938
27,157

7,237
8,333
8,700
7,205
7,320
7,442
8,178
8,573
9,176
7,139
7,748

7,300
7,354
7,018
6,777
7,515
7,385
6,970
6,458
6,894
6,177
7,474

11,483
11,867
12,071
12,352
11,904
12,668
12,190
11,964
12,335
12,208
11,861

6,906
9,008
9,932
10,689
11,679
13,008
14,559
15,567
15,501
15,638
16,661
16,960
17,840
19,699
21,815
24,386
26,206
27,482
2,726
29,013
3,481
4,567
6,182
31,090
7,278
8,689
31,414
32,512 21,862 20,818
38,081 24,659 23,485
43,696 28,702 26,699
46,019 33,213 31,243
49,444 36,956 35,616
53,278 43,934 41,764
60,437 87,596 81,348
69,245 105,125 96,090
79,186 120,174 111,546
83,037 129,580 126,655

Mobile home2
LiquiExdated
tended

...

612
2,521
5,121
7,061
5,788
4,326
4,859
5,712
5,412
6,471

Other
ExLiquitended
dated

.

13,685
15,632
19,006
19,839
20,524
23,531
25,314
26,547
26,669
31,126
32,715
34,121
37,398
42,043
47,653
52,005
55,977
61,435
65,717
69,554
74,849
76,957
78,793
87,666
87,250
86,381
98,204
88,651
99,150
104,231
88,207

11,955
14,859
16,423
18,105
19,946
21,874
23,340
25,192
25,789
27,757
30,361
32,775
34,761
38,123
42,801
47,230
52,159
57,712
60,366
64,288
71,188
72,705
72,246
78,238
81,294
83,079
89,417
75,012
84,128
90,796
90,175
7,904
7,756
7,615
7,266
7,258
7,016
7,407
7,841
7,511
8,097
7,192
7,187
7,557
7,474
7,659
7,850
7,368
7,641
7,729
7,749
7,305
7,591
7,435

5,098

478
1,754
2,975
4,184
4,720
4,536
4,720
5,341
5,126
4,868
4,610

9,971
10,034
10,373
10,677
10,589
10,436
10,641
10,419
10,665
10,851
10,688
10,998

522
452
435
397
299
424

418
397
380
383
349
366

377
415
442
513
424
479

363
382
399
372
400
413

8,460
8,400
7,440
6,554
5,959
6,034
6,873
7,661
7,961
8,184
7,497
7,822

10,926
11,426
11,484
11,514
11,554
11,650
11,713
11,473
12,042
11,818
11,808

383
409
641
551
609
488
451
536
543
487
498

407
456
553
406
366
399
384
360
368
352
440

7,956
8,097
8,410
8,770
8,316
8,407
7,931
7,826
7,374
7,118
7,392

'Consists of credit cards at retailers, gasoline companies, and commercial banks, and check credit at commercial banks. Prior to
1968, included in "other," except gasoline companies, included in noninstallment credit prior to 1971. Beginning 1977, includes openend credit at retailers, previously included in ''other." Also beginning 1977, some retail credit was reclassified from commercial into
consumer credit. Credit secured by real estate is generally excluded.
2
Not reported separately prior to July 1970.
Note.—Installment credit covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals through regular business channels,
usually to finance the purchase of consumer goods and services or to refinance debts incurred for such purposes, and scheduled to be
repaid (or with the option of repayment) in two or more installments.
Liquidated credit includes repayments, chargeoffs, and other credit.
See also Table 8-68.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




313

TABLE B-70.—Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing, J 959-81
[Billions of dollars]
Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage

Nonfarm properties
Farm
All
proper- properties
ties

End of year
or quarter

Total

Multi1- to 4- family
family properhouses ties

Commercial
proper- Total 2
ties 1

1- to 4-f3mily houses
Total

14.5

3.0
3.7
4.1
4.2

3iC
3.7
4.1
4.2

15.1
15.4
14.5
13.7
13.7

42
.6.1
9.8
13.6
17.1

4.3
6.1
9^
12.5
15.0

4.1
3.7
3.8
&9

0.2
2.4
55
7.2
8.1

26.5
30.6
34.1
37.3
40.0

14.3
16.9
18.9
20.8
22.6

11.5
12.5
13.4
14.5
16,3

22.1
26.6
29.3
32.1
36.2

18.9
22.9
25.4
28.1
32.1

8.6
9.7
10.8
12.0
12.8

10.3
13.2
14.6
16.1
19.3

44.6
49.0
54.9
61.5
69.2

26.3
28.8
33.1
38.0
43.6

14.3
14,9
15.3
16.8
18.7

18.3
20.7
23.2
26.1
29.2

42.9
47.8
51.6
55.1
59.3

38.9
43.9
47.2
50.1
53.8

14.3
15.5
16.5
19.7
23.8

24.6
28.4
30.7
30.4
30.0

78.0
86.8
94.6
105.5
119.4

49.3
55.1
60.4
67.6
77.0

141.9
154.7
169.3
186.4
203.4

20.3
23.0
25.8
29.0
33.6

32.4
36.4
41.1
46.2
50.0

62.3
65.6
69.4
73.4
77.2

56.4
59.1
62.2
65.9
69.2

26.7
29.5
32.3
35.0
38.3

29.7
29.6
29.9
30.9
30.9

132.3
148.5
166.9
188.2
209.8

85.5
95.6
107.1
120.5
134.1

312.1
333.4
356.1
383.5
412.2

220.5
232.9
247.3
264.8
282.8

37.2
40.3
43.9
47.3
52.3

54.5
60.1
64.8
71.4
77.1

81.2
84.1
88.2
93.4
100.2

73.1
76.1
79.9
84.4
90.2

42.0
44.8
47.4
50.6
54.5

31.1
31.3
32.5
33.8
35.7

231.0
249.3
267.9
290.1
312.0

147.4
156.9
167.4
180.4
192.7

30.3
32.2
35.8
41.3
46.3

443.8
494.3
567.7
641.1
696.2

298.1 60.1 85.6
328.3 70.1 95.9
372,2 82.8 112.7
416.2 93.1 131.7
449.4 100.0 146.9

109.2
120.7
131.1
135.0
140.2

97.3
105.2
113.0
116.2
121.3

59.9
65.7
68.2
66.2
65.1

37.3
39.5
44.7
50.0
56.2

334.6
373.5
436.5
506.0
556.0

200.8
223.1
259.2
300.0
328.1

750.7
832.2
957.4
1,098.2
1,244.2

490.8
556.5
655.9
765.2
878.9

100.6
104.5
111.8
121.1
128.9

159.3
171.2
189.7
211.9
236.5

147.0
154.1
161.7
176.4
199.0

127.7
133.5
141.6
153.4
172.9

66.1
66.5
68.0
71.4
81.0

61.6 603.7
67.0 678.0
73.6 795.7
82.0 921.8
92.0 1,045.2

363.0
422.9
514.3
611.8
706.0

1,353.8

960.1 137.2

256.5

225.1

195.2

93.6

101.6 1,128.7

764.9

84.5 944.4
85.8 981.0
89.2 1,014.4
92.0 1,045.2

629.5
658.2
684.1
706.0

28.9

16.3

5.6

7.0

1.8

1.8

6.5
6.4
6.0
5.4
4.9

30.0
31.2
30.8
29.9
29.7

17.4
18.4
18.2
17.8
17.9

5.7
55
5^8
5.8
5.6

6.9
7.0
6.7
6.3
6.2

2.3

3.0
3.7
4.1
4.2

2.3

1945. .
1946 .
1947
1948
1949.

35.5
41.8
48.9
56.2
62.7

4.8
4.9
5.1
W

30.8
36.9
43.9
50.9
57.1

18.6
23.0
28.2
33.3
37.6

5.7
6.1
6.6
7.5
8.6

6.4
7.7
9.1
10.2
10.8

72.8
82.3
91.4
101.3
113.7

6.1
6.7
7.2
7.7
8.2

66.7
75.6
84.2
93.6
105.4

45.2
51.7
58.5
66.1
75.7

10.1
11.5
12.3
12.9
13.5

129.9
144.5
156.5
171.8
190.8

9.0
9.8
10.4
11.1
12.1

120.9
134.6
146.1
160.7
178.7

88.2
99.0
107.6
117.7
130.9

207.5
228.0
251.4
278.5
305.9

12.8
13.9
15.2
16.8
18.9

194.7
214.1
236.2
261.7
287.0

333.3
356.5
381.2
410.9
441.4

21.2
23.1
25.1
27.4
29.2

474.2
526.5
603.4
682.3
742.5

801.5
888.7
1,021.1
1,169.0
1,326.9

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961.
1962
1963
1964

..

1965
1966
1967. .
1968 . ..
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973.
1974

.

.

.
....

l-to4family
houses

27.7
28.2
27.1
25.8
25.5

6.6

36.5
37.6
36.7
35.3
34.7

.

Total

27.1

35.5

1940
1941..
1942
1943. .
1944

...

VA
FHA guarinsured anteed
1.8

1939

1950
1951
1952.
1953
1954

Conventional ;)

Government underwritten

1980, ..

1,445.7

50.9
56.6
63.6
70.8
82.7
91.9

1979
1
II
lit
IV

1,201.5
1,246.0
1,289.5
1,326,9

74.2
77.9
80.8
82.7

1,127.4
1,168.1
1,208.7
1,244.2

787.9
820.4
852.3
878.9

122.9
125.0
126.8
128.9

216.5
222.7
229.6
236.5

183.0
187.1
194.3
199.0

158.4
162.2
168.2
172.9

73.9
76.4
79.1
81.0

1980:
1 ..
||
III
IV

1,356.4
1,378.6
1,411.4
1,445.7

85.8
88.8
90.2
91.9

1,270.6
1,289.8
1,321.2
1,353.8

898.0
910.4
935.7
960.1

130.3
132.7
134.8
137.2

242.4
246.7
250.7
256.5

207.5
211.6
218.9
225.1

180.8
184.1
190.0
195.2

86.0 94.8
87.4 96.7
90.6 99.4
93.6 101.6

1,063.1
1,078.2
1,102.3
1,128.7

717.1
726.2
745.7
764.9

1,372.6 972.2 138.6 261.8
1,399.1 990.4 140.1 268.6
1,423.6 1,008.3 141.7 273.6

229.1
233.6
237.0

198.8 95.7 103.1 1,143.5
202.7 98.1 104.6 1,165.5
205.9 100.0 105.9 1,186.7

773.4
787.7
802.4

1975
1976
1977 . .
1978
1979

1981:

1

II
m

. .

1,467.0 94.4
1,496.4 97.3
1,523,6 100.0

1
2
3

Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations.
Includes FHA insured multifamily properties, not shown separately.
Derived figures. Total includes multifamily and commercial properties, not shown separately.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, based on data from various Government and private organizations.




314

TABLE B-71.—Mortgage debt outstanding by holder, 1939-81
[Billions of dollars]
Major financial institutions
End of year
or quarter

Total

1939
1940

35.5

1941
1942
1943
1944

36.5
37.6
36.7
35.3
34.7

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

35.5
41.8
48.9
56.2
62.7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954.'

72.8
82.3
91.4
101.3
113.7

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959,.

129.9
144.5
156.5
171.8
190.8

Total

18.6
19.5
20.7
20.7
20.2
20.2
21.0
26.0
31.8
37.8
42.9
51.7
59.5
66.9
75.1
85.7
99.3
111.2
119.7
131.5
145.5
157.6
172.6
192.5
217.1
241.0

Savings
and loan
associations

Other holders

Mutual
savings
banks

Commercial
banks <

Life
insurance

com-

panies

Federal

and

related
agencies2

3.8

4.8

4.3

5.7

5.0

4.1
4.6
4.6
4.6
4.8

4.9
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.3

4.6
4.9
4.7
4.5
4.4

6.0
6.4
6.7
6.7
6.7

4.9
4.7
4.3
3.6
3.0

5.4
7.1
8.9
10.3
11.6

4.2
4.4
4.9
5.8
6.7

4.8
7.2
9.4
10.9
11.6

6.6
7.2
8.7
10.8
12.9

2.4
2.0
1.8
1.8
2.3

13.7
15.6
18.4
22.0
26.1

8.3
9.9
11.4
12.9
15.0

13.7
14.7
15.9
16.9
18.6

16.1
19.3
21.3
23.3
26,0

2.8
3.5
4.1
4.6
4.8

31.4
35.7
40.0
45.6
53.1

17.5
19.7
21.2
23.3
25.0

21.0
22.7
23.3
25.5
28.1

29.4
33.0
35.2
37.1
39.2

5.3
6.2
7.7
8.0
10.2

60.1
68.8
78.8
90.9
101.3

26.9
29.1
32.3
36.2
40.6

28.8
30.4
34.5
39.4
44.0

41.8
44.2
46.9
50.5
55.2

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

333.3
356.5
381.2
410.9
441.4

264.6
280.8
298.8

319.9
339.1

110.3
114.4
121.8
130.8
140.2

44.6
47.3
50.5
53.5
56.1

49.7
54.4
59.0
65.7
70.7

60.0
64.6
67.5
70.0
72.0

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

474.2
526.5
603.4
682.3
742.5

355.9
394.2
450.0
505.4
542.6

150.3
174.3
206.2
231.7
249.3

57.9
62.0
67.6
73.2
74.9

73.3
82.5
99.3
119.1
132.1

74.4
75.5
76.9
81.4
86.2

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

801.5
888.7
1,021.1
1,169.0
1,326.9

647.5
745.0
848.2
938.6

581.2

278.6
323.0
381.2
432.8
475.7

77.2
81.6
88.1
95.2
98.9

136.2
151.3
179.0
214.0
245.2

89.2
91.6
96.8
106,2
118.8

11.5
12.2
12.6
11.8
12.2
13.5
17.5
20.9
25.1
31.1
38.3
46.4
54.6
64.8
82.1
101.0
116.6
140.3
170.4
216.4

1960
1961 'I.
1962
1963
1964

""'..'.

207.5
228.0
251.4
278.5
305.9

Individuals and
others

11.9
12.0
12.2
11.7
11.5
11.5
12.1
13.8
15.3
16.6
17.5
18.4
19.3
20.4
21.7
23.2
25.3
27.1
29.1
32.3
35.1
38.4
43.1
46.3
49.5
52.7
55.2
58.2
61.4
65.9
71.2

1980

1,445.7

996.8

502.8

99.9

263.0

131.1

256.6

79.9
85.9
98.9
112.2
117.8
119.3
124.7
135.7
150.5
172.0
192.3

1979:
)
II "
Ill
IV

1,201.5
1,246.0
1,289.5
1,326.9

919.3

865.6
893.6

441.4
456.5
468.2
475.7

96.1
97.2
97.9
98.9

219.7
228.8
238.8
245.2

108.4
111.1
114.4
118.8

203,6

181.1
192.2
216.4

154.8
160.3
166.6
172.0

1980:
t
II
Ill
(V

1,356.4
1,378.6
1,411.4
1,445.7

951.2

958.7
977.3
996.8

479.0
481.0
491.9
502.8

99.2
99.2
99,3
99.9

250.7
253.0
258.0
263.0

122.4
125.6
128.1
131.1

228.6
238.2

247.1

176.7
181.7
187.0
192.3

1981:
1
II
Ill

1,467.0
1,496.4
1,523.6.

1,006.8
1,023.3
1,036.4

507.2
514.8
518.4

99.7
100.0
99.0

266.7
273.2
281.1

133.2
135.3
137.0

263.5

196.7
201.6

938.6

1
Includes
2

256.6

271.4

279.9

206.8

loans held by nondeposit trust companies, but not by bank trust departments.
Includes former Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA) and new Government National Mortgage Association (QNMA),
as well as Federal Housing Administration, Veterans Administration, Public Housing Administration, Farmers Home Administration,
and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation, Homeowners Loan Corporation, and Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation.
Also includes GNMA Pools and U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA, Federal Land Banks, and Federal Home Loan
Mortgage Corporation. Other U.S. agencies (amounts small or current separate data not readily available) included with
"individuals and others."
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, based on data from various Government and private organizations.




315

GOVERNMENT FINANCE
TABLE 3-72.—Federal budget receipts, outlays, and debt, fiscal years 1972-83
[Millions of dollars; fiscal years]
Actual
Description

Transition
quarter

1977

1972

1973

1974

1975

1976

207,309

230,799

263,224

279,090

298,060

81,232

355,559

148,846
71,619
-13156

161,357
90,766
=21 325

181,219
103,138
= 21,133

187,505
116,683
-=-25,098

201,099
131,750
34,789

54,085
31,530
-4,383

241,312
150,560
-36,313

230,681

245 647

267,912

324,245

364,473

94,188

400,506

178110
65J27
-13,156

186 951
80,021
-21,325

199,918
89,126
-=21,133

240,081
109,261
= 25,098

269,921
129,341
- 34,789

65,088
33,482
-4,383

295,756
141,063
-36,313

BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS:
Total receipts
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interfund transactions
Total outlays
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interf und transactions
Total surplus or deficit ( — }
Federal funds
Trust funds

-23,373

= 14,849

-4,688

-45,154

-=66,413

-12,956

=44,948

-29 264
5,892

-25 594
10,745

- 18,699
14,011

-52,576
7,422

-68,822
2,409

= 11,004
-1,952

= 54,444
9,496

OUTSTANDING DEBT, END OF PERIOD:
Gross Federal1 debt

437,329

468,426

486,247

544,131

631,866

646,379

709,138

Held by Government agencies
Held by the public

113,559
323,770

125,381
343 045

140,194
346,053

147,225
396,906

151,566
480,300

148,052
498,327

157,295
551,843

Federal Reserve System
Other .

71,426
252,344

75,181
267,863

80,648
265,405

84,993
311,913

94,714
385,586

96,702
401,625

105,004
446,839

207,309

230,779

263,224

279,090

298,060

81,232

355,559

94,737
32,166

103,246
36,153

118,952
38,620

122,386
40,621

131,603
41,409

38,801
8,460

157,626
54,892

52,574
15,477
5436
3,287

63,115
16260
4917
3,188

75,071
16,844
5035
3,334

84,534
16,551

90,769
16,963
5,216
4,074

25,219
4,473
1,455
1,212

106,485
17,548
7,327
5,150

3,252
380

3495
425

4,845
523

5777

935

5,451
2,576

1,500
111

5,908
623

230 681

245 647

267 912

324 245

364 473

94188

400,506

76,550
4,693

74,541
4066

77,781
5,681

85,552
6922

89,430
5,554

22,307
2,191

97,501
4,819

4173
1*270
4,235
5,280
2,216
8388
3^422

4030
1,179
4,763
4852
924
9065
4',595

3,977
837
5,670
2,227
3,925
9172
4,134

3989
2,169
7,336
1,659
5,607
10388
3,738

4,370
3,127
8,124
2,502
3,792
13,435
4,767

1,161
794
2,532
584
1,392
3304
1,340

4,677
4,172
10,000
5,526
98
14,636
6,348

12519
16127
63,913
10730
1650
2415
673
20,563

12735
17405
72,965
12013
2131
2568
7,351
22782

12344
20'364
84,437
13,386
2462
3243
6,890
28,032

15870
25742
108,576
16597
2942
3133
7,187
30,911

18,737
31,503
127,390
18,432
3,320
2948
7|235
34,511

5,162
32,797
3,962
859
883
2,092
7,216

20,985
36,582
137,900
18,038
3,600
3,169
9,499
38,009

-8,137

-12,318

-16,651

-14,075

-14,704

-2,567

15,053

-2,768
-5,089

-2927
-5,436

= 3319
= 6!583

-3980
-7,667

-4,242
-7,800

=985
-270

-4,548
-8,131

-279

-3,956

-6,748

-2,428

-2,662

-1,311

-2,374

BUDGET RECEIPTS
Individual income taxes
Corporation income taxes
Social insurance taxes and contributions
Excise taxes
.
Estate and gift taxes
Customs duiies
Miscellaneous receipts:
Deposits of earnings by Federal
Reserve System
All other
BUDGET OUTLAYS
National defense
International affairs
..
... .
General science, space, and technology
Energy
Natural resources and environment
Agriculture
,
Commerce and housing credit
Transportation
Community and regional development...
Education, training, employment and
social services
Health
Income security
Veterans benefits and services
Administration of justice
General government
General purpose fiscal assistance
Interest
Allowances
Undistributed offsetting receipts
Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts:
Employer share, employee retirement
Interest received by trust funds....
Rents and royalties on the Outer
Continental Shelf
See next page for continuation of table.




316

4611
3,676

8181

TABLE B-72.—Federal budget receipts, outlays, and debt, fiscal years 1972-83^Continued
[Millions of dollars; fiscal years}
Estimates

Actual

Description

1981

1982

1983

517,112

599,272

626,753

666,118

350,856
210,930
-44,674

410,422
239,413
-50,563

412,817
274,710
-60,774

433,664
296,650
-64,195

490,997

576,675

657,204

725,331

757,638

362,396
168,653
-40,052

419,220
202,129
-44,674

475,171
232,596
-50,563

523,936
262,169
-60,774

540,604
281,229
-64,195

1978

1979

1980

399,561

463,302

270,490
165,568
-36,498

316,366
186,988
-40,052

448,368
331,991
152,874
-36,498

BUDGET RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS:
Total receipts
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interfund transactions
Total outlays
Federal funds
Trust funds
Interfund transactions
Total surplus or deficit {

,

..

)

federal funds
Trust funds

-48,807

-27,694

-59,563

-57,932

-98,578

-91,520

-61,501
12,694

-46,030
18,335

-68,364
8,801

-64,749
6,817

-111,119
12,541

-106,940
15,421

780,425

833,751

914,317

1,003,941

1,134,186

1,258,405

169,477
610,948

189,162
644,589

199,212
715,105

209,507
794,434

220,752
913,434

236,971
1,021,434

115,480
495,468

115,594
528,996

120,846
594,259

124,466
669,968

399,561

463,302

517,112

599,272

626,753

666,118

180,988
59,952
120,967
18,376
5,285
6,573

217,841
65,677
138,939
18,745
5,411
7,439

244,069
64,600
157,803
24,329
6,389
7,174

285,917
61,137
182,720
40,839
6,787
8,083

298,578
46,752
206,481
42,993
7,162
8,870

304r533
65,269
222,510
41,663
5,948
9,390

6,641
778

8,327
925

11,767
981

12,834
956

14,974
943

15,809
996

448,368

490,997

576,675

657,204

725,331

757,638

105,186
5,922
4,742
5,861
10,925
7,731
3,331
15,445
11,070

117,681
6,091
5,041
6,856
12,091
6,238
2,579
17,459
9,542

135,856
10,733
5,722
6,313
13,812
4,762
7,788
21,120
10,068

159,765
11,130
6,359
10,277
13,525
5,572
3,946
23,381
9,394

187,497
11,074
6,942
6,413
12,626
8,633
3,265
21,228
8,366

221,068
11,968
7,633
4,215
9,911
4,494
1,591
19,628
7,263

26,463
41,232
146,180
18,974
3,802
3,706
9,601
43,966

29,685
46,962
160,159
19,928
4,153
4,093
8,372
52,556

30,767
55,220
193,100
21,183
4,570
4,505
8,584
64,504

31,402
65,982
225,099
22,988
4,698
4,614
6,856
82,537

-15,772

-18,488

-21,933

-30,320

27,770
73,437
250,870
24,155
4,521
5,146
6,417
99,095
-624
-31,502

21,552
78,105
261,736
24,383
4,592
5,008
6,686
112,536
-1,257
-43,474

-4,983
-8,530

-5,271
-9,950

-5,787
-12,045

= 6,371
-13,810

-7,560
-16,080

-8,353
-16,122

-2,259

-3,267

-4,101

-10,138

=7,861

-18,000

OUTSTANDING DEBT, END OF PERIOD:
Gross Federal debt
Held by Government agencies
Held by the public
Federal Reserve System
Other
BUDGET RECEIPTS
Individual income taxes, . .
Corporation income taxes
Social insurance taxes and contributions.
Excise taxes
Estate and gift taxes
Customs duties..
. .
....
Miscellaneous receipts:
Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve
System
All other
BUDGET OUTLAYS
National defense
International affairs
General science, space, and technology
Energy.
Natural resources and environment
Agriculture. .
Commerce and housing credit
Transportation
Community and regional development.
Education, training, employment, and social services.
. .
Health
Income security
Veterans benefits and services.
Administration of justice . .
General government
General purpose fiscal assistance
Interest
Allowances. .
,
Undistributed offsetting receipts.
.
....
Composition of undistributed offsetting receipts;
Employer share, employee retirement
Interest received by trust funds
Rents and royalties on the Outer Continental
Shelf

Note.—Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with
fiscal year 1977. Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1-June 30 basis. Beginning October 1976 {fiscal vear 1977).
the fiscal year is on an October 1-September 30 basis. The period July 1, 1976 through September 30, 1976 is a separate fiscal period
known as the transition quarter.
Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays.
See "Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1983" for additional information.
Sources: Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget.




317

TABLE B-73-—Federal budget receipts and outlays, fiscal years 1929-83
[Millions of dollars]

Receipts

Fiscal year

1929...
1933
1939
1940... .
1941
1942....
1943
1944
1945
1946..,
1947
1948
1949...

.

1950
1951
1952...
1953
1954..,
1955
1956 ...
1957
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970 .
1971
1972
1973
1974....
1975
1976
Transition quarter
1977
1978
1979....
1980 .. ...
1981 .
1982 1
>
1983

.

.

.

..
....

.

.

...

, ,

..
..

.

.. . .

Outlays

3,862
1,997
4,979
6,361
8,621
14,350
23,649
44,276
45,216
39,327
38,394
41,774
39,437
39485
51646
66,204
69,574
69,719
65,469
74,547
79,990
79,636
79,249
92,492
94389
99,676
106,560
112,662
116,833
130,856
148,906
152,973
186,882
192,807
187,139
207,309
230,799
263 224
279,090
298,060
81232
355!559
399 561
463)302
517 112
599 272
626,753
666,118

3,127
4,598
8,841
9,456
13,634
35,114
78,533
91,280
92,690
55,183
34,532
29,773
38,834
42,597
45,546
67,721
76,107
70,890
68,509
70,460
76,741
82,575
92,104
92,223
97795
106,813
111,311
118,584

118,430
134,652
157,608
178,134
183,645
195,652
210,172
230,681
245,647
267 912
324,245
364,473
94 188
400,506
448,368
490,997
576 675
657*204
725,331
757,638

Surplus or
deficit (-)
734
- 2,602
-3,862
=3,095
-5,013
=20,764
=54,884
=47,004
=47,474
= 15,856
3,862
12,001
603
-3 112
6,100
-1,517
~=6,533
-1,170
-3,041
4087
3,249
-2,939
- 12,855
269
-3406
-7',137
-4,751
=5,922
-1596
-3,796
-8,702
-25,161
3,236
-2,845
= 23,033
-23,373
-14,849
4688
=45,154
-66,413
12956
-44^948
=48,807
-27,694
-59563
57932
=98,578
-91,520

1
Estimates.
Note.—Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with
fiscal year 1977. Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1-June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977),
the fiscal year is on an October 1-September 30 basis. The 3-month period from July 1, 1976 through September 30, 1976 Is a
separate fiscal period known as the transition quarter.
Data for 1929-39 are according to the administrative budget and those beginning 1940 according to the unified budget.
Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays.
See "Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1983" for additional information.
Sources: Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget.




318

TABLE B-74.—Relation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income and
product accounts to the unified budget, fiscal years 1981-83
[Billions of dollars; fiscal years]

Estimate
Receipts and expenditures

1981
1982

1983

599.3

626.8

666.1

9.4
9.4
-2.8
-1.3
-1.0

10.8
10.2
-4.8
-1.5
-.5

11.3
11.9
-1.8
-1.6
-.3

613.0

641.0

685.7

RECEIPTS
Total budget receipts

. ,.

Government contribution for employee retirement (grossing)
Other netting and grossing
Adjustment to accruals
Geographic exclusions
Other

.

Federal sector, national income and product accounts, receipts
EXPENDITURES

657.2

725.3

757.6

Lending and financial transactions
Government contribution for employee retirement (grossing)
Other netting and grossing
Defense timing adjustment
Bonuses on Outer Continental Shelf land leases
Geographic exclusions
Other

-7.4
9.4
9.4
-1.4
7.9
-4.6
-2.6

-3.5
10.8
10.2
-.3
4.9
-4.7
-1.3

-2.5
11.3
11.9
-3.3
14.7
-4.5
2.3

Federal sector, national income and product accounts, expenditures .,

667.9

741.4

787.6

Total budget outlays

Note.—See Note, Table 8-73.
See Special Analysis B, "Special Analyses, Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1983" for description of these
categories.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Department of the Treasury, and Office of Management and
Budget.




319

TABLE B-75.—Government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts, 1929-BJ
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]

Total government
Surplus or
deficit

Calendar year or quarter
Receipts

Expenditures

State and local
government

Federal Government

national
income
and
product
accounts

Receipts

Expenditures

Surplus or
deficit
national
income
and
product
accounts

Receipts

Surplus or
deficit
(-),
Expend^ national
income
lures
and
product
accounts

1929

11.3

10.3

1.0

3.8

2.6

7.8

=0.2

9.3

10.7

= 1.4

2.7

4.0

1.2
-1.3

7.6

1933

7.2

7.2

~.l

1939

15.4,

17.6

=2,2

6.7

8.9

-2.2

9.6

9.6

.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

17.7
25.0
32.6
49.2
51.2
53.2
51.0
56.9
58.9
55.9

18.4
28.8
64.0
93.3
103.0
92.7
45.6
42.5
50.5
59.3

— 7
-3^8
= 31.4
=44.1
=51.8
= 39.5
5.4
14.4
8.4
=3.4

8.6
15.4
22.9
39.3
41.0
42.5
39.1
43.2
43.2
38.7

10.0
20.5
56.1
85.8
95.5
84.6
35.6
29.8
34.9
41.3

-1.3
= 5.1
=33.1
=46.6
-54.5
-42.1
3.5
13.4
8.3
-2.6

10.0
10.4
10.6
10.9
11.1
11,6
13.0
15.4
17.7
19.5

9.3
9.1
8.8
8.4
8.5
9.0
11.1
14.4
17.6
20.2

.6
1.3
1.8
2.5
2.7
2.6
1.9
1.0
.1
= .7

69.0
85.2
90.1
94.6
89.9
101.1
109.7
116.2
115.0
129.4

61.0
79,2
93.9
101.6
97.0
98.0
104.5
115.2
127.6
131.0

8.0
6.1
= 3.8
= 6.9
= 7.1
3.1
5.2
.9
= 12.6
-1.6

50.0
64.3
67.3
70.0
63.7
72.6
78.0
81.9
78.7
89.8

40.8
57.8
71.1
77.1
69.8
68.1
71.9
79.6
88.9
91.0

9.2
6,5
=3.7
=7.1
-6.0
4.4
6.1
2.3
= 10.3
= 1.1

21.3
23.4
25.4
27.4
29.0
31.7
35.0
38.5
42.0
46.4

22.5
23.9
25.5
27.3
30.2
32.9
35.9
39.8
44.3
46.9

-1.2
= .4
= .0
.1
= 1.1
= 1.3
-.9
= 1.4
=2.4
— 4

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

139.5
144.8
156.7
168.5
174.0
188.3
212.3
228.2
263.1
296.7

136.4
149.1
160.5
167.8
176.3
187.8
213.6
242.4
269.1
286.8

3.1
=4.3
= 3.8
.7
=2.3

96.1
98.1
106.2
114.4
114.9
124.3
141.8
150.5
174.4
196.9

93.1
101.9
110.4
114.2
118.2
123.8
143.6
163.7
180.5
188.4

3.0
=3.9
=4.2

49.8
54.4
58.0
62.8
68.5
75.1
84.3
94.7
107.2
118.7

.1
«-.4
.5

-L8
= 13.2
-.6.0
8.4

49.9
54.0
58.5
63.2
69.5
75.1
84.8
93.6
107.3
120.2

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979..

302.8
322,6
368.3
413.1
455.2
470.5
538.4
605.7
681.6
765.2

313.4
342.0
371.6
405.3
460.0
534.3
574.9
624.0
681.3
753.2

= 10.6
= 19.4
-3.3
7.8
=4.7
=63.8
= 36.5
= 18.3
1L9

191.9
198.6
227.5
258.6
287.8
287.3
331.8
375.1
431.5
494.4

204.3
220.6
244.3
264.2
299.3
356.6
384.8
421.5
460.7
509.2

= 12.4
= 22.0
= 16.8
^5.6
= 11.5
=69.3
-53.1
=46.4
-29.2
=14.8

135.4
153.0
178.3
195.0
211.4,
237.7
267.8
298.0
327.4
351.2

133.5
150.4
164.8
181.6
204.6
232.2
251.2
270.0
298.4
324.4

1.9
2.6
13.5
13.4
6.8
5.5
16.6
28.1
29.0
26.7

1980
1981"

836.8
954.6

869.0
979.7

=32.1
=25.1

540.8
624.8

602.0
686.4

=61.2
=61.6

384.0
416.8

355.0
380.3

29.1
36.5

1979
1
It
Ill
IV

739.7
750.9
775.3
794.7

721.7
737.0
764.0
790.3

18.1
13.9
11.3
4.4

477.0
485.9
500.6
514.0

488.4
494.0
515.8
538.6

= 11.5
=8.1
-15.2
= 24.5

340.9
342.7
355.4
365.6

311.4
320.8
328.9
336.7

29.5
21.9
26.5
28.9

815.0
807.6
839.9
884.7

824.6
850.2
885.5
915.5

-9,6
=42.5
-45.6
=30.8

528.4
520.9
540.8
573.2

564.7
587.3
615.0
641.1

= 36.3
=66.5
= 74.2
= 67.9

372.1
373.9
386.8
403.4

345.4
350.0
358.2
366.3

26.6
23.9
28.6
37.1

938.9
945,0
972.5

948.6
956.2
990.4
1,023.6

=9.7
-11.2
= 17.9

617.4
621.0
638.3

664.0
668.2
694.0
719.4

=46.6
=47,2
-55.7

411.7
413.6
419.6

374.8
377.5
381.8
387.1

36.9
36.1
37.8

.

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1980:
1
II .
Ill
IV

. .
.
...

'.

. .

...

-n

-14.2
= 6.0
9.9

= 13

l!fl
--.0
-I'.l
L5

1981:

II .
Ill
IV"

' ' . . ' .

Note.—Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts. Total
government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis,




320

TABLE B-76.—Federal Government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts,
1958-83
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Expenditures
Receipts

Net
inter*
est
paid

Subsidies
less
current
surplus
of
government
enterprises

Surplus
or
deficit
<-),
national
income
and
product
accounts

Transfer
payments

Year or qu.arter

GrantsPurIndirect Contriirt-aid to
Personal Corpo- business butions
chases
rate
State
for
Total tax and profits tax and social Total ' of goods
and
nontax
To
and
tax nontax insurTo foreign- local
receipts accruals accruals
services persons
ance
ers governments

Fiscal year: 2
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
..
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981 3
1982 3
1983

78.1
85.4
94.8
95.0
104.0
110.0
115.6
120.0
132.7
146.0
159.9
189.8
194.8
192.4
213.4
240.7
271.6
283.4
314.9
365.9
414.2
480.7
527.3
613.0
641.0
685.7

36.3
38.2
42.5
43.6
47.3
49.6
50.7
51.4
57.5
64.4
71.4
90.2
94.0
87.9
100.5
107.4
122.7
127.5
137.2
166.4
186.4
223.1
249.7
290.7
303.5
307.7

17.9
21.4
22.3
20.0
22.7
23.3
25.7
27.1
30.8
30.3
33.1
36.8
32.9
31.9
34.2
41.2
43.4
41.8
52.5
58.8
67.2
75.8
70.6
69.6
58.7
78.1

11.6
12.0
13.2
13.3
14.2
15.0
15.6
16.9
15.5
15.8
17.1
18.6
19.2
20.0
19.9
20.7
21.4
22.2
24.3
24.5
27.2
29.1
35.7
56.6
57.4
57.5

12.3
13.9
16.7
18.1
19.9
22.1
23.6
24.5
28.9
35.5
38.3
44.2
48.8
52.6
58.9
71.5
84.2
91.9
101.0
116.2
133.4
152.7
171.3
196.1
221.4
242.4

82.8
91.2
91.3
98.1
106.2
111,7
117.2
118.5
132.7
154.9
172.2
184.6
195.5
212.9
232.7
255.7
278.2
328.8
370.7
411.7
450.5
494.7
578.2
667.9
741.4
787.6

51.1
54.8
52.9
55.8
61.0
63.7
65.9
64.6
72.4
86.0
95.0
98.0
97.1
94.9
100.6
101.1
104.5
117.9
125.1
140.3
150.7
163.4
190.2
218.3
249.0
272.9

17.8
19.9
20.6
23.6
25.1
26.5
27.4
28.4
31.8
37.2
42.7
48.7
55.0
67.7
76.1
87.2
101.8
131.4
153.8
166.6
178.7
197.8
234.7
273.9
306.0
324.6

1.7
1.8
1.8
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.0
2.3
2.8
2.7
3.0
3.1
3.0
3.2
3.5
4.0
4.6
5.8
6.1
6.2

4.7
6.2
6.9
6.9
7.6
8.3
9.8
10.9
12.7
14.8
17.8
19.2
22.6
26.8
32.6
40.4
41.6
48.4
57.5
68.3
74.7
79.1
86.7
90.1
86.3
76.8

5.4
5.6
6.8
6.4
6.4
7.1
7.7
8.2
8.7
9.6
10.4
11.9
13.5
14.0
14.0
15.7
19.6
21.7
25.2
28.4
33.5
40.6
51.2
66.9
81.4
95.9

2.4
2.5
2.4
3.3
4.1
4.0
4.1
4.3
4.8
5.2
4.1
4.7
5.5
7.0
6.5
9.2
7.6
6.0
6.2
7.0
9.6
9.8
10.8
13.0
12.5
11.2

-4.7
-5.8
3.4
-3.1
-2.2
-1.7
-1.5
1.4
.0
-8.9
-12.3
5.2
-.1
-20.5
-19.2
-14.9
-6.6
-45.4
-55.8
-45.8
-36.3
-14.0
-50.9
-54.9
-100.4
-101.9

Calendar year:
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981 p .

78.7
89.8
96.1
98.1
106.2
114.4
114.9
124.3
141.8
150.5
174.4
196.9
191.9
198.6
227.5
258.6
287.8
287.3
331.8
375.1
431.5
494.4
540.8
624.8

36.8
39.9
43.6
44.7
48.6
515
48.6
53.9
61.7
67.5
79.7
95.1
92.6
90.3
108.2
114.7
131.3
125.8
147.3
170.1
194.9
231.4
257.8
296.2

18.0
22.5
21.4
21.5
22.5
24.6
26.1
28.9
31.4
30.0
36.1
36.1
30.6
33.5
36.6
43.3
45.1
43.6
54.6
61.6
71.2
74.6
70.2
64.9

11.5
12.5
13.4
13.6
14.6
153
16.2
16.5
15.6
16.3
18.0
19.0
19.3
20.4
20.0
21.2
21.7
23.9
23.4
25.0
28.1
29.4
40.6
61.3

12.4
14.9
17.6
18.3
20.5
231
24.0
25.0
33.1
36.7
40.7
46.7
49.3
54.4
62.7
79.5
89.8
94.1
106.5
118.5
137.2
159.0
172.2
202.5

88.9
91.0
93.1
101.9
110.4
1142
118.2
123.8
143.6
163.7
180.5
188.4
204.3
220.6
244.3
264.2
299.3
356.6
384.8
421.5
460.7
509.2
602.0
686.4

53.9
53.9
53.7
57.4
63.7
646
65.2
67.3
78.8
90.9
98.0
97.6
95.7
96.2
101.7
102.0
111.0
122.7
129.2
143.9
153.4
167.9
198.9
228.6

19.6
20.1
21.6
25.0
25.6
270
27.9
30.3
33.5
40.1
46.0
50.6
61.3
72.7
80.5
93.3
114.5
146.3
158.8
169.6
181.8
204.9
244.9
279.3

1.8
1.8
1.9
2.1
2.2
22
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.6
2.7
2.6
3.2
3.1
3.2
3.2
3.8
4.2
4.9
5.1

5.6
6.8
6.5
7.2
8.0
91
10.4
11.1
14.4
15.9
18.6
20.3
24.4
29.0
37.5
40.6
43.9
54.6
61.1
67.5
77.3
80.4
88.0
87.0

5.2
6.2
6.8
6.2
6.8
73
8.0
8.4
9.2
9,8
11,3
12,7
14,1
13.8
14.4
18.0
20.7
23.1
26.8
29.1
35.2
42.3
53.3
73.3

2.8
2.1
2.6
4.0
4.2
39
4.5
4.6
5.5
4.7
4.5
5.2
6.5
6.3
7.9
7.8
5.5
6.9
5.8
8.2
9.3
9.4
12.0
13.2

-10.3
= 1.1
3.0
=3.9
=4.2
3
-3.3
.5
-1.8
-13.2
-6.0
8.4
-12.4
-22.0
-16.8
= 5.6
-11.5
-69.3
-53.1
-46.4
-29.2
-14.8
=61.2
-61.6

1980:
I
It
III
IV

528.4
520.9
540.8
573.2

246.9
252.0
259.4
272.9

80.5
60.9
66.7
72.6

31.9
38.7
42.9
49.1

169.2
169.3
171.8
178.6

564.7
587.3
615.0
641,1

190.0
198.7
194.9
212.0

224.4
232.2
260.4
262.6

4.5
3.8
4.9
6.4

85.5
87.2
87.7
91.8

50.3
54.4
53.5
55.2

10.1
11.0
13.7
13.1

=36.3
-66.5
= 74.2
-67.9

617.4
621.0
638.3

283.3
293.2
306.4
3019

74.6
64.8
66.4

60.6 198.9
62.6 200.4
61.8 . 203.7
60.2 206.9

664.0
668,2
694.0
719.4

221.6
219.5
226.4
246.7

267.3
270.7
287.8
291.4

4.7
4.1
5.8
5.7

90.2
89.6
85.4
82.9

67.7
70.4
75.6
79,4

12.6
13.9
13.3
13.1

^46.6
-47.2
-55.7

1981:

1
II
Ill
IV '

1
2

Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements, not shown separately.
Under provisions of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the fiscal year for the Federal Government shifted beginning with fiscal
year 1977. Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1-June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977), the
fiscal year is on an October 1-September 30 basis. The 3-month period from July 1, 1976 through September 30, 1976 is a separate
fiscal period known as the transition quarter.
3
Estimates.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Office of Management and Budget.




321

TABLE B-77.—State and local government receipts and expenditures, national income and product accounts,
1946-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Receipts

Calendar year
or quarter
Total

Expenditures

Indirect
Personal Corpo- business Contribu- Federal
rate
tax and profits tax and tions for grants-msocial
nontax
tax
nontax
aid
receipts accruals accruals insurance

Total »

Subsidies
Net
Pur- Trans- interest less
fer
chases paycurrent
paid surplus
of
less
goods ments diviof
to
and
per- dends governservices sons received ment
enterprises

Surplus
or
deficit
(»),
national
income
and
product
accounts

1946..
1947.
1948..
1949

13.0
15.4
17.7
19.5

1.7
2.1
2.4

1.5

0.5
.6
.7
.6

9.3
10.7
12.2
13.3

0.6
.7
.8
.9

1.1
1.7
2.0
2.2

11.1
14.4
17.6
20,2

9.9
12.8
15.3
18.0

1.7
2.3
3.0
3.0

0.2
.1
.1
.1

=0.7
~,8
-.8
-.9

1.9
1.0
.1
-7

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

21.3
23.4
25.4
27.4
29.0

2.5
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.5

.8
.9
.8
.8
.8

14.6
15.9
17.4
18.8
19.9

1.1
1,4
1.6
1.7
2.0

2.3
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.9

22.5
23,9
25.5
27.3
30.2

19,8
21.8
23.2
25.0
27.8

3.6
3.1
3.3
3.5
3.6

.1
.0
.0
.0
.1

-.9
-1.0
-1.1
= 1.2
-1.3

-1.2
= .4
-,0
.1
-1.1

1955
1956
1957 . .
1958
1959

31.7
35.0
385
42.0
46.4

3.9
4.5
50
5.4
6.1

1.0
1.0
10
1.0
1.2

21.6
23.8
257
27.2
29.3

2.1
2,3
26
2,8
3.1

3.1
3.3
42
5.6
6.8

32.9
35.9
398
44.3
46.9

30.6
33.5
371
41.1
43.7

3.8
3.9
43
4.8
5.1

.1
.1
.1
.1
.1

-1.5
= 1.6
=1 7
-17
^2.0

-1.3
-.9
—14
-24

1960, . .
1961
1962
1963
1964

49.9
54.0
58.5
63.2
69.5

6.7
7.4
8.2
8.8
10.0

1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.8

32.0
34.4
37.0
39.4
42.6

3.4
3.7
3.9
4.2
4.7

6.5
7.2
8.0
9.1
10.4

49.8
54.4
58.0
62.8
68.5

46.5
50.8
54.3
59.0
64.6

5.4
5.8
6.0
6.4
6.9

.1
.1
.1
.1
«.l

=2.2
=2.3
=2.5
= 2.8
=2.8

.1
--.4
.5
.5
1.0

75.1
84.8
93.6
107.3
120.2

10.9
12.8
14.6
17.5
20.6

2.0
2.2
2.5
3.1
3.4

46.1
49.7
54.0
60.9
67.6

5.0
5.7
6.7
7.2
8.3

1U
14.4
15.9
18.6
20.3

75.1
84.3
94.7
107.2
118.7

71.1
79.8
89.3
101.0
111.2

7.3
8.1
9.4
10.5
12.2

-.3
= .7
-.9
-1.1
-1.4

= 3.0
=3.0
=3.1
-3.2
= 3.3

=n
.1

1970
1971
1972.. .
1973
1974

135.4
153.0
178.3
1950
211.4

23.2
26.4
32.8
360
39.0

3.5
4.1
5.0
58
6.5

75.0
83.3
91.5
997
107.4

9.2
10.2
11.5
130
R6

24.4
29.0
37.5
406
43.9

133.5
150.4
164.8
1816
204^6

124.4
138.7
151.4
1685
193!l

14.7
17.3
19.3
207
20^9

= 2.0
-1.7
-1.9

= 3.6
=3.7
=4.2
=43
= 4>

1.9
2.6
13.5
134
6i8

1975
1976..
1977.. .
1978
1979

237.7
267.8
298.0
327.4
351.2

43.1
49.6
56.4
63.9
70.6

7.1
9.3
11.0
11.7
13.0

116.2
128.3
141.0
149,9
159.0

16.8
19.5
22.1
24.6
28.1

54.6
61.1
67.5
77.3
80,4

232.2
251.2
270.0
298.4
324.4

217.2
232.9
250.6
279.2
305.9

24.6
27.6
29.7
32.8
35.0

-4.5
-4.8
= 5.1
-5.7
= 6.3

5.5
16.6
28.1
29.0
267

1980
1981 » .
1979:
1
II
III..
IV...

384.0
416.8

80.7
91.9

12.2
11.5

171.6
189.9

31.5
36.4

88.0
87.0

355.0
380.3

335.8
361.1

38.9
42.0

-5.1
-4.5
-5,2
=-7.7
-10.3
-12.4
-14.6

-7,4
= 8.2

Z9.1
36.5

340.9
342.7
355.4
365.6

67.7
67.8
72.3
74.7

13.2
12.9
13.1
12.9

155.1
156.4
160.6
163.9

26.8
27.9
28.6
29,2

78.2
77.8
80.8
84.9

311.4
320.8
328.9
336.7

293.4
301.6
310.4
318.3

33.8
34.5
35.4
36.4

-9.4
-9.9
-10.6
-11.2

=6.0
-6.2
-6.5
=6.7

29.5
21.9
26.5
28.9

372.1
373.9
386.8
403.4

76.2
78.3
82.1
86.3

13.7
10.6
11.7
12.6

167.0
167.7
173.0
179.0

29.6
30.2
32.3
33.7

85.5
87.2
87.7
91.8

345.4
350.0
358.2
366,3

326.8
331.3
338,6
346.6

37.2
38.1
39.7
40.5

-11.8
-12.2
-12.7
=-13.0

-7.0
-7.2
-7.5
-7.7

26.6
23.9
28.6
37.1

411 7
413.6
419.6

886
89.7
93.3
96.1

ire

13 1

1849
18&9
192.3
195.6

348
35l9
36.9
38.0

90 2
89^6
85.4
82.9

374 8
37L5
381.8
387.1

3549
357!9
362.5
369.0

41 2
42ll
42.6
42.2

— 13 4
-K2
-15.1
= 15.8

—7 9
-87
= 8.2
-8.3

369
36! 1
37.8

1965
1966, . .
1967
1968
1969

....

1980:

1
II
III
IV

1981:
|
||
III

IV

'. * "

11.7

1
Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements, not shown separately.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




322

= 33

-si)

= .0
1.5

TABLE B-78.—State and local government revenues and expenditures, selected fiscal years, 1927-80
[Millions of dollars]
General expenditures by function 2

General revenues by source2
Fiscal year 1
Total

Sales
and Individu- Corpo- Revenue
from
ration
al
All
Property gross
net
Federal
taxes
reincome income Govern- other 3
ceipts taxes
ment
taxes
taxes

Total

Education

Highways

Public
welfare

All
other 4

1927

7,271

4,730

470

70

92

116

1,793

7,210

2,235

1,809

151

3,015

1932
1934
1936
1938

7,267
7,678
8,395
9,228

4,487
4,076
4,093
4,440

752
1,008
1,484
1,794

74
80
153
218

79
49
113
165

232
1,016
948
800

1,643
1,449
1,604
1,811

7,765
7,181
7,644
8,757

2,311
1,831
2,177
2,491

1,741
1,509
1,425
1,650

444
889
827
1,069

3,269
2,952
3215
3,547

1940
1942
1944
1946
1948

9,609
10418
10,908
12,356
17,250

4,430
4537
4,604
4,986
6,126

1,982
2,351
2,289
2,986
4,442

224
276
342
422
543

156
272
451
447
592

945
858
954
855
1,861

1,872
2123
2,269
2,661
3,685

9,229
9,190
8,863
11,028
17,684

2,638
2586
2,793
3,356
5,379

1,573
1490
1,200
1,672
3,036

1,156
1,225
1,133
1,409
2,099

3,862
3889
3,737
4,591
7,170

1950
1952
1953
1954

20,911
25,181
27,307
29,012

7,349
8,652
9,375
9,967

5,154
6,357
6,927
7,276

788
998
1,065
1,127

593
846
817
778

2,486
2,566
2,870
2,966

4,541
5,763
6,252
6,897

22,787
26,098
27,910
30,701

7,177
8,318
9,390
10,557

3,803
4,650
4,987
5,527

2,940
2,788
2,914
3,060

8,867
10,342
10619
11,557

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

31,073
34,667
38,164
41,219
45,306

10,735 7,643
11,749 8,691
12,864 9,467
14,047 9,829
14,983 10,437

1,237
1,538
1,754
1,759
1,994

744
890
984
1,018
1,001

3,131 7,584
3,335 8,465
3,843 9,250
4,865 9,699
6,377 10,516

33,724
36,711
40,375
44,851
48,887

11,907
13,220
14,134
15,919
17,283

6,452
6,953
7,816
8,567
9,592

3,168
3,139
3,485
3,818
4,136

12,197
13,399
14,940
16,547
17,876

1960
1961 .
1962
1963.

50,505
54,037
58,252
62,890

16,405
18,002
19,054
20,089

11,849
12,463
13,494
14,456

2,463
2,613
3,037
3,269

1,180
1,266
1,308
1,505

6,974
7,131
7,871
8,722

11,634
12,563
13,489
14,850

51,876
56,201
60,206
64,816

18,719
20,574
22,216
23,776

9,428
9,844
10,357
11,136

4,404
4,720
5,084
5,481

19,325
21,063
22,549
24,423

8
1962-636
1963-645
1964-65

62,269
68,443
74,000

19,833 14,446
21,241 15,762
22,583 17,118

3,267
3,791
4,090

1,505 8,663 14,556
1,695 10,002 15,951
1,929 11,029 17,250

63,977
69,302
74,546

23,729
26,286
28,563

11,150
11,664
12,221

5,420
5,766
6,315

23,678
25,586
27,447

5
1965-66 5
1966-67 5
1967-68
1968-69*
1969-70«

83,036
91,197
101,264
114,550
130,756

19,085
20,530
22,911
26,519
30,322

4,760
5,826
7,308
8,908
10,812

2,038 13,214
2,227 15,370
2,518 17,181
3,180 19,153
3,738 21,857

19,269
21,197
23,598
26,118
29,971

82,843
93,350
102,411
116,728
131,332

33,287
37,919
41,158
47,238
52,718

12,770
13,932
14,481
15,417
16,427

6,757
8,218
9,857
12,110
14,679

30,029
33,281
36,915
41,963
47,508

1970-71 «
1971-72*
1972-73s
1973-745
1974-75 6

144,927 37,852 33,233
166,352 42,133 37,488
190,214 45,283 42.047
207,670 47,705 46,098
228,171 51,491 49,815

11,900
15,237
17,994
19,491
21,454

3,424
4,416
5,425
6,015
6,642

26,146
31,253
39,256
41,820
47,034

32,374
35,826
40,210
46,541
51,735

150,674
166,873
181,227
198,959
230,721

59,413
64,886
69,714
75,833
87,858

18,095
19,010
18,615
19,946
22,528

18,226
21,070
23,582
25.085
28^55

54,940
61,907
69,316
78,096
92,180

1975-765
1976-77 «
1977-785
5
1978-79 5
1979-80

256,176
285,796
315,960
343,278
382,322

24,575
29,245
33,176
36,932
42,080

7,273
9,174
10,738
12,128
13,321

55,589
62,575
69,592
75,164
83,029

57,191
61,673
68,436
79,864
95,466

256,731
274,388
296,983
327,517
369,086

97,216
102,805
110,758
119,448
133,211

23,907
23,105
24,609
28,440
33,311

32,604
35,941
39,140
41,898
47,288

103,004
112,537
122,476
137,731
155,277

24,670
26,047
27,747
30,673
34,054

57,001
62,535
66,422
64,944
68,499

54,547
60,595
67,596
74,247
79,927

1
2

Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote 5.
Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned uttfities and liquor stores, and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental
receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded.
3
Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues.
4
Includes expenditures for health, hospitals, police, local fire protection, natural resources, sanitation, housing and urban renewal,
local parks and recreation, general control, financial administration, interest on general debt, and unallocable expenditures.
5
Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June 30. Data for 1963 and earlier years include local government
amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year.
Note.—Data are not available for intervening years.
Source.- Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.




323

TABLE B-79.—Interest-bearing public debt securities by kind of obligation, 1967-8 J
[Millions of dollars]

End of year
or month

Fiscal year:
1967 , .
1968.. . .
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

Nonmarketabte

Marketable

Total
interestbearing
public
debt
securities

Treasury
bonds >

us

Total

Treasury
bills

Treasury
notes

58,535
64,440
68,356
76154
86',677
94,648
100,061
105,019
128,569
161,198
156,091
160,936
161,378
199,832
223,388

49,108
71,073
78,946
93489
104,807
113,419
117,840
128,419
150,257
191,758
241,692
267,865
274,242
310,903
363,643

97,418
91,079
78,805
62956
53,989
49,135
45,071
33,137
36,779
39,626
45,724
56,355
71,073
83,772
96,178

111,614
117,808
125,623
136,426
150,816
168,158
193,382
206,663
216,516
226,673
254,121
281,816
312,314
311,896
313,286

51,213
51,712
51,711
51,281
53,003
55,921
59,418
61,921
65,482
69,733
75,411
79,798
80,440
72,727
68,017

4

Total

savings
bonds

Foreign
govern
ment
and
public
series2

Government
account
series

Other ^

1,514
3,741
4,070
4,755
9,270
18,985
28,524
25,011
23,216
21,500
21,799
21,680
28,115
25,158
20,499

56,155
59,526
66,790
76,323
82,784
89,598
101,738
115,442
124,173
130,557
140,113
153,271
176,360
189,848
201,052

2,731
2,828
3,051
4,068
5,759
3,654
3,701
4,289
3,644
4,883
16,797
27,067
27,400
24,164
23,718

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

322,286
344,401
351,729
369,026
396,289
425,360
456,353
473,238
532,122
619,254
697,629
766,971
819,007

1980
1981

906,402
996,495

210,672
226,592
226,107
232,599
245,473
257,202
262,971
266,575
315,606
392,581
443,508
485,155
506,693
594,506
683,209

846,517
853,366
862,211
868,866
873,529
876,275
880,395
888,733
906,402
906,948
909,371
928,912

535,658
540,636
557,493
564,869
567,560
566,735
576,145
583,419
594,506
599,406
605,381
623,186

175,522
177,422
190,780
195,296
195,387
184,684
191,491
199,306
199,832
202,309
208,721
216,104

283,990
286,814
290,390
291,831
291,532
301,455
302 626
300,251
310,903
311,927
311,119
321,634

76,147
76,400
76,323
77,741
80,641
80,596
82,027
83,861
83,772
85,170
85,541
85,449

310,859
312,730
304,718
303,997
305,968
309,539
304,250
305,314
311,896
307,542
303,989
305,726

78,247
77,338
75,643
73,889
73,247
73,072
72,968
72,853
72,727
72,669
72,524
72,217

30,045
29,643
26,901
26,250
25,925
25,460
25,779
25,845
25,158
24,805
24,501
24,034

174,904
178,415
175,451
179,652
182,642
186,842
181,479
182,447
189,848
185,665
182,447
185,092

27,664
27,336
26,722
24,207
24,156
24,165
24,022
24,170
24,164
24,404
24,518
24,385

929,825
946,455
963,207
962,779
964,792
969,921
. .
972,053
978,920
... . 996,495
999,451
1,011,936
1,027,300

628,482
642,905
661,142
657,906
656,185
660,769
666,405
673,765
683,209
689,578
704,819
720,293

220,423
228,972
235,315
225,849
224,514
218,786
217,532
219,854
223,388
229,061
233,905
245,015

321,176 86,883
324,540 89,393
336,505 89,323
341,052 91,006
338,419 93,252
348,788 93,196
354,005 94,868
357,603 96,308
363,643 96,178
362,649 97,867
370,794 100,119
375,332 99,946

301,343
303,550
302,065
304,873
308,608
309,152
305,647
305,155
313,286
309,874
307,117
307,007

71,057
70,443
70,057
69,518
69,229
68,934
68,719
68,355
68,017
67,718
67,739
67,837

23,804
23,986
24,162
24,411
24,789
23,514
21,943
21,431
20,499
20,471
20,309
19,025

182,197
185,020
183,833
186,979
190,839
192,962
191,647
192,060
201,052
198,053
195,541
196,665

24,287
24,102
24,015
23,965
23,750
23,741
23,339
23,310
23,718
23,632
23,529
23,480

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July ..
'*
Aug,
Sept. .
Oct
Nov
Dec
1981:
Jan
Feb
Mar .. .
May
June.

July.,
Aug
Sept
Oct.
Nov.
Dec

1
Includes Treasury bonds and minor amounts of Panama Canal and postal savings bonds.
8
Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness, notes, bonds, and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues.
3
Includes depository bonds, retirement plan bonds, Rural Electrification Administration bonds, State and local bonds, and special
issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks.
4
Includes $5,610 million in certificates not shown separately.

Note.—Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1-June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977) the fiscal
year is on an October 1-September 30 basis.
Source: Department of the Treasury.




324

TABLE B-80.—Estimated ownership of public debt, securities, 1967-81
[Par values;1 billions of dollars]
Public debt securities
Held by private investors

1975
1976
1977. . . .
1978
1979

. . .

1980
1981

71.8
76.1
84.8

46.7
52.2
54.1

204.4
217.0
214.0

55.5
59.7
55.3

13.2
12.5
11.6

95.2
102.9
111.5
123.4
138.2

57.7
65.5
71.4
75.0
80.5

217.2
228.9
243.6
258.9
255.6

52.6
61.0
60.9
58.8
53.2

533.2
620.4
698.8
771.5
826.5

145.3
149.6
155.5
167.9
187.7

84.7
94.4
104.7
115.3
115.5

303.2
376.4
438.6
488.3
523.4

907.7
997.9

.

Hetdby
Federal
Reserve
Banks

370.1
397.3
426.4
457.3
474.2

Fiscal year:
1967
1968
1969

Held by
Government
accounts

322.9
345.4
352.9

End of year or month

1970
1971
1972.
1973
1974

Mutual
savings
banks
Comand
mercial insur- Corpora4
tions 6
banks
ance
companies

197.7
208.1

120.7
124.3

Total 2

State and
local
governments 6

Individuals 7

Miscellaneous
investors 3 8

11.0
12.0
11.1

23.6
25.1
26.4

70.4
74.2
77.3

30.7
33.4
32.3

10.4
10.3
10.2
9.6
8.5

8.5
7.4
9.3
9.8
10.8

29.0
25.9
26.9
28.8
28.3

81.8
75.4
73.2
75.9
80.7

35.0
49.1
63.2
76.0
74.2

69.0
92.5
99.8
94.4
92.5

10.6
16.0
20.5
21.2
21.5

13.8
24.7
21.2
18.1
22.1

31.7
39.3
48.2
63.8
66.5

86.8
96.2
106.5
113.9
115.5

91.3
107.7
142.4
176.9
205.3

589.2
665.4

109.7
112.2

24.3
26.2

25.9
37.8

77.0
86.2

123.0
140.3

229.3
262.7

Total ^

1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr ..
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

847.7
854.6
863.5
870.0
877.9
877.6

184.5
187.8
186.3
188.2
190.7
194.9

116.3
115.2
116.7
118.8
124.3
124.5

546.9
551.6
560.5
563.0
562.9
558.2

97.0
98.2
98.1
96.3
97.7
100.3

21.1
21.5
22.6
22.6
22.6
22.3

23.0
23.1
23.2
23.0
22.8
22.6

70.3
75.5
70.7
70.7
70.7
71.1

117.0
113.8
124.8
125.3
124.3
120.2

218.5
219.5
221.1
225.1
224.8
221.7

881.7
893.4
907.7
908.2
913.8
930.2

189.2
189.8
197.7
193.4
189.8
192.5

119.6
119.8
120.7
121.5
120.8
121.3

573.0
583.8
589.2
593.3
603.2
616.4

101.4
106.1
109.7
113.2
111.4
116.0

23.2
23.4
24.3
24.7
25.4
25.5

23.7
24.3
25.9
25.9
25.8
25.7

72.9
74.7
77.0
76.8
78.3
78.8

121.2
124.1
123.0
122.9
125,3
129.2

230.6
231.2
229.3
229.8
237.0
241.2

1981Jan .
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

934.1
950.5
964.5
964.0
968.5
971.2

189.5
192.0
190.9
193.9
197.8
199.9

117.2
118.9
119.0
119.7
118.3
120.0

627.4
639.6
654.6
650.4
652.3
651.2

117.2
116.4
117.5
113.5
113.2
113.3

25.5
25.3
23.7
23.7
25.3
24.0

30.4
35.2
40.0
40.4
38.8
38.7

77.3
80.4
82.3
83.6
85.1
83.0

134.2
136.2
138.6
138.2
139.9
139.6

242.8
246.1
252.5
251.0
250.0
252.6

973.3
980.2
997.9
1,005.0
1,013.3
1,028.7

198.6
199.0
208.1
204.9
202.1
203.3

123.4
124.5
124.3
123.0
126.5
129.9

651.3
656.7
665.4
677.2
684.6
695.5

114.2
115.0
112.2
111.3
110.0

25.4
26.1
26.2
24.7
24.5

37.8
38.0
37.8
38.6
38.3

86.0
86.2
86.2
88.3
87.5

139.5
140.2
140.3
141.0
141.6

248.4
251.2
262.7
273.3
282.6

..

July
Aug
Sept... .
Oct
Nov
Dec.
1
U.S. savings
2

bonds, series A-F and J, and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value.
As of July 31, 1974, public debt outstanding has been adjusted to exclude the notes of the International Monetary Fund to conform
with the Budget presentation. This adjustment applies to the 1967-81 data in this table.
3
For comparability with 1975-81 published data, published data for 1967-74 have been adjusted to exclude notes of the
International Monetary Fund. These adjustments amounted to $3.3 billion in 1967, $2.2 billion in 1968, and $0.8 billion in each year
1969 through 1974. These adjustments were necessary in order to add to the total public debt figures as published by the Department
of 4 Treasury.
the
Includes commercial banks, trust companies, and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions,figures exclude securities held in trust departments.
6
Exclusive of banks and insurance companies.
6
Includes trust, sinking, and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies, and of Territories and
possessions.
7
Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts.
8
Includes savings and loan associations, nonprofit institutions, corporate pension trust funds, dealers and brokers, certain
government deposit accounts and government-sponsored agencies, and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in
the United States.
Note.—Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1—June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977), the
fiscal year is on an October 1—September 30 basis.
Source: Department of the Treasury.




325

TABLE B-81.—Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities
held by private investors, 1967-81

End of year or month

Amount
outstanding,
privately
held
nelQ

Maturity class
Average length
Within
lyear

5 to 10
years

Ito5
years

10 to 20
years

20 years
ana over
Years

Millions of dollars
Fiscal year:
1967
1968
1969

150,321
159,671
156,008

56,561
66,746
69,311

53,584
52,295
50,182

21,057
21,850
18,078

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974 ...

157,910
161,863
165,978
167,869
164,862

76,443
74,803
79,509
84,041
87,150

57,035
58,557
57,157
54,139
50,103

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

210,382
279,782
326,674
356,501
380,530

115,677
151,723
161,329
163,819
181,883

463,717
549,863

1980:
Jan
Feb.
Mar
Apr
May
June. .
July
Aug
Sept
Get
Nov
Dec

1981
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr . . . .
May
June
July
Aug
Sept..
Oct..
Nov
Dec

Months

5
4
4
3
3
3
3
2

1
5
2
8
6
3
1
11

2
2
2
3
3
3

8
7
11
3

9
10
8
8
10
10
9
10
9
9
10
9

12,968
12,670
12,337

8,286
14,503
16,033
16,385
14,197

6,153
6,110
6,097
7,876
6,357
6,358
8,741
9,930

65,852
89,151
113,319
132,993
127,574

15,385
24,169
33,067
33,500
32,279

8,857
8,087
8,428
11,383
18,489

220,084
256,187

156,244
182,237

38,809
48,743

25,901
32,569

4,611
6,652
10,531
14,805
20,304
22,679
30,127

408 300
414,647
430,036
435,283
433,175
431,893

192 829
195,694
208,542
207,942
209,899
198,365

135,132
137,442
137,514
142,011
140,835
147,756

36,793
37,593
40,151
40,111
36,317
39,715

21,247
21,794
21,725
23,140
22,270
22,229

22,299
22,124
22,104
22,079
23,854
23,828

446,255
454,063
463,717
467,845
475,365
492,294

210,106
218,977
220,084
222,346
230,987
239,697

149,215
150,764
156,244
156,712
154,434
159,585

39,426
35,652
38,809
38,747
38,021
41,175

23,682
25,948
25,901
27,338
27,266
27,250

23,826
22,722
22,679
22,702
24,657
24,587

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

502,248
515,178
532,800
528,992
529,057
531,525

247,958
256,007
263,208
254,533
258,101
252,489

156,845
160,163
167,226
167,570
167,865
172,784

43,969
43,382
46,786
49,616
43,842
47,032

27,241
28,690
28,662
28,587
30,296
30,268

26,235
26,936
26,918
28,685
28,953
28,952

3
3
3
3
3
3

9
10
9
10
11
11

533,778
540,228
549,863
558,169
569,534
580,670

251,307
251.533
256,187
263,717
266 163
275,322

171,504
180,669
182,237
177,834
189,570
188,422

50,242
48,743
52,201
47,615
50,851

30,172
32,602
32,569
32,536
34,164
34,055

30,553
30,127
30,127
31,881
32,022
32,020

4
4
4
4
4

4

0
1
0
0
1
0

45,297

8,272
7,645
6,922
4,564
3,481

4

9
3

Note.—All issues classified to final maturity.
Through fiscal year 1976, the fiscal year was on a July 1- June 30 basis; beginning October 1976 (fiscal year 1977), the fiscal year
is on an October 1—September 30 basis.
Source: Department of the Treasury.




326

CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE
TABLE B-82.—Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Profits after tax with inventory valuation and
capital consumption adjustments

Corporate
profits with
inventory
valuation
and capital
consumption
adjustments

Corporate
profits tax
liability

1929

9.0

1.4

7.7

5.8

1.9

1933

-1.7

.5

-2.3

2.0

-4.3

Year or quarter

Total

Dividends

Undistributed
profits with
inventory
valuation
and capital
consumption
adjustments

1939

5.3

1.4

3.9

3.8

.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1946
1947
1948
1949

8.6
14.1
19.3
23.5
23.6
16.6
22.3
29.4
27.1

2.8
7.6
11.4
14.1
12.9
9.1
11.3
12.4
10.2

5.8
6.5
7.9
9.5
10.7
7.5
11.0
17.0
16.9

4.0
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.6
5.6
6.3
7.0
7.2

1.8
2.1
3.6
6.1
6.1
1.9
4.7
10.0
9.7

33.9
38.7
36.1
36.3
35.2

17.9
22.6
19.4
20.3
17.6

16.0
16.1
16.7
16.0
17.5

8.8
8.5
8.5
8.8
9.1

7.2
7.6
8.2
7.2
8.4

45.5
43.7
43.3
38.5
49.6

22.0
22.0
21.4
19.0
23.6

23.4
21.8
21.8
19.5
26.0

10.3
11.1
11.5
11.3
12.2

13.1
10.7
10.3
8.2
13.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

47.6
48.6
56.6
62.1
69.2

22.7
22.8
24.0
26.2
28.0

24.9
25.8
32.6
35.9
41.2

12.9
13.3
14.4
15,5
17.3

12.1
12.5
18.2
20.4
23.9

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

80.0
85.1
82.4
89.1
85.1

30.9
33.7
32.5
39.2
39.5

49.1
51.4
49.9
50.0
45.6

19.1
19.4
20.2
22.0
22.5

30.0
32.0
29.7
27.9
23.1

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

71.4
83.2
96.6
108.3
94.9

34.2
37.5
41.6
49.0
51.6

37.2
45.7
55.0
59.3
43.3

22.5
22.9
24.4
27.0
29.9

14.8
22.8
30.5
32.3
13.4

110.5
138.1
164.7
185.5
196.8

50.6
63.8
72.6
83.0
87.6

59.9
74.3
92.2
102.5
109.2

30.8
37.4
39.9
44.6
50.2

29.1
36.9
52.3
57.9
59.1

1980
1981"

182.7
189.0

82.3
76.4

100.3
112.6

56.0
63.1

44.3
49.5

1979:
I
II
III
IV

201.9
196.6
199.5
189.4

88.5
86.4
88.4
87.2

113.3
110.2
111.1
102.2

49.0
49.8
50.2
51.6

64.3
60.5
60.9
50.6

200.2
169.3
177.9
183.3

94.2
71.5
78.5
85.2

106.0
97.8
99.5
98.1

53.9
55.7
56.7
57.7

52.1
42.1
42.8
40.4

203.0
190.3
195.7

87.7
76.4
78.1

115.3
114.0
117.6

59,6
62.0
84.8

55.7
52.0
52.8

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

....

..

. .

. .

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

'

...

.

v

1980:

\
||

Ill
IV

1981:

1

II

HI

Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




327

TABLE B-83.—Corporate profits by industry, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment
Domestic industries
Year or quarter

Financial l
Total

Total

Nonfinancial

Total

Federal
Reserve
banks

Other

Total

Manufacturing'

Wholesale
and
retail
trade

Utilities 3

Other

Rest
, of the
world

10.5

10.2

1.3

0.0

1.3

8.9

5.2

1.0

1.8

0.9

0,2

-1.2
6.5

-1.2

,3

.0

.3

-1.5

= .4

-.5

.0

-.7

.0

6.1

.8

.0

.8

5.3

3.3

.7

1.0

.3

.3

1940. .
1941...
1942
1943
1944
1945 .
1946 . . .
1947.,.
1948 .
1949

9.8
15.4
20.5
24.5
24.0
19.3
19.6
25.9
33.4
31.1

9.6
15.0
20.1
24.1
23.5
18.9
18.9
24.9
32.2
29.9

1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.6
1.7
2.1
1.7
2.6
3.1

.0
.0
.0
.0

.9
1.0
1.2
1.3
1.6
1.6
2.0
1.6
2.3
2.9

8.6
14.0
18.9
22.8
21.9
17.3
16.8
23.2
29,6
26,8

5.5
9.5
11.8
13.8
13.2
9.7
9.0
13.6
17.6
16.2

1.2
1.4
2.2
3,0
3.2
3.3
3.8
4.6
5.5
4.5

1.3
2.0
3.4
4.4
3.9
2.7
1.8
2.2
3.0
3.0

.6
1.1
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.5
2.1
2.9
3.6
3.1

.3
.4
.4
.4
.4
.3
.7
1.0
1.3
1.1

1950
1951
,,..
1952
1953, ...
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

37.9
43.3
40.6
40.2
38.4
47.5
46.9
46.6
41.6
52.3

36.7
41.5
38.7
38.4
36.4
45.1
44.1
43.5
39.1
49.6

3.1
3.6
4.0
4.5
4.6
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.7
6.8

.2
.3
.4
.4
.3

3.0
3.3
3.7
4.1
4.3
4.5
4.5
4.6
5.1
6.0

33.5
37.9
34.7
33.9
31.8
40.3
39.1
38.3
33.5
42.9

20.9
24.6
21.7
22.0
19.9
26.0
24.7
24.0
19.4
26.4

5.0
5.0
4.8
3.8
3.8
5.0
4.5
4.4
4.6
5,9

4.0
4.6
4.9
5.0
4.7
5.6
5.9
5.8
5.9
7.0

3.6
3.7
3.3
3.1
3.4
3.6
4.1
4.0
3.6
3.6

1.3
1.7
1.9
1.8
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.1
2.5
2.7

1960
1961
1962 .
1963.. .
1964
1965 ..
1966
1967
1968 .
1969

49.7
50.0
55.1
59.7
66.0
76.0
80.9
78.1
84.9
80.8

46.7
46.8
51.5
55.8
61.8
71.5
76.7
73.7
79.7
74.6

7.2
7.0
7.3
6.8
6.9
7.5
8.5
9.0
10.4
11.1

1.0
.8
.9
1.0
1.1
1.4
1.7
2.0
2.5
3.1

6.2
6.3
6.4
5.8
5.8
6.2
6.8
7.0
7.9
8.0

39.5
39.8
44.2
49.0
54.9
64.0
68.2
64.8
69.3
63.5

23.6
23.3
26.0
29.3
32.3
39.3
41.9
38.5
41.2
36.6

4.9
5.0
5.8
5.9
7.5
8.1
8.2
9.1
10.4
10.5

7.4
7.8
8.4
9.3
10.0
11.0
11.8
10.7
10.8
10.3

3.6
3.7
3.9
4.4
5.1
5.6
6.3
6.5
6.9
6.1

3.0
3.2
3.6
3.9
4,2
4.5
4.2
4.4
5.2
6.1

1970 . ..
1971 . .
1972 .
1973.. .
1974
.. .
1975
1976
1977
. ,,
1978
1979
. ...

68.9
82.0
94.0
105.6
96.7
120.6
151.6
176.7
199.0
212.7

62.4
74.9
85.3
92.0
80.4
107.6
137.4
161.2
179.3
182.4

12.1
14.1
15.3
15.9
15.0
11.8
17.1
23.5
29.3
31.6

3.6
3.3
3.4
4.5
5.7
5.7
6.0
6.2
7.7
9.6

8.6
10.7
11.9
11.4
9.3
6.2
11.1
17.3
21.6
22.0

50.2
60.8
70.0
76.0
65.4
95.8
120.3
137.7
150.0
150.8

26.6
34.1
40.7
45.5
39.0
52,6
69.2
76.2
85.3
88.9

9.5
11.7
13.4
13.9
12.5
21.3
22.4
27.0
24.5
23.0

8.2
8.5
9.0
8.7
6.1
10.0
14.5
17.8
20.7
18.0

5.9
6.5
6,9
8.0
7.9
11.9
14.2
16.7
19.5
20.8

6.5
7.1
8.6
13.7
16.3
13.0
14.3
15.5
19.7
30.3

1980
1981 »

199.8
202.9

168.7
178.9

30.6
24.2

11.9
14.6

18.7
9.7

138.1
154.7

74,5 •
81.9

20.9
27.8

18,5
20.5

24.1
24.5

31.1
24.0

1979:
I
||
Ill
IV

217.8
213.0
215.6
204.5

191.7
184.4
180.5
172.9

31.3
31.0
31.5
32.6

8.8
9.2
9.7
10.5

22.5
21.8
21.7
22.1

160.4
153.4
149.0
140.3

99.4
91.5
84.4
80.2

21.0
22.9
25.6
22.6

20.8
19.2
17.1
14.9

19.1
19.7
22.0
22.6

26.0
28.5
35.1
31.7

1980:
1
II
Ill
IV

215.6
186.9
195.9
201.0

179.0
157.5
165.0
173.4

33.3
30.1
28.7
30.5

11.9
12.7
11.3
12.0

21.4
17.4
17.4
18.5

145.7
127.5
136.2
142.9

92.1
61.3
68.5
76.2

14.8
25.9
20.4
22.6

16.1
16.6
22.5
18.8

22.7
23.7
24.8
25.2

36.6
29.3
30.9
27.7

217.7
205.1
209.1

192.3
182.3
184.6

28.6
24.3
22.7

13.5
14.3
15.2

15.1
10.1
7.5

163.7
158.0
161.9

90.4
84.4
85.1

27.5
28.4
30.1

20.8
20.0
21.6

25.1
25.1
25.2

25.4
22.8
24.5

1929 ..
1933
1939

1981:

I
II
Ill

.

.

!l
.1
.2

!6
.6

1
Consists of the following industries: Banking; credit agencies other than banks; security and commodity brokers, dealers, and
services; insurance carriers; regulated investment companies; small business investment companies; and real estate investment trusts.
2
See Table B-84 for industry detail.
3
Consists of transportation, communication, and electric, gas, and sanitary services.

Note.=The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) beginning
1948, and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




328

TABLE B-84.—Corporate profits of manufacturing industries, 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment
Durable goods
Year or quarter

Total
manufacturing

Total

Primary
metal
industries

Fabricated
metal
products

Nondurable goods

Machin- Electric Motor
and
ery,
elec- vehicles
except tronic
and
electri- equip- equipcal
ment
ment

Other

Total

Food
and
kindred
products

Chemicals
and
allied
products

Petroleum
and
coat
products

' "1.9
1,6

1.7
1.8

2.8
1.9

3.7
2.8

Other

2.6

1929

5.2

2.6

1933

-4

_4

.0

1939

3.3

1.7

17

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

5.5
9.5
11.8
13.8
13.2

3.1
6.4
7.2
8.1
74

9.0
13.6
17.6
16.2

2.4
5.8
7.5
8.1

"i.6

1.5

.8
.7

'"l.2~
1.3

'.B

2.1

1.8
1.7

4.6
5.7
59
5.2
66
7.8
10.0
8.1

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

20.9
24.6
21.7
22.0
19.9
26.0
24.7
24.0
19.4
26.4

12.0
13.2
11.7
11.9
10.5
14.3
12.8
13.3
9.3
13.7

2.3
3.1
1.9
2.5
1.7
2.9
3.0
3.0
1.9
2.3

1.1
1.3
1.0
1.0
.9
1.0
1.1
1.1
.9
1.1

1.6
2,3
2.3
1.9
1.7
1.7
2.1
2.0
1.4
2.1

1.2
1.3
1.5
1.4
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.5
1.3
1.7

3.1
2.4
2.4
2.6
2.1
4.1
2.2
2.6
.9
3.0

2.6
2.8
2.6
2.6
2.9
3.5
3.2
3.1
2.9
3.5

8.9
11.4
9.9
10.1
9.4
11.8
11.9
10.7
10.0
12.7

1.6
1.4
1.7
1,8
1.6
2.2
1.8
1.8
2.1
2.4

2.3
2.8
2.3
2.2
2.2
3.0
2.8
2.8
2.5
3.5

2.3
2.7
2.3
2.8
2.7
3.0
3.3
2.6
2.1
2.5

2.7
4.4
3.6
3.3
2.9
3.6
4.1
3.6
3.3
4.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

23.6
23.3
26.0
29.3
32.3
39.3
41.9
38.5
41.2
36.6

11.6
11.4
14.0
16.3
17.9
23.0
23.8
20.9
22.2
18.9

2.0
1.6
1.6
2.0
2.5
3.1
3.6
2.7
1.9
1.4

.8
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.4
2.0
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.0

1.8
1.9
2.3
2.5
3.3
3.9
4.5
4.1
4.1
3.7

1.3
1.3
1.5
1.6
1.7
2.7
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.3

3.0
2.5
4.0
4.9
4.7
6.2
5.1
3.9
5.5
4.7

2.7
3.1
3.5
4.0
4.4
5.1
5.2
4.9
5.7
4.9

12.0
11.9
12.0
13.1
14.4
16.3
18.1
17.6
19.1
17.7

2.2
2.3
2.3
2.7
2.7
2.8
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.0

3.1
3.2
3.2
3.6
4.0
4.6
4.9
4.3
5.2
4.5

2.5
2.2
2.2
2.1
2.4
2.9
3.2
3.9
3.7
3.2

4.2
4.1
4.3
4.6
5.3
6.0
6.8
6.3
7.0
6.9

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

26.6
34.1
40.7
45.5
39.0
52.6
69.2
76.2
85.3
88.9

10.2
16.3
22.4
24.3
13.2
18.9
30.4
36.0
43.0
39.5

.8
.7
1.6
2.2
5.4
2.9
2.1
1.3
3.2
4.2

1.1
1.5
2.1
2.5
1.6
3.0
3.8
4.5
4.8
5.0

2.9
2.9
4.3
4.6
2.9
4.7
6.3
7.6
8.9
8.8

1.2
1.9
2.8
3.0
.4
2.1
3.4
5.4
6.3
6.3

1.2
5.0
5.9
5.7
l!9
7.2
9.2
8.9
4.3

2.9
4.3
5.7
6.2
2.9
4.3
7.6
8.0
11.0
10.8

16.5
17.8
18.3
21.2
25.8
33.6
38.8
40.2
42.3
49.4

3.2
3.5
2.9
2.4
2.8
8.6
6.9
6.7
5.9
6.9

3.9
4.4
5.2
6.0
5.6
6.5
8.3
8.0
8.3
. 8-2

3.5
3.5
3.0
5.0
10.5
9.6
12.6
11.8
12.6
18.3

5.9
6.4
7.2
7.8
6.8
8.9
11.0
13.7
15.4
16.0

1980
1981".

74.5
81.9

20.9
26.4

3.1
3.9

3.9
4.2

6.3
7.9

5.3
6.5

-4.3
-1.1

6.5
5.0

53.7
55.4

7.3
9.2

7.5
8.5

24.6
23.2

14.3
14.6

99.4
91.5
84.4
80.2

50.9
43.0
34.8
29.3

4.8
4.7
4.5
2.8

5.5
5.3
4.6
4.8

9.3
8.8
9.2
8.0

7.1
6.4
5.8
5.7

11.8
6.6
-.8

12.4
11.1
11.1
8.8

48.5
48.5
49.6
50.9

6.6
7.5
6.7
6.7

9.4
8.8
7.8
6.6

15.0
16.9
17.7
23.7

17.4
15.4
17.4
13.8

92,1
61.3
68.5
76.2

28.1
10.1
19.4
25.8

5.9
2.0
.7
3.8

5.2
1.7
3.9
4.8

7.3
5.7
6.2
6.1

6.6
3.8
5.5
5.3

-2.9
-8.8
-4.8
-.8

6.0
5.6
8.0
6.6

64.0
51.2
49.1
50.4

8.2
6.7
5.7
8.6

8.8
6.0
7.0
8.1

31.0
25.3
22.2
19.9

16.0
13.2
14.2
13.8

90.4
84.4
85.1

31.5
31.9
26.0

5.1
3.8
3.7

4.1
4.6
4.7

8.7
8.2
8.6

8.4
6.2
6.6

-1.6
2.7
22

6.8
6.3
4.7

58.9
52.5
59.0

10.4
9.5
8.9

10.1
8.3
8.5

21.6
19.6
26.4

16.8
15.1
15.2

1979:
I

II
Ill
IV

9.7

...

.

2.4
31

. .,

4.5

.. .. ...^

1980:

I
II
Ill
IV ..

1981:
1
II

Ill

Note.—The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the 1972 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) beginning
1948, and on the 1942 SIC prior to 1948.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




329

TABLE B-85.—Sales, profits, and stockholders' eqtrity, all manufacturing corporations, 1950-81
[Billions of dollars]

Year or
quarter

Profits
Sales
(net)

1950
181.9
245.0
1951....
250.2
1952
265.9
1953.....
1954....
248.5
278.4
1955
307.3
1956....
1957
320.0
1958.,,
305.3
1959
338.0
345.7
I960....
356,4
1961 ....
1962,..,
389.4
1963..,.
4127
1964....
443.1
1965
492.2
1966
554.2
1967.,.
575.4
631.9
1968
694.6
1969
708.8
1970
1971
751.4
1972
849.5
1973
1,017.2
1973: IV.... .
275.1

TgTsTIvT.

Before After
income income
taxes1 taxes

23.2
27.4
22.9
24.4
20.9
28.6
29.8
28.2
22.7
29.7
27.5
27.5
31.9
34.9
39.6
46.5
51.8
47.8
55.4
58.1
48.1
52.9
63.2
81.4
21.4

12.9
11.9
107
11.3
11.2
15.1
16.2
15.4
127
16.3
15.2
15.3
177
19.5
23.2
27.5
30.9
29.0
32.1
33.2
28.6
31.0
36.5
48.1
13.0
13.2
58.7
49.1
64.5
70.4
81.1
98.7
92.4

Stockholders'
equity 2

83.3
98.3
103.7

Nondurable goods industries

Durable goods industries

All manufacturing corporations

Profits
Sales

(net)

86.8
116.8
122.0

Before After
income income
taxes l taxes

12.9

Stockholders'
equity 2

Profits
Sales
(net)

Before After
income income
taxes1 taxes

Stockholders'
equity *

15.4
12.9
14.0
11.4
16.5
16.5
15,8
11.4
15.8
14,0
13.6
16.8
18.5
21.2
26.2
29.2
25.7
30.6
31,5
23.0
26.5
33.6
43.6
10.8

6.7
6.1
5.5
5.8
5.6
8.1
8.3
7.9
5.8
8.1
7.0
6.9
8.6
9.5
11.6
14.5
16.4
14.6
16.5
16.9
12.9
14.5
18.4
24.8
6.3

39.9
47.2
49.8
52.4
54.9
58.8
65.2
70.5
72.8
77.9
82.3
84.9
89.1
93.3
98.5
105.4
115.2
125.0
135.6
147.6
155.1
160.4
171.4
1887
1947

95.1
128.1
128.0
128.0
1257
136.3
147.8
154.1
156.7
168.5
171.8
181.2
194.1
203.6
216.8
235.2
262.4
274.8
296.4
328.1
345.7
369.3
4137
489.9
135.0

10.3
12.1
10.0
10.4
9.6
12.1
13.2
12.4
11.3
13.9
13.5
13.9
15.1
16.4
18.3
20.3
22.6
22.0
24.8
26.6
25.2
26.5
29.6
37,8
10.6

6.1
5.7

5.2
5.5
5.6
7.0
7.8
7.5
6.9
8.3
8.2
8.5
9.2
10.0
11.6
13.0
14.6
14.4
15.5
16.4
157
16.5
18.0
23.3
67

43.5
51.1
53.9
55.7
58.2
61.3
66.4
70.6
74.6
79.2
83.1
87.7
92.3
96.3
101.3
106.3
115.1
122.6
130.3
142.3
1517
160.5
172.0
185.4
1917

6.2
24.7
21.4
30.8
34.8
41.8
45.2
35.6

113.9
185.8
531.6
196.0
208.1
544.1
224,3 6137
239.9 670.8
262.6 7357
292.5 876.1
316.0 1,013.8

10.5
51.0
44.6
54.3
57.2
62.9
81.8
88.2

7.0
34.1
277
33.7
35.5
39.3
53.5
56.9

182.1
199,0
215.3
238.4
256.8
277.9
308.0
348.9

108.2
113.1
120.1
131.6
141.1
147.4
157.1
165.4
172.6
181.4
1897
199.8
211.7
230.3
247.6
265.9
289.9
306.8
320.8
343.4
374.1
386.4

137.9
122.8
142.1
159.5
166.0
148.6
169.4
173.9
175.2
195.3
209.0
226.3
257.0
291.7
300.6
335.5
366.5
363.1
381.8
435.8
527.3
140.1

368.0
395.0

1227
529.0

423.4
4627
496.7
540.5
600.5
664.9

521.1
589.6
657.3
7607
865.7
883.0

10.1
41.1
35.3
507
57,9
69.6
72.4
57.2

1974....

236.6
1,060.6

1975
1976
1977.,..
1978
1979
1980

1,065.2
1,203.2
1,328.1
1,496.4
1,741.8
1,896.8

20.6
92.1
79.9
104.9
115.1
132.5
154.2
145.4

340.3
3775
376.9
401.8

26.9
360
33.4
36.3

16.0
221
20.4
22.6

518.7
5333
547'.8
562.3

170.1
1950
1897
205.9

13.6
198
17J)
19.1

7.9
120
10^3
11.6

250.3
2591
2667
274.4

170.3
1824
187.2
195.9

13.3
162
16*.4
17.1

8.1
101
lO'.l
11.0

268.4
2742
28U
287.8

406.6
436.4
437.5
461.2

36.5
42.6
38.2
36.8

22.7
26.8
247
24.5

576.2
592.5
609.2
624.0

207.5
222.6
213.6
221.9

18.8
21.6
16.4
157

11.4
13.3
10.3
10.1

281.9
289.3
296.5
302.1

199,1
213.8
223,9
239.3

17.7
21.1
21.9
21.2

11.2
13.5
14.4

294.3
303.2
312.6
3Z1.9

4657
466.3
464.2
500.6

39.5
35.9
33.2
36.8

24.8
22.4
21.0
24.3

643.9
658.1
670.5
687.1

219.8
2187
212.6
231.9

15.8
13.5
11.9
16.0

97
8.2
7.2
10.4

308.0
312.6
317.2
326.1

245.9
247.6
251.6
2687

23.7
22.4
21.3
20.8

14.2
13.7
13.9

15.1

335.9
345.5
353.3
360.9

503.5
528.9
521.4

37.8
45.4
39.2

23.6
29.0
24.7

702.1
721.8
735.9

229.0
250.5
239.3

16.1
20.3
15.8

9.8
12.5
10.0

333.4
342.3
347.8

274,5
278.5
282.1

217
25.1
23.3

13.8
16.5
147

3687
379.5
388.1

1978:
|

ti
in

IV

1979:
|

li'Z

III
IV

1980:

I.

II
Ill
IV

1981;

t

II
Ill

14.4

1
In the old series, "income taxes" refers to Federal income taxes only, as State and local income taxes had already been deducted.
In 8 new series, no income taxes have been deducted.
the
Annual data are average equity for the year (using four end-of-quarter figures).
Note,—Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes In accounting procedures, industry
classifications, sampling procedures, etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series, see "Quarterly Financial Report for
Manufacturing, Mining, and Trade Corporations, Federal Trade Commission.
Source: Federal Trade Commission.




330

TABLE B-86.—Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales, all
corporations, 1947-81
Ratio of profits after income taxes (annual
rate) to stockholders' equity— percent '
Year or quarter

manufacturing

Profits after income taxes per dollar of
sales— cents

All
manufacturing
corporations

Durable
goods
industries

Nondurable
goods
industries

All
manufacturing
corporations

Durable
goods
industries

Nondurable
goods
industries

15.6
16.0
11.6
15.4
12.1
10.3
10.5
9.9
12.6
12.3
10.9
8.6
10.4
9.2
8.9
9.8
10.3
11.6

14.4
15.7
12.1
16.9
13.0
11.1
11.1
10.3
13.8
12.8
11.3
8.0
10.4
8.5
8.1
9.6
10.1
11.7

16.6
16.2
11.2
14.1
11.2
9.7
9.9
9.6
11.4
11.8
10.6
9.2
10.4
9.8

6.7
7.1
6.4
7.7
5.3
4.5
4.2
4.6
5.7
5.2
4.8
3.9
4.8
4.0
3.9
4.4
4.5
5.1

6.7
6.8
5.4

13.0
13.4
11.7
12.1
11.5
9.3
9.7
10.6
12.8
13.4

13.8
14.2
11.7
12.2
11.4
8.3
9.0
10.8
13.1
12.9

10.4
11.5
12.2
12.7
11.8
11.9
11.5
10.3
10.3
10.5
12.6
14.0

6.7
7.0
5.8
7.1
4.9
4.3
4.3
4.5
5.4
5.3
4.8
4.2
4.8
4.4
4.3
4.5
4.7
5.2
5.6
5.6
5.0
5.1
4.8
4.0
4.1
4.3
4.7
4.7

5,7
5.6
4.8
4.9
4.6
3.5
3.8
4.2
4.7
4.5

14.3
14.9
11.6
13.9
14.2
15.0
16.4
13.9

13.3
12.6
10.3
13.7
14.5
16.0
15.4
11.3

15.3
17.1
12.9
14.2
13.8
-14.2
17.4
16.3

5.6
5.5
4.6
5.4
5.3
5.4
5.7
4.9

5.0
4.7
4.1
5.2
5.3
5.5
5.2
4.0

6.1
6.4
5.1
5.5
5.3
5.3
6.1
5.6

1
II
III.,
IV

12.4
16.7
14.9
16.1

12.7
18.7
15.5
17.0

12.1
14.8
14.4
15.3

4.7
5.9
5.4
5.6

4.7
6.2
5.4
5.6

4.8
5.6
5.4
5.6

1979:
|
|
|
III
IV

15.7
18.1
16.3
15.7

16.2
18.4
14.0
13.4

15.3
17.8
18.4
17.9

5.6
6.1
5.7
5.3

5.5
6.0
4.8
4.6

5.6
6.3
6.4
6.0

1980:
I
II . . . .
Ill
IV

15.4
13,6
12.5
14.1

12.6
10.6
9.1
12.7

18.0
16.4
15.6
15.4

5.3
4.8
4.5
4.8

4.4
3.8
3.4
4.5

6.1
5.7
5.5
5.2

13.4
16.1
13.4

11.8
14.6
11.5

14.9
17.4
15.2

4.7
5.5
4.7

4.3
5.0
4.2

5.0
5.9
5.2

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971. .
1972 . . .
1973
1973: IV
New series:
1973: IV
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 .
.

.

...

..

..

....

.

1978:

1981:
II
Ill

U

6.5
4.5
4.1
4.3
4.4
5.1
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.9
4.8
4.7
4.7
4.9
5.4
5.5
5,6
5.3
5.2
5.0
4.5
4.5
4.4
4.8
5.0

1
Annual ratios based on average equity for the year (using four end-of-quarter figures). Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of
quarter only.
Note.—Based on data in millions of dollars.
See Note, Table B-85.
Source: Federal Trade Commission. •




331

TABLE B-87.—Relation of pro/its after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales, all
corporations, by industry group, 1980-81
Ratio of profits after income taxes (annual
rate) to stockholders' equity— percent *
Industry

1980

III

All manufacturing corporations
Durable goods industries
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary metal industries
Iron and steel
Nonferrous metals
Fabricated metal products
Machinery, except electrical
Electrical and electronic
equipment
Transportation equipment2
Motor vehicles and
equipment
Aircraft, guided missiles, and parts
Instruments and related
products
Other durable manufacturing
products , ,.,
Nondurable goods industries
Food and kindred products
Tobacco manufactures
Textile mill products
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing
Chemicals and allied products2
Industrial chemicals and
synthetics
Drugs
Petroleum and coal products...
Rubber and miscellaneous
plastics products
,
Other nondurable manufacturing products

1

II

1980

III

III

1981

IV

1

II

III

12.5

14.1

13.4

16.1

13.4

4.5

4.8

4.7

5.5

4,7

9.1

12.7

1L8

14.6

11.5

3.4

4.5

4.3

5.0

4.2

14.4
5.6

11.5
12.5

5.3
12.8

12.6
14.5

12.1
13.1

5.4
2.2

4.4
4.4

2.3
4,4

4.8
4.8

4.6
4.7

3.4
8.8

11.7
13.6

12.2
13.6

14.9
13.9

17.6
6.3

1.2
3.6

3.8
5.6

3.9
5.4

4.5
5.3

5.8
2.6

12.3
13.7

13.5
16.6

13.6
13.8

17.0
15.2

14.4
14,0

3.8
6.2

4.1
7.3

4.2
6.1

5.0
6.6

4.3
6.4

14.1
-6.2

15.6
3.4

16.2
4.3

15.8
12.6

12.9
1.5

4.8
-2.1

5.2
1.0

5.7
1.3

5.4
3.4

4.5
.4

-18.0

-3.0

-4.3

10.0

-7.1

-6.9

= .9

2.7

-2.3

15.4

15.5

20.4

17.0

13.9

4.3

4.0

5.7

4.5

4.0

-1.4

17,8

17.9

17,9

17.5

17.7

9.5

9.4

10.0

9.2

9.4

12.0

11.2

7.4

9.9

9.8

3.6

3.2

2.3

2.8

2.9

15.6

15.4

14.9

17.4

15.2

5.5

5.2

5.0

5.9

5.2

15.2
22.3
6.6
10.6
17.2

17.4
15.3
8.6
11.6
16.7

12.6
21.2
8.8
12.5
13.6

14.1
19.2
13.8
13.7
15.2

14.1
18.8
9.8
9.9
15.6

3.5
13.0
1.8
4.5
5.8

4,0
8.8
2.2
4.9
5.5

3.0
12.5
2.3
5.3
4.8

3.4
10.4
3.3
5.6
5.2

3.4
10.8
2,5
4.1
5.2

15.2

13.7

16.5

15.7

14.0

7.1

6.4

7.3

6.9

6.5

10.5
22.6

10.9
16.9

15.6
16.4

13.8
16.1

11.3
16.0

5.0
15.1

4.9
11.3

6.6
10.4

5.9
10.9

5.1
10.2

17.8

17.3

16.4

21.8

17.8

7.2

6.2

5.7

8.1

6.6

5.4

9.2

12.0

14.8

11.6

1.6

2.7

3.6

4,2

3.4

16.3

14.6

11.5

13.8

14.7

3.3

3.2

2.7

3.2

3.4

1

Ratios based on equity at end of quarter.
* Includes other industries not shown separately.
Source; Federal Trade Commission.




Profits after income taxes per dollar
of sales— cents

1981

IV

manufacturing

332

TABLE B-88.—Determinants of business fixed investment 1955-81
[Percent, except as noted]
Nonfinancia! corporations

Real
investment
as
percent of
real
GNP

utifization
rate in
manufactur-

Cash
flow as
percent of
GNP 2

. . .

9.3
9.7
9.7
8.7
8.8

87.1
86.4
83.7
75.2
81.9

9.3
8.9
8.9
8.6
9.3

19.8
16.8
15.2
12.8
16.4

9.8
7.9
7.4
6.5
8.5

13.1
11.4
10.4
8.4
10.5

6.2
5.2
4.9
3.9
5.1

0.851
.843
.784
.813
.979

. . . .
. . .

9.1
8.8
9.0
9.0
9.4

80.2
77.4
81.6
83.5
85.6

8.9
8.8
9.4
9.7
10.1

15.0
15.1
17.4
18.8
20.2

8.0
8.2
10.3
11.2
12.5

9.9
9.6
11.2
12.1
13.3

4.9
4.7
6.1
6.7
7.8

.953
1.055
1.000
1.103
1.180

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

10.5
11.0
10.4
10.4
10.7

89.6
91.1
86.9
87.1
86.2

10.6
10.3
10.0
9.4
8.6

22.1
21.8
19.3
18.9
16.5

14.0
13.7
12.4
11.3
9.7

15.4
15.5
13.5
14.0
12.7

9.5
9.2
8.2
8.0
7.2

1.257
1.132
1.143
1.182
1.059

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

10.5
10.0
10.2
11.0
10.9

79.3
78.4
83.5
87.6
83.8

7.8
8.3
8.6
8.0
7.0

12.8
13.5
14.3
14.3
11.0

7.9
8.5
9.1
8.7
6.1

8.8
10.1
11.1
13.8
12.7

4.7
5.8
6.6
9.0
8.6

.865
.941
1.016
.933
.666

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

9.7
9.7
10.2
10.7
11.0

72.9
79.5
81.9
84.4
85.7

9.0
9.3
9.6
9.3
8.9

11.9
12.9
13,7
13.3
12.3

7.7
7.9
8.6
8.2
7.6

9.5
9.5
11.0
11.6
11.6

6.0
5.4
6.8
7.3
7.7

.660
.746
.657
.609
.561

1980
1981*.

10.7
10.7

79.1
78.4

8.6
9.3

10.7
11.1

6.9
8.0

9.6
(6)

6.5
(6)

.531
(6)

Year

1955
1956
1957.
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962.
1963
1964

. .

. .
.

Capac-

ing '

1
Federal Reserve Board index.
2
Cash flow calculated as after-tax
3

Rate of return on
depreciable assets3
Before
tax

After
tax

Rate of return on
stockholders'
equity 4
Before
tax

After
tax

Ratio of
market
value to
replacement
cost of
net
assets5

profits plus capital consumption allowance plus inventory valuation adjustment.
Profits plus capital consumption adjustment and inventory valuation adjustment plus net interest paid divided by the stock of
depreciable assets valued at current replacement cost. In previous Economic Reports, depreciable assets included inventories.
4
Profits corrected for inflation effects divided by net worth (physical capital component valued at current replacement cost).
5
Equity plus interest-bearing debt divided by current replacement cost of net assets.
• Not available.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis), Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Council of
Economic Advisers.




333

TABLE B-89.—Sources and uses of funds, nonfarm nonfmancial corporate business, 1946-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Uses

Sources
External
Credit market funds

Year or
quarter

Total

Internal '

Total

Total

Securities and
mortgages

Loans
and
shortterm
paper

Other 2

Total

Capital
expenditures 3

DiscrepIncrease
ancy
(sources
in
financial less uses)
assets

1946
1947
1948
1949

18.7
27.0
28.9
19.9

8.1
12.9
19.1
19.5

10.6
14.1
9.7
.4

6.9
8.4
6.5
3.1

3.6
5.4
6.7
4.9

3.3
3.0
-.2
-1.8

3.7
5.8
3.3
-2.7

16.8
25.6
25.3
18.3

18.1
17.3
20.3
14.8

«1.4
8.4
5.0
3.5

1.9
1.4
3.6
1.6

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

42.1
36.4
29.9
27.8
29.6

18,0
20.2
21.9
21.7
23.9

24.0
16.2
8.0
6.1
5.7

8.1
10.5
9.5
5.7
6.5

4.2
6.4
8.0
6.0
6.7

3.9
4.1
1.4
= .4
-.2

15.9
5.7
-1.5
~'.B

40.4
37.6
29.2
28.0
27.8

24.0
30.2
24.6
25,7
22.9

16.4
7.4
4.6
2.3
4.9

1.7
^1.2
.6
= .1
1.8

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

52.7
44.9
43.4
41.9
56.3

29.5
29.5
31.5
30.3
36.0

23.2
15.4
11.9
11.7
20.2

10.2
12.8
12.3
10.5
12.3

6.4
7.5
10.4
10.5
8.1

3.7
5.3
1.9
-.0
4.2

13.1
2.5
-.4
1.2
7.9

49.1
40.8
39.1
38.5
51.2

32.6
36.8
34.9
27.7
37.0

16.5
4.0
4.2
10.8
14.2

3.5
4.1
4.3
3.4
5.0

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

48.6
56.3
60.1
68.4
74.9

35.4
36.5
42.8
46.5
51.8

13.2
19.8
17.3
22.0
23.1

12.1
12.9
12.8
12.5
15.1

7.5
10.7
9.4
8.4
8.8

4.6
2.2
3.4
4.0
6.2

1.2
6.9
4.6
9.5
8.0

41.4
51,0
55.5
60.4
64.9

37.5
36.7
43.2
44.7
50.1

3,9
14.2
12.3
15.7
14.8

7.2
5.3
4.6
8.0
10.0

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

93.5
99.2
97.2
117.4
121.6

58.5
62.6
63.6
65.0
64.4

35.0
36.6
33.6
52.4
57.2

20.2
25.3
30.3
31.5
38.4

9.3
15.9
21.6
18.9
20.7

11.0
9.5
8.7
12.6
17.7

14.8
11.2
3.3
20.9
18.8

82.7
91.3
88.5
106.0
115.3

61.0
74,7
72.2
75.4
83.7

21.8
16.6
16.3
30.6
31.6

10.8
7.9
8.7
11.4
6.3

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

108.1
133.7
165.8
208.7
202.9

61.8
73.5
85.0
91.7
85.6

46.3
60.2
80.8
117.0
117.3

41.1
45.6
57.6
72.9
82.8

32.1
41.2
40.7
36.9
39.1

9.0
4.4
16.9
36.0
43.6

5.3
14.6
23.2
44.0
34.5

98.7
122.7
149.1
191.9
190.1

80.0
86.0
99.0
121.5
137.9

18.7
36.7
50.1
70.5
52.2

9.4
11.0
16.7
16.7
12.9

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

167.9
223.4
264.2
320.4
366.7

119.7
134.2
156.1
171.9
190.6

48.3
89.2
108.1
148.5
176.1

41.7
64.3
84.6
93.2
104.8

49.7
48.0
48.1
45.8
39.5

-8.0
16.3
36.5
47.4
65.3

6.5
24.9
23.5
55.3
71.4

150.9
201.4
228.5
290.9
340.6

109.7
148.3
174.1
199.2
220.9

41,2
53.0
54.4
91.7
119.7

17.0
22.0
35.7
29.5
26.2

1980.... ..

336.2

196,8

139.3

106.1

66.5

39.7

33.2

291.7

216.9

74.9

44.5

369.1
362.6
403.2
332.0

188.8
190.7
195.6
187.3

180.3
171.9
207.6
144.8

105.4
113.2
112.9
87.6

38.8
35.3
41.1
42.5

66.6
77.9
71.8
45.0

74.9
58.7
94.7
57.2

343.1
337.1
374.8
307.4

219.6
224.6
223.6
215.9

123.5
112.5
151.2
91.5

26.0
25.6
28.4
24.7

359.6
265.4
325.4
394.3

194.9
192.9
199.2
200.3

164.7
72.5
126.3
194.0

126.7
70.1
93.3
134.3

65.9
62.3
63.5
74.1

60.8
7.8
29.8
60.2

37.9
2.4
33.0
59.6

310.6
224.8
289,1
342.4

224.1
212.0
207.1
224.3

86.5
12.8
82.0
118.2

49.0
40.7
36.3
51.9

340.7
396.6
393.1

222.0
228.2
233.0

118.8
168.4
160.1

78.1
123.5
112.0

62.1
29.0
-4.1

16.0
94.5
116.1

40.7
44.9
48.1

319.4
356.3
362.9

231.6
265.4
276.1

87.8
90.9
86.8

21.4
40.3
30.1

1979:

|
II
III..
IV

.

1980:
1
II
III..
IV
1981:
ill . " .
Ill P.

.

1
Undistributed profits (after inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments), capital consumption allowances, and foreign
branch profits, dividends, and subsidiaries' earnings retained abroad.
2
Consists of tax liabilities, trade debt, and direct foreign investment in the United States.
3
Plant arid equipment, residential structures, inventory investment, and mineral rights from U.S. Government.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




334

TABLE B-90.—Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations, 1939-81
[Billions of dollars]
Current liabilities

Current assets
End of year
or quarter

Total

Cash 1

U.S.
Government 2
securities

Net
Notes
Notes Other working Current
3
Other
and
and
accounts Inven- current Total accounts current capital ratio
liabiltories assets
receivpayable ities
able

All corporations4
SEC series: 5
1939

54.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

22.1

18.0

1.4

30.0

21.9

8.1

24.5

1.817

2.0
4.0
10.1
16.4
20.9
21.1
15.3
14.1
14.8
16.8

24.0
28.0
27.3
26.9
26.5
25.9
30.7
38.3
42.4
43.0

19.8
25.6
27.3
27.6
26.8
26.3
37.6
44.6
48.9
45.3

1.5
1.4
1.3
1.3
1.4
2.4
1.7
1.6
1.6
1.4

32.8
40.7
47.3
51.6
51.7
45.8
51.9
61.5
64.4
60.7

23.2
26.4
26.0
26.3
26.8
25.7
31.6
37.6
39.3
37.5

9.6
14.3
21.3
25.3
24.9
20.1
20.3
23.9
25.0
23.3

27.5
32.3
36.3
42.1
45.6
51.6
56.2
62.1
68.6
72.4

1.838
1.791
1.767
1.818
1.880
2.127
2.083
2.010
2.065
2.193

28.1
30.0
30.8
31.1
33.4
34.6
34.8
34.9
37.4
36.3

19.7
20.7
19.9
21.5
19.2
23.5
19.1
18.6
18.8
22.8

56.8
61.5
67.4
68.5
73.6
88.9
97.7
102.2
109.7
120.6

55.1
64.9
65.8
67.2
65.3
72.8
80.4
82.2
81.9
88.4

1.7
2.1
2.4
2.4
3.1
4.2
5.9
6.7
7.5
9.1

79.8
92.6
96.1
98.9
99.7
121.0
130.5
133.1
136.6
153.1

48.3
54.9
59.3
59.5
61.7
76.1
83.9
86.6
90.4
101.0

31.6
37.8
36.8
39.4
38.0
'45.0
46.6
46.5
46.2
52.0

81.6
86.5
90.1
91.8
94.9
103.0
107.4
111.6
118.7
124.2

2.024
1.934
1.938
1.927
1.952
1.851
1.823
1.838
1.869
1.811

289.0
306.8

1960
1961

2.2

13.1
13.9
17.6
21.6
21.6
21.7
22.8
25.0
25.3
26.5

161.5
179.1
186.2
190.6
194.6
224.0
237.9
244.7
255.3
277.3

..

10,8

60,3
72.9
83.6
93.8
97.2
97.4
108.1
123.6
133.0
133.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

37.2
41.1

20.1
20.0

129.2
139.2

91.8
95.2

10.6
11.4

160.4
171.2

106.8
114.6

53.6
56.6

128.6
135.6

1.802
1.792

Nonfinancial corporations 6
5

SEC series:
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969 .

254.7
269.7
288.2
305.6
336.0
364.0
386.2
426.5
473.6

34.8
37.1
39.8
40.5
42.8
41.9
45.5
48.2
47.9

16.5
16.8
16.7
15.8
14.4
13.0
10.3
11.5
10.6

97.9
103.2
110.5
119.9
134.1
146.6
155.3
173.9
197.0

95.0
100.5
106.8
113.1
126.6
142,8
153.1
166.0
186.4

10.5
12.1
14.4
16.3
18.1
19.7
22.0
26.9
31.6

123.7
132.4
145.5
156.6
178.8
199.4
211.3
244.1
287.8

84.4
88.7
97.0
104.9
121.5
137.5
147.1
168.8
199.2

39.3
43.7
48.5
51.7
57.3
61.9
64.2
75.3
88.6

131.0
137.3
142.7
149.0
157.2
164.6
174.9
182.4
185.7

2.059
2.037
1.981
1.951
1.879
1.825
1.828
1.747
1.646

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

492.3
529.6
599.3
697.8
790.7

50.2
53.3
59.0
66.3
71.1

7.7
11.0
10.6
12.8
12.3

206.1
221.1
248.2
288.5
322.1

193.3
200.4
225.7
263.9
313.6

35.0
43.8
55.8
66.4
71.7

304.9
326.0
375.6
450.9
530.4

211.3
220.5
282.9
340.3
402.3

93.6
105.5
92.7
110.7
128.1

187.4
203.6
223.7
246.9
260.3

1.615
1.625
1.595
1.548
1.491

735.4
759.0
826.8
902.1
1,030.0
1,200.9

73.2
82.1
88.2
95.8
104.5
116.1

11.1
19.0
23.4
17.6
16.3
15.6

265.8
272.1
292.8
324.7
383.8
456.8

319.5
315.9
342.4
374.8
426.9
501.7

65.9
69.9
80.1
89.2
98.5
110.8

453.4
451.6
494.7
549.4
665.5
809.1

269.8
264.2
281.9
313.2
373.7
456.3

183.6
187.4
212.8
236.2
291.7
352.8

282.0
307.4
332.2
352.7
364.6
391.8

1.622
1.681
1.672
1.642
1.548
1.484

1,281.6

121.0

17.3

491.2

525.4

126.7

877.2

498.3

378.9

404.4

1,461

1,234.0
1,232.2
1,254.9
1,281.6

110.5
111.5
113.4
121.0

15.2
14.0
16.4
17.3

470.3
463.4
478.7
491.2

518.9
525.0
524.5
525.4

119.2
118.3
121.9
126.7

836.5
826.0
850.5
877.2

467.7
463.0
477.2
498.3

368.8
363.1
373.4
378.9

397.5
406.2
404.3
404.4

1.475
1.492
1.475
1.461

1,321.2
1,317.4
1,349.2

120.5
118.5
118.3

17.0
17.7
16.0

507.3
507.4
519.7

542.8
540.0
557.2

133.6
133.7
138.1

910.9
908.1
951.1

504.0
500.8
529.1

406.9
407.2
422.0

410.3
409.3
398.1

1.450
1.451
1.419

FTC-FRB series:7
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1980:

1
(1
Ill
IV.

. . .

1981:

1
II
Ill

1

Includes time certificates of deposit.
Includes Federal agency issues.
Total current assets divided by total current liabilities.
4
Excludes banks, savings and loan associations, and insurance companies.
5
Based on data from "Statistics of Income," Department of the Treasury.
6
Excludes banks, savings and loan associations, insurance companies, investment companies, finance companies (personal and
commercial), real estate companies, and security and commodity brokers, dealers, and exchanges.
1
Based on data from "Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing, Mining, and Trade Corporations," Federal Trade Commission. See
"Federal Reserve Bulletin," July 1978, for details regarding the series.
2

3

Note.—SEC series not available after 1974.
Sources-. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Trade Commission, and Securities and Exchange Commission.




335

TABLE B-91.—State and municipal and corporate securities offered, 1934-81
[Millions of dollars]
Corporate securities offered for cash
State
and
Industry of corporate issuer
Type of corporate security
municipal
securities
Total
offered
Electric,
for cash corporate Common Preferred Bonds
CommuniManufac- gas, and Transporand
{princi- offerings
cation
tation 3
turing l
stock
stock
water 2
notes
pal
amounts)

Year or quarter

939

1934.

397

19

6

372

67

Other

133

176

21
103

1939.

1,128

2,164

87

98

1,979

604

1,271

186

1940
1941 .
1942 .
1943
19441 '

1,238
956
524
435
661

2,677
2,667
1,062
1 170
3^202

108

2,386
2,389
917
990
2,670

992
848
539
510
1,061

1,203
1,357
472
477
1,422

324
366
48
161
609

159
96
4
21
109

795
1 157
2|324
2,690
2,907

6011
6*900
6!577
7,078
6,052

34
56
163
397
891
779
614
736

183
167
112
124
369
758
1 127
'762
492
425

4855
4*882
5,036
5,973
4,890

2026
3701
2,742
2,226
1,414

2319
2158
3,257
2,187
2,320

1454
711
286
755
800

571

211
329
293
1,008
946

3,532
3,189
4,401
5,558
6,969

6,362
7,741
9,534
8,898
9,516

811
1,212
1,369
1,326
1,213

631
838
564
489
816

4,920
5,691
7,601
7,083
7,488

1,200
3,122
4,039
2,254
2,268

2,649
2,455
2,675
3,029
3,713

813
494
992
595
778

399
612
760
882
720

1,300
1,058
1,068
2,138
2,037

5,977
5,446
6,958
7,449
7,681

10,240
10,939
12,884
11,558
9,748

2,185
2,301
2,516
1,334
2,027

635
636
411
571
531

7,420
8,002
9,957
9,653
7,190

2,994
3,647
4,234
3,515
2,073

2,464
2,529
3,938
3,804
3,258

893
724
824
824
967

1,132
1,419
1,462
1,424
717

2,757
2,619
2,426
1,991
2,733

7,230
8,360
8,558
10,107
10,544

10,154
13,165
10,705
12,211
13,957

1,664
3,294
1,314
1,011
2,679

409
450
422
343
412

8,081
9,420
8,969
10,856
10,865

2,152
4,077
3,249
3,514
3,046

2,851
3,032
2,825
2,677
2,760

718
694
567
957
982

1,050
1,834
1,303
1,105
2,189

3,383
3,527
2,761
3,957
4,980

11148
11,089
14,288
16,374
11,460

14,782
17,385
24,014
21,261
25,997

1473
1,901
1,927
3,885
7,640

724 12,585
580 14,904
881 21,206
636 16,740
691 17,666

5,414
7,056
11,069
6,958
6,346

2,934
3,666
4,935
5,293
6,715

702
1,494
1,639
1,564
1,779

945
2,003
1,975
1,775
2,172

4,787
3,167
4,396
5,671
8,985

1970 ..
1971,
1972
1973
1974

17,762
24,370
22,941
22,953
22,824

37,451
43,229
39,705
31,680
37,820

7,037
9,485
10,707
7,642
4,050

1,390
3,683
3,371
3,341
2,273

29,023
30,061
25,628
20,700
31,497

10,647
11,651
6,398
4,832
10,511

11,009
11,721
11,314
10,269
12,836

1,253
1,148
860
811
1,005

5,291
5,840
4,836
4,872
3,932

9,252
12,867
16,298
10,897
9,632

1975.,
1976
1977
1978
1979

29,326
33,845
45,060
46,215
42,261

53,632
53,314
54,229
48,212
53,084

7,414
8,305
8,047
7,937
8,709

3,459
2,803
3,916
2,832
3,525

42,759
42,206
42,266
37,443
40,850

18,652
15,496
13,757
11,062
11,563

15,893
14,418
13,704
12,253
13,736

3,637
4,649
3,218
2,696
3,297

4,466
3,562
4,443
3,640
4,694

10,983
15,194
19,113
18,565
19,803

1980 .
1981: First 3
quarters

47,133

78,889

18,996

3,634

56,259

24,398

15,940

3,745

7,385

27,424

32,402

51,161

19,801

1,515

29,845

13,315

10,482

2,202

5,418

19,254

7,836
15,356
12,869
11,072

17,777
25,236
19,043
16,833

5,354
3,462
3,858
6,322

942
807
897
988

11,481
20,967
14,288
9,523

6,591
7,169
6,157
4,481

4,614
4,191
4,016
3,119

893
860
1,175
817

1,324
2,142
2,011
1,908

4,354
10,877
5,684
6,509

9,159
13,361
9,882

15,737
23,640
11,784

5,008
9,634
5,159

811
437
267

9,918
13,569
6,358

5,303
6,057
1,955

2,631
4,806
3,045

792
986
424

1,338
2,273
1,807

5,183
9,519
4,552

..
'. .

1945.
1946
194?' ., ".
1948
1949 .
1950..
1951,
1952
1953.,
1954 .

'..
.!.
. .

.

1955
1956
1957
1958.
1959

. .

1960
..
1961
1962. ...
1963 . .
1964 . .
1965
1966
.
1967
1968 .. .
1969

. .

1980:

1
II
111
IV

.

1981:
1 .
II
III

.
. . .

no

1
Prior
2
Prior
3

"902"

to 1948, also includes extractive, radio broadcasting, airline companies, commercial, and miscellaneous company issues.
to 1948, also includes telephone, street railway, and bus company issues.
Prior to 1948, includes railroad issues only.
Note.—Covers substantially alt new issues of State, municipal, and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in
amounts over $100,000 and with terms to maturity of more than 1 year; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks,
intercorporate transactions, and issues to be sold over an extended period, such as employee-purchase plans. Closed-end investment
company issues are included beginning 1973.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission, "The Commercial and Financial Chronicle," and "The Bond Buyer."




336

TABLE B-92.—Common stock prices and yields, 1949-81
Common stock 5yields
(percent)

Common stock prices1
New York Stock Exchange indexes (Dec. 31, 1965=50) 2

Year or month

Composite
1949

Industrial

Transportation

Utility ' Finance

6.59

15.48

18.40
22.34
24.50
24.73
29.69
40.49
46.62
44.38
46.24
57.38

6.57
6.13
5.80
5.80
4.95
4.08
4.09
4.35
3.97
3.23

13.99
11.82
9.47
10.26
8.57
7.95
7.55
7.89
6.23
5.78

44.45
49.82
65.85
70.49

618.04
691.55
639.76
714.81
834.05
910.88
873.60
879.12
906.00
876.72

55.85
66.27
62.38
69.87
81.37
88.17
85.26
91.93
98.70
97.84

3.47
2.98
3.37
3.17
3.01
3.00
3.40
3.20
3.07
3.24

5.90
4.62
5.82
5.50
5.32
5.59
6.63
5.73
5.67
6.08

37.24
39.53
38.48
37.69
29.79
31.50
36.97
40.92
39.22
38.20

60.00
70.38
78.35
70.12
49.67
47.14
52.94
55.25
56.65
61.42

753.19
884.76
950.71
923.88
759.37
802.49
974.92
894.63
820.23
844.40

83.22
98.29
109.20
107.43
82.85
86.16
102.01
98.20
96.02
103.01

3.83
3.14
2.84
3.06
4.47
4.31
3.77
4.62
5.28
5.47

6.45
5.41
5.50
7.12
11.59
9.15
8.90
10.79
12.03
13.46

60.61
72.61

37.35
38.91

64.25
73.52

891.41
932.92

118.78
128.05

5.26
5.20

12.66

37.08
36.22
33.38
35.29
37.31
38.53
38.77
38.18
38.77
38.44
38.35
37.84

64.22
61.84
54.71
57.32
61.47
65.16
66.76
67.22
69.33
68.29
67.21
67.46

860.74
878.22
803.56
786.33
828.19
869.86
909.79
947.33
946.67
949.17
971.08
945.96

110.87
115.34
104.69
102.97
107.69
114.55
119.83
123.50
126.51
130.22
135.65
133.48

5.41
5.24
5.87
6.05
5.77
5.39

i'4.98

78.67
82.15
84.92
88.00
92.32
90.37

52.61
57.92
51.77
48.62
51.07
54.04
59.14
62.48
65.89
70.76
77.23
75.74

76.24
73.52
76.46
77.60
76.28
76.80

89.23
85.74
89.39
90.57
88.78
88.63

74.43
72.76
77.09
80.63
76.78
76.71

38.53
37.59
37.82
38.34
38,27
39.23

70.04
68.48
72.82
74.59
74.65
79.79

962.13
945.50
987.18
1,004.86
979.52
996.27

74.98
75.24
68.37
69.40
71.49
71.81

86.64
86.72
78.07
78.93
80.86
81.70

74.42
73.27
63.67
65.65
67.68
68.27

38.90
40.22
38.17
38.87
40.73
40.22

74.97
73.76
69.38
72.56
76.47
74.74

947.94
926.25
853.38
853.25
860.44
878.28

132.97
128.40
133.19
134.43
131.73
132.28
129.13
129.63
118.27
119.80
122.92
123.79

30.01
35.37
33.49
3751
43.76
47.39
46.15
50.77
55.37
54.67

46.18
51.97
58.00
57.44

50.26
"53.51
50.58
46.96

45.41
45.43
44.19
42.80

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

45.72
54.22
60.29
57.42
43.84
45.73
54.46
53.69
53.70
58.32

48.03
57.92
65.73
63.08
48.08
50.52
60.44
57.86
58.23
64.76

32.14
44.35
50.17
37.74
31.89
31.10
39.57
41.09
43.50
47.34

1980
1981

68.10
74.02

78.70
85.44

63.74
66.06
59.52
58.47
61.38
65.43
68.56
70.87
73.12
75.17
78.15
76.69

72.67
76.42
68.71
66.31
69.39
74.47

Jufy. .
Aug
Sept
Oct.
Nov
Dec
1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar

t :•:::.•: ......
June
July
Aug

Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

„

Earningsprice
ratio'

15.23

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

way ::. ;...~'."
June

Dividendprice
ratio 8

179.48

10.87
13.08 .'."....'."...
13.81
13.67
16.19
21.54
24.40
23.67
24.56
30.73

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr

Standard
& Poor's
composite
index
(194143=10)*

216.31
257.64
270.76
275.97
333.94
442.72
493.01
475.71
491.66
632.12

9.02

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

1980:

DowJones
industrial
average3

.1. '.'

1

5.20
5.06
4.90
4.80
4.63
4.74
4.80
5.00
4.88
4.86
4.98
5.03

13.08

ii'.67
10.92

10.72
11.48

5.18
5.16
5.69
5.65
5.54
5.57

Averages of daily closing prices, except New York Stock Exchange data through May 1964 are averages of weekly closing prices.
Includes all the stocks (more than 1,500) listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Includes 30 stocks.
4
Includes 500 stocks.
5
Standard & Poor's series, based on 500 stocks in the composite index.
6
Aggregate cash dividends (based on latest known annual rate) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing
prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures; annul data are averages of monthly figures.
7
Quarterly data are ratio of earnings (after taxes) for 4 quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that
quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly ratios.
Note.—All data relate to stocks listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Sources: New York Stock Exchange, Dow-Jones & Co., Inc., and Standard & Poor's Corporation.
2

3




337

TABLE B-93.—Business formation and business failures, 1929-81

Business failures l
Index
of net
business
formation
(1967^
100)

Amount of current liabilities
(millions of dollars)

1929
1933"
1939 s
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952...
1953
1954...
.
1955
1956
... .
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965 ,
1966
1967
1968 . .
1969
1970
.. .
1971
1972 .
1973 ..
1974
1975
. .
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

New
business
incorporations
(number)

Business
failure
rate2

' 104.8"
86.4
90.8
90.1
94.5
92.4
90.8
98.2
95,4
91.4
91.1
98,1
94.5
91.1
92.8
94.7
98.0
99.5
98.9
100,0
107.6
113.5
107.1
109.5
115.5
115.5
111.2
108.8
117.2
126.5
132,9
131.7

132,916
112,897
96,346
85,640
93,092
83,778
92,946
102,706
117,411
139,915
141,163
137,112
150,781
193,067
182,713
181,535
182,057
186,404
197,724
203,897
200,010
206,569
233,635
274,267
264,209
287,577
316,601
329,358
319,149
326,345
375,766
436,170
478,019
524,565

103.9
100.3
69.6
63.0
54.4
44.6
16.4
6.5
4.2
5.2
14.3
20.4
34.4
34.3
30.7
28.7
33.2
42.0
41.6
48.0
51.7
55.9
51.8
57.0
64.4
60.8
56.3
53.2
53.3
51.6
49.0
38.6
37.3
43.8
41.7
38.3
36.4
38.4
42.6
34.8
28.4
23.9
27.8

22,909
19,859
14,768
13,619
11,848
9,405
3,221
1,222
809
1,129
3,474
5,250
9,246
9,162
8,058
7,611
8,862
11,086
10,969
12,686
13,739
14,964
14,053
15,445
17,075
15,782
14,374
13,501
13,514
13,061
12,364
9,636
9,154
10,748
10,326
9,566
9,345
9,915
11,432
9,628
7,919
6,619
7,564

22,165
18,880
14,541
13,400
11,685
9,282
3,155
1,176
759
1,003
3,103
4,853
8,708
8,746
7,626
7,081
8,075
10,226
10,113
11,615
12,547
13,499
12,707
13,650
15,006
13,772
12,192
11,346
11,340
10,833
10,144
7,829
7,192
8,019
7,611
7,040
6,627
6,733
7,504
6,176
4,861
3,712
3,930

744
979
227
219
163
123
66
46
50
126
371
397
538
416
432
530
787
860
856
1,071
1,192
1,465
1,346
1,795
2,069
2,010
2,182
2,155
2,174
2,228
2,220
1,807
1,962
2,729
2,715
2,526
2,718
3,182
3,928
3,452
3,058
2,907
3,634

121.1

Year or month

533,520

42.1

11,742

5,682

Number of failures

Total

Liability size class
Under
$100,000
$100,000 and over

Liability size class

Total

Under
$100,000

$100,000
and over

483.3
457.5
182.5
166.7
136.1
100.8
45.3
31.7
30.2
67.3
204.6
234.6
308.1
248.3
259.5
283.3
394.2
462.6
449.4
562.7
615.3
728.3
692.8
938.6
1,090.1
1,213,6
1,352.6
1,329,2
1,321.7
1,385.7
1,265.2
941.0
1,142.1
1,887.8
1,916.9
2,000.2
2,298.6
3,053.1
4,380.2
3,011.3
3,095.3
2,656.0
2,667.4

261.5
215.5
132.9
119.9
100.7
80.3
30.2
14.5
11.4
15.7
63.7
93.9
161.4
151.2
131.6
1313
167.5
211.4
206.4
239.8
267.1
297.6
278.9
327.2
370,1
346.5
321.0
313.6
321.7
321.5
297.9
241.1
231.3
269.3
271.3
258.8
235.6
256.9
298.6
257.8
208.3
164.7
179.9

221.8
242.0
49.7
46.8
35.4
20.5
15.1
17.1
18.8
51.6
140.9
140.7
146.7
97,1
128.0
151.4
226.6
251.2
243.0
322.9
348.2
430.7
413.9
611.4
720.0
867.1
1,031.6
1,015.6
1,000.0
1,064.1
967,3
699.9
910.8
1,618.4
1,645.6
1,741.5
2,063.0
2,796.3
4,081.6
2,753.4
2,887.0
2,491.3
2,487.5

6,060

4,635.1

272.5

4,362.6

Seasonally adjusted

1980:

Jan
Feb
Mar

fc- •..::•:
June

131.0
129.8
125.8
120.5
117.8
114.8

44,447
44,583
42,615
42,461
41,974
39,746

30.9
27.5
36.2
42.2
39.3
48.7

729
677
925
1,068
975
1,094

363
330
452
525
452
522

366
347
473
543
523
572

243.1
190.8
274.2
428.2
381.1
436.7

17.0
15.5
21.7
24.4
22.0
25.2

226.2
175.3
252.5
403.8
359.2
411.5

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

115.3
117,7
120.6
119.6
119.2
121.3

44,058
43,266
46,488
47,225
46,888
48,297

52.0
45.4
45.0
56.8
39.2
46.8

1,141
1,009
926
1,323
860
1,015

531
486
465
632
403
521

610
523
461
691
457
494

445.7
345.4
1,002.9
359.2
239.3
288.3

26.3
23.2
22.2
30.4
18.9
25.6

419.4
322.2
980.7
328.8
220.4
262,7

118.1
117.2
117.8
118.2
115.5
114.4

45,864
47,662
47,927
49,574
48,907
48,489

48.6
47.8
47.6
61.8
62.0

1,109
1,133
1,212
1,557
1,464

559
546
572
736
730

550
587
640
821
734

421.4
789.2
485.3
536.9
428.2

27.6
25.7
28.0
44.8
35.1

393.8
763.5
457.3
492.1
393.1

113.4
111.9
114.1
112.3

50,433
47,483
48,792
47,859

1981:

Jan
Feb
Mar
May ' ' '. '..
June

July

Aug
Sept
Odt

.

.

1
Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and, beginning 1933, of real estate, insurance,
holding, and financial companies, steamship lines, travel agencies, etc.
2
Failure rate per 10,000 listed enterprises.
3
Series revised; not strictly comparable with earlier data.
Sources: Department of Commerce (Bureau of Economic Analysis) and Dun & Bradstreet, Inc.




338

AGRICULTURE
TABLE B-94.—Farm income 1929-81
[Billions of dollars; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Income of farm operators from farming
Gross farm income

Net farm income

Cash marketing receipts

Year or quarter
Total '

Total

Livestock

and

products

Crops

Value of
inventory
changes2

Production
expenses

Current
dollars

1967
dollars3

1929
1933
1939

13.8
6.9
10.7

11.3
5.3
7.9

6.2
2.8
4.5

5.1
2.5
3.3

-0.1
-.2
.1

7.7
4.4
6.3

6.2
2.6
4.4

12.0
6.6
10.6

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

11.3
14.3
19.9
23.3
24.0
25.4
29.6
32.4
36.5
30.8

8.4
11.1
15.6
19.6
20.5
21.7
24.8
29.6
30.2
27.8

4.9
6.5
9.0
11.5
11.4
12.0
13.8
16.5
17.1
15.4

3.5
4.6
6.5
8.1
9.2
9.7
11.0
13.1
13.1
12.4

.3
.4
1.1
-.1
-.4
-.4
.0
-1.8
1.7
-.9

6.9
7.8
10.0
11.6
12.3
13.1
14.5
17.0
18.8
18.0

4.5
6.5
9.9
11.7
11.7
12.3
15.1
15.4
17.7
12.8

10.7
14.7
20.2
22.7
22.2
22.8
25.8
23.0
24.5
17.9

33.1
38.3
37.8
34.4
34.2
33.5
34.0
34.8
39.0
37.9

28.5
32.9
32.5
31.0
29.8
29.5
30.4
29.7
33.5
33.6

16.1
19.6
18.2
16.9
16.3
16.0
16.4
17.4
19.2
18.9

12.4
13.2
14.3
14.1
13.6
13.5
14.0
12.3
14.2
14:7

.8
1.2
.9
-.6

'.2
-.5
.6
.8
.0

19.5
22.3
22.8
21.5
21.8
22.2
22.7
23.7
25.8
27.2

13.6
15.9
15.0
13.0
12.4
11.3
11.3
11.1
13.2
10.7

18.9
20.5
18.8
16.2
15.4
14.1
13.8
13.1
15.2
12.3

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964.
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

38.9
40.5
42.3
43.4
42.3
46.5
50.5
50.5
51.8
56.4

34.2
35.2
36.5
37.5
37.3
39.4
43.4
42.8
44.2
48.2

19.0
19.5
20.2
20.0
19.9
21.9
25.0
24.4
25.5
28.6

15.3
15.7
16.3
17.4
17.2
17.5
18.4
18.4
18.7
19.6

.4
.3
.6
.6
-.8
1.0
-.1
.7
.1
.1

27.4
28.6
30.3
31.6
31.8
33.7
36.5
38.2
39.5
42.1

11.5
12.0
12.1
11.8
10.5
12.9
14.0
12.3
12.3
14.3

13.0
13.3
13.3
12.8
11.3
13.7
14.4
12.3
11.8
13.0

1970.
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

58.6
62.0
71.0
98.9
98.3
100.3
101.8
108.7
127.5
151.9

50.5
52.9
61.2
87.1
92.4
88.2
94.8
96.3
112.9
131.9

29.6
30.6
35.7
45.9
41.4
43.0
46.1
47.6
59.2
68.5

21.0
22.3
25.5
41.1
51.1
45.1
48.7
48.7
53.7
63.4

.0
1.4
.9
3.4
-1.6
3.4
-2.4
1.0
.6
5.3

44.4
47.4
52.3
65.6
72.2
75.9
83.1
90.3
101.1
119.2

14.2
14.6
18.7
33.3
26.1
24.5
18.7
18.4
26.5
32.7

12.2
12.1
14.9
25.1
17.7
15.2
11.0
10.1
13.5
15.0

1980 4
1981

150.5
164.4

136.4
142.5

67.4
68.8

69.0
73.7

-2.0
4.0

130.7
141.5

19.9
22.9

8.0
8.4

1979:
I
||
Ill
IV

148.2
152.8
152.5
154.1

129.8
132.8
131.4
133.6

70.0
69.5
67.1
67.5

59.8
63.3
64.3
66.1

4.4
5.1
6.6
5.1

114.8
116.9
120.2
124.9

33.4
35.9
32.3
29.2

16.1
16.8
14.6
12.8

II
Ill
IV

149.3
145.8
151.9
155.1

133.0
131.9
139.2
141.5

66.3
64.0
68.9
70.4

66.7
67.9
70.3
71.1

.9
-1.9
-3.7
-3.3

125.9
128.9
132.2
135.6

23.4
16.9
19.7
19.5

9.9
6.9
7.9
7.6

1981:
1
|
|
Ill
IV*

159.2
163.9
167.6
166.8

142.5
143.1
143.8
140.5

69.8
68.9
69.4
67.0

72.7
74.2
74.4
73.5

-.5
3.4
6.0
7.1

139.3
141.0
142.9
142.8

19.9
22.9
24.7
24.0

7.5
8.5
8.9
8.5

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

. . . .

1980:
I

.

'Cash marketing receipts and inventory changes plus Government payments, other farm cash income, and nonmoney income
furnished by farms.
2
Physical changes in end-qf-period inventory of crop and livestock commodities valued at average prices during the period.
3
Income in current dollars divided by the consumer price index (Department of Labor).
4
Forecast.
Source: Department of Agriculture, except as noted.




339

TABLE B-95-—Farm output and productivity indexes, 1929-81
[1967-100]
Farm output
Crops2

Productivity indicators
Farm output per hour of
farm work
Farm
Crop
output proLiveper duction
unit of per
stock
and
total acre* Total Crops
input
products

Total »

Feed
grains

Food
grains

Oil
crops

Livestock
and
products2

62
55

48
44

52
36

11

53

52

56

26

57

53

50

16
16

16

51

Year

15

25

59

59

60

19

20

27

60
64
71
77
73

60
62
68
66
67

62
63
70
64
68

20
21
24
24
24

21
23
25
24
25

27
28
30
31
30

73
71
70
68
72

68
71
68
74
71

67
71
66
75
69

26
27
28
31
32

31
32
33
34
35

75
78
78
79
82

71
71
74
75
76

68
70
72
72
71

34
35
38
39
42

27
29
29
33
33
36
35
39
40
42

37
39
40
41
43

Total1

1929
1933
1939

53
58

64

51

48

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944.. .
1945
1946
1947
1948..
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956..
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961....
1962
1963
1964..
1965..
1966..
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

60
62
70
69
71

67
68
76
71
75

52
56
64
59
62

52
60
63
54
67

70
71
69
76
74

60
65
50
72
63

70
72
85
81
70

74
76
79
79
80

73
77
73
83
79
76
78
81
81
79

64
59
63
61
64

65
64
83
76
67

8
25
29
29
40
41
36
36
34
39
47
45
46
47
46
47
49

82
82
81
87
88

82
82
80
89
89

68
68
74
80
84

63
66
62
91
73

53
60
58
69
64

84
84
83
84
88

78
80
80
87
87

74
76
76
86
85

44
47
51
57
59

45
48
53
61
61

46
48
50
54
58

91
91
92
96
95

93
91
92
96
94

87
78
79
86
75

87
80
74
77
86

68
77
78
81
81

87
91
92
95
97

90
91
92
96
95

89
91
95
97
95

65
67
71
77
81

66
68
72
77
79

62
66
71
77
82

98
95
100
102
102
101
110
110
112
106
114
117
119
122
129
122
134

99
95
100
103
104

88
89
100
95
99
89
116
112
115
93
114
120
126
135
148
123
154

88
88
100
106
98
91
107
102
114
120
142
' 141
132
125
144
157
188

95
97
100
114
116
117
121
131
155
127
153
132
175
182
219
171
199

95
97
100
100
101

100
97
100
102
103
102
110
110
111
105
115
115
114
116
119
115
126

100
97
100
105
106
102
112
115
116
104
112
111
116
121
129
116
132

89
92
100
106
110
115
128
136
140
136
152
162
170
182
198
194
209

90
94
100
106
108
111
126
135
138
128
142
146
157
166
182
165
192

86
93
100
105
112
121
128
137
144
156
160
178
189
204
222
240
244

,

. ..
. . .
. .

1975
1976
1977.. .. .
1978.. .
1979
1980
1981"

100
112
113
119
110
121
121
129
131
144
131
152

105
106
107
105
106
101
105
106
106
109
113
115

1
Farm output measures the annual volume of net farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or
consumption in farm households.
a
Gross production.
3
Includes items not included in groups shown.
4
Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




340

TABLE B-96.—Farm input use, selected inputs, 1929-81
farm population
April1

As
perNumcent
ber
of
(thou- total
sands) population2

Year

Farm employment
(thousands 3

Total

Selected indexes of input use (1967=100)

Crops
harvested
Fam- Hired
(mil- Total
lions of
\
work- work- acres) *
ers
ers

Farm
labor

Feed,
Meseed,
AgriFarm chanical cultural
and
power
livereal
and
8
estate machin- chemi- stock
cals
purery
chases8

102

329

103

38

10

96

321

97

32

6

28

2,727

365
340
331

98

294

102

40

11

41

23.1
22.6
21.4
19.2
17.9

10,979 8,300 2,679
10,669 8,017 2,652
10,504 7,949 2,555
10,446 8,010
2,436
10,219 7,988 2,231

341
344
348
357
362

100
100
103
104
105

293
288
296
292
289

103
102
100
98
98

42
44
51
55
57

13
14
15
17
20

42
45
48
52
52

17.5
18.0
17.9
16.6
16.2

10,000
10,295
10,382
10,363
9,964

7,881 2,119
8,106 2,189
8,115 2,267
8,026 2,337
7,712 2,252

354
352
355
356
360

103
101
101
103
105

271
260
246
240
231

98
102
103
103
104

58
57
64
72
80

20
21
23
25
27

54
53
55
56
61

23,048
21,890
21,748
19,874
19,019

9,926
15.2
9,546
14.2
9,149
13.9
12.5 . 8,864
11.7
8,651

7,597 2,329
7,310 2,236
7,005 2,144
6,775 2,089
6,570 2,081

345
344
349
348
346

104
107
107
106
105

217
218
208
200
192

105
105
105
105
105

84
90
94
96
96

29
32
35
36
37

63
67
69
69
71

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

19,078
18,712
17,656
17,128
16,592

11.5
11.1
10.3
9.8
9.3

8,381
7,852
7,600
7,503
7,342

6,345
5,900
5,660
5,521
5,390

2,036
1,952
1,940
1,982
1,952

340
324
324
324
324

105
103
101
100
102

185
174
162
156
151

105
102
102
100
101

97
98
97
97
98

39
41
41
43
49

72
75
74
79
84

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

15,635
14,803
14,313
13,367
12,954

8.6
8.1
7.7
7.1
6.7

7,057
6,919
6,700
6,518
6,110

5,172
5,029
4,873
4,738
4,506

1,885
1,890
1,827
1,780
1,604

324
302
295
298
298

101
100
100
100
100

145
139
133
-129
122

100
100
100
100
100

97
94
94
93
93

49
53
58
65
71

84
88
90
90
92

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

12,363
11,595
10,875
10,454
10,307

6.4
5.9
5.5
5.2
5.1

5,610
5,214
4,903
4,749
4,596

4,128
3,854
3,650
3,535
3,419

1,482
1,360
1,253
1,213
1,176

298
294
306
300
290

98
98
100
100
99

110
103
100
97
93

99
99
100
99
98

94
96
100
101
101

75
85
100
105
111

93
97
100
97
101

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

9,712
9,425
9,610
9,472
9,264

4.7
4.5
4.6
4.5
4.3

4,523 3,348
4,436 3,275
4,373 3,228
4,337 3,169
4,389 3,075

1,175
1,161
1,146
1,168
1,314

293
305
294
321
328

100
100
100
101
100

89
86
82
80
78

101
99
98
97
95

100
102
101
105
109

115
124
131
136
140

104
111
113
116
107

4.1
3.8

3,026
2,997
2,863
2,689
2,501

1,317
1,377
1,307
1,268
1,273

336
337
344
337
349

100
103
105
105
108

76
73
71
67
66

96
97
99
97
96

113
116
120
126
130

127
145
154
161
184

101
110
112
115
120

2.7 3,705 2,402 1,303
2.5 ' (8) <8)
()
•

352
367

106
106

65
64

96
97

128
127

174
175

119
120

1929

30,580

25.1

12,763

9,360

1933

32,393

25.8

12,739

9,874 2,865

1939

30,840

23.5

11,338 8,611

30,547
30,118
28,914
26,186
24,815

- 24,420
25,403
25,829
24,383
24,194

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

...

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

1975
1976
1977.
1978
1979
1980
1981 P.

.,

..
.

..

8,864
8,253

7
6,194
7
6,501
7

6,241

6,051
5,800

4,342
4,374
4,170
3,957
2.8 3,774

7
2.8
7
2.9
7
7
7

3,403

31

^arm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce, i.e., civilian population living on farms,
regardless of occupation. See also footnote 7.
2
3 Total population of United States, including Armed Forces overseas. Data revised to incorporate results of the 1980 census.
Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data, published by the Department of Agriculture, differ from those on
agricultural employment by the Department of Labor (see Table B-29) because of differences in the method of approach, in concepts
of 4employment, and in time of month for which the data are collected.
6Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits, tree nuts, and farm gardens.
Fertilizer, lime, and pesticides.
6
Nonfarm constant dollar value of feed, seed, and livestock purchases.
7
Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm, farm population (in thousands and as percent of total
population) for 19/7, 1978, and 1979 is 7,806 and 3.5; 8,005 and 3.6; and 7,553 and 3.4, respectively.
6
Report discontinued.
Sources: Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census).




341

TABLE B-97.—Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, 1940-81
[1977 = 100]
Prices received by farmers

All

Year or month

farm
products

1940
1941.
' . ., .
''
1942.
1943.
1944
1945.
1946. ..
1947
1948.
1949
1950.. .
1951..
. ..
1952
1953
1954,
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959..
1960
1961 .,
1962
1963..
1964.,
..
1965.. .
1966
1967.. . .
1968..
1969.. .
1970...
1971
1972..
.,
1973..
1974
1975 ....
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1980:
Jan. .
Feb
Mar
Apr.. .
May. .
June

July
Aue

Sept
Oct.
Nov
Dec

Crops

Livestock
and
products

All
comrnodities,
services,
interest,
taxes,
and
wage
rates *

Prices paid by farmers
Production items
Tractors
and
Fuels
selfFertilTotal2
proand
izer
pelled
energy
machinery

22
27
35
42
43
45
52
60
63
55
56
66
63
56
54
51
50
51
55
53
52
53
53
53
52
54
58
55
56
59

21
25
34
43
46
47
53
61
59
52
54
61
62
55
56
53
54
52
52
51
51
52
54
55
55
53
55
52
52
50

23
29
36
41
41
44
50
60
65
56
58
70
64
56
52
49
47
51
57
53
53
52
53
51
49
54
60
57
60
67

18
19
22
25
26
28
30
35
38
36
37
41
42
40
40
40
40
42
43
43
44
44
45
45
45
47
49
49
51
53

60
62
69
98
105
101
102
100
115
132
134
138

52
56
60
91
117
105
102
100
105
116
125
134

67
67
77
104
94
98
101
100
124
147
144
142

55
58
62
71
81
89
95
100
108
123
138
150

21
22
26
28
30
30
33
39
43
41
42
47
47
44
44
43
43
44
46
46
46
46
47
47
47
48
50
50
50
52
54
57
61
73
83
91
97
100
108
125
138
148

130
131
128
123
125
127
135
140
141
142
145
145

115
115
115
113
117
118
125
130
132
133
141
143

144
146
141
133
133
136
144
150
150
150
149
148

132
134
136
135
135
137
138
139
141
142
143
143

144
144
143
143
142
142
142
137
133
130
130
128

144
144
145
143
142
138
138
129
120
119
121
122

145
144
141
143
141
146
146
145
146
140
138
133

147
148
149
150
150
150
150
151
151
150
150
150

"39"
40
42
44
47

37
37
41
44
44
45
45
50
55
56
54
57
59
59
59
58
57
58
58
57
57
58
58
57
57
57
56
55
52
48

49
51
54
58
68
82
91
100
109
122
136
152

48
50
52
56
92
120
102
100
100
108
134
144

49*
49
50
50
51
52
53
54
57
79
88
93
100
105
137
188
213

132
134
135
135
135
136
137
140
141
142
144
144

127
127
133
133
133
137
137
137
142
142
142
142

123
123
135
135
137
137
137
137
137
136
136
136

171
181
187
190
191
192
192
190
191
190
191
193

126
126
126
126
126
126
128
128
128
128
128
128

146
146
147
149
149
150
148
148
148
147
147
145

142
142
146
146
146
155
155
155
159
159
159
159

136
136
145
145
147
147
147
147
147
144
144
143

201
212
216
217
216
215
214
214
214
214
214
214

140
140
140
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135
135

."'.:.'.'/. '

1981:

Jan ....
Feb ...
Mar.
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct....
Nov
Dec

. . "".

".'.'.

,

Wage
rates3

Addendum:
Average
farm
real
estate
value
per
acre4

7
8
10
14
17
19
20
22
23
22
22
25
26
27
27
27
28
29
30
32
33
33
34
35
36
38
41
44
48
53

7
7
7
8
9
10
It
13
14
14
14
16
18
18
18
19
19
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
29
31
33
35
38
40

57
59
63
69
79
85
93
100
107
117
127
136

42
43
47
53
66
75
86
100
109
125
145
158

145

158

' Includes items used for family living, not shown separately.
2
Includes other items not shown separately.
3
Seasonally adjusted; annual data are averages of seasonally adjusted data.
4
Average for 48 States. Annual data are for March 1 of each year through 1975 and for February 1 beginning 1976. Monthly data
are for first of month.
Source: Department of Agriculture,




342

TABLE B-98.—U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities, 1940-81
[Billions of dollars]
mports

Exports

Year

Food
Feed
Total » grains grains 2

1940 . .
1941
1942

0.5

1943
1944

,

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

12
2.1
2.1

.

2.3
3.1
40

4
4
4
4
4

()

<o'{

.

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959

I960
1961
1962
1963. .
1964.

.

..

,

..

.

.

.3

.9

.3

.6
1.1
1.1
,7
.5

.2

1.0
1.1
.9

.4
5
.5
.4
.6
.6
.6
.7
.8
1.0

1.0

12

.5

2.9
4.0
3.4
2.8
3.1

.2

.

3.2
4.2
4.5
3.9
4.0

.3
.4
.3
'.6

.6
1.0
1.0
.8
.9

4.8
5.0
5.0
5.6
6.3

.5
.5
.8
.8
.9

1.2
1.4
1.3
1.5
1.7

6.2

'.3
.2

1.1

1.4

2

'.2
2
.3

4

.2

.6

1.2
1.3
1.3
1.3

.4
.5
.5

1970
1971. , .
1972
1973
..
1974

7.3
7.7
94
17.7
22.0

1.1
1.0
15
3.5
46

1.4
1.3
18
4.7
54

1.9
2.2
24
4.3
57

.4
.6

1975 . .. .
1976 .
1977
1978 ,
. . .
1979

21.9
23.0
23.6
29.4
34.7

5.2
6.0
4.9
59
7.7

6.2
4.7
3.6
55
6.3

1980
1981

41.2
43.3

9.8
94

7.9
96

..

.8

.7
1.1
.7
.6
.5

3.1
2.9

.2

.3
.5

4.0
5.2
4.5
4.2
4.0

.2

.6

.2

.7
.5
.6

4.0
4.0
4.0
3.9
4.1

.6
.6
.6
.7
.8

3.8
3.7
3.9
4.0
4.1

.2

.4

.9

1.8
1.5
1.4
1.2

.4

.5

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4

1.0
.7
.4

1.3
1.1
.9
.9

!3
.3
'6

.4
.3
.4
.4
.3

.5

6.9
6.4
6.3
6.0

.4
.4
4

4

.3
.3
.2
.3
.3

.8

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969 . .

1.7
2.3
28

!i
.1
"i

.9
.9
.7

1.1

1.5

(

.8

.4

,4

4.1

'.2
.2

.2

'.2

2
.3
.3

.3

.4
.3

-0.8
-1.0
=.1
.6
.3

4
4
4
4
4

<o*

.8
1.2

.1

.7

1.1
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.5

.2
.2
.2
.2
.3

-1.1
-1.1
-1.1
-1.3
-.9

.5
.4
.5
.7
.8

1.4
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.1

.2
.2
.2
.2
.2

=.8
.2
.6

.6
.7
.9
.9
.8

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.2

.2
.2
.2
.2
.2

1.0
1.3
1.2
1.6
2.3

.9

1.1
1.1
1.0
1.2
.9
1,2
1.2
13
1.7
16

.1

2.1
2.4
1.9
1.3
1.1
1.5
1.9
29
9.3
118

1.7
2.9
4.2
4.0
4.2
4.2
2.9

.5
.6
1.0
1.4
1.2

'.5
.6

4.5
4.5
5.0
5.0

.4
.4
.5

1.2
1.1
1.3
1.4

.9
1.0
11
1.6
18

5.8
5.8
65
8.4
102

.5
.6

.9
13

.5
.5
7
.7
9

.8
8

1.6
1.5
18
2.6
22

4.5
5.1
6.6
82
8.9

1.0
1.0
1.5
17
2.2

.9
.9
1.1
14
1.2

1.7
2.4
2.7
3.0
3.8

9.3
11.0
13.4
148
16.7

.8
.9
1.2
15
2.1

1.8
2.3
2.3
31
3.9

9.4
96

2.9
23

1.3
15

3.8
4.2

17.4
168

2.1
26

3.8
35

1
Total includes items not shown separately.
2
Rice, wheat, and wheat flour.
3
includes nuts, fruits, and vegetable preparations.
4

0.1
'.2

AgriCocoa cultural
beans trade
and
prod- balance
ucts

2

.6

.7
.7
.7
.8

.5

Coffee

0.2
'5

.2
.4
3

.3

Crops, Anifruits, mals
and
and
vege- prodtables 3 ucts

o'l
( )

.2
.1

.4
.7
14

0.1

Total

1

1.3
1.7
13
1.5
1.8

ti.1
PI

!i

Animals
and
products
0.1
.3
.8
1.2
1.3

S3

.1

3.6

..

<4)

Tobacco

Cotton

0.2
.1
1
.2
.1

ft
4

3.5

.. .

Oilseeds
and
products

,2

.1
.2
.2
.2
.3
.2
2

'5

.9
.9

.3

l'{

12.6
12.0
10.2
14.6
18.0
23.8
265

Less than $50 million.
Note.—Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce. Agricultural
commodities are defined as (1) nonrnarine food products and (2) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex
processes of manufacture. Export value, at U.S. port of exportation, is based on the selling price and includes inland freight,
insurance, and other charges to the port. Import value, defined generally as the market value in the foreign country, excludes import
duties, ocean freight, and marine insurance.
Source.- Department of Agriculture.




343

TABLE B-99.—Balance sheet of the farming sector, 1929-82
[Billions of dollars]
Claims

Assets
Financial assets

Other physical assets
Beginning of
year

Total

Household DeposInvestLive- 1 MachinReal
U.S.
its
estate stock ery and Crops2 equip- and savings ments in
ment
coopermotor
cur- bonds atives
and
vehicles
furnish- rency
ings

^

Total

Real
estate
debt

Other
debt

Proprietors'
equities

.

1929

48.0

6.6

3.2

9.8

1933

30.8

3.0

2.5

8.5

1939

34.1

5.1

3.2

53.0
54.8
62.9
736
844

33.6
34.4
37.5
416
48.2

5.1
5.3
7.1
96
9.7

3.1
3.3
4.0
4.9
5.4

2.7
3.0
3.9
5.1
6.1

4.2
4.1
4.8
4.8
4.7

3.2
3.5
4.2
5.5
6.6

0.3
.3
.5
1.1
2.2

0.8

.9
.9
1.0
1.1

53.0
54.8
62.9
73.6
84.0

6.6
6.5
6.4
6.0
5.4

3.4
3.9
4.1
3.9
3.5

43.0
44.4
52.4
63.7
75.1

93.8
102,9
115.9
127.4
134.6

53.9
61.0
68.5
73.7
76.6

9.0
9.7
11.9
13.2
14.4

6.5
5.4
5.3
7.4
10.1

6.7
6.3
7.1
9.0
8.5

5.2
5.5
7.2
8.1
8.9

7.9
9.4
10.2
9.9
9.6

3.4
4.2
4.2
4.4
4.6

1.2
1.4
1.5
1.7
1.9

93.8
102.9
115.9
127.4
134.6

4.9
4.7
4.9
5.1
5.3

3.4
3.2
3.5
4.1
6.1

85.5
95.0
107.4
118.1
123.2

1950. . . .
1951
1952
1953
1954 ,.

134.5
154.3
170.1
167.6
164.6

77.6
89.5
98.4
100.1
98.7

12.9
17.1
19.5
14.8
11.8

12.2
14.1
16.7
17.4
18.4

7.6
7.9
8.8
9.0
9.2

8.4
9.6
10.1
9.6
9.5

9.1
9.1
9.4
9.4
9.4

4.7
4.7
4,7
4.6
4.7

2.0
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9

134.5
154.3
170.1
167.6
164.6

5.6
6.1
6.7
7.2
7.7

6.8
6.9
8.0
8.9
9.2

122.1
141.3
155.4
151.5
147.7

1955.
1956
1957. . . .
1958 .
. ..
1959.

168.8
173.6
182.8
191.3
208.4

102.2
107.5
115.7
121.8
131.1

11.2
10.6
11.0
13.9
17.7

18.6
19.3
20.2
20.1
21.8

9.6
8.3
8.3
7.6
9.3

9.7
10.0
9.6
9.6
9.4

9.4
9.5
9.4
9.5
10.0

5.0
5.2
5.1
5.1
5.2

3.1
3.2
3.5
3.7
3.9

168.8
173.6
182.8
191.3
208,4

8,2
9,0
9.8
10.4
11.1

9.5
9.8
9.5
10.0
12.6

151.2
154.8
163.5
170.9
184.8

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

210.2
210.8
219.3
227.7
235.8

137.2
1385
144.5
150.2
158.6

15.3
15.6
16.4
17.3
15.9

22.7
22.2
22.5
23.5
23.9

7.7
8.0
8.8
9.3
9.8

9.2
8.7
8.9
8.8
8.8

9.2
87
8.8
9.2
9.2

4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.2

4.2
4.5
4.9
5,0
5,4

210.2
210.8
219.3
227.7
235.8

12.0
12.8
13.9
15.2
16.8

12.8
13.4
14.6
16.2
17.6

185.4
184.6
190.8
196.3
201.4

1965
1966 .. . .
1967 . .
1968.
1969 . .

243.8
260.8
274.2
288.0
302.8

167.5
179.2
189.1
199.7
209.2

14.5
17.6
19.0
18.9
20.2

24.8
26.0
27.4
29.8
31.3

9.2
9.7
10.0
9.6
10.6

8.4
8.4
8.3
8.8
9.4

9.6
10.0
10.3
10.9
11.5

4.2
4.0
3.9
3.8
3.8

5.6
5.9
6.2
6,5
6.8

243.8
260.8
274.2
288.0
302.8

18.9
21.2
23,1
25.1
27.4

17.9
19.5
20.9
22.3
23.1

207.0
220.1
230.1
240.6
252.3

1970.
1971
1972
1973 . . .
1974

314.9
326.0
351.8
394.8
478.5

215.8
223.2
239.6
267.3
327.7

23.5
23.7
27.3
34.1
42.4

32.3
34.4
36.6
39.3
44.2

10.9
10.7
11.8
14.5
22.1

9.6
10.0
10.8
11.9
12.3

11.9
12.4
13.2
14.0
14.9

3.7
3.6
3.7
4.0
4.1

7.2
8.0
8.8
9,7
10.8

314.9
326.0
351.8
394.8
478.5

29.2
30.3
32.2
35.8
41.3

23.8
24.2
26.9
29.5
32.8

261.9
271.5
292.7
329.5
404.4

503.8
576.3
664.0
737.1
872.9

359.8
418.2
496.4
554.6
655.1

24.5
29.4
29.0
31.9
51.3

54.7
64.0
71.0
76.9
85.1

23.3
21.3
22.1
24.8
28.0

12.6
12.8
13.7
15.5
18.0

14.0
14.5
14.8
15.2
15.5

3.8
3.9
3.9
3.9
4.2

11.0
12.2
13.1
14.3
15.7

503.8
576.3
664.0
737.1
872.9

46.3
51.1
56.5
63.7
70.8

35.5
39.8
46.1
55.6
65.3

421.9
485.5
561,4
617.8
736.8

1,004.4
1,090.3
1,176.5

756.2
828.7
894.5

61.4
60.9
63.0

96.7
102.3
109.5

33.5
36.4
42.8

19.4
22.0
23.7

15.9
16.2
16.6

4.0
3.8
3.9

17.3
20.0
22.0

1,004.4
1,090.3
1,176.5

82.7
92.0
103.4

75.2
82.6
91.1

846.5
915.7
982.1

1940.. . .
1941 .
1942
1943
1944

1945
1946. ..
1947
1948
1949

. ..

.

.

.

1975
1976 3
1977
1978
1979.
1980
1981 .
1982 «

.

6.8

..j with 1961, horses and mules are excluded.

Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms
3
4 Beginning 1977, data are for farms included in the new farm
Forecast.
Note, Beginning 1960, data include Alaska and Hawaii.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans.
definition, that is, places with sales of $1,000 or more annually.

344

INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS
TABLE B-100.—Exchange rates, 1967-81
[Cents per unit of foreign currency, except as noted]
Year and month

Belgian franc

Canadian
dollar

French franc

German mark

Italian lira

Japanese yen

March 1973,,

2.5378

100.333
92.689
92.801
92.855

35.548
25.084
25.048
25.491

0.38190

2.0125
2.0026
1.9942

22.191
20.323
20.191
19.302

0.17604

1967
1968
1969

.16022
.16042
.15940

.27613
.27735
.27903

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

2.0139
2.0598
2.2716
2.5761
2.5713

95.802
99.021
100.937
99.977
102.257

18.087
18.148
19.825
22.536
20.805

27.424
28.768
31.364
37.758
38.723

.15945
.16174
.17132
.17192
.15372

.27921
.28779
.32995
.36915
.34302

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

2.7253
2.5921
2.7911
3.1809
3.4098

98.297
101.410
94.112
87.729
85.386

23.354
20.942
20.344
22.218
23.504

40.729
39.737
43.079
49.867
54.561

.15338
.12044
.11328
.11782
.12035

.33705
.33741
.37342
.47981
.45834

1980 .
1981

3.4247
2.7007

85.530
83.408

23.694
18.489

55.089
44.362

.11694
.08842

.44311
.45432

3.4768
3.4417
3.5164
3.2625

85.904
85.442
86.302
84.461

24.117
23.738
24.273
22.643

56.409
55.241
56.332
52.387

.12136
.11750
.11856
.11048

.41074
.43213
.45514
.47484

2.9633
2.6899
2.5157
2.6465

83.784
83.427
82.547
83.918

20.609
18.484
17.247
17.682

48.009
43.958
41.170
44.508

.09995
.08827
.08232
.08352

.48644
.45491
.43173
.44572

1980:

1
f|
ill ....
IV

1981:

1
II
IN
IV

Netherlands
guilder

Swedish krona

Swiss franc

United Kingdom
pound

Multilateral trade-weighted value of
the U.S. dollar (March 1973 = 100)
Real 1

Nominal

March 1973

34.834

1967
1968
1969

27.759
27.626
27.592

22.582
19.373
19.349
19.342

23.104
23.169
23.186

247.24
275.04
239.35
239.01

100.0
120.0
122.1
122.4

1970.
1971
1972 „ .
1973
1974

27.651
28.650
31.153
35.977
37.267

19.282
19.592
21.022
22.970
22.563

23.199
24.325
26.193
31.700
33.688

239.59
244.42
250.08
245.10
234.03

121.1
117.8
109.1
99.1
101.4

98.8
99.2

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

39.632
37.846
40.752
46.284
49.843

24.141
22.957
22.383
22.139
23.323

38.743
40.013
41.714
56.283
60.121

222.16
180.48
174.49
191.84
212.24

98.5
105.6
103.3
92.4
88.1

93.9
97.3
93.1
84.2
83.2

1980
1981

50.369
40.191

23.647
19.860

59.697
51.025

232.58
202.43

87.4
102.9

84.8
100.7

51.228
50.274
51.680
48.295

23.698
23.533
24.088
23.269

60.123
59.398
61.247
58.050

225.26
228.24
238.16
238.55

87.4
87.8
85.4
89.0

84.2
85.3
82.9
86.8

43.864
39.567
37.057
40.500

21.976
20.520
18.866
18.096

52.817
49.097
47.756
54.726

230.96
207.92
183.62
188.22

94.5
103.1
110.1
105.3

92.3
100.3
108.1
102.2

1980:

I
II
II!., .
IV

1981:
1 ..
||

III
IV

31.084

1
Adjusted by the consumer price index for all urban consumers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




345

100.0

TABLE B-101.—U.S. international transactions, 1946-81
[Millions of dollars; quarterly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
Investment income 3

Merchandise » 2

Year or
quarter
Exports

Imports

Net

Receipts

Net

Payments

Net (rave!
Balance Remittances,
Net
pensions
and
Other
military transpor- services, on goods and other Balance on
current 4
and
transac- tation
net» services 1 4 unilateral account '
tions
transfers '
receipts
4,885
8,992
2,417
873

1946
1947
1948
1949

11,764
16,097
13,265
12,213

-5,067
-5,973
-7,557
-6,874

6,697
10,124
5,708
5,339

772
1,102
1,921
1,831

-212
-245
-437
--476

560
857
1,484
1,355

=493
-455
-799
-621

733
946
374
230

310
145
175
208

7,807
11,617
6,942
6,511

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

10,203
14,243
13,449
12,412
12,929

-9,081
-11,176
-10,838
-10,975
-10,353

1,122
3,067
2,611
1,437
2,576

2,068
2,633
2,751
2,736
2,929

-559
-583
-555
-624
-582

1,509
2,050
2,196
2,112
2,347

-576
-1,270
-2,054
-2,423
-2,460

= 120
298
83
=238
= 269

242
254
309
307
305

2,177
4,399
3,145
1,195
2,499

-4,017 -1,840
884
=3,515
614
=2,531
= 2,481 -1,286
-2,280
219

1955
1956"
1957
1958
1959.,.

14,424 -11,527
17,556 -12,803
19,562 "13,291
16,414 -12,952
16,458 -15,310

2,897
4,753
6,271
3,462
1,148

3,406
3,837
4,180
3,790
4,132

-676
-735
-796
-825
-1,061

2,730
3,102
3,384
2,965
3,071

-2,701
-2,788
-2,841
-3,135
-2,805

= 297
= 361
-189
-633
-821

299
447
482
486
573

2,928
5,153
7,107
3,145
1,166

-2,498
430
2,730
= 2,423
=2,345
4,762
= 2,361
784
-2,448 -1,282

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964

19,650
20,108
20,781
22,272
25,501

= 14,758
-14,537
-16,260
-17,048
-18,700

4,892
5,571
4,521
5,224
6,801

4,616
4,999
5,618
6,157
6,824

-1,237
-1,245
-1,324
-1,561
-1,784

579
3,379 -2,752 =964
3,754 =2,596 -978
594
4,294 = 2,449 -1,152
809
4,596 -2,304 -1,309
960
5,040 -2,133 -1,146 1,041

5,132
6,346
6,025
7,167
9,604

=2,308
= 2,524
-2,638
-2,754
^2,781

2,824
3,822
3,387
4,414
6,823

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969.

26,461
29,310
30,666
33,626
36,414

=21,510
-25,493
-26,866
-32,991
-35,807

4,951 7,437
3,817 7,528
3,800 8,020
635 9,368
607 10,912

-2,088
-2,481
-2,747
-3,378
-4,869

5,349 -2,122 = 1,280
5,047 -2,935 = 1,331
5,273 -3,226 4,750
5,990 -3,143 -1,548
6,043 -3,328 -1,763

1,387
1,365
1,612
1,630
1,833

8,285
5,963
5,708
3,563
3,393

=2,854
= 2,932
--3,125
•=2,952
-2,994

5,432
3,031
2,583
611
399

1970...
1971
1972, .
1973,
1974...

2,603 11,747
42,469 -39,866
43,319 -45,579 = 2,260 12,707
49,381 -55,797 = 6,416 14,764
911 21,808
71,410 -70,499
98,306 = 103,649 -5,343 27,587

1975.
1976
1977
1978
1979

107,088
114,745
120,816
142,054
184,473

1980

223,966 -249,308 -25,342 75,936

1979:

I
j|
III
IV

1980:

1
II
ill
IV

1981:

1

II
III".

-98,041
= 124,051
= 151,689
= 175,813
= 211,819

9,047
-9,306
= 30,873
=33,759
-27,346

25,351
29,286
32,179
43,265
66,699

-2,922
-2,625
-4,525
-5,638

-5,516 6,231 = 3,354
- 5,436 7,271 = 2,893
-6,572 8,192 =3,420
-9,655 12,153 = 2,070
-12,084 15,503 -1,653

-2,038
-2,345
-3,063
-3,158
= 3,184

2,180
2,495
2,766
3,184
3,986

5,625
2,269
-1,941
11,021
9,309

=3,294
2,331
=3,701 -1,433
-3,854 =5,795
7,140
= 3,881
5
2,124
= 7,186

12,787
-746
15,975
559
1,528
17,962
21,400
738
33,463 -1,947

-2,792
-2,558
-3,293
-3,178
-2,622

4,598
4,711
5,182
5,792
5,460

22,893
9,382
-9,493
-9,008
7,008

^4,613 18,280
- 4,998
4,384
-4,617 -14,110
-5,067 44,075
1,414
-5,593

-798 6,674

10,779

-.7,056

3,723

1,228
679
1,052
-189

= 12,564
= 13,311
= 14,217
=21,865
=33,236

=43,174 32,762

-2,515

-46,766
51 117
-54,210
- 59,726

=4,730
=7283
-6|974
-=8,359

14,111
15582
18',055
18,952

-7,351
—7948
-8>34
-9,203

6,760
7 634
9!321
9,749

-134
—324
= 565
-923

-678
— 677
=722
-545

1,322
1353
l',393
1,390

2,539
702
2,453
1,312

-1,311
= 1381
-l',401
-1,501

54,898 -65,024
55,667 -62,411
56,252 -59,154
57,149 -62,719

-10,126
=6,744
-2,902
-5,570

20,465
16,860
18,850
19,764

-10,629
= 10,342
-10,697
-11,507

9,836
6,518
8,153
8,257

-918
-427
-455
-715

-532
-152
-38
-76

1,523
1,592
1,719
1,838

-217
787
6,478
3,734

-1,878 = 2,095
-1,332
-545
-1,503
4,975
-2,344
1,390

-65,775 =4,677 21,566
-67,387 -6,910 22,399
- 65,079 =7,042 23,610

-12,513
-13,666
-14,120

9,053
8,733
9,490

~568
-698
= 72

-668 1,650
=245 1,780
-66 1,684

4,790
2,660
3,994

-1,527
-1,518
-1,894

42,036
43834
47J236
51,367

61,098
60,477
58,037

1
Excludes
2
Adjusted
a

3,263
1,142
2,100

military.
from Census data for differences in valuation, coverage, and timing.
Fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States are excluded from
investment income and included in other services, net.
4
In concept, balance on goods and services is equal to net exports and imports in the national income and product accounts (and
the sum of balance on current account and allocations of special drawing rights is equal to net foreign investment in the accounts),
although the series differ because of different handling of certain items {gold, extraordinary military shipments, etc,), revisions, etc.
(See next page for continuation of table,)




346

TABLE B-101.—U.S. international transactions, 1946-81—Continued
[Millions of dollars; quarterly data seasonally adjusted, except as noted]
U.S. assets abroad, net
[increase/capital outf low (-)]
Year or quarter
Total

1946
1947.. .
1948
1949... .

U.S. official Other U.S,
Government
reserve
assets
assets8

Foreign assets in the U.S., net
[increase/capital inflow { + )]

U.S.

private
assets

Total

Foreign
official
assets

Other
foreign
assets

Allocations
of special
drawing
rights
(SDRs)

Statistical discrepancy
Total (sum

of the

items with
sign
reversed)

Of which:
Seasonal
adjustment
discrepancy

623
-3,315
-1,736
-266

1950
1951
1952
1953
1954

Z'". .. .!

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959.. . .

1,758
-33
-415
1,256
480

••

182
-869
-1,165
2,292
1,035

... .

-4,099
-5,538
-4,174
-7,270
-9,560

2,145
607
1,535
378
171

-1,100
-910
-1,085
-1,662
-1,680

-5,144
-5,235
-4,623
-5,986
-8,050

2,294
2,705
1,911
3,217
3,643

1,473
765
1,270
1,986
1,660

821
1,939
641
1,231
1,983

-1,124
-360
-907

-5,716
-7,321
-9,757
-10,977
-11,585

1,225
570
53
-870
-1,179

-1,605
-1,543
-2,423
-2,274
-2,200

-5,336
-6,347
-7,386
-7,833
-8,206

742
3,661
7,379
9,928
12,702

134
-672
3,451
-774
-1,301

607
4,333
3,928
10,703
14,002

-458
629
-205
438
-1,516

ZZZZ

-9,337
-12,475
14497
-22,874
-34,745

2,481
2,349
-4
158
-1,467

-1,589
-1,884
-1,568
-2,644
5
366

-10,229
=-12,940
-12,925
-20,388
-33,643

6,359
22,970
21,461
18,388
34,241

6,908
26,879
10,475
6,026
10,546

-550
-3,909
10,986
12,362
23,696

-219
-9,779
-1,879
-2,654
-1,620

zzzz

1975
1976 ..
1977.
1978
1979

-39,703
-51,269
-34,785
-61,070
-62,639

-849
-2,558
-375
732
-1,133

-3,474
-4,214
-3,693
-4,644
-3,767

-35,380
-44,498
-30,717
-57,159
-57,739

15,670
36,518
51,218
63,748
38,946

7,027
17,693
36,816
33,561
-13,757

8,643
18,826
14,403
30,187
52,703

7,139"

5,753
10,367
-2,323
11,398
21,140

1980....

-84,776

-8,155

-5,165

-71,456

50,261

15,492

34,769

1,152

29,640

-8,057
-15,639
-24,942
-14,003

-3,585
322
2,779
-649

-1,093
-971
-778
-925

-3,379
-14,990
26943
12*429

2,259
7,007
24,345
5,335

= 8,688
=9,785
6,011
-1,295

10,948
16,792
18,334
6,630

1,139

3,430
9,309
=455
8,857

=42
1,165
-3,122
2,000

-12,639
24837
-19,302
-27,995

-3,268
502
-1,109
-4,279

-1,456
-1,187
-1,427
-1,094

-7,915
24152
-16,766
-22,622

7,509
7,232
11,651
23,870

-7,462
7,557
7,686
7,711

14,971
-326
3,965
16,158

1,152

6,073
18,151
2,676
2,736

-206
1,355
-3,291
2,139

-22,397
-21,971
-18,004

-4,529
-905
-4

-1,395
-1,485
-1,242

-16,473
-19,581
-16,758

7,140
12,888
15,056

5,503
-2,779
-5,847

1,637
15,667
20,903

1,093

10,901
7,941
848

-340
1,222
=2,592

1960
1961,.
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

...

.

1970
1971
1972
1973..
1974

. ..

.

1979:
II .."
Ill
IV. ..

1980
if*
Ill
IV

1981
if.....
lllp..

.

.

6
9

-1,019

989

867
717
710

Includes extraordinary U.S. Government transactions with India.
Consists of gold, special drawing rights, convertible currencies, and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund
(IMF).
Note.—Quarterly data for U.S. official reserve assets and foreign assets in the United States are not seasonally adjusted.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




347

TABLE B-102.—U,S. merchandise exports and imports by principal end-use category, 1965-81
[Millions of dollars; quarterly data seasonally adjusted]
Exports

Imports

Nonagricuitural

Nonpetroleum

Year or quarter
Total

Agricultural
Total

Capital
goods,
except
automotive

Total
Other
goods

Petroleum
and
products

Total

Industrial
supplies
and
materials

Other
goods

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

26,461
29,310
30,666
33626
36,414

6,305
6,949
6453
6297
6,096

20,156
22,361
24,213
27329
30,318

8,052
8,907
9,934
11 111
12,369

12,104
13,454
14,279
16218
17,949

21,510
25,493
26866
32*991
35,807

2,034
2,078
2,091
2384
2,649

19,476
23,415
24,775
30607
33458

9,123
10,235
9956
12,027
11 798

10,353
13,180
14,819
18580
2l'360

1970
1971
1972
19731
1974

42,469
43,319
49,381
71,410
98,306

7,374
7,831
9,513
17,978
22,412

35,095
35,488
39,868
53,432
75,894

14,659
15,372
16,914
21,999
30,878

20,436
20,116
22,954
31,433
45,016

39,866
45,579
55,797
70,499
103,649

2,927
3,650
4,650
8,415
26,609

36,939
41,929
51,147
62,084
77,040

12,416
13,794
16,308
19,634
27,819

24,523
28,135
34,839
42,450
49,221

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

107,088
114,745
120,816
142,054
184,473

22,242
23,381
24,331
29,902
35,594

84,846
91,364
96,485
112,152
148,879

36,639
39,112
39,767
46,470
58,842

48,207
52,252
56,718
65,682
90,037

98,041
124,051
151,689
175,813
211,819

27,017
34,573
44,983
42,312
60,482

71,024
89,478
106,706
133,501
151,337

24,013
29,759
35,670
42,542
49,880

47,011
59,719
71,036
90,959
101,457

1980

223,966

42,232

181,734

74,077

107,657

249,308

78,919

170,389

55,603

114,786

42,036
43,834
47,236
51,367

7650
8,267
9,323
10,354

34386
35,567
37,913
41,013

13792
14,174
15,248
15,628

20594
21,393
22,665
25,385

46766
51,117
54,210
59,726

11459
13,560
16,366
19,097

35307
37i557
37,844
40,629

11095
12,419
12,493
13,873

24212
251138
25,351
26,756

54,898
55,667
56,252
57,149

10,274
10,055
10,834
11,069

44,624
45,612
45,418
46,080

17,068
18,482
19,204
19,323

27,556
27,130
26,214
26,757

65,024
62,411
59,154
62,719

21,174
21,029
17,387
19,329

43,850
41,382
41,767
43,390

15,471
13,712
13,122
13,298

28,379
27,670
28,645
30,092

61,098
60,477
58,037

12,731
11,075
10,044

48,367
49,402
47,993

20,198
21,265
20,484

28,169
28,137
27,509

65,775
67,387
65,079

20,819
21,201
17,946

44,956
46,186
47,133

14,681
15,233
15,377

30,275
30,953
31,756

"™. .".

1979;

1
I I . . ..
lit
IV

1980:

1
II...
Ill
IV

1981:

|
II
Ill"

Note.—Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military shipments.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




348

TABLE B-103.—U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area, 1973-81
[Millions of dollars]
Item

Exports
Industrial countries
Canada
Japan
Western Europe
Australia, New Zealand,
and South Africa
Other countries, except Eastern Europe
OPEC 23

Other

Eastern Europe
Imports
Industrial countries
Canada
Japan
Western Europe
Australia, New Zealand,
and South Africa
Other countries, except Eastern Europe
OPEC2....
3
Other

1973

1974

1980

1981 first
3 quarters
at annual
rate1

1976

1977

1978

1979

114,745

1975

120,816

142,054

184,473

223,966

239,483

71,410

98,306 107,088

48,529

64,487

66,496

72,335

76,970

87,948

115,930i

136,915

143,173

16,710
8,356
21216

21842
10,724
28 164

23,537
9,567
29,884

26,336
10,196
31,883

28,533
10,566
34094

31,229
12,960
39 546

38,690
17,629
54177

41389
20,806
67603

46653
22,056
65516

2,247

3,757

3,508

3,920

3,777

4,213

5,434

7,117

8,948

20,834

32,082

37,343

38,287

40,951

50,213

62,630

82,908

91,936

11,561
26,726

12,877
28,074

14,846
35,367

14,537
48,093

17 364
65,544

21119
70,817

17,420

25,863

6219

9,956
27,387

2047

1737

3249

3414

4,123
4

3,893

2,895
4

4

211,819

4373

4143

5913
4

4

249,308

4

70,499 103 649

98,041

48,985

61,092

55,973

67,488

79,228

99,151

112,600

127,439

142,420

17,694
9665
19,774

22392
12414
24267

21,710
11257
20[764

26,475
15,531
23,003

29,645
18,565
28,226

33,552
24 541
36,618

39,020
26261
41,826

42,434
31217
47,255

47389
36547
52,821

1,852

2,019

2,242

2,479

2,792

4,440

5,493

6,533

5,663

20,913

41,580

41,334

55,379

70,680

74,402

96,137

119,138

120,278

5,097
15,816

17,234
24,346

18,897
22,437

27,409
27,970

35,778
34,902

33,286
41,116

45,039
51,098

55,602
63,536

51,779
68,499

601

977

734

875

1127

1508

1896

1444

1624

Eastern Europe

124,051

1
Preliminary; seasonally adjusted.
2
Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria,
3
Latin American Republics, other Western Hemisphere, and other
4

151,689

175,813

264 321

Qatar, Saudi-Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
countries in Asia and Africa, less members of OPEC.
For 1976-80, imports of nonmonetary gold from International Monetary Fund are included in total but, not in area detail.
Note.—Data are on an international transactions basis and exclude military.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




349

TABLE B-104.—U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups, 1958-81
[Millions of dollars; monthly data seasonally adjusted]
Merchandise exports1
Year or
month

General imports8

Total
Food,
domesFood, Crude
bever- materi- Manubevertic and
foreign 2 Total2 a ages, als and factured Total3 ages,
and
4
exports
and
goods5
tobacco
tobacco fuels
F.a.s. value 8

1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974

16,375
16,426
19,659
20,226
20,986
» 22,467
25,832
26,742
29,490
31,030
34,063
37,332
42,659
43,549
49,199
70,823
97,998

Merchandise trade balance

Merchandise imports

Domestic exports

Crude Manumateri- factured
als and goods8
fuels 4

Total,
c.i.f.
value 7

Exports Exports Exports
less
less
less
imports, imports, imports,
customs f.a.s.
ci.f.
value

Customs value

16,211 2,688 3,052 11,547 13,392 3,550 4,164
16,243 2,852 2,996 11,179 15,690 3,580 4,615
19,459 3,167 3,942 12,583 15,073 3,392 4,418
19,982 3,466 3,864 12,784 14,761 3,455 4,334
20,717 3,743 3,356 13,668 16,464 3,674 4,691
22,182 4,188 3,775 14.297 17,207 3,863 4,755
25,479 4,637 4,337 16,529 18,749 4,022 5,029
26,399 4,519 4,273 17,433 21,427 4,013 5,440
29,054 5,186 4,404 19,218 25,618 4,590 5,718
30,646 4,710 4,726 20,844 26,889 4,701 5,367
33,626 4,592 • 4,865 23,818 33,226 5,365 6,031
36,788 4,446 5,006 26,785 36,043 5,308 6,391
42,025 5,058 6,692 29,344 39,951 6,230 6,542
42,911 5,076 6,441 30,443 45,563 6,404 7,268
48,399 6,569 7,091 33,740 55,583 7,379 8,838
69,730 12,938 10,735 44,731 69,476 9,235 13,446
96,634 15,233 15,802 63,523 101,394 10,701 31,842

5,311
2,983
7,117 I...".' ..
736
6,863
4,586
6,537
5,465
7,649
4,522
8,070
5,260
9,106
7,083
11,244
5,315
14,446
3872
15,756 28,745
4,141
20,624 35,320
837
23,011 38,241
1,289
25,907 42,429
2,708
30,414 48,342 -2,014
37,767 58,862 - 6,384
45,001 73,573
1,348
56,202 108,392 =3,396

2,283
-1,257
-909
230
=4,793
-9,663
2,752
-10,395

F.a.s. value 8
1974*
1975*
1976*
1977*
1978*
1979*

98,181
107,652
115,223
121,232
143,681
181,860

96,634
106,100
113,476
118,944
141,040
178,426

1980*
1981*

220,630 216,436 30,407 33,719 143,891 244,871 18,551 93,973 125,122 256,984
233,677 228,899 33,206 33,022 154,283 261,305 18,376 93,090 142,544 273,352

15,233
16,793
17,234
15,963
20,604
24,587

15,802
15,197
16,095
18,579
20,957
28,222

63,523
70,951
77,241
80,151
94,473
116,587

102,559
98,503
123,477
150,390
174,757
209,458

10,709
9,923
11,891
14,227
15,743
17,735

32,064
32,596
41,474
53,554
51,901
71,390

55,223
51,080
64,775
76,554
100,317
112,226

110,468
105,880
132,498
160,411
186,045
222,228

--4.378
9,149
-8,254
-29,158
-31,076
-27,599

12,287
1,772
-17,274
-=39,179
-42,364
-40,368

-24,241 -36,354
27,628 =39,675

1980:
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

17,419
16,984
18,265
18,567
17,647
18,440

17,079
16,695
17,887
18,228
17,270
18,059

2,208
2,176
2,535
2375
2,153
2,365

2,847
2,811
2,961
2,877
2,891
2,867

11,364
11,253
11,557
11,860
11,541
12,124

21,142
21,779
20,947
19,766
20,587
20,353

1,663
1,412
1,558
1,498
1,536
1,592

8,145
9,173
8,577
7,744
8,034
8,174

10,815
10,576
10,345
9,971
10,421
10,063

22,299
22,947
22,048
20,812
21,683
21,403

-3,723
-4,794
-2,682
-1,198
-2,941
= 1,912

-=4,880
-5,963
•3,783
-2,245
-4,036
=2,963

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

18,267
19,087
18,828
19,214
18,715
19,251

17,953
18,771
18,521
18,770
18,344
18,918

2,445
2,534
2,724
2,886
2,909
3,099

2,825
3,149
2,752
2,554
2,447
2,746

12,227
12,448
12,483
12,473
12,241
12,368

19,139
19,713
19,941
20,347
19,860
21,436

1,594
1,467
1,391
1,583
1,680
1,583

6,853
7,292
7,112
7,506
7,059
8,331

10,138
10,390
10,524
10,520
10,572
10,897

20,074
20,665
20,837
21,244
20,751
22,364

-872
-626
1,112
-1,134
-1,145
=2,185

= 1,808
= 1,578
- 2,008
-2.031
=2,036
= 3,113

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June

18,825
19,764
21,434
19,818
18,869
19,870

18,459
19,441
21,000
19,408
18,499
19,461

2,926
2,938
3,334
2,879
2,680
2,582

2,896
2,936
3,245
2,458
2,541
2,328

11,913
12,816
13,658
13,392
12,562
13,581

23,194
21,922
20,949
22,289
21,310
21,975

1,748
1,588
1,609
1,477
1,676
1,467

9,041
9,141
7,478
8,947
7,206
8,270

11,777
10,714
11,294
11,291
11,822
11,597

24,265
22,910
21,886
23,283
22,314
22,993

4,370
-2,158
485
-2,471
^2,441
-2,105

-5,440
^3,146
=451
-3,465
4,445
-3,123

July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec

19,264
19,050
19,655
19,044
19,118
18,821

18,894
18,740
19,212
18,614
18,716
18,312

2,534
2,455
2,783
2,908
2,684
2,518

2,434
2,637
2,805
2,877
2,838
2,940

13,046
13,051
13,030
12,338
12,580
12,245

19,807
23,528
21,229
23,234
22,522
19,516

1,385
1,500
1,396
1,602
1,425
1,515

6,598
7,768
7,400
7,646
7,471
6,155

11,296
13,636
11,932
13,261
12,823
11,229

20,728
24,665
22,231
24,312
23,530
20,412

-542
-4,478
-1,574
=4,191
-3,404
= 695

-1,463
-5,614
- 2,576
-5,268
4,412
-1,591

1981:

1
2

z~:

Beginning 1960, data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in 1965.
Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded
from total exports.
3
4 Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind.
Includes fats and oils.
6
Includes machinery, transportation equipment, chemicals, metals, and other manufactures. Export data for these items include
military grant-aid shipments through 1977 and exclude them thereafter.
s
TotaT arrivals of imported goods other than intransU shipments.
7
C.i.f. (costs, insurance, and freight) import value at first port of entry into United States. Data for 1967=73 are estimates.
8
F.a.s. (free alongside ship) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports.
Note.—Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to 1969.
Trade in gold is included beginning 1974. Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area, except supplies
for the U.S. Armed Forces. Exports include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well
as other private relief shipments.
Data for 1980 and 1981 include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands, except that for 1980 Virgin Islands exports are reflected only in the
figures for total domestic and foreign exports and trade balance.
*Data for 1974-79 for total domestic and foreign exports, total general imports, imports of fuels, and trade balance include trade of
the Virgin Islands.
Source: Department of Commerce (Bureau of the Census and International Trade Administration).




350

TABLE B-105.—International investment position of the United States at year-end, selected years, 1970-80
[Billions of dollars]
Type of investment
Net international investment position of the United States...
U S assets abroad
U S official reserve assets
Gold
Special drawing rights (SDRs)
Reserve position in the International Monetary
Fund (IMF)
Foreign currency reserves
Other U S Government assets
U.S. loans and other long-term assets
U S short-term assets other than reserves
U.S. private assets
Direct investments abroad (book value)
Foreign securities
Claims on foreigners reported by U.S. banks, not
included elsewhere
Claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by
U.S. nonbanks
Foreign assets in the United States
Foreign official assets
U S Government securities *
Other U S Government liabilities
Liabilities reported by U.S. banks, not included
elsewhere
Other official assets
Other foreign assets
Direct investments in the United States (book
value)
Liabilities reported by U.S. banks, not included
elsewhere
U.S. Treasury securities.. .
.
Other U.S. securities2. . .
Liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by
U S nonbanks

1974

1972

1970

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

58.6

37.1

58.8

83.8

71.3

77.5

95.0

165.5

145

199.0
132

255.7
159

347.2
187

379.1
193

447.9
187

508.9
190

122.7
603.6
268

11.1

10.5

11.7

11.6

11.7

11.7

11.2

11.2

4.4
.3
460

4.9
.0
496

10.1

54.2

1.3
3.8
584

635

44.1

47.8

52.3

56.5

61.9

.9

2.0

2.4

1.9
.6

.5

321

361

1.9
.0
384

29.7
2.5

34.1

36.3

2.4

2.6

1.6

1.0
4.4

2.7

2.6
2.9

210

89.9
27.6

2.1
201.5
110.1
282

44.2

1.8
310.2
146.0
494

138

207

462

81.1

926

1308

1570

8.5

11.4

17.0

20.3

22.3

28.1

31.1

33.7

1068

1618

1969

63.2

79.8

3078
140.8

3704
172.9

4139

26.1

159.5

4809
175.7

177
1.7

529
1.6

581
2.6

2634
104.2
726
8.8

1054
10.2

1285
12.5

1066
12.4

1182
13.0

6.7

8.5
2

18.4

17.2

18.0

23.3

30.5

30.4

118.8
75.5

o

80.7

2.0
149.7

98.7

6

1.9
282.4
136.8

1171

56
159.1

72

1.9
375.0
162.7
534

1.9
431.5
186.8
566

1.7
513.3
213.5
621

2040

1670

85
197.5

99
2544

141
3052

13.3

14.9

25.1

30.8

34.6

42.5

54.5

65.5

22.7

21.2

41.8

53.5

60.2

77.7

110.3

121.1

34.7

50.7

34.9

54.9

51.2

53.6

14.1
58.6

16.0
74.0

107

136

130

134

149

169

286

1.2

88

1
Includes
2

1.2

1.7

7.0

7.6

8.9

Treasury and agency issues of securities.
Corporate and other bonds and corporate stocks.
Note.—Gold is valued at SDR35 per ounce, throughout. The SDR value is converted to dollars at $1/SOR before December 1971, at
$1.08571/SDR from December 1971 through January 1973, at $1.20635/SDR from February 1973 through June 1974, and as measured
by the basket valuation of the SDR beginning July 1974.
Source: Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.




351

TABLE B-IQ6.—World trade: Exports and imports, 1965, 1970, 1975, and 1978-81
[Billions of U.S. dollars]
Area and country

1965

1970

1975

1978

Exports, f.o.b
3

1979

1980

1981 »

2

129.8

226.0

583.9

883.14

1,086.1

1,283.9

1,444.4

United States
Canada,
Japan

27.5

43,2
16.7
19.3

108.0

143.7

181.8

220.7

235.5

European Community4

65.2

113.6

300.6

France.
West Germany
Italy.
. .
United Kingdom

10.2
17.9
13.8

18.1
34.2
13.2
19.6

53.1
90.2
34.8
44.5

20.2

33.1

85.4

127.3

161.9

194.7

2224

34.5

53.8

200.5

297.0

408.7

5428

5213

10.6
23.9

17.6
36.2

111.7

88.8

144.4
152.5

211.3
197.4

2983
244.5

2697
251,6

23.2

34.9

90.5

137.3

170.6

203.8

205.6

12.8
18.2

33.4
45.3

52.4
65.6

647

764

811

11.8

187.5

314.7

Developed countries

8.5
8.5

7.2

Other developed countries
Developing countries
OPEC8
Other
Communist countries8
U.S.S.R
Eastern Europe
China

82
20

TOTAL

34.1
55.7

2.2

73

874.9

48.4
98.4

58.3

67.6

71.9

102.3

130.4

153.6

465.7

581.9

670.5

761.0

79.4

100.7
171.8

116.0
192.9

107.6
175.6

142.5
56.1
71.7

72.2
91.0

77.9

102

1,317.7

138

77.7

115.1

87.5

195

74.3

104.0

81.8

22 1

1,665.4

2,030.5

2,171.3

Imports, c.i.f. 7
Developed countries

3

136.8

235.7

610.8

917.5

1,175.2

1,419.4

1,557,8

United States
Canada
Japan

23.2

42.4

103.4
362
578

183.1
465
799

218.9
570
1098

253.0
625
141 3

266.9
704
145 1

European Community4

70.5

307.2

470.7

614,4

733.1

819.2

540

818

1070

1349

121 6
163.1
91 2

87
82

France
West Germany
Italy .
United Kingdom

74
161

Other developed countries

263

191

17.6

29.9

188.0
99 5

TOTAL

1029

1199

413

1062

1372

175 1

559

1860

2918

3475

2295
4554

99
459

527

1003

1333

1947

1364

247 2

319 0

3344

341

1008

144 1

170 6

202 7

212 2

81

1 I
1Z

159.6
779

226

U.S.S.R

12L8

64
300

Communist countries*

74.9

364

6

Eastern Europe
China

118.9

104

Developing countries
OPEC
Other

143
189

11 7

508

57 8

68 5

70 i)
88.9
22.9

2 077 5

9 9fi7 ^

11.6

1.8

195 8

150
220

384
542

37 1

sii

18.5

2.2
325 7

7.4

897 6

1
Preliminary estimates.
2
Free-on-board ship value.
3
Includes the OECD countries, South Africa, and non-OECD Europe.
4
Includes Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, and the Netherlands,
5

565
785

971

72.6
11.2

1 353 4

83.0
15.6
I

CQ-3

0

93.1
20.8

1016

2562
4973
1629

not shown separately.
Includes Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and
Venezuela.
8
Includes North Korea. Vietnam, Albania, Cuba, Mongolia, and Yugoslavia, not shown separately.
7
Cost, insurance, and freight value, except Eastern Europe (except Hungary) and U.S.S.R,, which are f.o.b (free on board).
Sources: International Monetary-fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and Council of Economic Advisers.




352

TABLE B-107.— World trade balance and current account balances, 1965, 1970, 1975, and 1978-81
[Billions of U.S. dollars]
Area and country

1975

1970

1965

1978

1980

1979

1981 >

World trade balance2
Developed countries3

France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom.

-7.0

..

-135.5

-113.4

4.7
-2.1
-2.1
-6.6

-39.4
1.9
18.4
— 5.1

-37.0
1.3
-7.5
-32.6

-32.3
5.1
-10.9
-62.6

-31.4
1.5
8.5
-58.2

-.2
.3
-.2
-2.3

-1.0
4.3
-1.8
-2.4

-.8
15.2
-3.6
-9.6

-2.4
20.7
-.4
-6.8

-6.3
12.2
-5.7
-11.8

-18.9
4.9
-21.8
-4.8

-14.0
12.5
-16.9
2.4

-10.0

-13.3

-34.8

5.2

61.1

87.4

24.0

47.3
-42.2

111.0
-49.9

161.9
-74.5

106.8
-82.8

-27.0

6

-6.1

-8.2
-2.1

14.5

4.2
-6.1

OPEC5
Other

7.7
-9.8

59,0 *
-44.5

-20.8

.5

U.S.S.R
Eastern Europe
China
..

.8

-10.3

68

.0

1.1

-6.6

1.1

-3.7
-6,0
-.1

1.6
70
1.0

6.9
-5.1
-1.8

7.9
-5.6
-1.3

1.9
-7.1
-.8

-8.4

.0
-11.0

-22.8

35.7

Current account balances

-28.0

6.9

2.4

9.8

5.4
-1.1
.9

2.3
1.1
2.0

18.3
-4.7
-.7

-14.1
-4.3
16.5

1.4
-4.2
-8.8

.8

3.1

.4

15.3

-11.6

.4
-1.6
2.2
-.1

.1
.9
1.1
2.0

-.2
4.0
-.8
-3.4

3.3
9.2
6.2
,1.8

1.2
-5.3
5.5
-1.8

-8.5

-3.0

190

-.5
80

27.0
-30.0

4.0
-23.0

Other9

29

= 18.0

-9.0

-4.0

TOTAL

-4.5

-18.6

-18,2

-10.7

United States
Canada
Japan..
European Community4
France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom
Developing countries
..

-47.0

-96.0

8

3.8

OECD

OPEC5
Other

338

.1
.2
.2

Communist countries

..

-89.1

.8
2.5
.4
-5.2

-1.9

Developing countries

TOTAL7

341

-5i3

Other developed countries

97

4.3
'-.2

United States...
Canada
Japan . . . . 4
European Community

-30.7

-72.7

350

3.7
-1.6
-10.7

8.8
-7.5
5.5

-39.9

208

-7.4
-16.4
-9.6
7.5

-6.5
-8.5
-9.5
14.3

24.0

50.0

-8.0

62.0
-38.0

110.0
-60.0

60.0
680

10
-23.7

-5.0
-48.0

1
Preliminary estimates.
2
Exports f.o.b. (free-on-board ship value) less imports c.i.f. (cost, insurance, and freight).
3
Includes the OECD countries, South Africa, and non-OECD Europe.
4
Includes Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Greece, ireland, and the Netherlands, not shown
5

separately.
Includes Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and
Venezuela.
6
Includes North Korea, Vietnam, Albania, Cuba, Mongolia, and Yugoslavia, not-shown separately.
7
Asymmetries arise in global payments aggregations because of discrepancies in coverage, classification, timing, and valuation in the
recording of transactions By the countries involved.
• OECD basis.
.9 Includes Communist countries and non-OECD developed countries.
Sources: International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and Council of Economic Advisers.




353

TABLE B-108.—International reserves, selected years, 1952-81
[Millions of SDRs; end of period]
1981

Area and country

1952

1972

1978

1979

1980

November

2 49 303

. ..
_ .

.
.

Germany
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands .

&

Norway
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Oil-exporting countries
Algeria
Indonesia.
Iran
Iraq
Kuwait . . .

.

Libya . . . .
Nigeria
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Venezuela
Non-oil developing countries
Africa.
..
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere . . .

305 229

356,813

362,920

174,089

180,777

211,491

207,474

24,714
1,944
920
1,101
183

17,220
2,561
1,168
2,021
251

12,112
5,572
5,656
16,916
767

15,032
3,507
1,856
25,714
348

15,170
2,951
1,359
15,667
344

21,479
3,160
1,603
20,164
277

26,055
3,858
1,554
25,055
275

1,081
1,753
256
237
4,049

2,505
3,564
787
664
9,224

4,611
4,535
2,471
972
10,691

3,833
5,307
2,514
1,204
16,212

4,879
7,330
2,712
1,501
24,301

4,626
5,700
2,325
1,212
21,359

960
8
318
722
953

6,957
32
359
4,068
1,943

21,907
78
1,038
5,605
4,407

41,360
106
2,064
11,436
5,823

43,225
125
1,692
16,149
7,301

40,975
138
2,256
20,476
10,669

41,137
217
2,301
18,052
9,380

304
1,045
802
2,919
3,308

1,220
4,618
1,453
6,961
5,201

2,236
8,270
3!375
16,549
13,100

3,241
10,550
2,880
15,391
15,626

4,783
9,813
2,893
15,190
16,851

5,515
9,974
3,242
11,748
13,848

1,699

...

281 576

110,285

164
134
504
1,667
1,956

United States
Canada
Australia..
Japan..
...
New Zealand.

146,627

52,536

116
1,133
150
132
686

Industrial countries3

62850

38,583

All countries *

Austria.
Belgium,
Denmark..
Finland
France

1962

2030

10,042

46,219

56,316

73,601

81218

84
314
177
131
50

186
108
211
193
97

454
531
885
720
335

1,714
2,024
9327

2,213
3,093
11682

3,152
4,311

3,446
5,007

2,008

2,268

3,169

3,250

500

96
289

2,694
346
149
27
2,303

3,237
1,470
304
171
14,896

4,902
4,235
445
228
14,791

10,372
8,049
692
286
18,536

8,646
3,766
910

1107

5,958

1600

5,579

2648
7,140

268

26,880

443

583

1,595

643
5,031

8,488

8172

25,343

60,106

66,937

69882

69698

1,202
3407
967
826
2,087

1,635
2549
U46
940
1,700

3,169
6640
5,639
2,402
7,494

3,906
20670
6,410
6,930
22,191

4,287
23207
5,652
7,443
26,348

4,444
24952
6,180
8,312
25,996

4,333
25377
6,494
9,137
24,358

1
Includes
2
3 Includes

Taiwan, not shown In area detail.
Cuba.
Includes Luxembourg.
Note.- International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities' holdings of gold, special drawing rights (SDRs), reserve positions
in the International Monetary Fund, and foreign exchange. Data exclude U.S.S.R., other Eastern European countries, Mainland China, and
Cuba (after I960).

U.S. dollars per SDR (end of period) are: 1952 and 1962-1.00000; 1972-1.08571; 1977-1.21471; 1978-1.30279; 1979^
1.31733; 1980—1.27541; and November 1981—1.18072.
Source: International Monetary Fund, "International Financial Statistics."




354

TABLE B-109.—Growth rates in real gross national product, 1960-81
[Percent change]
1960-73
annual
average

Area and country

1974

1976

1975

1977

1978

1979.

1980

l

1981

U.S. dollar
value in
1980

(billions) ^

4.8

United States
Canada
Japan

0.9

-0.4

4.9

3.7

3.8

3.4

1.2

1.3

7,553

4.2
54

OECD countries

_.6
36
_3

-1.1

5.4
5.5
6.5

5.5
2.1
5.3

4.8
3.7
5.1

3.2
35
5.6

-.2
.0
4.2

1.9
30
3.8

2,626
246
1,098

10.5

12
1.4

European Community3

4.7

1.6

-1.2

5.0

2.4

3.3

3.4

1.1

-.8

2,740

France
West Germany
Italy
United Kingdom

57
48
5.2
32

3.2
5
4.1
10

2
-18

-6

5.2
52
5.9
36

3.1
28
1.9
13

3.7
36
2.7
33

3.5
45
4.9
14

1.2
18
4.0
-18

.5
10
.0
20

660
826
376
509

5.4

3.5

.2

3.7

2.0

2.4

2.8

2.0

.8

843

4.9

4.0

3.3

3.7

4.0

4.8

2.4

2.1

1.2

2,755

4.9
4.1
64

3.9
4.7
37

1.7
4.1
77

4.8
3.4
6

3.2
2.8
86

3.4
3.0
116

.8
1.3
85

1.3
.4
62

2.0

1,420
613
569

8
90
8

8.0
5.6

-.3
4.0

5.9
4.8

1.9
5.5

2.3
4.9

Other OECD4
Communist countries 5
USSR
Eastern Europe
China

-3.6

Developing countries6
Oil exporting7....,

other!:

-2.2

30

1907

:.

5.8

12.3

5.4

TOTAL

-3.0

4.4

540
1,367

12215

Preliminary estimates.
2
Estimates based on conversion at average rates of exchange for 1980, except for those of the Communist countries, which were
converted at U.S. purchasing power equivalents.
3
Includes Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, and the Netherlands, not shown separately.
"Growth rates are for OECD countries other than the Big Seven (United States, Canada, Japan, France, West Germany, Italy, and the
United Kingdom).
5
Includes North Korea, Vietnam, Albania, Cuba, Mongolia, and Yugoslavia, not shown separately.
6
Growth rates are for country groupings used in International Financial Statistics, International Monetary Fund.
7
Includes Algeria, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
8
1967-72 annual average.
Note.—for France, Italy, the United Kingdom, the developing countries, and industrial country groupings, data relate to real gross
domestic product.
Sources: Department of Commerce, International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
and Council of Economic Advisers.




355

TABLE B-110.—Industrial production and consumer prices, major industrial countries, 1960-81
[1967-100]
United
States

Year or quarter

Canada

Japan

European
Community'

France

West
Germany

Italy

United
Kingdom

Industrial production 2

66,2
66.7
72.2
76.5
81.7

63.1
65.6
71.2
75.7
82.6

43.0
51.2
55.4
61.7
71.4

74.7
78.1
81.3
84.8
91.0

70
73
78
86
90

78.4
82.8
86.1
88.9
96.6

59.2
65.5
71.9
78.4
79.2

84.4
84.3
85.1
88.4
95.0

89.8
97.8
100.0
106,3
111.1

89.7
96.2
100.0
106.4
113.7

74.2
83.8
100,0
115.2
133.4

94.7
98.4
100.0
107.4
117.6

93
98
100
104
114

102.1
103.0
100.0
109.2
123.2

82.8
93.3
100.0
106.4
110.5

97.7
99.2
100.0
106.7
110.3

1970.
1971
1972
1973
1974

107.8
109.6
119.7
129.8
129.3

115.3
121.5
130.7
144.6
149.2

151.8
155.7
167.0
190.5
183.1

123.3
126.1
131.7
141.4
142.3

120
128
135
145
148

131.1
133.6
138.7
147.7
145.1

117.6
117.5
122.7
134,6
140.6

110.9
110.6
113.2
123.0
120.0

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

117.8
130.5
138.2
146.1
152.5

140,3
148.5
152.2
157.7
166.0

163.9
182.0
189.7
201.1
217.7

132.8
142.6
145.9
149.4
156.6

139
149
152
155
163

137.1
149.1
152.0
154.1
161.8

127.6
143.5
145.1
147.9
157.6

114.3
117.4
122.9
126.9
131.7

1980
1981

147.0
151.0

162.7

232.5

155,1

160

162.3

166.5

122.9

1980:
I
II
III
IV

152.6
144.5
142.3
148.7

165.0
160.9
160.8
164.4

233.6
234.1
229.2
233.0

159.4
157.6
153.1
151.4

166
162
162
158

167
163
161
159

174.2
169.6
156.8
165.0

128.0
124.2
120.6
118.2

166.1
170.4
165.4

236.7
236.0
238.5

150.9
150.9

152
151
155

162
160
161

166.1
161.8
154.7

117,2
117.5
118.5

IV

151.8
152.5
153.0
146.3

I960
1961
1962
1963
1964

88.7
89.6
90.6
91.7
92.9

85.9
86.7
87.7
89.2
90.9

68.3
71.8
76.7
82.5
85.8

77.0
81.1
84.5
87.6
90.8

a
78.0
^ 80.6
85.4
89.5
92.5

82.9
84.8
87.4
89.9
92.0

74.1
75.7
79.2
85.1
90.1

79.0
81.6
85.1
86.8
89,6

94.5
97.2
100.0
104.2
109.8

93.1
96.5
100.0
104.0
108.8

91.6
96.3
100.0
105.3
110.9

94.2
97.5
100.0
103.7
108.0

94.8
97.4
100.0
104.5
111.3

95.0
98.4
100.0
101.6
103.5

94.2
96.4
100.0
101.4
104.1

93.9
97.6
100.0
104.8
110.3

1970 .
1971
1972
1973
1974

116.3
121.3
125.3
133.1
147.7

112.4
115.6
121.2
130.3
144.5

119.3
126.5
132.3
147.9
184.0

113.3
120.3
127.6
138.3
156.4

117.1
123.5
131.1
140.7
160.0

107.1
112.7
119.0
127.2
136.1

109.2
114.4
121.0
134.0
159.7

117.4
128.5
137.7
150.2
174.3

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

161.2
170.5
181.5
195.4
217.4

160.1
172.1
185.9
202.5
221.0

205.8
224.9
243.0
252.3
261.3

176.7
195.2
214.7
229.9
250.7

178.9
196.1
214.5
233.9
259.1

144.2
150.4
155.9
160.2
166.8

186.8
218.1
255.2
286.2
328.5

216.5
252.4
292.4
316.6
359.0

1980
1981

246.8
272.4

243.5
273.9

282,3

281.8

294.2

175.9
186.4

398.0

423.6
473.9

1980:
I
II . .
Ill
IV

236.5
245.0
249.6
256.2

233.5
240.0
246.8
253.8

273.2
282.2
285.2
288.8

270.1
279.0
285.2
292.0

280.3
289.0
298.3
306.6

172.5
175.7
176.9
174.8

373.5
388.1
404.6
426.1

399.6
422,9
431.9
439.9

262.9
269.0
276.7
280,7

262.0
270.2
278.2
285.0

291.4
296.3
296.9

300.7
310.2
317.8

315.7
326.1
338.9

182.2
185.5
187.8
190.0

448.4
468.0
482.1

450.4
472.3
480.5
492.3

I960
1961
1962
1963..
1964

1965
1966
1967 ".""
1968
1969 ....

.'..'.'.. .

1981:
I

||
HI

Consumer prices

1965
1966 .
1967
1968. .
1969

!

.

1981:
|
II
Ill
(V ....

„

1
Consists of Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, United Kingdom, and West jGermany.
Industrial production excludes data for Greece, which joined the EC in 1981.
2
All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
3
Data for 1960 and 1961 are for Paris only.
Sources: Department of Commerce {International Trade Administration) and Department of Labor (Bureau of Labor Statistics).




356

TABLE B—111.—Unemployment rate, and hourly compensation, major industrial countries, 1960—81
[Quarterly data seasonally adjusted]

United
States

Year or quarter

Canada

Japan

France

West
Germany

Italy

United
Kingdom

Unemployment rate (percent) l
5.5
6.7
5.5
5.7 .
5.2

7.0
7.1
5.9
5.5
4.7

1.7
1.5
1.3
1.3
1.2

1.6
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.3

1.1
.6
.6
.5
.4

3.8
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.6

2.1
1.9
2.7
3.3
2.4

1965
1966
1967.
1968
1969 .

4.5
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.5

3.9
3.4
3.8
4.5
4.4

1.2
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1

1.4
1.8
1.8
2.4
2.2

.3
.3
1.3
1.1
.6

3.5
3.8
3.4
3.4
3.3

2.1
2.2
3.2
3.2
3.0

1970.
1971
1972
1973
1974

4.9
5.9
5.6
4.9
5.6

5.7
6.2
6.2
5.5
5.3

1.2
1.3
1.4
1.3
1.4

2.4
2.7
2.8
2.7
2.9

.5
.6
.7
.7
1.6

3.1
3.1
3.6
3.4
2.8

3.1
3.9
4.2
3.2
3.1

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

8.5
7.7
7.1
6.1
5.8

6.9
7.1
8.1
8.4
7.5

1.9
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.1

4.2
4.6
5.0
5.4
6.1

3.5
3.5
3.5
3.4
3.0

3.2
3.6
3.6
3.7
3.9

4.6
6.0
6.3
6.3
5.7

1980
1981

7.1
7.6

7.5
7.6

2.0
22.2

6.5
7.6

3.0
4.3

3.9
4.2

7.4
11.0

1980:
1.
It
III
IV

6.3
7.3
7.6
7.5

7.5
7.7
7.5
7.4

1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2

6.2
6.5
6.5
6.6

2.8
2.9
3.1
3.3

4.0
4.0
3.9
3.8

5.9
6.6
7.5
9.1

7.4
7.4
7.4
8.3

7.3
7.2
7.5
8.4

2.2
2.4
2.2
2
2.2

7.0
7.7
7.9
8.0

3.6
4.0
4.5
5.1

3.9
4.4
4.1
4.4

9.9
10.6
11.1
12.0

I960
1961
1962.,' . . !
1963
1964

!

..

....

1981:

1

II
III

IV

..

.

..

Hourly compensation (1977= 100) 3
I960..
1961
1962
1963
1964.

36.7
37.7
39.2
40.4
42.0

29.9
29.4
28.7
29.4
30.6

6.6
7.7
8.8
9.8
11.0

15.9
17.5
19.2
21.3
22.9

10.4
12.1
13.8
14.8
15.9

11.9
13.1
15.5
18.3
20.4

25.0
26.9
28.3
29.6
31.6

1965
1966
1967
1968
1969.

42.9
44.8
47.0
50.4
53.9

32.1
34.6
37.3
40.0
43.0

12.4
13.6
15.3
17.9
21.3

24.6
26.2
28.3
31.9
31.6

17.5
18.8
19.9
21.1
23.4

21.8
22.8
25.4
27.1
30.7

34.7
37.7
38.2
35.6
38.9

57.6
61.1
64.4
69.1
76.4

47.8
53.1
58.1
63.4
75.0

25.4
30.3
40.1
55.0
67.1

33.2
37.2
45.3
59.1
65.5

29.0
34.4
41,9
57.2
67.7

36.8
43.1
52.3
- 66.4
73.9

44.4
51.9
60.1
65.6
78.3

85.5
92.4
100.0.
108.2
118.8

82.4
97.1
100.0
99.4
106.6

77.1
82.3
100.0
136.1
138.6

88.0
90.2
100.0
123.3
148.6

80.2
84.0
100.0
125.6
150.0

95.0
89.5
100.0
119.0
142.9

96.6
91.9
100.0
128.0
168.9

131.6
146.2

117.7

143.5

172.3

163.5

168.5

228.8

1970
1971.
1972
1973
1974

„ .

1975
1976
1977
1978
1979..
1980
1981

...

'Unemployment rates, approximating U.S. concepts. Data for United Kingdom exclude Northern lreland^_Quarterly data for France,
West Germany, and United Kingdom should be used as less precise indicators of unemployment under IfS. concepts than the annual
data. Beginning 1977t changes in the Italian survey resulted in a large increase in persons enumerated as unemployed. However, many
also reported that they had not actively sought work in the pasi 30 days. Such persons have been provisionally excluded for
comparability with U.S. concepts; their mention would more than double the Italian rates shown.
2
Annual average based on 11 months data; quarterly average based on 2 months data.
3
Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons (wage and salary earners and the selfemployed) in the United States and Canada and to all employees (wage and salary earners) in the other countries. For France and
United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees, but are labor
costs to employers.
Source: Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.




357
















