he Economic Report
of the President
TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS
1 9 5 D

Together With a Report to the President

THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW




By the
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




The Economic Report
of the President
TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS

January 6, 1950

Together With a Report to the President
THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW
By the
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON: 1950




Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. G.
Price of sincle CODV. 50 cents
single copy,




II

LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
THE WHITE HOUSE,

Washington, D. C, January 6,1950.
The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE,
The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.

SIRS: I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress,
as required under the Employment Act of 1946.
In preparing this report, I have had the advice and assistance of the
Council of Economic Advisers, members of the Cabinet, and heads of independent agencies.
Together with this report, I am transmitting a report, the Annual Economic Review: January 1950, prepared for me by the Council of Economic
Advisers in accordance with section 4 (c) (2) of the Employment Act
of 1946.
Respectfully,







Contents
Page

THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT

. . . .

1

SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC SITUATION

3

UNIFYING PRINCIPLES FOR ACTION
ECONOMIC POLICIES

6
8

Price and wage policies
Business investment
Private housing investment
Rent control
Fiscal policy
Credit policies
Farm policy
Developmental programs and community services . . . .
Social security
International economic programs
SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS

ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW, JANUARY 1950:
A Report to the President by the Council of Economic
Advisers




8
9
10
11
11
11
12
12
13
14
16

19




To the Congress of the United States:
As 1950 opens, renewed confidence prevails in the American economy.
This confidence is in itself an element of strength; and it is justified by the
facts.
Late in 1948 we stood at the peak of the inflationary boom. It was
clear that an eventual adjustment was inevitable before we would have
a firm basis for stability and steady economic growth. During 1949 we
met the test of that adjustment. Despite rough going for a few months,
we made necessary changes with much less distress and difficulty than
ever before. Today we are on firmer ground than we were a year ago.
Prices are down somewhat, and show the relative stability on which
firm business and consumer plans can be based. Inventories of manufacturers and retailers have been reduced, and now are better adjusted to
the rate of sales. These changes were accomplished with only very small
reductions in dollar incomes and consumer spending. Allowing for price
changes, the volume of goods and services purchased by consumers in 1949
was actually larger than in 1948. Business is proceeding with good profit
prospects. Home building in 1949 reached a higher level than ever before.
More important still, employment and production, which declined during the first few months of 1949, have in recent months been moving upward
again. Considerably more people now have jobs than at the low point last
year. Industrial production has increased by 9 percent since July. Holiday
sales have hit an all-time peak.
The relatively safe passage from inflation to greater stability was no
accident. Businessmen, workers, and farmers demonstrated much greater
judgment and restraint than in earlier similar periods. Their actions
showed that they had gained understanding of the causes of our economic
situation and what should be done to improve it. Their efforts were aided
by public policies which had been developed over the years and had been
improved by experience. Government measures in such fields as credit
and banking, social insurance, and agricultural price supports, proved their
worth in cushioning the downswing and lending strong support to the recovery movement.
This effective teamwork between free enterprise and Government confounded the enemies of freedom who waited eagerly, during 1949, for the
collapse of the American economy. Our economy continues strong. We
are able to continue and advance the domestic and international programs
which are the hope of free peoples throughout the world.




We have succeeded in avoiding a serious set-back in 1949. We have
regained stability; but we need more than stability. The great motivating
force in our economic system is the perpetual will to move ahead, to use our
skills and our resources more efficiently, to produce more at lower cost, and
to provide a better and richer life for all our citizens. The American economy must expand steadily.
Maximum production and maximum employment are not static goals;
they mean more jobs and more business opportunities in each succeeding
year. If we are to attain these objectives, we must make full use of all the
resources of the American economy.
During the past year, we did not do so. Our success thus far in reversing
the forces of recession cannot hide the high price we paid for economic
instability. The downturn brought anxiety and suffering to millions who
became unemployed, and to their families. It brought failure to many
small businesses. It reduced the opportunities for the creation of new enterprises. It hurt the free nations whose continuing revival depends upon
trade with us. It caused our total output for 1949 to be some 10 to 13 billion
dollars lower than it would have been if maximum production and employment had been maintained.
In earlier economic reports, I emphasized the dangers of permitting inflationary pressures to continue, and urged measures to hold them in check.
Most of these measures were not adopted, and the break in the economic boom, against which I had warned, came to pass. Six months ago,
the Midyear Economic Report pointed out the way to recovery. Additional steps should now be taken to complete the process of recovery. We
must not again make the mistake of failing to adopt affirmative policies
necessary for continued economic stability and growth.
At present, our economy is moving upward again. But we have not yet
reached the point of fully employing our resources.
Although output is high, some resources of plant and equipment are
not being fully used. Although employment is large, unemployment in
recent months has been about V/2 to 2 million higher than in the corresponding months of 1948. Furthermore, our technology, productive facilities, and labor force are continuing to grow.
If we are to use all these resources, we must tap the dynamic forces of
expansion within the American economy. One of the most important
of these dynamic forces is the process of business investment, by which
productive capacity is enlarged and improved. In the fourth quarter of
the year, business investment has not kept pace with the improvement in
economic conditions. If the downward trend in business investment were
to continue, our prospects for full recovery and continued expansion would
be seriously endangered.
There is no need for this decline to continue. There are immense opportunities for business investment in nearly every segment of the economy.




There are in general sufficient funds available to businessmen who want to
seize these opportunities. The initiative of businessmen, aided by proper
Government policies, can and should soon reverse the trend of business
investment.
Business investment can continue at a high level only if markets for
consumer goods continue to expand. Price and wage policies should be
directed at enlarging these markets. For only by broadening the distribution of goods and services can our business system find full use for its
expanding productive capacity.
The events of 1949 demonstrated anew the basic strength of the American
economy. They also demonstrated that economic affairs are not beyond
human control. We should now seek to establish a course that will complete the recovery and carry us on to steady economic growth.

Summary of the Economic Situation
Total civilian employment in 1949 averaged 58.7 million, somewhat less
than the average of 59.4 million in 1948, and was 58.6 million in December
1949. Nonagricultural employment fell during the first five months, reaching a low of 49.7 million in May. Since that month it has increased at
more than the usual seasonal rate, reaching 51.8 million in December.
Over the year, unemployment averaged 3.4 million, or about 5 percent of
the labor force, compared with 2.1 million or 3 percent of the somewhat
smaller labor force in 1948. Unemployment at its worst in July 1949
amounted to 4.1 million. In December, it was just below 3.5 million, 1.6
million more than in December 1948. There has been a rapid rise in the
number of unemployed workers exhausting their rights to unemployment
benefits.
Total production of all goods and services in 1949 was 259 billion dollars.
Adjusted for changes in prices, this was about 1 percent lower than in
1948, and fell short of maximum production by 4 to 5 percent, or 10 to
13 billion dollars. The sharpest drop was in industrial production, which
averaged 9 percent lower than in 1948, while agricultural output dropped
about 1 percent. Construction advanced about 5 percent, and output of
electricity and gas rose about.2 percent. There was a gain in the service
industries.
From November 1948, until the low point of July 1949, industrial production declined 17 percent. Since July the trend has been upward,
interrupted only by work stoppages. By December industrial production
had regained nearly half of the lost ground.
Prices during the first half of 1949 showed a general but moderate decline, followed by relative stability in the second half. Wholesale prices
by the end of the year were down 7 percent from their level of a year
earlier and 11 percent below their 1948 peak. The sharpest declines were
in farm and wholesale food prices. Farm prices are now 23 percent




below the postwar peak and 12 percent below what they were a year ago.
The drop in consumers' prices was much more moderate. By November
1949, consumers' prices had declined 2 percent below the level at the end
of 1948 and 3 percent below their postwar peak.
Wage increases were received by a much smaller number of workers
than in previous postwar years. There was no general wage pattern. Wages
averaged slightly higher than in 1948, and consumers' prices were somewhat lower. One outstanding development was the growth of pension
and social insurance plans financed in whole or in part by employers.
Work stoppages in 1949 were about the same in number as in 1948, but
the two major stoppages, in coal and steel, involved such a large number
of workers that the loss in man-days of work was about 50 percent greater
than in 1948.
Profits were lower in 1949 than in 1948. For the year as a whole, corporate profits before taxes and the inventory valuation adjustment were
27.6 billion dollars, a drop of about 21 percent. Much of the loss in reported profits represented the effect of falling prices on inventory valuation.
Farm income (realized net income of farm operators) declined about
15 percent, reflecting the decline in prices. The agricultural price-support
program prevented a much sharper decline in prices and incomes.
Credit terms generally eased during the year. Interest rates declined. Business loans, reflecting the liquidation of inventories, declined
sharply during the first six months but began to advance again in the latter
part of the year. Instalment credit, after a slight decline in the first quarter,
resumed its advance and reached a new postwar peak. Most notable was
the more than 60 percent increase in automobile instalment credit during
the year.
Consumers' disposable income was slightly higher in 1949 than in 1948,
rising from 190.8 billion dollars to 192.9 billion dollars. The trend, however, was different, rising every quarter in 1948 and falling every quarter
in 1949. In the fourth quarter of 1949 the annual rate was 191.1 billion
dollars. Unemployment compensation in 1949 contributed 1.9 billion
dollars to consumer income, 1 billion dollars more than in 1948.
Consumer expenditures for goods and services were remarkably constant throughout 1949. Their total was 179 billion dollars. This was
equal to the total for 1948 as a whole, but about 2 billion dollars lower
than the annual rate in the second half of that year. Allowing for price
changes, consumers' expenditures represented a slightly higher volume of
goods and services purchased than in 1948. An increased proportion of
consumer spending was devoted to purchases of services and durable goods,
a decreased proportion to the purchase of nondurable goods.
Net personal saving amounted to 14.4 billion dollars, compared with 12
billion dollars in 1948. During 1949, however, the trend of saving was
downward, from an annual rate of 16.3 billion dollars in the first quarter




to 13.1 billion dollars in the fourth. While personal saving in 1949 was
high by any previous peacetime standards, it is estimated that about onethird of all families did not add to their savings, but instead spent more
than they earned.
Private domestic investment in 1949 was 18 percent below the preceding
year, primarily because of a shift from accumulation to liquidation of inventories. By the fourth quarter, the liquidation of inventories was slowed
down, but investment in plant and equipment continued to decline. The
drop in business investment was the principal feature in the lower level of
economic activity in 1949.
Construction, in spite of a slow start, exceeded the high level attained
in 1948 by 3 percent in dollar volume, and was an important stabilizing
force in the economy. Public construction increased by 25 percent over
1948. Private construction declined by 4 percent, but residential construction was particularly strong in the second half of the year, rising to a
new postwar peak in the fourth quarter. Housing starts for the year
exceeded 1,000,000, compared with 931,300 in 1948. The number of multifamily units started was about one-fourth larger than in 1948.
By the end of the year, the rate of total construction activity was 11 percent higher than it was a year earlier, and the backlog of contracts had
increased considerably. A reduction in prices and costs, the easing of credit,
the expanded authority of the RFC to purchase mortgages, and the renewal
of FHA authority to insure rental projects, all contributed to the upsurge.
Corporate finance reflected the changes in the economic situation. The
shift from increasing inventories and increasing customer credit in 1948, to
inventory reduction and a lower rate of increase in customer credit in 1949,
permitted corporations to improve their financial liquidity while continuing
large outlays for new plant and equipment. Liquid assets increased by
2.5 billion dollars. Short-term debt decreased by 4 billion, but long-term
debt increased by about the same amount. In 1949, internal sources of
corporate funds were larger than required for capital investment; in 1948,
internal sources of funds amounted to only about 70 percent of the requirements for capital investment.
The export surplus (the excess of our exports of goods and services over
our imports) was only slightly lower in total in 1949 than in 1948, but it fell
sharply in the second half of the year. This resulted primarily from a sharp
drop in our exports of goods and services, following severe losses of gold
and dollars by the countries in the sterling area. The devaluation of foreign
currencies subsequent to these losses has so far had little effect on our
economy.
Government fiscal transactions in 1949 helped to stabilize the economy.
Cash payments by governments—Federal, State and local—were about
8 billion dollars higher in the calendar year 1949 than in 1948. Federal
cash payments alone were 6.2 billion dollars higher. Nearly half of this




rise resulted from the impact of recessionary forces on such programs as unemployment compensation and agricultural price supports, and the remainder was mainly the result of larger expenditures for international and defense
programs. The increase in State and local cash payments was caused
chiefly by higher expenditures for schools, roads, and other public works.
With increasing government payments, and with a slight decline in the
gross national product, the ratio of all government payments to total output
increased from about 20 percent in 1948 to 2 3 ^ percent in 1949. Gash
receipts declined primarily because of the 1948 cut in Federal taxes.
As a result of these changes, the cash surplus of all governments—Federal,
State, and local—which amounted to over 7 billion dollars in the calendar
year 1948, became a cash deficit of 3 billion dollars in 1949. For the Federal Government, the result was a shift from a cash surplus of 8 billion
dollars to a cash deficit of about 1.7 billion dollars.

Unifying Principles for Action
These facts show our tremendous economic strength. But this strength
does not rest in material things alone.
If we are to continue our economic growth the major economic groups
must all pull together—businessmen, wage earners, and farmers must work
toward the same ends. Government, in turn, must carry out the aspirations of the v/hole people.
Our success will depend upon the widespread conviction that all groups
have a stake in the expansion of the economy—that all will share in the
benefits of progress. In the days ahead we must broaden our understanding of how the various interests of our people are interrelated.
Toward this end, I should like to point out certain principles on which
we can all base our economic efforts. The more widely these principles
are understood, the better able we shall be to solve our common problems
and reconcile the interests of different economic groups. The more widely
these principles are used as the basis for economic action and decision, the
more rapid will be our national progress.
First. Our economy can and must continue to grow.
An expanding population and an increasingly productive labor force
require constantly expanding employment opportunities and steadily rising
levels of investment and consumption. Within five years, we can achieve
an annual output in excess of 300 billion dollars. The gain in national
income would be equal to an average of nearly $1,000 for every family in
the United States. This would greatly improve standards of living. It
would go far toward our goal of the complete elimination of poverty. It
would provide employment opportunities for about 64 million workers.
Such prospects are not fanciful. They are based upon our long-term
record of achievement, including some years when we did not use fully our




resources of plant, managerial skills, and labor force. And today, we are
better equipped with these resources than ever before.
But we will not make this progress within five years unless we begin
to move in that direction now. Our immediate goal for 1950 should be to
regain maximum employment. This requires the reduction of unemployment to the minimum level consistent with labor mobility in a free economy.
We should strive this year to reduce unemployment from 3^4 million to 2
million, or 2J/2 million at most. This would mean about 61 million civilian
jobs. It would mean stepping up our national output by about 7 percent
above the 1949 total. These are our objectives for this year under the
Employment Act. If we put forth sufficient effort, we can reach these
objectives before the year's end.
Second. The benefits of growth and progress must extend to all groups.
Only in this way can the long-run welfare of any group be preserved.
If any part of our economy is depressed, or fails to gain, it can only serve
as a drag against the gains of other parts. There is no room for the
feeling that one group can prosper only at the expense of another. There
is abundant opportunity for all groups to prosper together. Expansion
to a 300 billion dollar economy within five years would place 30 to 45
billion dollars more per year in the hands of consumers for buying the needs
and comforts of life. It would provide opportunity for profitable business investment in plant, equipment, and housing which might run 3 to 6
billion dollars per year above the 1949 level. It would enable farmers to
sell about 10 percent more food for domestic consumption.
Third. This growth will not come automatically, but requires conscious
purpose and hard work.
Productivity per worker should be increased by at least 2 to 2j/s> percent
a year. Labor should base its policies on the prospect of a stable and
expanding economy. Businessmen should base their investment policies on
confidence in growth, shape their price policies to the needs of larger markets,
and proceed with vigor and ingenuity to develop new and better products
of all kinds. Farmers should make full use of new technology, and make
shifts in production toward those commodities most needed in a growing
peacetime economy.
To promote an environment in which businessmen, labor, and farmers
can act most effectively to achieve steady economic growth is a major task
of the Government. It must perfect measures for helping to stabilize the
economy. It must build up the natural resources which are essential to
economic progress, and expand the protective measures against human
insecurity. It must keep open the channels of competition, promote free
collective bargaining, and encourage expanded opportunities for private
initiative.
Fourth. The fiscal policy of the Federal Government must be designed
io contribute to the growth of the economy.




The Federal Budget is an important part of the national economy.
Wise budgetary policies can promote stability and maximum production
and employment throughout the economy.
In fields such as resource development, education, health, and social
security, Government programs are essential elements of our economic
strength. If we cut these programs below the requirements of an expanding economy, we should be weakening some of the most important
factors which promote that expansion. Furthermore, we must maintain
our programs for national security and international peace. These programs are the defense of the world against disaster. Upon them, our whole
future depends.
Government revenue policy should take into account both the needs of
sound Government finance and the needs of an expanding economy. Federal receipts should be sufficient over a period of years to balance the budget
and provide a surplus for debt reduction. At the same time, the tax structure, and the changes made in it from time to time, should be such as to
promote the amounts and types of investment, consumption, and saving
needed for economic expansion. We should recognize that the expansion
of the economy will generate additional revenues and strengthen the fiscal
position of the Government.
Fifth. We must deal vigorously with trouble spots which exist in our
economy even in times of general prosperity.
Special measures are needed to help low-income groups and, even more
important, to provide them with better opportunities to help themselves.
We must deal with the particular problems of communities or areas which
are depressed, or whose economic growth has been retarded. Whenever a
shortage of jobs, or lack of business opportunity, affects as many persons
as it does today, it is a matter for national concern. Economic stagnation
anywhere is an injury to the whole economy. We must direct specific
measures to these special problems.
In the light of these guiding principles, I turn to the consideration of
needed economic policies.

Economic Policies
Under our system, private and public policies go hand in hand. Private
economic policies provide motive power of the economy. Public economic
policies provide the framework for economic activity. Sound plans for our
future growth must take account of both, and blend them to achieve maximum effectiveness.
Price and wage policies
The basic economic problem facing the country now is not to combat
inflation. Instead it is to increase production, employment, and incomes
to complete the recovery from the 1949 downturn, and to go on to the higher




8

levels which will be made possible by a growing population and rising
productivity.
Business policies concerning prices should be determined with these
objectives in mind. In general, prices now seem at or near a stable
level consistent with continued expansion of business activity. There
are few if any major areas in which price increases would be justified under
present circumstances. In some outstanding areas, price cuts are feasible
and needed to maintain and expand sales. Furthermore, technological
progress should in part be reflected in price reductions from time to time.
Wage adjustments are one historic method by which buying power has
increased with increasing productivity. These adjustments are now in the
hands of management and labor. That is where they should remain. At
the same time, the participants in collective bargaining, particularly in
dominant industries, should recognize that wage adjustments affect not
only the employers and workers immediately engaged, but also the whole
economy.
I am glad to note that the Council of Economic Advisers is encouraging
joint conferences in which representatives of industry, agriculture, and
labor may together study the economic principles underlying maximum
economic activity. Such conferences should be productive of improved
policies.
Business investment
The large and imaginative programs of expansion and modernization of
plant facilities which have been undertaken since the war represent a signal
achievement by private enterprise. The trend of business investment, however, has recently been downward, and its continued decline would be a
cause for real concern.
There are tremendous business opportunities in a growing economy. Not
only are there more people in our country every year, needing food and
clothing, homes and household equipment, and all the other goods and
services of our bountiful productive system. Even more important, the
results of research and experience give us every year new and better materials and productive methods; new products are constantly being developed, and whole new industries begun. All these changes are continually
opening up new opportunities for productive investment.
There are, in general, ample funds available to businessmen who want to
expand or build new plants, to replace obsolete equipment, or to extend their
operations to new geographic areas. Banks are in a position to provide
funds for sound loans, and interest rates have been declining. The flow
of institutional savings, such as insurance premiums, is at record levels.
Corporations as a whole are in excellent financial condition. While there
are real difficulties facing some businessmen, particularly those whose enterprises are small or medium-sized, and those in certain parts of the country,




as a whole there is no general financial bar to a steady expansion of business
investment.
In order to reverse the present downward trend, and to achieve the rising
volume of business investment consistent with an expanding economy, businessmen should grasp the opportunities which lie ahead; and should help
to make the adjustments in prices and incomes which will translate potential
markets into real markets. The enterprise and imagination of private businessmen will be a crucial factor in achieving the upward growth of which
our economy is capable.
While our primary reliance should be placed upon private initiative, the
Government can also help to encourage a reversal of the downward trend of
business investment. The tax recommendations I shall transmit to the
Congress in the near future will, in addition to providing some net increase
in revenue, propose certain changes in our tax structure which will make
it more equitable and stimulate business activity.
There is a great need to meet the problems of small businessmen who
cannot now obtain adequate financing on reasonable terms. New devices
for encouraging private financial institutions to furnish equity capital to
small and medium-sized concerns are being studied in the Executive Branch,
and I hope to make recommendations to the Congress on this subject during the present session. Meanwhile, I recommend that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation be authorized to increase the maximum maturity
of its business loans substantially above the present 10-year limit.
Private housing investment
Housing is one of the major fields in which more investment is required
to meet the growing needs of our people. The level of housing construction in 1949 was only slightly higher than in 1925, despite a much larger
population. The relative lag of housing technology and various outmoded
practices have resulted in a wide gap between the cost of producing good
housing and the vast potential market for housing to be found in the needs
and desires of families of low and middle incomes.
The housing problem requires a vigorous combination of action by private enterprise and by all levels of government. Reduction of housing
costs, through technical progress, better organization, and improved financing, is imperative. Aside from public subsidized housing, further methods
must be found to enlarge the flow of private capital into housing. The
Federal Government should supplement the comprehensive housing legislation, enacted last year, with a new program to stimulate the flow of lowcost private money into the development of middle-income housing, mainly
through cooperative and other non-profit ventures.
A high level of residential construction is an integral part of a generally
expanding economy, and requires not only direct stimulation of investment
but also continued growth in consumer purchasing power.




10

Rent control
While the preceding recommendations aim at the fundamental solution
of the housing problem, the increases in rents which would follow a sudden
ending of rent control would still create severe hardships in a large number of
areas. It would lift the cost of living, impair consumer buying, and complicate the problem of wage adjustments. Therefore I recommend extension of rent control for another year.
Fiscal policy
At the present time the Federal Budget shows a deficit, principally because of the drop in incomes and employment in 1949, the untimely tax
reductions in 1948, and the continuing heavy demands of national security
programs. As business conditions continue to improve, we should bring
Government receipts and expenditures into balance, and provide some surplus for debt reduction, at the earliest date consistent with the welfare of
the country.
Despite the current deficit, the fiscal position of the Federal Government
is basically strong. If the trend of business continues upward as it should,
Federal revenue will increase. At the same time, under the policies I am
recommending in the Budget, Federal expenditures should decline somewhat over the next few years. This movement toward a balanced budget
should be accelerated by changes in our tax laws which will reduce present
inequities, stimulate business activity, and yield a moderate amount of additional revenue.
This reliance upon a combination of three factors—an expanding economy, all reasonable reductions in expenditures, and a moderate increase
in revenues through changes in the tax laws—is the wisest course toward
a balanced budget. In the long run, the Government's fiscal position depends upon the health of the national economy. It will not be promoted
by drastic slashes in expenditures which are essential to our economic
growth and to continued peace. Neither will it be promoted by tax increases so drastic as to stifle business activity. Either action would impair
our chances for achieving our major national and international objectives
and would threaten further recovery.
Credit policies
To carry out the purposes of the Employment Act, the Government
should be equipped, as a permanent matter, with the minimum tools necessary to control the basic factors of credit expansion.
To eliminate the competitive disadvantage of Federal Reserve membership, the authority of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
over bank reserve requirements should be revised. The Board should have
broader powers than it now has to increase bank reserve requirements in a period of inflation. This would be a protective measure for the entire banking

868148—50




2

II

system, and accordingly should be applicable to all banks insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
The Board's authority over instalment credit ended last June. Since
that time the excessive relaxation of instalment terms offered to consumers
has demonstrated the need for a restoration of the Board's authority.
I have heretofore pointed out the need for more effective Government
supervision over speculative trading on the commodity exchanges. I recommend that the Congress grant more specific and more adequate authority
for this purpose.
Farm policy
A generally prosperous economy will do more than all else to help the
farmer. As the economy grows, it can absorb an expansion of total agricultural output, provided the necessary shifts in amounts and types of different
products are made to meet the needs of a changing peacetime economy.
Changes in our farm policy are needed to accelerate these shifts in production, to check the decline in farm incomes which has persisted for more than
a year, and to accord to farmers a fair share of the fruits of prosperity.
These basic objectives of farm policy call for some shift of emphasis from
the support of prices of particular commodities to the support of farm
income.
There is also need for additional methods of support. Perishable products, in particular, cannot be supported satisfactorily by loans and purchases
alone, and yet these are the products the expansion of whose output is
most desirable. I therefore urge that support through production payments
be authorized.
Special measures are needed to aid low-income groups in agriculture.
These include measures to provide credit and management aids to lowincome farmers to help them enlarge and improve their farms. They include programs to provide rural electrification, rural telephones, better
farm housing, and improved opportunity for medical care. In addition,
we must continue to improve the education of our farm youth not only
to make them more efficient farmers, but also to help some of the underemployed people in agriculture find useful work in other occupations.
Increased emphasis should be given to encouragement of types of farming
which are most needed. Research and education, and conservation and
credit programs, as well as the Government's support of farm prices and
farm incomes, should be directed toward this end.
Developmental programs and community services
After the restraints imposed by war and by postwar inflation, Federal
programs for resource development, transportation, education, and health
are just beginning to adjust to the needs of an expanding national economy.
Even now, the requirements of national security, international aid, and
veterans' adjustments are so urgent and so large that progress in develop-




12

mental programs and community services must necessarily be limited to
gradual advancement at a rate below the genuine need.
Nevertheless, we are continuing to expand our investment in the development of our rivers for flood control, navigation, reclamation, and electric
power, in the expansion of our highways, and in the development of atomic
energy. I again urge early authorization of the St. Lawrence seaway and
power project, which should be started as soon as plans can be completed.
In most of our major river valleys we do not have satisfactory means for
preparing integrated programs of development. I have already recommended, and I again urge, that the Congress authorize the consolidation
of a number of Federal activities in the Pacific Northwest into a Columbia
Valley Administration.
Present deficiencies in education and health are so compelling that I
repeat my recommendation for new programs. Expansion of public health
services, and of enrollments in schools of medicine, nursing, dentistry, and
public health, should be started now. The growing number of children
of school age cannot be permitted to delay their education. I therefore urge
the prompt enactment of aid to elementary and secondary education, and the
provision of funds for a survey to determine the extent of the need for
school construction. There should also be authorized a limited program to
assist capable young people who are now financially unable to secure the
higher education essential to the full development of their talents.
Many of the existing procurement, construction, and loan programs of
the Federal Government can be adapted, to some extent, to alleviate serious
unemployment in particular local areas. The program initiated for this
purpose in the summer of 1949 has shown some good results and it will
be continued. It is evident, however, that some localities are faced with
long-term rather than temporary difficulties and that effective programs
to provide permanent solutions need to be worked out. The Federal
Government will continue to use all available resources for the aid of such
distressed areas and, cooperating with State and local agencies and private
groups, will assist in preparing programs adjusted to the long-range problems and opportunities of those areas.
Social security
In our growing economy, there can be no excuse for failure to develop
an adequate system for protecting our citizens against economic insecurity.
As we produce more, we can and should make more adequate provision
for the aged, those who cannot find work, and others in our society who
are in need.
I urge the Congress to act promptly on the recommendations I have made
for the extension and improvement of social security. We must move
rapidly toward a comprehensive social insurance system protecting nearly
all workers—including those employed in farming—and their families
against the risks of old age, unemployment, disability, death of the family




wage-earner, and illness. The costs of such a system, when measured
against the growing output of our economy, are well within our capacity
to pay.
The present programs of social security are grossly inadequate. Because
of the limited coverage of the present law, and the exhaustion of benefits
by many workers, one-third of the unemployed are now receiving no unemployment insurance benefits, and in some areas the proportion approaches
two-thirds. Many communities provide no public funds for the relief of
jobless workers and their families. There are also several million disabled
workers, many with families to support, who are not eligible for public insurance benefits. In some places, they do not even receive public relief.
Only 650,000 of the millions of bereaved or broken families with very low
incomes are receiving survivors insurance. Only 30 percent of the aged
population are eligible for social insurance benefits, which are so meager
that few can retire voluntarily. Needed medical care is denied to millions
of our citizens because they have no access to systematic and adequate
methods of meeting the cost.
The current inadequacy of the social insurance programs is sharply reflected in the disproportionate load now being borne by public assistance
programs. Increasing numbers of the aged, the disabled, and the unemployed have been forced to resort to public assistance. This distorts the
original intent of the Social Security Act that people are entitled to security
as a matter of right. The burden of public assistance is straining the fiscal
capacities of State and local governments. While enactment of proposed
social insurance programs will alleviate this problem in the future, provision
must be made for dealing with the problem in the meantime. I therefore urge enactment of the proposals which I submitted to the Congress
last spring for the extension and improvement of the program of Federal
grants to States for public assistance.
International economic programs
We are now in a transitional stage in the development of our international economic policies. Our short-run programs of aid to friendly
countries abroad have begun to bear fruit in increased production, expanding trade, and rising living standards. At the same time, the longrange nature of the problems of world production and trade has emerged
more clearly, and the need for the United States to play a continuing role
in world development through capital and technical assistance has become
evident.
The progress already made toward achieving the objectives of the European recovery program and of other short-run aid programs should prompt
the continuation of these programs on a basis commensurate with need.
To cripple them now would imperil past progress and risk the waste of
expenditures already made. I recommend that these programs be extended on a scale sufficient to accomplish the purposes for which they were
established.




14

In the years ahead, we must lay increasing emphasis upon long-run international economic programs. We need to move vigorously toward a
world-wide increase of international trade. This will result in larger imports into our country, which will assist other countries to earn the dollars
they need, and will at the same time increase our own standard of living.
An immediate step in this direction is to approve promptly the proposed
Charter for the International Trade Organization, which has been negotiated to establish a code of fair trade practice and a means for steadily
improving international commercial relations.
Even the maximum feasible reduction of barriers to world trade would
not alone make possible the continued increases in world production and
living standards which are essential to world peace. Such reductions are
of little immediate benefit to the underdeveloped areas of the world, which
cannot produce enough to achieve an export surplus and build up their
productive capital. These areas urgently need improved technical knowledge and increased capital investment. The aim of the Point Four program for assistance to underdeveloped countries is to help meet these needs.
To make the most effective use of invested capital, underdeveloped countries require technical assistance. Hearings have already been held by the
Congress on the legislation I have recommended to stimulate the interchange of technical assistance. I urge action on this proposal as soon as
possible.
The United States has sufficient productive strength to provide capital
for investment in productive developments abroad. In order to encourage
the private investment of United States funds abroad, I urge the Congress
to act promptly on the legislation now before it to authorize the ExportImport Bank to guarantee such investments against certain risks peculiar to
foreign investment. Through the negotiation of treaties, the Government
is moving to improve conditions for investment abroad and assure protection for the legitimate interests of United States investors. It will also continue to be the policy of the Government to encourage American investment
abroad only when it is carried on in a way that protects the interests of the
people in the foreign countries concerned.
I recommend also that certain provisions of the tax laws governing the
taxation of income from foreign investments be revised in order to stimulate
the flow of American capital abroad.
In addition to its direct contribution to increased production, the technical assistance program should prepare the way for, and stimulate the
preparation of, concrete development projects, on the basis of which an
increasing volume of private and public investment can be made. It is
unlikely that private funds, including those invested through the International Bank, and the present resources of the Export-Import Bank, will be
sufficient to meet the need for investment abroad. It will probably become
necessary at a later time to increase the lending authority of the ExportImport Bank.




15

Summary of Legislative Recommendations
I summarize below the legislative recommendations contained in this
Economic Report, and urge that the Congress enact them into law:
1. Make some revisions in the tax structure to reduce present inequities, stimulate business activity, and yield a moderate amount of net
additional revenue. My specific recommendations on taxes will be
transmitted to the Congress at an early date.
2. Enact a new program to stimulate private investment in housing
for middle-income families.
3. Substantially increase the maximum maturity period for business
loans made by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
4. Improve the protection of farm incomes and encourage needed
shifts in farm production, by authorization of production payments
and other changes in present legislation.
5. Establish a Columbia Valley Administration, and authorize the
St. Lawrence seaway and power project.
6. Provide for Federal aid to elementary and secondary education,
for a limited program of aid in support of higher education for capable
students, for aid to medical education, for the improvement of local
public health services, and for grants to States for surveys of the need
for school construction.
7. Extend and liberalize the social security structure by improving
old-age, survivors, and unemployment insurance, enacting disability
and health insurance, and expanding Federal grants-in-aid to States
for public assistance.
8. Extend rent control for another year.
9. Continue the foreign recovery programs on a basis commensurable with need.
10. Approve the Charter for the International Trade Organization.
11. Authorize the program for technical assistance to underdeveloped countries, and for guarantees by the Export-Import Bank against
risks peculiar to private investment abroad; and revise certain provisions in the tax laws governing the taxation of income from foreign
investments.
12. Provide additional authority over banking reserves to the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; extend that authority to
all banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and
restore the Board's authority to regulate consumer credit. Provide
authority to regulate speculation on the commodity exchanges.
* * * * *
In the Message on the State of the Union, I have stressed the fateful role
which the United States has come to occupy in the progress of human
destiny. Our responsibilities are already determined by the course of world




16

events. But how well we measure up to these responsibilities remains in
our own hands.
Moral leadership comes first, as we seek to inspire free men everywhere
with confidence in their cause. But history proves that many great moral
purposes have failed or faltered because the material strength to support
them was lacking. The economic power of the United States, at its full
potential, is the keystone of this support.
The Congress foresaw this when it gave our national economic policy the
degree of central significance accorded to it under the Employment Act of
1946. As the deliberations of the United Nations demonstrate, other
nations recognize the overwhelming importance to the cause of freedom of
wise economic policies and full employment.
Our economic situation today is good, and it can be better. The lessons
of the past and the magnificent challenge of the future continue to spur us
on. For all to thrive and prosper together, all must work together—with
mutual understanding and common purposes. That is the spirit of our
democracy. That is the spirit in which I transmit these recommendations
to the Congress, and to all those whose actions affect our economy.
HARRY S. TRUMAN.
JANUARY 6,




1950.




The Annual Economic
Review




January 1950

A Report to the President
By the
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,

Washington, D. C , January 3, 1950.
The PRESIDENT :

SIR: The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report, the
Annual Economic Review: January 1950, in accordance with section
4 (c) (2) of the Employment Act of 1946.
Respectfully,




Acting Chairman.

/w

21




Contents
Page
I. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN 1949

The course of employment and production
Employment
Production
Prices, wages, and profits
Prices
Wages and related matters
Profits
Money and credit
The flow of goods and purchasing power
Consumer income, spending, and saving
Business investment and
finance
International developments
Government transactions
Summary: The Nation's Economic Budget
II. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF 1949 AND THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK . . .

Bases for confidence as 1950 opens
Value of affirmative policies
Short-range outlook
The longer-range outlook
Adjustments still to be made
III.

PATHWAYS TO ECONOMIC GROWTH

Growth objectives for 1950-1954
Toward a balanced economy
High business investment needs
Availability of funds for investment
Specific problem areas
The housing problem
Adequacy of market opportunity
A high consumption economy
Expenditures for consumer durable goods
Expenditures for nondurable goods
Expenditures for services
Distribution of income




25

25
25
29
31
31
35
36
39
42
42
47
52
59
63
66

67
68
69
69
72
75

75
80
86
88
90
92
93
94
94
95
95
96

IV. NEEDED POLICIES

The function of prices
The function of wages
Aids to business investment
Fiscal policy
Effect <of 'general "economic conditions upon ^Federal
finance
Expenditure policy
Tax policy
Farm policy
Development of physical and human resources
Physical resources
Human resources
. .
The timing of developmental programs
Economic trouble spots
Advance planning and program
flexibility
Social security
Unemployment insurance
Old-age survivorship and disability protection. . . .
Health insurance
Public assistance
Social security costs
International economic policies
The dollar problem
The Point Four Program




Page
99

99
100
101
103
103
104
105
106
112
112
116
117
117
118
119
120
120
121
121
121
123
123
124

I. Economic Developments in 1949
T H E COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION

Employment
r ? M P L O Y M E N T levels for 1949 as a whole did not meet the maxiHrf mum employment goal set forth at the beginning of the year, which
called for an average employment about 1 million above that in 1948 to
absorb a growing labor force. Average civilian employment in 1948 was
59.4 million, and in 1949 it was 58.7 million, a drop of 700 thousand, instead of the needed increase of 1 million. However, the fairly steady
drop in total civilian employment which began late in 1948 and continued
through February 1949 was checked in March, due primarily to a seasonal
increase in agriculture. The low point in nonagricultural employment was
reached in May. Since then the trend in nonagricultural employment has
been upward, except for the period affected by the steel and coal stoppages.
By the end of the year, total civilian employment stood at 58.6 million,
or about 850 thousand below December 1948. (See chart 2.)
Manufacturing employment fell from an average of 15.3 million in 1948
to an average of 14.2 million in 1949. The decline from the September
1948 peak was steady until midsummer, when it was halted and reversed.
The drop during the first half of the year was most notable in durable lines,
although textiles also dropped significantly. Certain manufacturing segments, such as automobiles, aircraft, printing, and apparel, remained at
high employment levels throughout 1949. Employment also continued at
high levels in construction, trade, finance, and services. Government employment increased, largely in State and local government. There were
significant decreases in mining and railroad transportation.
Particularly noteworthy during the latter half of 1949 was the improving
employment situation in industries manufacturing nondurable goods. By
the year's end, total nonagricultural employment was 2.1 million higher
than in May.
Employment in agriculture averaged slightly higher in 1949 than in
1948, but in December 1949 the number of farm workers was about 600
thousand less than in December 1948.
The number of employed persons tells only part of the employment story,
since the number of hours worked is also important. For all employed
nonagricultural workers, the hours worked averaged about half an hour a




CHART 1

ECONOMIC INDICATORS
PERCENTAGE CHANGE

60

EMPLOYMENT *

?0 _

30

^^1948 to 1949
il.'.'.'.'.l.'fe^l^J949, 8econd half
l949 first half to

J'^^^Hf
10

PERCENTAGE CHANGE
64.5

20

»

-

-

10

111

r\

CIVILIAN
EMPLOYMENT

UNEMPLOYMENT

10

-10

10

10

PRODUCTION

0
-10

.

GROSS NATIONAL
PRODUCT
(1948 PRICES)
INDUSTRIAL
PRODUCTION

NEW PLANT
- -10
a EQUIPMENT *
EXPENDITURES!/

-20
10

-20
10

PURCHASING POWER
PERSONAL
INCOME
(AFTER TAXES)

-10

-10

-20

FARM INCOME

-20

(PROPRIETORS)

-30

-30
10

10

PRICES
CONSUMERS'
PRICES

-10

-10

WHOLESALE
PRICES

-20
-!/ NONAGRICULTURAL BUSINESSES.
* DATA FOR FIRST AND SECOND HALF 1949 NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION.

SOURCE: APPENDIX C




26

week less in 1949 than in 1948. Relating the total number of persons employed to the average weekly hours of work indicates that total man-hours
on the job in 1949 were some 2 percent lower than in 1948.
Part of this decline in working time was a result of the sizable increase
in involuntary part-time work caused by the decline in production. In September 1948, less than 1.4 million workers were working part time because
of work slack, inability to obtain full-time work, and job turn-over. The
number had risen to nearly 2.5 million by May 1949, increased slightly
during the summer, but probably declined somewhat in the fall and early
winter.
As manufacturing activity declined, the number of jobless rose from a
low of 1.6 million in October 1948 to 4.1 million at the high in July 1949.
There was an average of 3.5 million persons unemployed during the fourth
quarter of 1949, compared with 1.8 million during the last quarter of
1948. Virtually every important manufacturing area in the country experienced some increased unemployment in 1949; New England, with its heavy
concentration of textile, leather, and machinery factories, was the most
severely affected. In Rhode Island, as many as 20 percent of the workers
covered by the State unemployment insurance laws were drawing benefits
at midyear. In other States in this region, the ratio of insured unemployment at its peak ranged between 10 and 12 percent. Other States which
had a relatively high incidence of unemployment were New York, New
Jersey, Maryland, the Carolinas, Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, Illinois,
and California.
Unemployment represented 12 percent or more of the labor force in 12
major labor market areas out of the 100 reporting in December 1949.
In addition, there were numerous smaller areas where unemployment was
relatively as serious. These areas included textile and leather centers in New
England, coal and copper mining areas in Pennsylvania, Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, and Alabama, and metal-working centers in New England and
Michigan. Because of the nature of the industries affected, unemployment rose somewhat more sharply among men than among women. In
the fall of 1948, 27 out of every thousand men in the labor force were
unemployed, contrasted with 33 out of every thousand women. In the
fall of 1949, the ratios were 54 per thousand men and 58 per thousand
women.
For the whole of 1949 there was an average of 3.4 million persons
unemployed or over 5 percent of the labor force, compared with an average
in 1948 of 2.1 million or over 3 percent of the labor force. Since July, after
allowing for the adverse effects of the strikes, there has been a more-thanseasonal decline in unemployment. During the latter part of the year unemployment receded in virtually all major labor market areas. In December
1949 there were just under 3.5 million persons unemployed, compared with
4.1 million in July.
868148—50




3

27

CHART 2

LABOR FORCE
The labor force increased by about 800,000 from 1948 to 1949
and civilian employment dropped about 700,000.
MILLIONS OF PERSONS*

MILLIONS OF PERSONS '
80

80

UNEMPLOYMENT

TOTAL LABOR
FORCE

ARMED FORCES

NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J

1947

A S O N D J F M A M J

1948

J A S O N O

1949

Unemployment throughout 1949 was much higher than in 1948.
PERCENT OF LABOR FORCE

PERCENT OF LABOR FORCE

10

10

UNEMPLOYMENT
(AS PERCENT OF THE LABOR FORCE)

.£ H -I S

J F M A M J J

A S O N D J F M A M J J

-1 x J.I I 4 »•

A S O N D J F M A M J

J A S O N O

1949
* I 4 YEARS OF AGE ANO OVER.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




28

There has been a rapid rise during the year in the number of unemployed
workers exhausting their rights to unemployment benefits. During the
third quarter of 1949 more than 500 thousand persons exhausted their
rights to further benefits before finding employment, while in the comparable quarter of 1948 this was true of only about 225 thousand persons. In
a considerable number of the major labor market areas as many as 60 to 70
percent of the unemployed are not now eligible for unemployment compensation, compared with about 35 percent nationally. (Statistics on
employment are shown in appendix tables C-9 and C-10.)
Production
In January 1949, an increase in the total production of goods and services
of 3 to 4 percent, or 8 to 10 billion dollars measured in 1948 prices, was
set as a reasonable objective for the year. This production goal was not
accomplished. The dollar value of all goods and services produced (the
gross national product) was estimated at 262.4 billion dollars in 1948 and
at 258.7 billion in 1949, a drop of about 1.5 percent. This drop in dollar
value was due in part to lower prices and in part to a drop in real output.
The gross national product estimates, together with statistics on the physical output of goods, indicate that the total production of goods and services
dropped about 1 percent from 1948 to 1949. Thus we fell 4 to 5 percent
below the goal set at the beginning of the year, a deficiency of 10 to 13
billion dollars. Moreover, since output in the second half of 1949 was less
than in the first half, the deficiency widened during the year. (See appendix
table C-l.)
The physical goods component of total output in 1949 was about 5 percent
below the level of 1948. (See appendix table C-l4.) Industrial production dropped 8.8 percent, and agricultural output fell 1.4 percent. Construction increased 4.6 percent and the output of electricity and gas rose 1.6
percent. The Department of Commerce estimates of changes in personal
consumption expenditures from 1948 to 1949 suggest that there was some
increase in the output of service industries. Evidently the drop in output
of goods in 1949 was almost offset by an increase in services.
The 1.4 percent drop in agricultural output represented a decline of
about 4 percent in the production of crops and an increase of about 5
percent in the output of meat and animal products. The production of
wheat and of feed grains continued at very high levels, although falling
a little below 1948. Larger plantings caused cotton production to increase
in spite of a drop in yield per acre. Food supplies available to the American
public continue ample compared with those of most previous years.
The index of industrial production reached a peak of 195 percent of the
1935-39 average in October and November 1948, and then fell rather
steadily until it reached a low of 161 in July 1949. This represented a
drop of 17 percent from the peak. The greatest rate of decline was in
durable goods and minerals, production of which fell 20 percent and 24




29

CHART 3

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
Industrial production by December 1949 had recovered nearly
half of the drop from its Novemt>er 1948 peak to its July
1949 low.
PERCENT OF 1935-39 AVERAGE

250

PERCENT OF 1935-39 AVERAGE

250

ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION

200

200

NONDURABLE

150

150
MINERALS

100
n H

1
I

I

I

I

1 I

I

I
S

1948

I
0

1 100

I HT I
N

0

J

I

I

I

I I

I

F

I

I
S

I
0

l~1 o
N

D

1949

SOURCE: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.

percent, respectively, while the output of nondurables fell only 14 percent.
(See appendix table C-15.)
Since July the trend of industrial production has been reversed and a
considerable recovery has occurred. After the low of 161 in July, the
index of industrial production recovered substantially in August and September, dropped temporarily in October because of the coal and steel
stoppages, and recovered further in the last two months of the year, reaching
176 in December. The December figure was 9 percent above the midsummer low, but still 10 percent below the peak of October and November 1948. The recovery in industrial production has been greater in the
nondurable goods industries, the output of which rose 12 percent, than in
the output of durable goods industries, the output of which increased only
8 percent. (See chart 3.)
Thus, in the closing months of 1949, industrial output was rising, although
it was still considerably below the peak level attained in 1948. Construction and the output of gas and electricity were above 1948 levels, and
agricultural output was only slightly below the 1948 record-




PRICES, WAGES, AND PROFITS

Prices
Price movements during 1949 paralleled the course of total economic
activity. A general but moderate decline in prices during the first half
of the year was followed by relative stability in the second half. The abatement of the postwar inflationary boom did not bring with it an accelerating
decline in prices.
Wholesale prices. Wholesale prices by the end of 1949 had declined
6.9 percent from their level of a year earlier and were 11.0 percent below
their August 1948 postwar peak. The largest drops were in wholesale
farm and food prices, while industrial prices fell least. (See chart 4
and table 1.) The bulk of the drop was during the first half of the
year. During the second half, the slight further drop was accounted
for mainly by wholesale farm and food prices while industrial prices
levelled off.
Wholesale prices of farm products and prices received by farmers
both fell about 12 percent during 1949, and ended the year more than
20 percent below their peak of January 1948. Prices paid by farmers
decreased only about 3 percent during the year, and the ratio of prices
received to prices paid fell to 98 percent of parity in December, compared
with 108 a year before. This was the first time since 1941 that the parity
ratio had stood below 100. (See appendix table C-23.)
Downward pressure on farm prices was exerted by the continuing high
level of crop production, which brought some surpluses. The decline
continued in the second half of the year, when marketings of hogs and
of eggs and poultry increased markedly. The demand for the better
grades of beef cattle continued strong, and while the drop in hog prices
was sharp, marketing was orderly and support was not required. Grain
prices were quite firm at the end of the year.
Wholesale food prices during the year declined 8.5 percent and at
the end of the year were 18.0 percent below their 1948 peak level. Following a considerable decline early in the year, wholesale food prices were
quite stable through the third quarter. Subsequently, under the pressure of
seasonal increases in supply, food prices began to decline again. Noteworthy, however, was the strength of certain imported commodities, with
coffee, cocoa, and pepper reflecting in part speculative expectations about
the future size of the crops.
Industrial prices declined during the first half of the year and then
levelled off. During the year, industrial prices declined 5.0 percent and
ended 5.3 percent below the 1948 peak level. The weakness in industrial prices during the first half year reflected the process of inventory liquidation which was a major economic development during that
period. The greatest pressure was on the prices of industrial materials,
because manufacturers' inventories of such materials were reduced first and




CHART 4

WHOLESALE PRICES
Industrial prices, offer a moderate decline in the first 6 months,,
stabilized in the second half of the year. The trend of farm
prices was downward. Wholesale food prices after little change
for most of the period dropped in the last quarter.
PERCENT OF 1926 AVERAGE
220

PERCENT OF 1926 AVERAGE
220

200

200
FARM PROOUCTS

180

180

160

160

140

140

OTHER THAN FARM PROOUCTS
AND FOODS

120

120

(INDUSTRIAL PRICES)

100

100
"T! •..I. i. i i T . . i•iI• iii i T ! •••• Ii • ••i T
J F M A M J JA S0N 0 J F M A N J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J

1946

1947

1948

I.•. .71
J A S O N O

1949

PERCENTAGE CHANGES
JUNE 46 TO
POSTWAR PEAK

ALL

ITEMS

POSTWAR PEAK TO DEC. 49
DEC. 48 TO DEC. 49

FARM PRODUCTS

FOODS

OTHER THAN FARM
PRODUCTS AND FOODS

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR




mmmmmmm

most sharply. (See appendix table C-19.) The downward movement
embraced most categories, with notable exceptions, including the steel and
automobile groups.
TABLE 1.—Changes in wholesale prices
Percentage change
Commodity group

December 1948
to June 1949

All commodities.

June 1949 to
December
19491

-4.9

-2.1

-4.8
-4.6
-4.9
-3.5
-5.1
-5.3
-3.6
-5.3
-10.9
-2.2

Farm products
Foods
Other than farm products and foods..
Hides and leather products
Textile products
Fuel and lighting materials
Metals and metal products
Building materials
Chemicals and allied products. __
Housefurnishing goods
Miscellaneous
Special groups:
Raw materials
_
Semimanufactured articles
Manufactured products

December 1948
to December
19491

-8.1
-4.1
—. 1

-4.5
-8.9
-4.4

+.4

-12.5
-8.5
-5.0
-2.8
-5.7
-5.2
-3.7
-6.0
-11.8
-2.5
-6.0

2-2.5
2-1.0
2-1.7

2-6.9
2-9.8
2-6.0

+.8
-.6
+.1

-.1
-.7
-1.0
-.3

i Percentage changes based on preliminary estimates for December 1949, except as noted.
Change from December 1948 to November 1949.
Source: Department of Labor (see appendix table C-22.)

3

By July the major wave of industrial price cuts was over. During the
third quarter, there was a considerable firming up in the prices of many
industrial materials, particularly those which had suffered the greatest
decline during the first half of the year. Thus, there were increases in the
prices of cotton and rayon textiles, steel scrap, the nonferrous metals, lumber,
and other commodities.
While the firmness of the industrial price level continued into the fourth
quarter, there were a number of divergent trends. Copper and zinc continued strong while lead weakened again. Lead prices were under the
pressure of foreign competition. Tin prices were dropping as they were
freed to find their level in the open market and supplies v/ere increasing.
Lumber prices continued to reflect the high level of construction. Late in
1949 steel prices were advanced. Most finished goods prices continued
stable but increases were recorded for tires and tubes, carpets, sheets, and
some others. (Data on wholesale prices may be found in appendix table
C-22.)
Consumers' prices. Consumers' prices were firm during most of 1949.
The decline which began in October 1948 continued steadily until February
1949. From then until November consumers' prices moved within a
relatively narrow range. In November the consumers' price index was
168.6, less than 2 percent below the level of 171.4 reached in December
1948, and about 3 percent below their postwar peak of 174.5. (See chart
5 and table 2.) Preliminary indications are that consumers' prices
declined in December.




33

CHART 5

CONSUMERS' PRICES
For most of the year, consumers' prices fluctuated within a
relatively narrow range primarily because of the movements
in food prices. Apparel prices declined steadily while rents
continued to rise.
PERCENT OF 1935-39 AVERAGE
220

PERCENT OF 1935-39 AVERAGE
220

200 -

- 200

180 -

- 180

160 -

- 160

- 140

- 120

100
11111111T1111111111 iTi 11111111 r n

1947

1946

1949

1948

PERCENTAGE CHANGES
DECREASE

INCREASE
JUNE 1946 TO POSTWAR PEAK

ALL ITEMS'

|£j POSTWAR PEAK TO NOV. 1949
OEC. 1948 TO NOV. 1949

FOOD

APPAREL

RENT
* A L S O INCLUDES HOUSEFORNISHINGS, FUEL, ELECTRICITY, REFRIGERATION, AND MISCELLANEOUS GOODS
AND SERVICES NOT SHOWN ON THIS CHART.
* « NOVEMBER 1949 IS POSTWAR PEAK.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR




34

The course of consumers' prices throughout the year was dominated by
the behavior of retail food prices, which had been declining steadily since
July 1948 and reached an initial low point in February 1949. From then
until June, retail food prices moved up again. A minor dip occurred in
July, but by September there was a return almost to the June level. In
November retail food prices were 2 percent below the level of December
1948. The drop from their postwar peak was about 7 percent, less than
half that in wholesale food prices.
Apparel prices declined steadily, and housefurnishings declined for most
of the year. Fuel prices recovered from the midyear decline. The miscellaneous items in the consumers' price index increased during the year and
rents moved continuously upward. (See appendix table C-21 for more
detail on consumers' prices.)
TABLE 2.—Changes in consumers* prices
Percentage change
Commodity group

December 1948
December 1948
June 1949
to
to
to
November 1949 November 1949
June 1949

All items

-1. 1

Food..
Apparel
_.
Rent.
Fuel, electricity, and refrigeration
Housefurnishings
Miscellaneous

—5 0
q
-1. 6
-5. 7
1

+

+.

e>

-1.6

-1 7
-2 1

—2.0
-7.0

+2. 6

+2.1
+.9

4-1. 9

0
5
+'.

-6.6

+.6

Source: Department of Labor (see appendix table 0-21).

Wages and related matters
Wages. In the face of some decline in the cost of living and a slackening
in employment, demand, and profits in many industries, the pressure for
wage increases, which had been general during the first three postwar
years, became less urgent and more selective in 1949. A substantial number
of organized workers obtained wage increases, but the increases were far
fewer and somewhat smaller in amount than in previous years. With the
labor market easing off, and with the union drive for higher wage rates
slackening, nonunion and clerical workers in private industry apparently
also received smaller increases than in previous years.
It is estimated that general wage rate increases negotiated in 1949
affected about one-third of the 15 million organized workers, while in
1948 a large majority of them received wage increases. The number of
nonunion workers receiving wage increases in 1949 is not known, but it
doubtless was well below previous postwar years. There was no general
wage pattern in 1949. In fact, the industries where wage increases were
common in 1949 were not pattern setters, and in many instances had not
been pattern followers in former years. Federal legislation raised the




35

salaries of some 3 million United States Government workers, including
those in the armed services.
For the first time in the past decade, some organized workers were
called upon to accept wage cuts. In the main, however, the wage decreases
for unionized workers resulted from agreements tying wage rates to small
changes in the consumers' price index. There were a few instances of
union locals agreeing to a general cut in wage rates. Wage cuts were
apparently more frequent among nonunion establishments.
Salaries, wages, and other labor income increased from 135.1 billion dollars in 1948 to 136.8 billion in 1949. Average weekly earnings in manufacturing increased from $54.14 to $54.78. Since the consumers' price index
went down 1.6 percent, the real income of employed wage and salary workers
appears to have increased slightly more than is indicated by the change
in money income. (See appendix tables C - l l , C-12, and C-13 for detail
on hours and earnings.)
Pensions, insurance, and other supplementary benefits. One of the outstanding developments in 1949 was the growth of pension and social insurance plans financed in whole or in part by employers. Although an
estimate of the number of workers securing additional benefits in 1949
under established plans or acquiring coverage for the first time is not
presently available, it appears likely that it will be substantially more than
1 million. In many instances the change in established plans amounted
to a small concession to unions seeking greater gains, but in other instances
the changes represented an important long-run charge upon industry.
Most of the recently negotiated plans are tied to the social security program,
so that the costs involved in the private plans will decline if benefits under
the Government program are increased.
Other supplementary benefits appeared in most of the year's settlements.
Only a minority failed to provide either a wage increase or some fringe
benefit, sometimes of significant size.
Commitments to establish company-financed pension and insurance plans
and the adoption of a higher Federal minimum wage to take effect in
January 1950, have substantially increased potential expenditures for labor.
Work stoppages. The number of work stoppages was about the same as
in 1948. The two most important were those in the coal and steel industries which affected about 800 thousand workers and accounted for half of
the man-days lost through work stoppages. As a result, man-days of idleness were 50 percent higher than in 1948. By the year's end, the steel
shut-down was over and steel output was above 93 percent of capacity. The
issues involved in the coal stoppage were still largely unsettled although the
miners had returned to work on a 3-day-week basis.

Profits
The moderate decline in economic activity and in prices which marked
1949 was accompanied, as was only to be expected, by a sharper drop




36

in profits. As conventionally measured, corporate profits before and after
taxes averaged more than 20 percent below their 1948 levels, while the gross
national product dropped less than 2 percent and wholesale prices less
than 7 percent.
Corporate profits before taxes (not adjusted for inventory valuation) for
1949 are estimated at 27.6 billion dollars, compared with the 1948 level
of 34.8 billion.
Corporate profits declined sharply during the first half of the year, and
by the second quarter were at an annual rate of 26.4 billion dollars before
taxes. During the third quarter, profits before taxes were at an annual rate
of 28.0 billion dollars. The rebound in manufacturing activity and the
peak rate of automobile output were mainly responsible for this increase.
Largely because of the work stoppages, however, profits before taxes fell to
an estimated annual rate of 26.5 billion in the fourth quarter. (See chart 6.)
Corporate profits after taxes in 1949 are estimated at 16.7 billion dollars,
compared with 21.2 billion in 1948. The 1949 return represented over
4 percent on sales and over 8 percent on net worth, compared with about
5 percent and 11 percent, respectively, in 1948.
CHART 6

CORPORATE PROFITS
Corporate profits during the 1st half of 1949 showed a
considerable decline reflecting the drop in prices and production.
The trend of profits was upward in the second half of the year,
interrupted by work stoppages. Dividends continued to rise.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

40

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
ANNUAL RATES, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

40

PROFITS BEFORE T A X E S *

30

20

20

10

10
DIVIDEND PAYMENTS
...i
i

I

I...

2 3 4

1946
*

NO ALLOWANCE

...1 1 1 1 i
1

2

3

4

1947

FOR INVENTORY

VALUATION

1

1 1...
2

3

1948

4

I
i

i
2

3 ^ 4-s/

1949

ADJUSTMENT.

•^PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS; BASED ON INCOMPLETE DATA.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE (EXCEPT AS NOTED)




37

The drop in net farm income also was substantial. Net farm income
before taxes (including value of physical changes in inventories) is estimated at 15.0 billion dollars for 1949, a drop of more than 18 percent from
the 1948 level of 18.4 billion. The most stable element in profits was the
income of unincorporated business and the professions. For this group,
net income before taxes (not adjusted for inventory valuation) is estimated
at about 23.4 billion dollars, a decline of 6 percent from the 1948 level
of 24.9 billion. (See appendix table C-4.)
The conventional measures of business profits during the past four years
have been complicated by the changes in the price level and by the effect
of these changes upon the value placed upon inventories. Prior to the last
quarter of 1948 the price level was constantly rising. Since then it has
been falling. When inventories are sold and replaced at higher prices, part
of the profits reported by business are locked up in the higher costs of the
inventory and are therefore unavailable for other purposes. In periods
when inventories are replaced at lower prices, funds are released, thus increasing the availability of funds to business beyond that indicated by the
current reports on profits. Thus, the conventional measure of profits leaves
uncertain the availability of such profits for investment in new plant and
equipment, and for the payment of dividends.
For the years 1946 to 1948, when prices were rising, the added cost of
replacing inventories relative to the profits reported by corporations was
as shown in table 3. During 1949, when prices fell, the costs of replacing
inventories were correspondingly reduced. The reduction in cost of replacing inventories during 1949 is estimated at 2.7 billion dollars, in contrast
to an increase of 2.2 billion in 1948.
TABLE 3.—Corporate profits and costs of replacing*inventories
[Billions of dollars]
Corporate
profits before
taxes

Period

1946 1947
1948 2
1949

-

23.6
31.6
34.8
27.6

Corporate
profits after
taxes
13.9
19.1
21.2
16.7

Changes in
costs of
replacing
inventories l
+5.2
+6.0
+2.2
-2.7

1
1

Inventory valuation adjustment with signs reversed. See appendix table C-4.
Estimates based on incomplete data; first half by Department of Commerce and second half by Council
of Economic Advisers.
Sources: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

This resulted in a net shift of 4.9 billion dollars in the cost of replacing
inventories, compared with 1948. Hence, although corporate profits after
taxes fell 4.5 billion dollars, the funds internally available for new plant and
equipment and for the payment of dividends were somewhat more in 1949
than in 1948. There was no longer need for working capital to absorb
an increasing value placed on goods in inventory, a factor which had been




responsible for much of the increase in bank credit required by business in
earlier years. Coupled with the liquidation of inventories which marked
the recession in the first half of the year, this made funds available which
permitted corporate managers to reduce bank borrowings and to increase
dividends, while maintaining new investment in plant and equipment at a
high level. (Detailed statistics on profits may be found in appendix tables
C-4, and C-29 to C-34.)
MONEY AND CREDIT

The four important features in the field of money and credit in 1949
were the relaxation of credit restrictions, the usual heavy draft upon the
supply of money incident to the payment of Federal taxes in the first
quarter of the year, the resumption of private credit expansion during the
latter part of the year, and the beginning of a period of deficit financing and
public debt enlargement.
The decline in business loans during the first half of the year did not
reflect any real credit tightness. Most business firms were comfortable
in their financial situation. The volume of business, even while the recessionary movement was under way, was sufficiently large and profitable for
business loans to be paid off when declining inventories released a part of
the working capital invested therein. In the first 7 months of the year,
business loans of the leading city banks declined 17 percent reaching 12.9
billion dollars at the end of July.
Before the end of the third quarter, the downward trend of business loans
was reversed. Expanding business activity again created a demand for
working capital, and the movement continued to the end of the year, when
the business loans of leading city banks were 13.9 billion dollars, compared
with 15.6 billion a year earlier. The business loans and other loans of country banks were never affected in the same degree. Total loans of all commercial banks in the United States continued at a higher level in every
month in 1949 than in the corresponding month of 1948. However, the
course was very different in the two years. In 1948, bank loans were rising
steadily throughout the year, reaching the postwar peak in December. In
1949, there was a slight decline in bank loans until July. There then began
an expansion which gained a higher level in each succeeding month.
In the first quarter of the year, automobile instalment credit increased
moderately while other kinds of instalment credit declined markedly. Regulations affecting instalment credit terms were then relaxed and the volume
of instalment credit resumed its advance at about the previous postwar
rate. In the third quarter, with the expiration of controls, the growth of
instalment credit was accelerated. By the end of the year automobile instalment credit outstanding had increased over 60 percent from the end of
1948.
The Federal Reserve System contributed to the general easing of credit




39

terms during the year by a number of actions including several reductions
in reserve requirements. Although business loans continued to diminish
as business requirements contracted, Federal Reserve action helped to
avoid any general pressure for credit liquidation and improved the foundation for the expansion of business which occurred later in the year. There
was also some easing in the terms and availability of credit to private borrowers and to State and local governments. Both long- and short-term
interest rates declined during the year. One important observable result
of the reduction of reserve requirements was an enlargement of bank
holdings of Government securities, with a corresponding expansion in bank
liquidity positions.
Since income tax payments are so much higher than before the war, the
heavy concentration of Federal tax payments within the winter months has
the effect of causing a sharp decline in bank deposits during the first quarter
of each year. Although this decline is often anticipated in part by a
preceding accumulation of deposits, the concentrated drain within a short
period reduces buying power.
Demand bank deposits, the largest element in the money supply,
declined 2.9 billion dollars from the end of December 1946 to the end of
March 1947. In 1948, the decline in the first quarter was 5.6 billion
dollars, and in the first quarter of 1949 it was 4.4 billion. These declines
are closely related to the payment of Federal taxes within this period, when
a heavily disproportionate part of the personal and corporate income taxes
of each year are paid notwithstanding the shift to the withholding plan
affecting most individual income taxpayers. The interruptions in the
march of strong and inflationary forces in early 1947 and early 1948, and the
progress of the recessionary movement in the first half of 1949, were not
unrelated to this seasonal reduction in the money supply. (See chart 7.)
In April 1949, the gross national debt was reduced to 251.6 billion dollars by use of the Treasury surplus of the preceding 3 months. Federal
expenditures exceeded receipts in every succeeding month except June,
September, and December, when quarterly income tax payments created
surpluses. The gross Government debt increased each month, reaching
about 257 billion dollars by the end of the year.
In 1949, the monetary and fiscal policies adopted since the beginning of
the war again permitted the Treasury to secure funds without causing a
tightening of the money market or a restriction of credit. On the contrary, there developed a movement to lower interest rates which was
exhibited in a market demand for Government securities so strong that
the Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve System felt that it
should exert less pressure against a rise in the market price. Its statement on June 28, 1949, that its open market operations in buying and
selling Government securities would permit greater freedom to the market
was followed by a substantial rise in bond prices and by an increased




40

CHART 7

MONEY SUPPLY
The heavy concentration of Federal income tax collections
in the

1st quarter

tends to contract the money supply

in that period of the year.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
200

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
200

TOTAL MONEY SUPPLY
175

175

150

150

125

125

CURRENCY OUTSIDE BANKS

100

100

75

50
ADJUSTED DEMAND DEPOSITS

25

J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N O

1947

1948

1949

END OF MONTH

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

CHANGES IN DEMAND DEPOSITS
(MAGNIFIED SCALE)
+5

+5

V

V

I I I I I 1 I I 1 I1
i i i i i i i i i
I 1 I I I I I I I I I
J FM AMJ J A S O N D J F W A M J
J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D
1947
1948
1949
SOURCE: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM




-5

market demand for short-term securities. Yields were driven down so
low that the Committee directed sales by the Federal Reserve Banks of
large amounts of short-term issues in order to provide a means for investment of some of the excess reserves and thereby avoid disorderly moneymarket conditions. During the second half of the year, yields on long-term
bonds continued at close to the lowest levels of the postwar period, while
short-term rates rose somewhat from the low level reached in July. (Statistics on money, banking, and credit are given in appendix tables C-24 to
C-28).
T H E FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER

Consumer income, spending, and saving
For 1949 as a whole, consumer income (personal income before taxes) and
expenditures were about equal to the levels of 1948. Such income in each
year totaled about 212 billion dollars, and expenditures were about 179
billion. Since income taxes were lower, income at the disposal of consumers increased slightly, and the rate of saving went up correspondingly.
Peak rates of disposable income (income after taxes) were reached late
in 1948, and personal saving reached a peak early in 1949. Disposable
income in 1949 was 192.9 billion dollars, compared with 190.8 billion in
1948. But the trend of disposable income in 1949 was downward, falling
in every quarter. (See chart 8.) It reached an annual rate of 191.1
billion in the fourth quarter. This was in marked contrast to the 1948
trend, when disposable income rose in each quarter. Personal saving declined from the exceptionally high rate of 16.3 billion dollars or 8.4 percent
of disposable income in the first quarter of 1949 to 13.1 billion or 6.9 percent
of disposable income in the fourth quarter. This decline resulted from
declines in income coupled with remarkable stability in total consumption
expenditures. (Appendix B and appendix tables C-2, G-5, C-6, C-7, and
C-8 provide statistics on consumer income, spending, and saving.)
Major components of personal income. The major impact of the decline in business activity was registered principally in lower incomes of
corporate business, rather than in personal incomes. During the first half
of 1949 total compensation of employees dropped, but has since then
remained firm despite work stoppages. Business and professional income
was fairly constant in 1949 after a small initial drop from the fourth quarter
of 1948. Farm income, on the other hand, dropped substantially throughout 1949. Cash farm incomes from marketings fell from 30.5 billion dollars
in 1948 to 27.7 billion in 1949. Net farm income after expenses fell more
than total income because farm expenses remained high, and inventories increased less than in 1948. The minor components of income (rents, dividends, and interest) remained nearly stable throughout last year or increased slightly.




CHART 8

CONSUMER INCOME, SPENDING,
AND SAVING
Although postwar peaks of disposable income and expenditures were
reached late in 1948, the crest in personal saving was not
attained until the first part of 1949. Income and saving dropped
during 1949, while expenditures remained almost stable.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

250 I

1 250
ANNUAL RATES.SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

200 -

- 200
DISPOSABLE
INCOME

^

(PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES)

^ , ^ 0 $

SHI
•ill

100 -

^^^^^^^^^^^^CONSUMPTION

1941

1942

1943

1944

150

100

EXPENDITIURES^^

50 <

^

Hiiii

ijllll

150 -'

1945

1946

1947

1948

50

I949 jy

1

FOURTH QUARTER ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS , BASED ON INCOMPLETE DATA.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE (EXCEPT AS NOTED)

Consumer expenditures. Consumer expenditures were fairly stable
throughout 1949 at an annual rate between 178 and 179 billion dollars.
This level was equal to that for 1948 as a whole, but about 2 billion dollars
below that of the second half of that year. Throughout 1949 there was a
noticeable change in the composition of expenditures, with an increased
proportion going to services and durable goods.
Heavy purchase of durable goods in 1949 was due largely to the greater
availability of automobiles, for which there was a substantial excess demand
at the beginning of the year. Automobile instalment credit outstanding
expanded rapidly starting in March, and other instalment credit also
increased. Moderate drops in the prices of foods and apparel helped to
sustain volume in nondurable lines. While department store sales were
about 5 percent below the dollar volume of 1948, unit volume was probably
maintained through price reductions, promotions, and sales of lower-priced
merchandise. (See appendix table G-20.)

8G8143—50




43

Service expenditures continued to increase in 1949. Housing services
increased as a result of higher actual and imputed rental values, and an
increased total supply of residential units. Rents and utility costs were both
significantly above 1948, offsetting to a considerable extent declines in other
consumer prices. A variety of miscellaneous service charges, such as interest
on consumer debt, also rose, pushing total expenditure for services up
significantly.
CHART 9

PERSONAL SAVING

SELECTED ITEMS

Tangible investment in homes and business assets declined by about
$ 2 billion from 1948 to 1 9 4 9 . In 1949, the increase in liquid
assets exceeded the increase in debt for the first time since 1946.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
—I 20

NET TANGIBLE INVESTMENT

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
20

NET FINANCIAL SAVING

-'NET FINANCIAL SAVING EQUALS THE INCREASE IN LIQUID ASSETS MINUS THE INCREASE IN DEBT.
-'ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS; BASED ON INCOMPLETE OATA.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (EXCEPT AS NOTED)




44

Net personal saving. Net personal saving (gross saving less increases
in consumer credit and other forms of dissaving) in 1949 as a whole was
14.4 billion dollars, compared with 12.0 billion in 1948. However, it
decreased throughout the year. The first quarter saving was at an annual
rate of 16.3 billion dollars. By the fourth quarter it had fallen to 13.1
billion.
This net saving represented a much larger positive saving on the part of
many families, offset in part by very substantial dissaving by other families.
The main forms of dissaving are drawing down liquid assets and going into
debt for durable consumer goods or family expenses. Personal saving includes both investment in tangible assets—such as homes, business and farm
equipment—and liquid (or financial) saving. It does not include purchases of durable consumer goods, even though the purchasers of such goods
may regard them as long-term capital assets. Personal saving includes not
only what we ordinarily think of as consumer saving, but also the saving
done by unincorporated businesses, farms, and nonprofit organizations.
In chart 9, showing all forms of personal saving, the tangible forms are
shown in the top segment, and in the lower segment is shown the financial
saving, which includes increases in liquid assets (such as currency and
deposits in banks, bonds, and stocks) less net increases in debt.
TABLE 4.—Components of personal saving 1
[Billions of dollars]
Item

1946

Increases in liquid assets..

1947

1948

15.3

Currency, deposits, U. S. Government bonds, and saving and loan shares.-Insurance reserves
Corporate and State and municipal securities

11.5

7.8

11.6
3.4
.3

6.5
3.7
1.4

1.4
3.5
2.9

9.2

Equals: Net financial saving

7.9

4.1
3.3
4.2

4.1
2.5
1.4

6.1

Mortgage debt (residential)..
Consumer debt
Business debt

11.6

3.2
3.3
2.6

Less: Increase in debt.

-.1

Plus: Net tangible investment..

-.1
13.6

Personal business investment.
Purchases of new homes

4.3
2.5

1.8
4.6

7.0
6.6

Less: Statistical discrepancy,.

2.6

1.2

1.6

Equals: Net personal saving..

10.3

5.1

12.0

i See appendix table B-2—for sources and uses of personal funds.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Securities and Exchange Commission.

Since the war a large part of personal saving has consisted of investment
in tangible assets. This accounted for the increase in saving between
1947 and 1948. As shown in table 4, investment in assets of unincorporated businesses and farms rose from 1.8 billion dollars in 1947 to 7.0
billion in 1948, while home purchases increased from 4.6 billion to 6.6 bil-




45

lion. These tangible types of saving were in fact so large in 1947 and 1948
that a substantial amount of business and mortgage debt was incurred in
financing them. This increase in debt offset the rise in holdings of liquid
assets, so that financial saving fell from 6.1 billion dollars in 1946 to negligible amounts in 1947 and 1948. (See chart 9.) Thus on balance personal
saving in 1947 and 1948 was of a type which added directly to demand and
inflationary pressures but supplied no funds to the rest of the economy.
TABLE 5.—Tangible andfinancialsaving^1
[Billions of dollars, unadjusted for seasonal variation]
Tangible
saving

Period

13.6

1949—year
First half
Second half

-1.2
1.0

5.1
6.5

.

-0.1

6.0
7.8
11.6

1948—year
* < First half..
^
Ki "Second half

Net financial
saving

1.7
-.3

1.4

1
The total of estimated financial and tangible saving differs from net personal saving by the statistical
discrepancy of $1.6 billion in 1948 and —$1.4 billion in 1949. See Table 4 above.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Securities and Exchange Commission.

In 1949, as shown in table 5, according to estimates based on rather incomplete data, tangible investment declined, while for the first time since
1946 there was a significant volume of net financial saving. Liquid assets
continued to accumulate at about the 1948 rate, but the rise in debt was
less rapid, particularly in the first part of the year.
Saving by income groups. While personal saving in 1949 was high by
any previous peacetime standards, it is estimated that about one-third of all
American families did not add to their savings, but instead spent more
than their current incomes, either by drawing down their assets or by going
into debt. Data for 1948 (the most recent available) show that the lowest
two-fifths of the population, classified in terms of current income,
as a whole spent more than their incomes. There was a substantial amount
of dissaving by many families in all income brackets (as shown in appendix
table B-5); however, in the lower two-fifths of the population amounts
dissaved greatly exceeded positive saving. Moreover, there was a sharp
upward trend in the amount of dissaving by the lower-income groups from
1945 through 1948.
A great part of dissaving in the past 3 years in both lower- and middleincome groups has been in the form of consumer credit obtained to purchase automobiles and other consumer durables. About 59 percent of the
dissaving families reported purchases of durable goods in 1948, despite the
fact that the families in the lowest-fifth income group as a whole spent
20 percent more than their income for nondurable goods and services.
(See appendix table B-8.)




46

In the lower- and middle-income groups a large volume of saving is
now contractual, in the form of mortgage-amortization payments, lifeinsurance premiums, and payments into retirement funds. Private insurance equities, which are the type of asset most commonly owned by all
income groups, have increased by about 3.5 billion dollars each year for the
last several years. Home improvements as well as home purchases were also
important in 1947 and 1948.
l
TABLE 6.—Net personal saving and net income of each fijtKoj the*Nation's spending units
Spending units ranked by
size of income
Lowest fifth
Second fifth
Third fifth
Fourth fifth
Highest fifth
All spending units

Percentage of net saving l
1941

1946

1945

Percentage
of net
income,
1948

1948

1947

-7
0
8
11
88

0
6
9
21
64

-8
3
5
21
79

-13
1
7
12
93

-24
-3
7
21
99

4
11
16
22
47

100

100

100

100

100

100

* For a definition of the spending unit and a distribution of positive and negative saving, see appendix B .
Sources: Department of Labor (1941) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1945-48).

Table 6 shows that saving has been highly concentrated among the
groups with the largest incomes. Much of the saving was in the form of
increased holdings of corporate securities and tax-exempt State and municipal issues. Personal holdings of these assets, which are held almost exclusively
by upper-income recipients and trusts, increased 2.9 billion dollars in 1948,
as shown in table 4.
The ability of families in all income ranges to spend in excess of current
income has been greatly increased by the liquidation of personal debts and
mortgages and the acquisition of liquid assets, mainly bank deposits and
Government bonds, that occurred during the war. The increase in the
amount of negative saving, especially among lower-income groups, indicates
that since the war large groups of the population have incurred
substantial debt obligations and made inroads into liquid reserves. Total
holdings of liquid assets by all individuals have continued to increase,
although at a diminishing rate.
Business investment and finance
The decline in the gross national product which marked 1949 reflected
primarily a decline in the level of gross private domestic investment. In
1949 gross private domestic investment amounted to an estimated 36.8
billion dollars, compared with an estimated 45.0 billion in 1948, a drop
of 8.2 billion, or about 18 percent. The drop in the gross national product
was only 3.7 billion dollars. Gross private investment last year was 14.2
percent of the gross national product, compared with 17.1 percent in 1948.
(See appendix table C-l.)
Investment fell steadily in the first two quarters of the year, and after
that showed little change. It is estimated that the rate in the final quarter




47

represented about 13.7 percent of the gross national product, compared
with 17.8 percent in the peak fourth quarter of 1948. The current ratio is
somewhat below that characteristic of previous peacetime high levels of
activity.
Of the three components of gross private domestic investment—construction, equipment, and inventory accumulation—it was mainly the shift
from inventory accumulation to inventory liquidation which accounted
for the fall in the total. Thus, on a seasonally adjusted basis the gross
national product fell from its peak annual rate of about 270 billion dollars
in the fourth quarter of 1948 to about 255 billion in the fourth quarter of
1949, a decline of 15 billion. During the same period, gross private domestic investment fell 13 billion dollars, or from an annual rate of 48 billion
in the last quarter of 1948 to an annual rate of 35 billion dollars in the fourth
quarter of 1949. The annual rate of inventory accumulation declined 10.5
billion dollars, from a rate of 9 billion dollars in the fourth quarter of 1948
to a liquidation of 1.5 billion dollars in the fourth quarter of 1949. The
balance of the drop in gross private investment occurred in producers'
durable equipment, which during the same period fell 3 billion dollars.
Most of the drop in this component took place in the fourth quarter. Private new construction, which rose during the second half of the year, was
running at a somewhat higher rate in the fourth quarter than a year
earlier. (See chart 10.)
Plant and equipment. Total plant and equipment outlays declined
1.4 billion dollars, or almost 5 percent, in 1949 compared with 1948. The
drop occurred in nonfarm outlays as farm expenditures for these items
remained about the same. (See chart 10 and also appendix table C-3.)
Nonfarm plant and equipment outlays for 1949 are estimated at about
6 percent below the very high 1948 rate. After allowing for price
changes, the decline in real volume was about two-thirds of the drop
in money outlays. The trend of such expenditures has been downward
from the peak in the last half of 1948, and by the fourth quarter of 1949
was almost 16 percent below the level a year earlier.
Manufacturing outlays for plant and equipment (see appendix table
C-17) declined almost 15 percent between 1948 and 1949. Manufacturing
(which represented 40 percent of the nonfarm plant and equipment outlays in 1949) accounted for over 90 percent of the decline in the total dollar
volume of outlays for new plant and equipment. Transportation other
than railroads showed a decline of over 27 percent. Outlays of mining,
and commercial and miscellaneous industries declined about 9 percent
and 6 percent, respectively. On the other hand, railroads and electric
and gas utilities increased their investment outlays in 1949. The increase
in railroad investment was only slight. Their plant and equipment
outlays, which in 1949 had been ahead of 1948 in both of the first two
quarters, were in the final quarter of 1949 sharply below the correspond-




CHART 10

CHANGES IN BUSINESS INVESTMENT
The shift from accumulation of inventories in 1948 to liquidation in 1949
was the most striking change in business investment. Slight declines
were recorded for new construction and new producers' durable
equipment.
(BILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
LIQUIDATION
-10
0
1

INVESTMENT
20
30

10
1

1

GROSS PRIVATE
DOMESTIC
NVESTMENT

NEW
CONSTRUCTION

i

"*

•••••••'•"

CHANGE FROM
1948 TO 1949
-10
0

1

1948
1949"

50

40

j

1

Zl

NEW PRODUCERS'
DURABLE
EQUIPMENT

1

CHANGE IN
BUSINESS
INVENTORIES

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

ing quarter of 1948. Outlays by utilities increased 18 percent, gaining
quarter by quarter over 1948, but the gains were narrowing.
The decline in nonfarm investment in plant and equipment during 1949
does not appear to have been accelerated by the downturn in the first half
of 1949, but represents an orderly tapering off of programs along lines that
had been planned by the end of 1948.
Nonfarm business inventories. The process of inventory liquidation,
which was a major factor in the decline in business activity during 1949,
was slackening by the latter part of the year and in many areas was being
reversed. Since the level of consumption remained high, many producers
discovered that inventories were being reduced more than was consistent
with maintaining production equal to consumption. Business buying was
resumed on a more normal basis and more in line with the rate of sales.
A strong contributory factor was the firming up of the price structure. The
process of rebuilding inventories in the main proceeded cautiously. There
were few signs of any speculative developments.
The book value of inventories in manufacturing and trade reached a
peak of 58.6 billion dollars on a seasonally adjusted basis at the end of




49

November 1948. By the end of October 1949, the book value had declined
to 54.5 billion dollars, a drop of about 7 percent. The largest drop was
in manufacturing, where book values dropped about 9 percent compared
with about 5 percent in wholesaling and 4 percent in retailing. (See
appendix tables C-18 to C-20.)
The drop in the book value of inventories reflected in part the drop in
prices and in part actual physical liquidation. By the third quarter of
1949, the liquidation of nonfarm inventories was at a seasonally adjusted
annual rate of 2.6 billion dollars, a shift of almost 10 billion dollars from
an inventory accumulation at an annual rate of 7.1 billion dollars in the
fourth quarter of 1948. The rate of liquidation of inventories in the third
quarter of 1949 was higher than in the second quarter. However, in the
last quarter of the year there was a drop to an annual rate of 1.5 billion
dollars. Trade inventories, seasonally adjusted, in October were appreciably above their summer lows.
While the liquidation was continuing in manufacturing, its character
was changing. Initially liquidation began in purchased materials, thus
reflecting the fear of price declines. By the end of the third quarter, liquidation had substantially slackened for purchased materials but was continuing
for finished durable goods. There was some evidence in the third quarter
that inventories of steel were being built up in anticipation of the work
stoppage. During the fourth quarter, work stoppages in the steel and the
coal industries depleted the inventories of these commodities. The settlement of the work stoppage in the steel industry led to strong pressure to
rebuild the stocks of this vital commodity.
The ratio of manufacturers' inventories to sales in November 1949 was
lower than at the end of 1948. For wholesalers the October ratio was
somewhat higher, for retailers slightly lower, than a year earlier. Manufacturers' and retailers' inventory-sales ratios were still considerably below
prewar levels.
Corporate finance. The change from increasing inventory costs and
increasing customer credit in 1948 to the situation of inventory reduction
and small increase in customer credit in 1949 permitted corporate business
to improve its liquidity position, while continuing large outlays for new
plant and equipment. There were many corporations which experienced
financial difficulty in 1949, but for the group as a whole there was a growth
in financial strength and a large number of business firms increased their
dividends.
Financing the growing volume and costs of inventories and the enlargement of customer credit in 1948 absorbed 8.6 billion dollars of corporate
funds. In 1949, on the contrary, there was only a small increase in customer credit, and the liquidation of 3.7 billion dollars in inventory accounts
added this sum to the funds resulting from the profits of current business
operations. The internal funds available for new investment included also




those from depreciation charges which rose by 13 percent, compared with
1948. (See appendix table C-34.)
On account of the improved financial position of corporations, funds
from internal sources were more than equal to the requirements for capital
investment in 1949, while in 1948, when there were large increases in
inventories and customer credit as well as larger outlays for plant and
equipment, they were only about 70 percent of such requirements. There
was little change in the amount of corporate debt, a decline of 4.2 billion
dollars in short-term debt being offset by an increase in bonded and other
long-term debt. The net increase of 3.7 billion dollars in bond issues was
substantially less than in 1948 while stock issues of 1.4 billion provided
slightly more new equity capital than in the preceding year. An increase
of 2.5 billion dollars in liquid assets marked the improved liquidity of
corporate treasuries.
Construction, In spite of a slow start, the volume of construction in
1949 exceeded the high level attained in 1948. The strength in construction acted to minimize the general decline in the first half of 1949 and
was one of the main forces of revival evident in the second half. The
total volume of construction, public and private, amounted in 1949 to 19.3
billion dollars compared with 18.8 billion in 1948, a rise of 3 percent. Public construction, which accounted for 27 percent of total construction in
1949, increased by 25 percent. Private construction showed a slight drop
of 4 percent in dollar terms, but residential construction was particularly
strong in the second half of the year, rising on a seasonally adjusted basis
to a new postwar peak in the fourth quarter. The total rate of activity at
the year's end was about 11.4 percent above that for December 1948. In
addition the backlog of contracts let is now considerably higher than a year
ago, so that 1950 will begin at higher levels than 1949. (See appendix
table C-16.)
The construction of factories and commercial facilities declined somewhat during the year. Since activity in these areas began promptly after
the end of the war and went forward more rapidly than did public construction, the subsequent declines were not unexpected.
In the field of utilities, the large increase in the number of families and
in income has greatly increased the demand for communication, power,
and transportation facilities. To date public utilities (including a considerable amount of Federal power development) have not yet been able
to meet these needs. Utility firms in general continued their long-range
programs throughout the year despite the hesitancy evidenced by them
early last year. While construction of communications facilities declined,
this decrease was more than offset by increases in electric power and gas
industries.
The year 1949 turned out to be a record one for residential construction.
The increase in private building construction during the year was confined




largely to residential building, and was particularly large in the field of
multi-family structures. The slow start was due in part to the adjustment
the industry was making to lower prices and to building for rent rather
than for sale. The average cost per dwelling unit fell approximately 10
percent from the summer of 1948 to the first part of 1949. While less
than 9 percent of private residential starts in 1947, and less than 11 percent
in 1948, were multi-family units, over 14 percent were multi-family units in
January 1949, and for the first 8 months of the year the number of
these units started was 28 percent higher than in the comparable months
of 1948 and represented 16 percent of all private starts.
It took time for builders, material manufacturers, and lenders to adjust to this shift in housing markets and housing types. The shift was
facilitated by the renewal of section 608 of the National Housing Act which
provided for insurance of rental projects on favorable terms. By May, the
industry was responding to the improved conditions. In July, the private
starts were higher than the July figure for any previous year since the war.
The easing of interest rates and of credit, including liberalization of laws
governing RFC purchases of real estate mortgages, also were important in
holding this volume high through the rest of the year. Public housing rose
also, and the total volume of private and public starts continued to rise
until September when it reached approximately 100,000 units. It stayed
at this level in October, making an all-time record for this month, and thereafter declined less than seasonally.
Public construction showed the greatest strength. This was due largely
to the fact that public construction of a nonmilitary nature had been
restrained since 1940. There was great need for schools, hospitals, highways, and natural resources development, despite high costs. A larger
volume of public bond issues for public construction purposes was voted
in 1949 than in any previous postwar year. Public school construction was
three times as great as in 1947 and one and one-half times as great as in 1948.
Public hospital construction was five times as great as in 1947, and more
than twice as great as in 1948. Conservation and development construction also increased, being nearly double that for 1947, and one and onefourth times that in 1948.
International developments
The most notable international economic developments of 1949 were
the critical deterioration of the United Kingdom's and the rest of the
sterling area's dollar position and the subsequent devaluation of the
pound sterling and other foreign currencies in terms of the dollar.
Although the conditions underlying these developments are of great
long-run significance for the American economy, the developments themselves did not greatly affect the economy during 1949. Nevertheless,
the world political and economic situation did exercise an important influence upon economic activity during 1949, not only through the continued




52

necessity for high national defense expenditures, but also through a renewed
expansion of government expenditures to aid foreign countries.
Such aid had declined from 1947 to the middle of 1948, as some of the
early postwar aid programs ended and funds provided by others were used
up. When the European Recovery Program got under way in the second
half of 1948, our aid began to expand again. In 1949, it reached a postwar record total of 5.9 billion dollars, slightly exceeding the previous record
total reached in 1947, and exceeding the 1948 total by 1.2 billion dollars.
This increase did not result in an expansion of exports because it was more
than offset by the decline in other sources of dollars used by foreign countries for making purchases in the United States. The dollar value of our
imports of goods and services and the net outflow of private American
capital decreased while foreign countries as a whole ceased liquidating
their gold and dollar assets. As a result, our total exports of goods and
services actually diminished by a billion dollars from 1948 to 1949. These
developments, which are shown in tables 7 and 8, indicate that the effect
of increased aid was to limit the decline of exports in the face of a reduction
in other ways of financing them. (See also appendix tables C-35 to C-37.)
Table 7 shows that our total receipts from exports of goods and services
and investment income remained high in the first half of the year but fell
sharply in the second half as foreign countries took measures to stop the
second and third quarter depletion of their reserves, while our total payments for goods and services, including income on investments, fell in the
first half of the year and then recovered. As a result, the total export surplus first rose and then shrank rapidly. Although for the year as a whole
the surplus of 5.8 billion dollars was only about one-half billion dollars
below the 1948 figure, it had fallen to an estimated rate of 3.8 billion a year
by the last quarter. These developments are shown in table 7 and in
chart 11.
T A B L E 7.—United States exports and imports of goods and services
[Billions of dollars]
Exports of
goods and
services l

Period

Imports of
goods and
services 1

Surplus of
exports of
goods and
services J

1936-38 average
1946—.
1947
1948
19492
____
Annual rates:
1948—First quarter....
Second quarter,.
Third quarter._.
Fourth quarter.

4.1
15.0
19.7
16.8
15.8

3.6
7.2
8.5
10.5
10.0

0.5
7.8
11.2
6.3
5.8

17.7
16.9
15.8
16.8

10.1
10.1
11.0
10.7

7.6
6.8
4.8
6.1

1949—First quarter....
Second quarter..
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter 2

17.0
17.7
14.5
14.1

10.4
9.7
9.9
10.3

6.6
8.0
4.6

1 Includes income on investments.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—For greater detail see appendix tables C-35 and C-36.
Source: Department of Commerce.




53

CHART 11

EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF
GOODS AND SERVICES
Exports and the export surplus fell sharply in the second
half of 1949.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
ANNUAL RATES

B I L L I O N S OF DOLLARS
ANNUAL RATES

25

25
EXPORTS OF GOODS
AND SERVICES-17
20

20

I 5

I5

10

10

IMPORTS OF GOODS
AND SERVICES *

I

J I
1 2

3

1946

4

1

2

3

I
2

I
3

1948

1947

4

1949

All of the export surplus was financed by ERP or other
Government aid.
15

15
EXPORT SURPLUS

10

-^INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS.
1/ESTIMATE BASED ON INCOMPLETE OATA.
* OTHER MEANS OP FINANCING WAS NEGATIVE IN THIS QUARTER.

SOURCE: U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE




54

Imports of goods declined sharply during the first three quarters of
1949, and, despite a marked recovery beginning in the summer, were
slightly lower than in 1948. Average prices of imported raw materials
and foods had begun to decline in the second half of 1948. In the first
half of 1949, price declines became more general among imported products,
and the total quantity of goods imported also began to fall. The net
result was that by the third quarter of 1949 the dollar value of our merchandise imports had fallen 20 percent below the level for the fourth
quarter of 1948. All economic classes of imports fell in value during this
period except manufactured foodstuffs, the average price of which rose
more than enough to offset the decline in the quantity purchased. These
price and quantity changes were largely a reflection of the improvement
in world production of the products we import and the decline in our own
demand for imports.
TABLE 8.—Financing the surplus of goods and services supplied to foreign countries
[Billions of dollars]
Means of financing
Surplus of
exports of
goods and
services *

Period

1936-38 average .
1946
1947
1948
1949 8
Annual rates:
1948—First quarter
Second quarter. _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter 6
Fourth quarter

_

_

-

.

0.5
7.8
11 2
6.3
58

Government aid
(net) 2

76
6.8
48
6.1
__ _
._ _

5.1
57
4.7
59
51
3.4
41
6.0

6.6
8.0
4.6
3.8

6.3
6.4
5.5
5.3

Liquida- Outflow of
Other
tion of forUnited
eign gold States pri- means of
financing 5
and dollar vate capi(net)
assets 3
tal*
(net)
(net)
0.8
2.0
4.5
.9
—l

0.3
.7
1.0
.4

1.4

1.0

2.2
.6
-.8
-.1
1.3
.4
-1.8

1.4
1.1
.6
.5
.2
.4
.5

0.4
.3
-.3
-.4
.1
-.2

-1.0
.3

1

-1.7
-.2

1
Includes income on investments.
2
Includes grants and loans, but excludes subscription to the capital of the International Bank for Eeconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. For detail, see appendix table C-37.
3
Includes net sales of gold to the United States and net liquidation of foreign dollar assets, including longterm investments. Excludes liquidation of assets held by the International Bank and the International
Monetary Fund.
4
Includes both long-term and short-term capital but excludes purchase of obligations of the International
Bank.
s Includes private gifts, net dollar disbursements by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund, and allowance for errors and omissions.
6
Estimates based on incomplete data.

NOTE.—For greater detail see appendix table C-35.
Source: Department of Commerce.

The drop in our demand for foreign goods was chiefly the result of the
decline of domestic industrial activity, especially business buying, which
is the immediate determinant of imports. Folio wing the reversal of the
business trend the value of imports rose substantially. Most of the recovery




55

was in the quantity of goods brought in. (For further statistics relating to
imports of merchandise see appendix tables C-42, C-43, and C-44.)
The fall in imports of goods during the first half of 1949 was followed
by sharp cuts in merchandise exports after June. In the third quarter
of 1949, exports fell in value 14 percent below the last quarter of 1948,
partly because of reductions in prices throughout the year, and partly because
of 3 very drastic cut in the quantities shipped, primarily to Western Europe
CHART 12

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
IN WESTERN EUROPE
Industrial production in countries participating in the European
Recovery Program has risen greatly.
PERCENT OF 1938

PERCENT OF 1938

140

140
NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION

120

120
EXCLUDING WESTERN
GERMANY

100

100

80

80

— 60

60 —

JH

i l l
M
II
i li
JFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASOND

1946
*

1947

1948

1949

PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES.

SOURCE: ECONOMIC COOPERATION ADMINISTRATION.

and the sterling area. Through November there was no indication of any
recovery in exports. (See appendix tables C-39, C-405 and C-41 for
further statistics relating to exports of merchandise.)
Events leading to devaluation. Since the Congress considered and
authorized the European Recovery Program, great progress has been made
by the Western European countries. In the 12 months ending in September 1949, industrial production in these countries rose 29 percent above
the level of two years earlier, reaching a figure 14 percent above 1938, and,
when Western Germany is excluded, it rose 21 percent in the same two-year
period to a level 26 percent above 1938. (See chart 12.) The quantity




of Western European exports to the rest of the world rose even more sharply,
going from 20 percent below the prewar figure in the first quarter of 1948
to 11 percent above it in the first quarter of 1949, an expansion of 39 percent
in one year. A net shipping deficit of 400 million dollars in 1947 was converted into a net surplus of 300 million in 1948. At the same time substantial, though unequal, progress was made by the Western European
countries in controlling inflationary pressures. As a result of these steps—
combined, it is true, with intensified import restrictions—these countries
were able to reduce substantially their current deficit with the United States
and also with other areas between 1947 and early 1949.
Despite this very great progress, the sterling area's dollar deficit began to
increase rapidly in 1949, causing an acute drain on the gold and dollar reserves of the United Kingdom and culminating in the devaluation of the
pound sterling and other important currencies.
Reversal of the previous expansion of United States imports from Europe
and the rest of the world was only one of several factors in this development.
From the first to the second quarters of the year, the sterling area's gold
and dollar deficit, which is affected by payments on capital as well as current
account, increased by an amount equivalent to 1.2 billion dollars a year. Of
this amount, the increase in its total import surplus with the United States
was at an annual rate of a little more than 700 million dollars. Nearly half
of this represented an increase in sterling area purchases from the United
States and about half was accounted for by a decline in the sterling area's
sale of goods and services to the United States. This decline was attributable largely to our domestic business decline, though also partly to a withholding of orders for goods as the maintenance of the pound at $4.03 came
into question. The price decline in the United States also had the effect
of widening the disparity between domestic and foreign, especially European,
export prices for manufactured goods. (See appendix table C-38.)
Among other causes were the fall in the prices of raw materials exported
by the dependent overseas territories of the Western European countries and
the sterling area, the deterioration in Western Europe's competitive position
resulting from the relatively greater fall in the prices of manufactured
products in the United States than in Europe, and the speculation concerning the value of the pound sterling to which these all gave rise. At the
same time the investment of American capital abroad began to diminish as
the foreign expansion programs of American companies, particularly oil
companies which were responsible for 60 percent of total private American
long-term investment abroad in 1948, were brought nearer completion or
curtailed. Import restrictions had to be further tightened in some countries
and in others earlier relaxations had to be reversed.
The pressure on the gold and dollar assets of the ERP countries, particularly on those of the United Kingdom, appears to have been mainly the
result of dollar payments to other areas rather than of an increase in Western




57

Europe's deficit with the United States. This is shown by the changes in
certain international transactions between the first and second quarters of
1949, shown in the following table in terms of annual rates:
Changes from
first to second
quarters of
1949
(millions of
dollars, annual
rates)

Increase in liquidation of ERP countries' gold and dollar assets

1,468

Increase in ERP countries' goods and services deficit with
United States
160
Decrease in ERP countries' receipts from United States gifts and
investments
176
Increase in dollar payments to other areas and errors and
omissions
1, 132

Most of the increase in dollar payments to the rest of the world went
to the dependent overseas territories of the ERP countries and to other
countries in Africa, Latin America, Asia, and Oceania, areas which consist
largely of the underdeveloped parts of the world. Increased deficits with the
United States were the principal reason for the higher dollar requirements of
these areas, except in the case of Latin America. The deficit of LatinAmerican countries with the United States did not increase much. As a
group they increased their dollar reserves and repaid short-term debt to
this country, but a large portion of this debt was incurred in financing
earlier deficits.
On September 18, the pound sterling was devalued 30% percent in terms
of the dollar, and in the next 2 months many other countries, including most
of those in the sterling area and Western Europe, some in South America,
Finland and Canada, also reduced the dollar values of their currencies.
Most of them devalued by about the same amount as the United Kingdom
but some countries important to our trade devalued by less. This widespread realignment of currency values in terms of the dollar was intended
primarily to correct distortions in prices, costs, production, and trade, and
to make possible an improvement in the balance of payments position of
the devaluing countries in relation to the United States and the rest of the
dollar area.
From the point of view of the United States, devaluation of foreign currencies tends to increase the quantity of our imports. Under normal conditions, it would also tend to reduce the quantity of our total exports. These
influences would normally be expected to exert a downward pressure upon
prices and production in industries competitively affected by imports, and in
our export industries. Under present conditions, however, our exports are
limited mainly by the dollars we make available to other countries through
our purchases, gifts, and foreign investment. Unless these sources of dollars
increased, foreign countries that were losing reserves would have had to cut




their purchases from us in one way or another. It is quite likely, therefore,
that the effect of devaluation, by making our goods more expensive to the
citizens of devaluing countries, will be to lessen the need of these countries
for direct restrictions upon imports. If this is the case, our exports are not
likely to be any lower than they would have been had devaluation not
occurred.
The limited data now available in the short period since devaluation indicate few major effects in United States markets which can clearly be attributed to devaluation. It takes time to make the shifts in trade which
devaluation tends to bring about.
Government transactions
NOTE: AS has been customary in previous reports, government transactions are
here measured on the so-called consolidated cash basis, rather than in the terms
of the conventional budget. Cash payments to and receipts from the public reflect
the volume of current cash transactions between government, on the one hand, and
the public, including business, foreign countries, and international institutions on the
other. All intragovernmental transactions are eliminated. Such data are more
useful for assessing the immediate economic impacts of government programs than
are the data in the conventional budget. A detailed description of the concepts
used is given in the "Budget of the United States, 1950," p. 1375.

Partly under the impact of recessionary tendencies which developed during the first half of the year, and partly as a result of the international
situation, the volume of cash payments in 1949 by all levels of government—
Federal, State, and local—rose substantially above their 1948 levels. The
1948 tax reduction and the 1949 decline in business caused cash receipts
to drop off. The result was a shift of over 10 billion dollars in the net cash
position of all governments, from a surplus of over 7 billion dollars in the
calendar year 1948 to a deficit of 3 billion in 1949. (See table 9 and
chart 13.)
T A B L E 9.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public
IBillions of dollars]
Calendar
year 1948

Total cash receipts

,.-_

Cash payments:
Federal
State and local

_

Total cash payments
Surplus (+) or deficit ( - ) :
Federal
State and local

__

_
_

Estimate based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix A.




__

36.9
15.8

43.1
17.5
60.6

+8.0

-1.7
-1.4
-3.0

-.8

+7.2

Total, surplus (+) or deficit (-)

5

_

_
.

1

868148—50

_

41.4
16.1
57.5

52.7

Cash receipts:
Federal
State and local

Calendar
year 1949»

44.9
15.0
59.9

Receipt or payment

59

With increasing government payments, and with a slight decline in the gross
national product as a result of price and other changes, the ratio of government payments to total output increased from about 20 percent in 1948
to about 2 3 / 2 percent in 1949.
Cash payments by the Federal Government. Table 10 shows the volume of cash payments to the public by the Federal Government during the
calendar years 1948 and 1949. Aggregate payments in 1949 were 6.2
billion dollars higher than in 1948.
TABLE

10.—Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Calendar years
Classification of payment *
1948

Direct payments for goods and services:
To individuals
_
To business and international
Loans and transfer payments to individuals
Loans, investments, subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture
Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions
Clearing account and adjustment to Daily Treasury Statement

1949»

9.0
10.1
11.1
3 6.5
6.5
-.3

38.9

Total Federal cash payments..

8.4
8.7
9.8
3 4.6
5.5
-.2

43.1

1
See appendix A for explanation of revised classification used in this table.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data.
3 Includes about 100 million dollars in interest payments to State and local governments.
NOTE.—Details will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix A.

The causes of the 6-billion-dollar rise in payments between 1948 and
1949 were divided between those arising from the impact of recession, and
those reflecting mainly the international situation. Recessionary forces
accounted for nearly one-half of the total increase in expenditures,
leading to expansion in three major fields: they meant an increase of about
1 billion dollars in unemployment compensation payments, and they meant
a sharp rise in the volume of farm price support loans not redeemed by
producers and taken over from private banks by the Commodity Credit
Corporation, and in the volume of mortgages purchased by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. The increase in these latter cash payments in return for loans and mortgages amounted in the aggregate to
nearly 2 billion dollars.
The needs of defense and foreign aid caused major program expansions,
with an aggregate increase of about 2.8 billion dollars. Other important
increases were in Federal public works, where construction activity in 1949
was some 20 percent higher than in 1948.
Cash payments by State and local governments. As was shown in
table 9, cash payments by State and local governments increased by over
V/2 billion dollars in 1949 above their 1948 level, thereby continuing
the upward trend which has persisted since the war. Expenditures on
schools, roads, and other public works still constitute the most rapidly




60

CHART 13

GOVERNMENT CASH RECEIPTS FROM
AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC
The net cash position of the Federal Government shifted from
a surplus in 1948 to a deficit in 1949. State and local
governments showed a cash deficit in both years.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

50

FEDERAL

20,

'PAYMENTS

10

'RECEIPTS

1948

1949
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
30

STATE AND LOCAL
DEFICIT

1948
CALENDAR

YEARS

SOURCE: SEE APPENDIX A




6i

1949

expanding segment of State and local activities. The increase in unemployment during 1949 led to some expansion in public assistance and
other welfare expenditures, but this was partly offset by a decline in the
total volume of bonus payments to veterans by State governments.
Federal cash receipts; the cash deficit. The calendar year 1949 was the
first full year in which the effects of the tax reduction of the Revenue Act
of 1948 were fully reflected in cash receipts. Receipts from direct taxes
on individuals were over 4 billion dollars lower (at an annual rate) during
the first half of calendar 1949 than during the same period of 1948, and tax
refunds were over half a billion dollars higher. These were the major
factors explaining the decline of 3.5 billion dollars in cash receipts of the
Federal Government, from 44.9 billion dollars in 1948 to 41.4 billion last
year. Corporate tax payments rose nearly 1 billion dollars, reflecting the
high profits of 1948. But this was more than offset by the continued sharp
down trend in receipts from surplus property and in other miscellaneous
receipts. Because of the deferred payment of taxes (particularly corporate
income taxes) receipts during the next 18 months will reflect in considerable degree the recession of 1949. (See table 11.)
TABLE

11.—Federal cash receipts from the public

[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
Calendar 1949
Source of cash receipts

Calendar
1948

Total i
Direct taxes on individuals
Direct taxes on corporations
Employment taxes
Excises and customs
Surplus property receipts
Deposits by States, unemployment insuranceVeterans' life insurance premiums
Other.
Less: Refunds of receipts
Total Federal cash receipts from the public..

First
half

Second
halfi

20.9
ll.l
2.5
7.9
1.2
1.0
.4
2.1
2.2

18.4
12.0
2.5
8.0
.5
1.0
.4
1.4
2.8

18.7
12.0
2.5
7.9
.7
.9
.4
1.4
2.8

18.2
12.0
2.5
8.0
.3
1.1
.4
1.4
2.8

44.9

41.4

41.7

41.2

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix A.

Reduced receipts and higher expenditures meant a marked shift in
the net cash position of the Federal Government. While 1948 showed a
cash surplus of some 8 billion dollars, the result for 1949 was a deficit of
about 1.7 billion. There was an increase during 1949 of approximately
the same amount in the national debt held by the public, reflecting increased sales of securities to the public.
Cash receipts of State and local governments; the cash deficit. The cash
receipts of State and local governments are less flexible with respect to
general business conditions than are those of the Federal Government, and
State and local tax rates, in conjunction with new taxes, have shown a
continuing rising tendency, in contrast to the sharp reductions contained




in the Federal Revenue Act of 1948. Thus the cash receipts of State and
local governments showed an increase of over 1 billion dollars in 1949
compared with 1948, despite the 1949 recession. The increase in receipts
was, however, less than the increase in expenditures, and the net cash
deficit of State and local governments combined increased from about
800 million dollars in 1948 to nearly l / 2 billion in 1949.
SUMMARY: T H E NATION'S ECONOMIC BUDGET

After 3 years of continuing increases, the year 1949 was the first year
that showed a decline in the total output of the economy both in dollars
and in real terms. This decline, however, was a very moderate one. Compared with the average of 1948, the dollar value of goods and services was
less than J/£ percent lower in the first half of 1949; and about 2j/s> percent
lower in the second half. This decline continued from the first to the
second half of the year and, as a matter of fact, continued from quarter
to quarter, according to preliminary estimates. The regularity of the
decline, however, is somewhat deceptive as an indicator of changes in
effective demand for goods and services. First, some of the drop in dollar
figures actually reflects a small drop in prices. Furthermore, the continued
drop in the fourth quarter is explained in part by work stoppages in steel and
coal.
Looking at the component parts of the Nation's Economic Budget, the
most drastic cut occurred in business investment. As the details presented
in appendix A show, this contraction was due mainly to the shift from
inventory accumulation in 1948 to inventory liquidation in 1949. New
construction and expenditures for producers' equipment remained at a
high level. This was also true of business receipts, which include undistributed earnings, capital consumption allowances, and the inventory valuation adjustment. The change in inventory movement was so drastic
that the net absorption of saving through domestic business investment
dropped from about 18 billion dollars in 1948 to 9 billion in 1949. (See
table 12 and chart 14.)
Even though the total export surplus in 1949 was nearly at 1948 levels,
net foreign investment, which excludes exports financed by gifts and grants,
disappeared almost entirely from the Nation's Economic Budget in 1949.
In the second half of the year, both the export surplus and net foreign
investment fell sharply, owing to reductions in private investment abroad, in
net liquidation of foreign assets, and in other forms of foreign investment.
The significant fact is that the contraction in domestic business investment during 1949 did not initiate a downward spiral in the economy.
Consumer disposable income dropped only slightly and consumer expenditures remained on an even keel. Thus consumer saving, which was
very high during the first half of the year, declined somewhat during the
second half. Federal, State, and local government expenditures increased
nearly 8 billion dollars from 1948 to 1949. Government receipts declined,




63

CHART 14

THE NATION'S ECONOMIC BUDGET
The most significant development in the Nation's Economic
Budget between 1948 and 1349 was a decline of about
$ 8 billion in business investment, and a change from d
Government surplus to a deficit.
1948

(BILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
•//RECEIPTS '.

TOTAL*
(Gross National Product)

Transfer payments-^

EXCESS OF
EXPENDITURESH RECEIPTS (+)
0
j-

m

CONSUMERS

, CONSUMER
E SAVING

BUSINESS

EXCESS OF
INVESTMENT

INTERNATIONAL

EXCESS OF
INVESTMENT
3
J

GOVERNMENT

CASH
SURPLUS

(Federal.state, local)
Tronsfer payments *

1949

(BILLIONS OF DOLLARS)

TOTAL*
(Gross National Product)

Transfer payments «
777] CONSUMER
•£]
SAVING

CONSUMERS

BUSINESS

EXCESS OF
INVESTMENT
EXCESS OF
RECEIPTS

INTERNATIONAL

GOVERNMENT
CASH
DEFICIT

(Federal, state, locol)
ransfer payments *

* TRANSFER PAYMENTS ARE INCLUDED IN RECEIPTS OR EXPENDITURES OF THE SEPARATE
BUT NOT IN THE TOTAL GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT.

Scale.
SOURCE: SEE APPENDIX A.




64

ACCOUNTS

"
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

transforming a 7-billion-dollar cash surplus into a 3-billion-dollar cash
deficit in 1949, or a net shift of 10 billion dollars. This shift in the government position coincided with a decline in the net absorption of funds for
business investment of nearly the same amount. Thus the high level of
private domestic investment other than inventory accumulation, the substantial increase in government expenditures, and the high level of consumer demand prevented the inventory liquidation from initiating a
serious downturn in general business conditions.
TABLE 12.—The Nation's Economic Budget
[Billions of dollars]
Calendar year 1948
Economic group
Receipts

Expenditures

Calendar year 1949 1

Excess of
receipts

(+) or
deficit
(-)

Receipts

Expenditures

Excess of
receipts

(+)or

deficit
(-)

CONSUMERS
Disposable income relating to current production.
Government transfers and net interest payments

175.8
14.9

Disposable personal income
Expenditures for goods and services _
_
Personal savings (+)-_
_ _.

190.8

177.0
15.9
192.9

178.8

178.5
+12.0

+114

BUSINESS
Retained business receipts from current production .
.
Gross private domestic investment _ _
Excess of receipts (-f-) or investment (—)

28.8

27.6

45.0

36 8

-18.2

-9.B

INTERNATIONAL
Government loan transfers abroad _
_
Net foreign investment
.
Excess of receipts (+) or investment (—)

1.3

.7

1.9

0

— .6

+.7

G O V E R N M E N T (Federal, State, and local)
60.2
—.3

Tax payments or liabilities
Adjustment to cash basis
Cash receipts from the public
Purchases of goods and services
Government transfers _ . __

. _

69.9

_

Cash payments to the public
Excess of receipts (+) or payments (—)

56.3
+1.2
57.5

36.7
16.0
52.7

43.5
17.1
60.6

+7.2

-S.O

ADJUSTMENTS
For receipts relating to gross national product
Other adjustments
Total: Gross national product

—.4
0
.

262.4

-.4
0
262.4

-2.2
-.8

0

258.7

-2.2
—.8
258.7

0

1
Estimates based on incomplete data. See appendix A for detail for 1949 by half years.
NOTE.—Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer
payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics; they are not included in the gross national
product. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.

Source: Based on data from the Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget.




65

(See appendix A.)

II. The Significance of 1949 and the Economic Outlook

D

URING the past year there has taken place an impressive demonstration of the strength and resiliency of the American economy. In
the closing months of 1948, we were still confronted by inflation. We knew
that it had to end and many feared that the longer the end was deferred the
harder would be the fall. Our position now is more comfortable. The
inevitable end of the inflationary process has come. We are now enjoying a recovery movement. The successful combination of private and
public actions, which limited the recession of inflationary forces to a moderate and brief downturn in business, justifies an optimistic outlook for the
coming months and confidence that we shall be able to deal with the
problems of a somewhat more remote period.
Even at midyear, when the recessionary movement was reaching its
most aggravated stage and a further substantial decline in industrial production in July had to be anticipated, the Council found that "many factors
augur well for the successful culmination of the readjustment process
in early stability followed by renewed growth." We looked forward to the
"unique and fortunate experience of liquidating a major inflation without
falling into a severe recession." But it was our expressed warning that
the presence of some business decline should not be allowed to aggravate the
pessimism which had appeared in the business world in the spring. For
this would have led, as it had done in earlier periods, to a more serious
deflationary movement with distributors withholding orders for new goods
and manufacturers and other producers responding by reducing production
and employment further.
Fortunately, business did not continue this pessimistic course. Even in
July, before there had appeared many indications of improvement in scattered branches of the economy, a pronounced improvement in business sentiment developed. This made it possible for the underlying factors of economic strength, which had not yet suffered serious deterioration, to resume
their upward pressure upon general business activity. By August, the signs
that the recessionary movement was at or near its end were numerous, and
in September the trend of revival became clear. The recovery movement
was threatened by serious industrial controversies and work stoppages in
the following weeks. But it proved strong enough to hold its place and
to become active when production and employment in the steel industry




66

was resumed in November and an uneasy armistice in the coal industry
permitted limited production and employment.
BASES FOR CONFIDENCE AS 1950 OPENS

The past year furnished a test whether there would develop a serious
deterioration in confidence which then seemed to the Council the main
danger, and that main danger was surmounted. Other difficult problems
still lie ahead. The recovery since last summer is still incomplete, and
whether it continues and we achieve our national objective of maximum employment, production, and purchasing power in 1950 will depend upon the
success of the actions of business, labor, farmers, and government in consolidating the strong forces underlying the economy.
The first basis for confidence today is that the size of the total decline
in economic activity during 1949 was moderate. While drastic in some
areas, it did not seriously impair our general strength. From the end of
1948 to the end of 1949, the total output of goods and services measured in
dollar terms dropped about 5 percent, but when allowance is made for price
changes the real decline was less than 2 percent. Total employment dropped
less than 2 percent while unemployment rose from 3 percent of the labor
force to over 5 percent. The decline in consumer disposable income was
less than 3 percent, in industrial wholesale prices 5 percent, and in consumer
prices less than 2 percent. No one should minimize the hardship and suffering inflicted upon the unemployed. But one must also give due regard to
the high volume of income and employment which persisted. In these
circumstances lay the force of recovery.
Although the Council was moderately optimistic at midyear 1949, few
would have predicted during the decline of the first half year that the year's
end would leave us in such good condition. The decline was not only
moderate but also brief. By the second half, declining tendencies were supplanted by the forces of revival. Thus, there was no time for these declining
tendencies to sap the confidence or reserves of business, undermine the
morale or savings of the people, or impose heavy additional burdens upon
government.
The simplest reason for confidence about the short-run future is the
most important. It is that the economy is now moving upward, and thus
is itself generating recuperative forces. At, midyear, despite its basic
optimism, the Council said that the most serious fact confronting us was
that the decline had not yet been reversed. So long as it continued, we
could not be sure that the strong factors of recovery, which we saw, would
not be overcome by increasing weaknesses in other business conditions.
Today the situation is reversed. Industrial production, which fell 17
percent in the 8 months from its November 1948 peak to its July 1949 low,
had recovered almost half of the decline by December. A distinct upward
movement has now been created, and it may be counted upon to continue




67

unless it is interrupted by factors which we shall discuss and which must be
faced. It would have to move a considerable distance in absorbing our
unused resources of manpower and of plant capacity before it would
encounter the danger of inflation.
VALUE OF AFFIRMATIVE POLICIES

The economic downturn during the first half of 1949, which began when
production, employment, and personal incomes were at or near record
levels, again proved that conflicting forces are always present in our complex economy, and that its basic elements of strength will at times be challenged. The course of events in the second half of the year demonstrated
our improved capacity to protect the economy against depressions growing
out of moderate recessions, and to fortify those forces to which a free economy must look for renewed expansion.
Evidence of this improvement was shown in the behavior of business
in several ways: the avoidance of speculative excesses, the generally prudent
management of inventories, the refusal to accelerate the decline by cutting
wages or by resorting to large-scale lay-offs, and the general resistance to a
deflationary complex. While many producers were unwilling to reduce
prices, preferring to reduce output and employment, even in this respect
there has been progress toward a long-range point of view. Correspondingly—and also with some exceptions—labor manifested fairness and moderation in its wage demands during the testing period and exhibited in other
respects its mature concern about the condition of the whole economy and
its confidence that the economic ship would safely ride through the storm.
Such economic behavior refutes those critics of our system who
have argued that our difficulties and conflicts would become progressively
more insoluble. The lesson of 1949 is that our free institutions, our educational processes, and the liberty of our people to make their own decisions
have made us stronger than before.
The strength manifested within our business system has been matched
by the contributions of government toward economic stability. The manifold improvements in our financial structure need no detailed description.
Bank runs have become virtually impossible. Arrant speculation has been
dampened. Credit measures have been improved. The flexible powers of
the Federal Reserve System have been invoked. The management of the
national debt has been prudent and reassuring to the public and has been
consistent with maintaining favorable credit conditions for the benefit of
business. The system of farm price supports has prevented collapse in the
most volatile of all markets. Unemployment insurance has provided partial
continuity of income to the main victims of declining production, and has
thus served to support the demand for goods. The volume of government
outlays, including those for foreign aid, while serving other important pur-




68

poses, has unquestionably introduced stability into a large sector of the
economy.
Clearly, in government policy no less than in private action there
is need for further improvement. But the wide range of agreement about
the proved utility of conscious efforts—both private and public—to protect
our economy from disaster and to facilitate its intrinsic propensity for
growth means that we are learning how to use our intelligence to accomplish
all that our resources permit.
SHORT-RANGE OUTLOOK

For the near future, the economic outlook is good. The revival in business activity which began in the summer of 1949 has already manifested
sufficient strength to carry well into the first half of 1950. Liquidation of
inventories has substantially slackened, and in many areas rebuilding is
going forward. Consumer disposable income, though somewhat down
from the peak level of the fourth quarter of 1948, is still above the average
for that year as a whole. The demand for automobiles is still high. The
large rate of construction contracts currently let promises a high level of
activity for the coming months. The rate of business investment in plant
and equipment, although declining, still continues relatively high. Government activity will provide strong support. It is estimated that aggregate
cash payments by Federal, State, and local governments will increase by
about 4 or 4^4 billion dollars in calendar year 1950. The largest part of
this in the form of a national insurance dividend will place about 2.6 billion
dollars in the hands of veterans during the year, mostly in the first 6 months.
Although the short-range outlook is good, we are still a considerable distance from maximum employment, production, and purchasing power. The
primary question in the minds of many is whether the rebound in productive
activity will prove to be temporary or is the beginning of continuous growth.
T H E LONGER-RANGE OUTLOOK

There are two reasons why we cannot stop short with an analysis which
presages a continued upswing of production, employment, and general business activity over the next few months. In the first place, the outlook for
the next few months will be even brighter if our system of free enterprise—
which includes businessmen, workers, farmers, and consumers—grows in
confidence that rising prosperity is not to be short-lived and that we need not
again be confronted by disruption or concern even as great as that of early
1949. And in the second place, just as improved analysis and action by
business and government enabled us to get through 1949 as well as we
did, similar efforts should now provide at least equivalent aid in dealing
with the looming problems of the future.
The somewhat longer-range outlook may best be understood in the




69

broad perspective of progressive adjustments since the end of the war.
As earlier reports pointed out, the postwar period brought extraordinary
demands for goods to carry out industrial modernization and expansion
plans, to meet military and foreign requirements, to fill inventory pipe lines,
and to restock the depleted store of goods in the hands of consumers. These
demands, made effective by large liquid savings and access to ample credit
in addition to current incomes at record levels, could not be satisfied by
current levels of production. This gap between current demand and current supply generated the upward spiral of prices. The rising cost of living
propelled wages upward, which further swelled the spending stream and in
turn pressed costs and prices still higher. Even though the level of output
was constantly reaching new peacetime peaks, it was failing to match the
demand.
It was clearly foreseeable that in time the restocking boom on the part
of both producers and consumers would wane, and that this demand would
need to be replaced by more lasting peacetime demand in order to maintain
maximum production and employment. It was also clear that this peacetime demand would have to grow even more than other types of demand
declined, because the progress of technology and the growth of the labor
force require a substantial increase in total national output from year to
year in order to provide maximum employment. A key danger was found
in the fact that the inflationary process was bringing about price-income
relationships which would make the necessary adjustments difficult to
achieve in an orderly fashion. If they were too long delayed, the ultimate
result would be the forcing of so many adjustments into so short a period
of time that an unfavorable chain reaction throughout the economy might
precipitate a broad downward sweep.
Some of these adjustments took place gradually, but not sufficiently to
prevent the turning point in the boom from leading into the decline of the
first half of 1949. In a highly complex situation, the most crucial factor
appears to have been the failure of demand to grow in proportion to the
increasing potential output at maximum production and employment.
There was a much greater physical availability of commodities, while rising
prices had limited the growth of demand. By the latter part of 1948, consumer demand at current prices was far more selective and far less urgent
than it had earlier been. There began to develop softening in some industrial prices, as the price-income structure and the current buying propensities of the public did not support a sufficient level of buying of a
normal peacetime character. Thus, there was a substantial increase in the
accumulation of inventories, largely of an involuntary character resulting
from the failure of sales to grow at the expected rate. The sensitivity of
businessmen to the possibility of further price declines, particularly in the
value of inventories, led to a reduction in inventories. Orders were cut
back. The weakening of price prospects created further hesitation on the




part of buyers. The result was a sharp decline in industrial production
and employment, and an extension of weakness to those areas, such as metals,
which had been showing considerable market strength. Heavy seasonal tax
payments added to the downward movement of private expenditure.
But soon after midyear, the reversal of the trend became apparent.
Industrial production had been cut so sharply that it fell far below the
level needed to support existing consumption, and inventories in many
areas were depleted unduly. The stabilization of industrial prices by July,
resulting in part from firmness in costs and in part from the sharp cut
in industrial production which relieved the pressure of supply on the
market, ended the expectation of further general price cuts. The sale
of automobiles had continued to increase with an enlarged supply. Some
readjustments in costs and prices of housing had kept production at high
and increasing levels. A large upsurge in the building of rental units had
followed the renewal of authority to insure projects on favorable terms.
Government outlays were expanding. When renewed buying by those
who had been waiting for price cuts was added to these continuing elements
of high demand, the course of the economy again became definitely upward.
This review sheds light on 1950. Some changes, which can be fairly well
foreseen, could halt the advance of the eco'nomy in the latter part of the year.
The distribution of the insurance dividend to veterans, which will increase
consumer buying power in the first six months, will have been largely completed and have a diminished effect on demand in the second half year.
The diminution of the foreign aid program, together with the devalution of
foreign currencies, may not be offset by an increase in foreign investment; in
that case, the export surplus will be reduced. The market for automobiles
at present prices has been brought fairly in line with normal demand, and
continuance of production at the 1949 rate throughout the coming year
may require tapping the large unfilled market among lower-income groups.
Rental construction, although running strong, is primarily for those able to
pay high rents, and as that limited demand is fully met, rental construction
may ultimately decline unless new policies shift it into lower-cost projects.
Coupling these and other possibilities with the currently declining trend of
business investment, there are some who foresee a moderate business decline
in the latter part of 1950. This could happen, but it is not necessary. The
Council believes that affirmative action can and should be taken by business
and Government to prevent it from happening.
The Council's confidence that action can be successfully undertaken to
continue stability and growth throughout 1950 and beyond is based on
several factors. In part it is based on the great potential demand of business and consumers, supported by ample funds and credit. The economy
has demonstrated its elasticity, and we do not doubt its ability to make
further adjustments. The stimulus afforded by lower prices and costs, as
well as by favorable lending terms, is graphically illustrated by the sharp




increase in the demand for residential construction, a segment of the economy which made a disappointing record in the second half of 1948. At the
opening of the second quarter of 1949, when the general economic situation
was deteriorating, housing construction began an up-trend leading to an alltime record. In the second place, our confidence is strengthened by the
conviction that we have learned to take proper counter-measures when we
are threatened with serious deficiencies in production, investment, or consumption. This applies to business action. It also applies to government,
whose programs have been, and will continue to be, an underlying factor
supporting demand.
Adjustments scaled to the longer-range outlook should begin now.
ADJUSTMENTS STILL T O BE MADE

The Council does not agree with those who suggest that business expansion may proceed so rapidly as to produce a new wave of inflation at an
early date. It is true that some market shortages still exist at current
levels of demand. But in general we are now operating considerably
below the reasonably full utilization of our resources of plant and manpower, while technology is on the march, and further gains in population and productivity are to be expected. The ratio of demand to our
producing ability would need to climb a considerable distance before we
would again be confronted with the conditions which produce any generality of inflation in an economy with a basic financial structure as sound
as ours and with resources for expansion so great. We may now concentrate our energies upon adjustments required for the sustained restoration
of maximum levels of employment and production, confident that we can
meet the dangers of inflation if and when they again confront us.
(1) The fact that we are not now threatened with general inflation
does not justify price increases at any vital points in the industrial structure.
Such price increases, instead of being called inflationary, should be regarded
as fundamentally retarding in that they will reduce our likelihood of
gaining maximum production and employment by imposing further restrictions upon a level of demand which is not yet sufficiently high. If there
is any room for price change in some vital industrial areas, it is in a downward and not in an upward direction. Earnings are generally rewarding,
though not so high as a year ago, and they can best be protected and advanced by those policies which will maintain and expand volume.
Steel prices are a case in point. Steel affects the whole economy, and
some reduction in steel prices would favorably influence the whole economic situation. A stable and expanding economy requires a growing
volume of steel output and of those other basic products which use steel.
Some of these other products, whose prices are affected by steel prices, are
also priced at a level where sustained and growing output seems uncertain
at current prices. The statements of the steel industry accompanying the




recent price increases did not in our judgment impair the shortly prior
findings of the Steel Industry Board. These findings were to the effect
that the price-profit-cost situation in the steel industry, allowing for pensions, did not justify price increases and in fact left room for price decreases
in view of no wage-rate increases.
During the inflationary period, each price rise upon an article or service
which affected the cost of production of other goods not only caused an
increase in the price of the latter, but in addition such price increases were
magnified through each successive step of production and distribution.
Today the general situation will not always permit an increase in price to
compensate for the increase in cost, and in any event it will not often be
possible for the increase in price to spiral. Nonetheless, business should
strive to the utmost to avoid price increases, which are unsettling even
where not individually of major significance. The economy can expand
more fully and confidently if prices do not rise, and the economy will be
given favorable impulse by some selective downward adjustments now that
the danger has been removed of a sweeping downward movement in the
price structure.
(2) An outstanding problem is the maintenance of a sufficiently high
level of business investment, primarily in plant and equipment. New
investment for these purposes in 1949, while continuing at a level which
belied the reports of business pessimism, declined by a substantial amount,
and surveys of the investment plans of business firms indicate a further
decline in the first quarter of 1950. Business investment should resume
expansion as business recovery continues. We should also endeavor to
shape our national policies to favor continued business investment at a
high and growing rate. However, the real requirement for sustained
business activity is the prospect of an adequate profit for a long enough
time. Government policies in fields such as taxation affect the costs of
enterprise, and consequently changes in such policies have some effect
upon the profit expectations of the prospective investor and enterpriser.
But this factor is of less significance than the current and prospective needs
of consumers for goods or services to be produced. Changes in tax rates
can, at most, be only small under present circumstances. The possibilities
for increase in consumption are large.
(3) In a growing peacetime economy, the growth of consumption should
be even more rapid than the growth in plant and equipment outlays, although
both should continue to grow. We shall not be completely out of the woods
after our recent difficulties until private adjustments and public policies
are successful in raising the level of consumption, which is not now sufficiently high for sustained maximum production and employment or for
the full prosperity of our business system.
(4) Investment and consumption cannot expand in balanced proportion unless those of influence in our business system realize fully—and many




73

of them now do—that domestic and world affairs do not permit even those
deviations from maximum employment and production which were considered normal or tolerable in earlier times. The total real output of
our economy in 1949 was between 10 and 13 billion dollars below the output
that would have resulted at the maximum levels of production and employment contemplated under the Employment Act. We cannot afford for any
length of time this wastage of our potential strength. The economic loss
is accompanied by an aggravation of social tensions. It creates major
fiscal problems as revenues, decline at any given level of tax rates, thus disrupting long-range fiscal policy based on a reasonable balance between
free enterprise and the inescapable obligations of responsible government.
It produces international repercussions by reducing our imports, making
it more difficult for other nations to solve their dollar problem, and undermining the exemplary position of our system in the eyes of the peoples of
the free world.
(5) In addition to the purely domestic adjustments discussed in the
present section is the problem of adjusting our policies to the prospective
ending of the European Recovery Program. The international economic
policies which this makes necessary are discussed in the final section of this
report.
Awareness of our capacity for growth is the first step to its attainment.
For our growth will be facilitated as investors, businessmen, workers, farmers,
and consumers—and government—shape their judgments and actions confidently to conform to their belief in growth.
In succeeding sections of this report, we shall show to what great
heights of economic strength we will be carried within a few years if we
advance steadily, even though at a pace no more rapid than we have
averaged in half a century of ups and downs, of booms and depressions, of
war and peace. Then we shall consider the policies which may both protect
the process of growth and also gain for it a greater degree of smoothness and
stability.




74

III. Pathways to Economic Growth
In its Fourth Annual Report to the President, published last month,
the Council singled out confidence in future growth as a prime conditioning factor of the American economy. In stressing the potentialities
for growth, we do not propose a blueprint for the whole economy, but rather
attempt to define the opportunities for future markets. This not only may
serve as a guide for the course of public policy along constructive lines, but
may also help to meet the needs of private business for basic bench marks for
development of their programs and policies. We have stressed the fact
that only through such growth could the various economic groups in this
country prosper and progress together, instead of engaging in bitter and
hopeless conflicts to obtain for themselves larger shares of a static national
output.
Such an interpretation makes it clear that the problems of growth and
stability are closely related. Affirmative efforts toward balanced growth are
our main shield against serious periodic downturns. And the prevention of
such downturns will remove the great obstacle to the speed and certainty of
our long-range growth.
There is no one pathway to economic growth in a free economy, and
that is why we have used the plural for the main heading of this discussion.
Yet all business thinking and public decisions are based upon the realization
that some roads are better than others, and that we must constantly seek to
discern and follow the more promising ways in meeting the requirements
under the Employment Act of 1946. The Council, under the Employment
Act, must join in the search for these more promising ways.
We cannot be sure of all of our conclusions, and we would have neither
the means nor the desire to enforce them upon others even if we could be sure.
But in earlier reports, we set forth some tentative findings for constructive
criticism. We are now prepared in the same spirit to present the results
of further study and observation.
GROWTH OBJECTIVES FOR 1950-1954

There is a vital connection between the objectives which may be set for
1950 and those that we envisage over a somewhat longer span of time. It
is only by looking backward over a number of years that we can truly
appraise the strength and promise of the American economy. Correspond-

868148—50




6

75

CHART 15

NATIONAL OUTPUT AND LABOR INPUT
Our long-run production achievements have been more
the result of increased productivity than of increased
employment. Output per man-hour has more than quadrupled
in the last 6 0 years.
PERCENT OF 1890
1000

PERCENT OF 1890
1000

900

900

800

800

700

700

600

600
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT
(CONSTANT DOLLARS)
500

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

NUMBER OF EMPLOYED
WORKERS

AVERAGE HOURS
PER EMPLOYED
WORKER

100
90
80
70

70
60

M M I M I I H I M I1 1 I 1 1 1 1 111II 1 1 1 1 1111 1 1 1 1 1 1 11II1 1 1 1 1 1 11111
1
1
60
1910
1930
1940
1900
1920
1950

1890

INDICATE APPROXIMATE TRENDS.

" •

SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF
ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




CHART 16

NATIONAL OUTPUT AND POPULATION
Total output has increased nearly eight-fold since 1890 while
the population has grown by 2>£ times. As a result,
production per capita has more than tripled.
PERCENT OF 1890
1000

PERCENT OF 1890
1000

900

900

800

800

700

700

600

500

600
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT
(CONSTANT DOLLARS) "V

500

400

400

300

300

200

200

POPULATION

100

too

90

90

80

80

70

70

6 0 I I M M I I I I I I I I I M l I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 60
1910
1890
1900
1950
1920
1930
1940
NOTE: BROKEN LINES SHOW ESTIMATES
INDICATE APPROXIMATE T R E N D S .

WHICH ARE BASED ON FRAGMENTARY

DATA BUT

WHICH

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




77

ingly, it is only by looking forward for a few years that we can appreciate the
prospects before us sufficiently to begin their achievement in 1950.
Over the past six decades, our national output of goods and services
has been multiplied seven- or eight-fold, representing an average annual
rate of increase of nearly 3J/$> percent and a virtual doubling of total output
every 20 years. In 1949, this total output was about 260 billion dollars;
measured in the same price terms, it was about 35 billion dollars in 1890.
During the same time span, our population increased to not quite two
and one-half times its 1890 size, while average working hours in industry
decreased by one-third. (See charts 15 and 16.)
With a somewhat larger proportion of the population now engaged in
economic pursuits, the net result has been that our total production per
man-hour of work has quadrupled. This growth in productivity averaged
about 2 or 2J4 percent, annually compounded, and brought amazing
advances in our real wealth and general standards of living. Per capita
output, measured in 1948 dollars, increased from $550 in 1890 to $1,750
in 1949, or over 200 percent. The purchasing power of a typical American
family now is about 130 percent greater than that of the much larger typical
American family of 60 years ago.
The beginning of 1950 finds the American economy greater in its potentialities than ever before. Our managerial and working skills are greater,
our farms and factories better equipped, and indications are that the pace
of our technological advance will be maintained. It is a reasonable estimate that we should be able by a combination of private and public efforts
to continue to increase productivity per fully employed worker by about
2 to 2/4 percent annually in coming years. The total output will be affected
by the net increase in the labor force which, under conditions of ample job
opportunities, should a few years hence, say in 1954, bear about the same
relationship to the total population as at present. Lessened participation
by school-age youths and the effect of the resumption of the long-term trend
toward earlier retirement may be offset by higher participation by women.
Even with some further reduction in the workweek, perhaps mainly through
longer and more widely enjoyed vacations, we should achieve in 1954 an
expansion of about 18 percent in total output and about 12/2 percent in per
capita output over that of 1949. At current price levels, this would mean
attainment of a gross national product in excess of 300 billion dollars. This
potential increase in the annual output of the American economy would
be nearly 50 billion dollars, or approximately $1,000 per family.
But the first step toward our goal for future years is our goal for 1950.
Despite the process of recovery, we are not now measuring up even to a
conservative definition of maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.
We should aim during this year to reduce unemployment from V/2
million to a figure in the neighborhood of 2, or at most 2/2, million—




CHART 17

CHANGING SHARES IN NATIONAL OUTPUT
As compared with experience in the 1920's and 1930's, a relatively
smaller share of national output now goes to consumers and
relatively larger shares to business investment and Government.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
300 1

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
300

200

200
GROSS NATIONAL
PRODUCT

PERSONAL CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURES

100

100

GROSS PRIVATE
DOMESTIC INVESTMENT

1920

GOVERNMENT PURCHASES
/
OF GOODS AND SERVICES *"K
NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT
'

1930

1940

PERCENT OF TOTAL
100

1950

PERCENT OF TOTAL100

50

50
PERSONAL CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURES

o r . L L L l . . . . t . i ! i . . > . )

1920

t - t i

1930

1940

* N E T FOREIGN INVESTMENT

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




79

1950

representing the "frictional" unemployment incident to the operations of a
flexible economy, plus a hard core of unemployment in certain localities
and occupations which can only gradually be reduced. Taking account
also of the natural increase in the labor force, the goal of achieving maximum employment before the end of this year requires job opportunities
for an addition of around 2 million people, bringing the total number of
civilian employed to about 61 million. We must strive for fuller employment opportunities for those who are involuntarily underemployed, including people forced into low-grade employment by the absence of adequate
job opportunities in their own occupations.
Maximum production for the year 1950 as a whole would require an
increase of about 7 percent over last year, in order to offer the needed
additional job opportunities to a growing labor force working at increasing
productivity. We cannot achieve this improved level of production for
the year as a whole, but it should be possible to attain maximum production
on a stable basis by the end of the year.
The maximum purchasing power objective for 1950 is to promote those
adjustments in the intricate network of the income and spending stream—
both private and public—which will provide our economy with the requirements for both stability and growth.
TOWARD A BALANCED ECONOMY

Whether or not we realize the gains within our reach depends upon
achieving a sustainable balance among the various sectors of our economy.
Attaining this balance requires that production and incomes shall not
develop in a manner resulting in the periodic downturns we have witnessed
in the past. Business income and investment should be large enough to
make full use of our technology, our inventiveness, and our labor force,
but not so large as to result in subsequent overproduction in relation xo
the absorptive capacity of markets. The income and spending of consumers should be sufficient to clear the markets of goods and to provide
incentives for still more business enterprise, but not so large as to cause
inflation. The expenditures of government should be large enough to
provide those services which our resources permit, which our people need,
and which cannot so effectively be provided in any other way, but not so
large as to overstrain our resources or to dampen the incentives of free
enterprise or alter the essential character of our economy. Our supply of
goods to foreign countries should be sufficiently large to promote a more
prosperous and more peaceful world, but not so large as to undermine our
domestic strength and thus defeat the very objective which we seek. The
whole task of economic policy, both private and public, is to work out
these arrangements bit by bit, pragmatically as we go along, benefiting
constantly by the lessons of past experience.




8o

CHART

18

CHANGING SHARES IN NATIONAL INCOME
Wages and salaries and business earnings accounted for
somewhat larger shares of national income in 1948-49
than in 1929. Interest and rents accounted for a
sharply reduced share.
PERCENT OF TOTAL
NATIONAL INCOME
80

PERCENT OF TOTAL
NATIONAL INCOME
80

COMPENSATION OF EMPLOYEES

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

20

UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL INCOME
(INCLUDES INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT)

20

10

10

0
20

0
20
FARM PROPRIETORS'INCOME

10

10

0
30

0
30
INTEREST AND RENTS

20

20

10

I 0

0
30

0
30
CORPORATE PROFITS BEFORE TAXES
(INCLUDES INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT)

20

20

I 0

10
0

1929

1932-34

1939

1948

1949iy

1/ESTI MATES BASE"D"ON INCOMPLETE DATA; INCLUDES SECOND HALF ESTIMATES BY
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE (EXCEPT AS NOTED)




8i

CHART 19

HOW CONSUMERS USED THEIR INCOME
Consumer income and spending have fluctuated with general
economic activity, rising during prosperous years and falling during
depressions.
BELLIONS

OF DOLLARS

200

160
CONSUMER DISPOSABLE
INCOME
V
120

PERSONAL
CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES

80

40

I 1 1 I 1 I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I 1 1 I 1 I I I [ I [ I I
1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

Personal saving, which was negative in the early thirties, averaged
about 5 percent of disposable income in prosperous prewar years.
PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE

INCOME

30

20

PERSONAL

SAVING .

10

-10 I I 1 I I I I I I M
1920
1925
SOURCES: U. S. DEPARTMENT




I I I I I I I I 1 II I I ! I I 1 I I I I
1930
1935
1940
1945
1950

OF COMMERCE

AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

82

Past experience can never give us any one exact pattern for these balanced relationships. But, when combined with quantitative analysis, it
can help to point the way toward some workable relationships within a
broad range. More important, past experience demonstrates fairly conclusively that enormous variations in these patterns from time to time
have been a concomitant of the vast instabilities to which our economy
has been unnecessarily subjected.
Whether the instabilities in these relationships are regarded as the cause
or the result of the business cycle, it is clear that economic stability cannot be
achieved without reduction in these excessive swings in various categories
of private activities. Of course, private and public policy in a free-enterprise
economy cannot completely remove fluctuations in business investment and
other economic activities.
These extraordinary variations in the composition of our gross national
product may be illustrated by the experience of the last three decades. (See
chart 17.)
Some of these variations were caused by wars. But it will be more profitable to focus attention upon aspects of the business cycle at least
partly independent of wars. Certainly we could not expect reasonably permanent stability in an economy in which gross private domestic
investment swung from 15 percent of the total national product in 1919-29
to 1.5 percent in 1932. Consequently we must be deeply concerned that
private domestic investment, which reached an even higher percentage in
1948 than in the boom year 1929, does not take another drastic downward
swing. Certainly the cyclical shifts in the portion of gross national product
represented by personal consumption expenditures from 76 percent in 1929
to 83 percent in 1933 to 68 percent in 1948 were not consistent with a reasonably stable economy.
Expenditures are mainly although not wholly determined by income,
and the excessive variation in our levels of general economic activity have
also been closely associated with income relationships which were not sustainable and therefore were subject to excessive periodic change. Chart
18 shows the relative changes in the main shares of national income since
1929.
Clearly, a smoothly functioning economic system was unattainable with
corporate profits after taxes ranging from 9.6 percent of the national
income in 1929 to minus 2.2 percent in 1932-34, or with a level of farm
income dropping by more than two-thirds between 1929 and 1932. Acceptance of such wide variations as ''inevitable" or "normal55 in a free
economy would drive business policy, labor and farm action, and Government programs along most undesirable lines.
Success in business operations requires the ability to forecast marketing
conditions, which means largely forecasting the buying ability and habits
of consumers. Chart 19 shows, for the period 1919-49, the excessive and




unpredictable variations in consumer income, expenditure, and saving,
while chart 20 indicates the impossibility of appraising even roughly the
composition of consumer demand, so long as income and expenditure are
subject to such wide fluctuations.
CHART 20

TYPES OF CONSUMER SPENDING
Expenditures for durable goods ranged from 1 [/2 to \2.x/z
percent of consumer expenditures prior to S939. Services
took a considerably larger proportion of total outlay in
depression years.
PERCENT OF TOTAL
CONSUMER EXPENDITURES
10
0

PERCENT OF TOTAL
CONSUMER EXPENDITURES

I '/////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////.

I

20

10
0

— 20

1920
SOURCES:

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

In an economy growing toward a gross national product of more than
300 billion dollars by 1954, the various sectors of the economy would need
to function in a balanced relationship, so as to avoid the inflationary effect
of demand exceeding supply or the deflationary effect of production running ahead of effective demand. If this balance can be achieved—and we
believe that it can—it is possible to outline in broad terms the vast opportunities that this would offer to our business system in the form both of
high investment levels and high sales of goods to ultimate consumers. The
broad depiction of these opportunities is a logical extension of the idea
of market analysis of business prospects, the value of which has been
increasingly recognized by the business world. It is a composite estimate
of what our resources can do and what our people may buy, which is
correspondingly an estimate of what business may have an opportunity to
sell.




The Council, since its inception and in response to its mandate, has been
making exploratory studies of potentialities for economic growth. While
it is relatively easy to estimate what the total output of the economy would
be in a future year if resources are effectively used, it is more difficult
to discern the broad relationships among the various sectors of the economy
which may facilitate growth without generating the disproportions that
threaten either inflations or depressions. Studies have been made specifically of expansion and modernization of productive capacity consistent
with the projected rise in total output, and of the increase in consumption
consistent with taking off the market the entire output of an expanding
production without undue price fluctuations. In addition to domestic
investment and consumption, these estimates have taken into consideration
the governmental and international transactions which enter into the
Nation's Economic Budget. These studies are still in the exploratory stage;
The Council hopes that eventually they may develop into useful guides to
voluntary adjustments and to the evolution of public policies to stabilize the
economy at a high level.
Preliminary study, however, permits estimates of investment and consumption opportunities in an expanding economy within a range of variation wide enough not to seem either arbitrary or all-wise, as set forth in the
following table.
TABLE 13,—Output ^consumption, and investment.
[Billions of dollars]
Item
Gross national product
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investment, exclusive of inventory accumulation..

1948
262.4
178.8
38.6

1949
258. 7
178. 5
37. 2

19541
300-310
210-225
38-43

* The 1954 estimates allow for only minor variation of prices from the present level.

Source: Department of Commerce (1948-49).

Some comments are here desirable with regard to the foregoing estimates. First, these estimates present objectives for an economy of maximum employment and production. This means that affirmative policies,
both public and private, will be needed to achieve them; they are not forecasts of developments which will occur inevitably. Second, usefulness
for the purposes intended would not be impaired if the figures were
varied moderately from those shown. Third, it should be noted particularly
that the figures involve a high level of private investment in equipment
and construction—a level well above that contemplated for 1950 in most
current forecasts. This investment trend should soon rise above the 1949
level, and within five years might even surpass the record established in
1948, when postwar making-up of deferred capital needs was in full swing.
Fourth, the estimates contemplate, over the five-year period, a growth in
consumer buying at a more rapid rate than the growth in business invest-




merit. Analysis indicates that this is necessary to maintain maximum employment and production in a growing peacetime economy, which in turn
is necessary to provide incentives for a high and growing level of business
investment. Fifth, the estimates contemplate programs in the governmental
sector based upon the assumption that some programs, such as those for
veterans, will decline. They assume moderate extension of certain accepted
programs, such as social security, upon foundations already established, and
also allow for some new programs in the domestic and international fields.
But they do not assume an intensification of international tensions, which
would necessitate a considerably higher level of activity in the government
sector as a whole. By 1954, this outline of peacetime growth would lead to
the government sector accounting for a smaller proportion of the total gross
national product than in 1949.
HIGH BUSINESS INVESTMENT NEEDS

It has been indicated that our growth toward a 300 billion dollar
economy by 1954 should afford opportunity by that year for an annual
gross private domestic investment, excluding investment in inventories, ranging from 38 to 43 billion dollars. The upper figure is considerably higher
than the level of either 1948 or 1949.
The realization of an adequate volume of investment between now and
1954 cannot be reconciled with a downturn for a substantial period, followed
by another boom. Analysis points up the conclusion that the growth in
investment should be encouraged at a fairly steady rate. We know only
too well from historical experience that large variations in investment
activity are inseparable from intermittent idleness and waste of our productive potentialities and a sacrifice of growth opportunities. With allowance for some backlogs of deferred expansion or replacement to be liquidated
over the next few years, the growth potential of investment should be
correlated with the general growth of the economy as a whole.
Very high outlays for the expansion of nonfarm plant and equipment in
the postwar years appear to have brought productive capacity as a whole—
with some exceptions—into a fairly workable relationship with requirements for a maximum employment economy. There has also been considerable modernization of equipment, although railroad equipment and
a few other types still present a backlog of deferred replacement. Abundant opportunities exist for further modernization of productive facilities,
and the upper range of the figures shown assumes that a large increase in
outlays could perhaps be achieved by more rapid retirement of facilities
for obsolescence. But present investment expectations of businessmen are
one indication that such an increase might be difficult. For nonfarm producers' plant and equipment, investment trends should reflect a reasonably
consistent historical relationship between such outlays and the growth of
buying power.




86

CHART 21

SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS
Corporate financial requirements dropped sharply in 1949
from the average level of the previous three years, as the
book value of inventories turned downward. These
requirements were financed primarily from earnings and
depreciation charges.
'
-10

-5

0

1
SOURCES

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
5
10

1

1946-48 AVERAGE

RETAINED
EARNINGS

DEPRECIATION
RESERVES

,

15

1

i

20

]

i
i

OTHER SOURCES

USES
PLANT AND
EQUIPMENT
OUTLAYS

1946-48 AVERAGE

si

INCREASE IN
1N V F N -_.,__-.,,,,_,.

TORIES

•: '

I

Kgj^&

OTHER

1

i

i

i

* PROFIT ESTIMATES FOR SECOND HALF 1949 BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES EXCHANGE AND
OTHER FINANCIAL DATA

The trend of investment in farm equipment and construction should
allow for expansion, increased mechanization, and replacement in keeping with the agricultural output requirements of a fully active economy.
For other private nonresidential construction—such as churches, schools,
hospitals, institutions, social and recreational buildings—about the 1949 rate
of outlays (which was about one-fifth above that of 1948) should be carried
forward. Inventories are in a reasonably workable relationship to sales at the
present time, and they may therefore be expected to increase roughly in proportion to the output of the private sector of the economy. The greatest
increase above current levels of private investment is clearly required in the




field of housing, because it is here that the total available supply of goods lags
farthest behind the needs of the people and presents the greatest challenge
to production and financial ingenuity.
For now and the foreseeable future, the problem of encouraging an adequate level of business investment assumes greater importance than is
indicated by the mere quantitative relationship of such investment to the
total size of the economy. A timely checking of the current downtrend in
investment, followed by resumption of growth, is by no means to be taken
for granted. Neither investment nor consumption can long sustain satisfactory growth unless both do; and the relatively modest growth in investment contemplated in the estimates presented above may well present even
more difficulty of attainment than the larger growth set as a consumption
goal. It is easier for public programs to stimulate consumer spending than
it is for these programs to enlarge business investment direct. Yet we
know from the experience of the 1930Js that, without a large and growing
volume of business investment, maximum employment and production can
hardly be achieved and can certainly not be maintained.
Availability of funds for investment
Consideration of the problem of supplying adequate funds for business
investment calls for a comparison of corporate financial requirements, under
conditions of maximum employment and production, with the sources of
funds likely to be available to meet these requirements. Corporations
account for the major share of business investment, and depend more
heavily than other businesses upon outside capital.
During the period 1946-48, as chart 21 and appendix table C-34 show,
corporations used an average of about 28 billion dollars a year to finance
plant and equipment expenditures, expansion of inventories, and expansion
of accounts receivable. These requirements were very high in comparison with prewar experience, even after taking into account the rise in
sales volume and prices. They reflected not only a volume of plant and
equipment expenditures nearly twice that reached in any previous year, but
also an impressively large volume of funds to finance expansion of working
capital.
In general, corporations during the very high investment period 1946-48
were adequately supplied with funds to finance their investment programs
along conservative lines despite the high level of taxation. In fact, a striking
characteristic of the period was the extent to which corporations were able
to meet these unprecedented financial requirements from their own funds.
During this period, corporations reinvested about 62 percent of their profits
after taxes, as compared with 31 percent in 1929 and 41 percent in the
3 years before the war. (See chart 22.) This large volume of retained
earnings enabled corporations to remain in a generally strong financial position in spite of the large requirements for funds. Their liquidity, as revealed
by various types of liquidity ratios, compared very favorably with the prewar




years. Relative to income after taxes, corporate debt at the end of 1948
was only about 50 percent as large as in 1929, and 45 percent as large as in
the period 1939-41. During 1949, as was shown in Part I, corporations
were generally able to improve their financial position and at the same
time to step up their dividend disbursements.
The postwar experience indicates that, in a period of high employment
and production, corporations experienced little difficulty in financing their
expansion in a manner which left them generally in a favorable financial
position. It seems unlikely that an expansion of the economy such as was
outlined above would pose a more difficult financial problem. We should
expect that in such an economy a higher level of business investment in
plant and equipment could be attained without imposing upon corporations
financial requirements as high as during the period 1946-48. The reason
for this is that probably not more than 3 to 4 billion dollars annually would
CHART 22

DISTRIBUTION AND RETENTION OF
CORPORATE PROFITS
Corporations retained in 1949 a smaller proportion of profits
after taxes than in 1946-48, but a larger proportion than
in 1929 or 1939-41.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

20

20

1929

1939-41
AVERAGE

1946-48 1949^
AVERAGE

1 / INCLUDES SECOND HALF ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS
SOURCE: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE




(EXCEPT AS NOTED).

be needed in an enlarging economy to expand inventories and customer
accounts in line with sales. These figures are far below the annual average
of about 13 billion dollars absorbed in rebuilding of inventories and in
financing customer credit during the inflationary period 1946-48.
The main sources of funds for corporations will be retained earnings
and depreciation reserves. If the economy continues to grow in line with
its indicated potential, corporate profits should increase enough so that,
even with a dividend disbursement ratio as high as in the late 1920's,
retained earnings and increasing depreciation reserves will furnish a major
part of new capital requirements. In these circumstances, the necessary
outside financing would be much less than the 11 billion dollars annually
secured from outside sources in 1946-48. The larger and established corporations will not face any serious problem of equity capital. Reinvested
earnings should be large enough, in conjunction with new stock issues
no larger than those of recent years, to improve the ratio of equity capital
to debt. Provided we are able to realize a sustained period of growth,
dividend disbursements may even be higher in the future than they have been
in recent years. We should then expect a sizable increase in the amount
of new capital forthcoming from stock issues. Indeed, late in 1949, and
probably as a result of these factors, the market for new stock issues improved
noticeably. Corporate managers have recently preferred to borrow funds
at prevailing low rates of interest, rather than to "dilute the corporate equity
capital," as they describe the issue of new stock at the price at which it
would be absorbed by the existing market. If the recent movement in
stock prices continues, many corporations will reverse their policy and seek
outside equity capital. Others will continue to be attracted by the tax
advantage of debt financing and by the continuance of low interest rates,
which is assured by the Government debt-management policy.
While corporations as a whole may not experience serious difficulty in
financing their expansion, individual corporations will fare unevenly in
the gains of prosperity. Some will be capable of meeting temporary
market adversities and financing expansion needs entirely from internal
resources. Others may better this record and in addition improve their
liquidity positions. Still others, however, may find internal resources quite
inadequate for these purposes and will seek funds actively from external
sources, in order to provide for corporate growth in line with expanding
markets and at times to cushion adjustments to changing competitive trends.
Specific problem areas
Despite the generally adequate supply of funds, there are important
gaps in our financial and investment structure. The prospect that total
saving is likely to be fully adequate for total investment opportunity does
not dispose of the problem of increasing the availability of funds for particular types of businesses, and of making them available in all regions of
the country in such forms and on such terms as to promote their full and




effective use. There is danger that the proportion of funds seeking fixedreturn investment will continue to rise and that the economy will generate
a larger volume of saving for such purposes than it can absorb, while at
the same time important types of investment will be impeded by lack of risk
capital. Small and new business concerns have always experienced great
difficulty in securing long-term loans and in acquiring outside equity capital,
and this problem has now been intensified by the larger concentration of
investment funds in the savings accounts of persons of moderate income
who seek fixed-return investments, and in institutions which have little
interest in financing small business.
There are particular industries, such as the railroads, in which capital
needs are very large in relation to earnings and which face especially thorny
problems of obtaining either debt or equity capital. Special consideration
must be given to certain strategic industries in which expansion desirable
for national security calls for larger or more rapid investment outlays than
are likely to be forthcoming from private investment.
CHART 23

HOUSING CONSTRUCTION:
SOME GROWTH COMPARISONS
The rate of house building in 1949 shows relatively small
growth since the 1920's in comparison with industrial
production, consumer expenditures, and automobile sales.
PERCENT OF 1920-29 AVERAGE

PERCENT OF 1920-29 AVERAGE

250

250

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION.

200

200

TOTAL CONSUMPTION
,(CONSTANT-DOLLAR
EXPENDITURES)

150

AUTOMOBILE SALES
(DOMESTIC FACTORY)

100

150

I 00
HOUSING CONSTRUCTION
(NONFARM STARTS)

50

1920-29 Average

1949

SOURCES: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE, DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE,
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS AND AUTOMOBILE
MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION

868148—50




7

CHART 24

HOUSING OUTLAYS, CONSUMER SPENDING,
AND NATIONAL PRODUCT
Private housing outlays have fluctuated much more widely
than national output or consumer expenditures.
RATIO SCALE
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

RATIO SCALE
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
10.0

300

8.0
200 -

6.0
150
/

£

1

100

^S
\

GROSS NATIONAL
, PRODUCT

j L

5.0

/ WAR
/
/ YEARS/

4.0

S (LEFT SCALE)

3.0
80

* /

60 ~ _ y >
*—*
50 -

CONSUMER 1 \ v y
EXPENDITURES. \
\ *
(LEFT SCALE)

\

y

S

/

/

M

1.5

A

40

1

PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL
I
CONSTRUCTION OUTLAYS 1

30

2.0

/
/

(BI6HT SCALE)

1
/

1

-

1.0

f

.8
20

-

.6
.5

15

.4
10

ii
1920

NOTE:

ii

i i ii
1925

ii

i i i iV
1930'

ii
1935

i

M

1 II

1940

M
1945

1M

1 1 .3
I960

MOST SERIES PRIOR TO 1929 NOT COMPARABLE WITH LATER DATA.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

The housing problem
The housing shortage is still acute, and the desire of the people for more
and better housing presents the largest single potential market now open
for increased investment. While 1949 was a peak year for housing, the
construction of new nonfarm housing in 1949 showed a much smaller increase from the levels of the 1920's than did the total physical volume of
consumption, the volume of industrial production, or the purchases of new
passenger automobiles. (See chart 23.) Housing has failed to keep pace
with over-all economic growth in the past quarter century.




92

Instability in so important a sector as housing has contributed powerfully
toward general economic instability. As shown by chart 24, which omits
the period 1942-45 to avoid the special complications of wartime, private
housing outlays have fluctuated more violently in the past three decades
than either total output or consumer expenditures.
Housing production should be stabilized at very high levels. Based upon
needs and resources, the objective over the next few years should be to build
on the average about V/2 million new residential units annually, or substantially more than the million in the year 1949—which, while an all-time
peak year for home-building, was only slightly above the level of 1925. A
considerable part of this new construction should represent replacement of
hopelessly obsolete housing, which should be cleared away on a much
enlarged scale. Improvements and enlargement of existing houses should
also require very large new investment. Allowing for some further decrease
in housing costs, and for the trend toward more economical design to meet
the needs of families of moderate income, but allowing also for the related
facilities and community developments which such a large amount of residential construction would carry with it, this volume of housing and related
improvements over the next few years would probably require an average
annual investment in the neighborhood of 12 to 14 billion dollars. This is
not a forecast of what the level of such housing investment is likely to be
without special efforts. On the contrary, we face the danger of a decline
rather than an increase in residential construction unless new means are
developed to enable more middle-income families to obtain new housing,
particularly as the backlog of postwar demand tapers off. This will require
strenuous efforts to develop workable stimuli along new lines. The Council regards the maintenance of a high and growing level of private investment in housing as perhaps the most important issue in connection with the
maintenance of a total level of investment high enough to support maximum employment and production over the next few years.
Adequacy of market opportunity
Adequate market opportunity for business means conditions favorable
to the disposition of full output at a return providing sufficient funds and
incentives in the form of profits. In the final analysis it is the appraisal
of market potential which mainly controls the rate of investment. No
redundancy of funds available for investment will promote a sufficiently
high level of investment if this market opportunity does not exist. If it
does exist, investment in general will grow with the rest of the economy and
will not in general be hampered by lack of capital funds.
A large contraction in business investment sets in because those making
investment decisions forecast a level of general economic activity not sufficiently high to assure profitable utilization of additional capacity. They
recognize that a generally expanding economy would continue to support a
high and growing investment level, but feel that the short-run outlook




93

does not presage the resumption or continuation of expansion. Thus the
first and foremost step toward solving the investment problem is to promote
the environment which will encourage businessmen to make their investment
decisions in the light of longer-run prospects for growth.
Our analysis of the magnitude and of a few of the probable characteristics
of an economy expanding toward the 300 to 310 billion dollar level indicates that high and growing levels of business investment—and the business
earnings necessary to motivate and help finance it—are entirely compatible
with expansion of ultimate consumer incomes and expenditures sufficient
to absorb the swelling product. If this absorption occurs, there should be
no real problem of business profits failing to provide generally adequate
incentives.
It is recognized that any prolonged contraction in corporate profits from
present levels would spell a sizable reduction in business investment, and
that an expanding economy cannot be founded upon a continually declining level of profits. But an expanding economy, associated with sufficiently
high market prospects and their full appreciation by the business community, would result in a rising level of corporate profits even if profit margins should be somewhat reduced. There is ground for belief that somewhat reduced profit margins would still provide generally adequate investment incentives under conditions of an expanding market furnishing a rising
absolute level of profits.
It should be recognized, however, that such expansion of the economy
may not occur if business pricing practices are not adapted to encouraging
a rising level of consumption. Pricing practices also bear directly on investment insofar as they are associated with restriction of capacity. The
degree of competition is an important determinant of outlays for costreducing improvements of productive facilities.
A HIGH CONSUMPTION ECONOMY

The broad estimate that consumer expenditures in a 300 to 310 billion
dollar economy would range from 210 to 225 billion dollars represents an
expansion in consumption of about 22 percent, or about 15 percent per
capita after allowing for population increase, over the level of 1949. This
measures the market opportunity for our business system.
Expenditures for consumer durable goods
Over the past decade, despite the war, there has been a great increase in
the ownership of durable goods by American families. Between the end of
1939 and the end of 1949, the number of radios in use increased from 39
million to 62 million, electric refrigerators from 14 million to 291/2 million,
and electric washers from 14/ 2 million to 2 5 ^ million.
Future economic growth would maintain large opportunities in the consumer durables field. About one-third of all households still lack electric
refrigerators, and a continued high rate of residential construction would




94

create a need for all types of appliances. The number of television sets
in use at the end of 1948 was slightly above a million; during 1949 almost
2/4 million sets were produced, indicating the very rapid expansion afforded
by this market.
More than 5 million passenger cars were produced in 1949, bringing
total private registrations to 35.5 million, or an average of one car for
every 4.2 persons. This compares with 26 million passenger cars at
the end of 1939, or an average of one car for every 5 persons. The
character of the demand for automobiles since the war, despite the mounting prices, should be sufficient warning that it is very easy to underestimate
the future market. Nor does the scope of demand at this time furnish a
clear guide to the demand when and if prices are reduced, or to the demand
when family incomes become larger. The universality of the desire of
Americans for automobiles has been thoroughly proved, and the history of
the industry does not permit doubt that management, once it finds that it
has exploited the market for higher-priced cars, will find ways through
price reductions and through cheaper models to attract the vast potential
demand not now able to come into the market for new cars.
The proportion of consumption expenditures now devoted to purchases
of durable consumer goods, including automobiles, appliances, and furniture, is about 14 percent, compared with 12 percent in 1929 and 10 percent
in 1939. (See chart 19, page 82.) There will be further working off of
backlog demand for certain goods, but a lifting of standards of living would
probably increase the share of expenditures on durable goods above that of
prewar years.
Expenditures for nondurable goods
The two major items of consumption in the category of nondurable goods
are food and clothing. The percentage of income spent currently for food
is higher than it used to be, reflecting higher prices for food and higher
quantities of consumption. Per capita food consumption is about 10
percent above the 1935-39 level. The level of 19 percent above prewar,
reached in 1946, would be exceeded if the diets of low-income families were
raised to an adequate nutritional level. Clothing expenditures, as a percentage of total expenditure, have shown a declining trend over the last three
decades. Nevertheless, budgetary studies show that many families, particularly in rural areas, obtain no more than minimum requirements. Income gains which would lift low-income families to a more satisfactory
standard of living would greatly enlarge the market for clothing.
Expenditures for services
Even with the expanded consumption of durable and nondurable goods
which has been outlined, the markets for these goods are not limitless.
The full utilization of our productive resources requires that the enterprise
and imagination which have created new products like automobiles and




95

radios shall increasingly be devoted to the development of even newer
products in an even wider variety. Beyond this, as standards of living
rise, a larger proportion of the people's wants and needs turn from the
basic requirements of life toward those things which add to the enjoyment
of living. Services such as education, health, and recreation are an area
of economic development yet in relative infancy. The expansion of these
services may involve varying patterns of private and public action, but in
any event they will vastly increase private employment and business opportunity for a wide range of related and supporting activities.
CHART 25

CHANGES IN AVERAGE FAMILY INCOME
The average family income of all groups has increased greatly from
the prewar period. The fifth of families having highest incomes
received the largest increase in dollars but smallest relative increase.
FAMILIES
ranked from
lowest to
highest income

0

LOWEST
FIFTH

$2,000
I

MONEY INCOME, 1948 DOLLARS
$4,000
$6,000

$8,000

$10,000

-1935-36
-1941
-1943

SECOND
FIFTH

.THIRD
FIFTH

FOURTH
FIFTH

HIGHEST
FIFTH

INCLUOES SINGLE INOtVIOUALS

SOURCES: NATIONAL RESOURCES PLANNING BOARD,DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

Distribution of income
The percentage of income going to various groups does not change
greatly over a short period of time. Nevertheless, the conditions of full
employment during the war were instrumental in bringing about a distribution of income in the United States more favorable to lower-income
recipients. Chart 25 and table 14 show the average income of each fifth of
the population, from those with the lowest income to those with the highest,
in two prewar years and in 1948. The greatest relative improvement since




1935-36 appears to have been in the second and third of the five brackets.
The top fifth had the largest average gain in absolute amounts but the
smallest percentage increases. In appraising the average income in the
lower brackets, it should be noted that these brackets include many young
single persons and retired persons whose income runs considerably lower
than that of families of two or more. In addition, many families have nonmoney income, such as home-produced food or fuel, not reflected in the
distributions. Nevertheless, income for many families is clearly below
the level required for an American standard of living. Recent investigations by the Joint Committee on the Economic Report have shed light
on the plight of these families, and on many of the social and economic
conditions contributing to inadequate income.
TABLE

14.—Money income received by each fifth of families and single persons, 1935-36,1941
and 1948

Families and single persons
ranked from lowest to
highest income

Percentage of money
income

1935-36
Lowest fifth..
Second fifth..
Third fifth...
Fourth fifth..
Highest fifth..
All groups..

4.0
8.7
13.6
20.5
53.2
100.0

1941
3.5
9.1
15.3
22.5
49.6
100.0

1948
4.2
10.5
16.1
22.3
46 9
100.0

Average money income in
dollars of 1948 Jpurchasing power

Percent increase
in average income

1935-36

1935-36
to 1948

$534
1,159
1,810
2,734
7,083
2,664

1941

1948

$592
1,546
2,597
3,816
8,418
3,396

$893
2,232
3,410
4,711
9,911
4,231

1941 to
1948
51
44
31
23
18
25

1
Current dollars divided by the consumers' price index on the base 1948=100 to give a rough measure of
changes in purchasing power of income. (See appendix table C-8.)
NOTE.—Adjustments have been made in basic survey data for each year. See appendix table B-l for a
distribution of families and single persons by income level for 1948. Detail wiD not necessarily add to
totals because of rounding.
Sources: National Resources Planning Board (1935-36), Department of Labor (1941), and Council of
Economic Advisers (1948).

The purely social consequences of income distribution are not within
the scope of this report, but it should not be forgotten that the functioning
of the economic system as a whole bears upon the life and livelihoods of
the people whom it is designed to serve. In addition, the distribution of income has a recognized bearing upon the functioning of the
whole economy and upon its prospects for growth. A balanced growth
of investment and consumption is closely related to income flow, which in
turn has a bearing upon the proportion of income that is spent for
consumption.
In 1948, consumer income and consumer expenditure each represented
a considerably lower percentage of gross national product than in prewar
years. The high tax structure necessitated by the war and its aftermath
absorbed part of the income which would otherwise have been available
to consumers. In 1949, the percentage of the total product represented by
this type of income and expenditure moved upward slightly. This is
shown by table 15.




97

T A B L E 15.—Selected series relating to consumption

Series

Personal consumption expenditures as percent of gross
national product
Net personal saving as percent of disposable personal
income.
Disposable personal income as percent of gross national product...
Per capita disposable personal income:
Current dollars
1948 dollars i
Index (1948 dollars, 1948=100)

1923-29 1933-35
average average

1937

1939

1948

1949

76.0

80.1

74.4

73.9

68.1

4.9

.2

5.5

3.8

6.3

7.5

79.9

80.2

78.8

76.9

72.7

74.6

641
888
68.2

408
732
56.2

552
920
70.7

536
923
70.9

1,302
1,302
100.0

1,293
1,309
100.5

69.0

1
Current dollars divided by the consumers' price index on the base 1948=100 to give a rough measure of
changes in purchasing power of income. (See appendix table C-8.)
Sources: Department of Commerce and Department of Labor (see appendix C for basic data).

The expansion of consumer demand which will be necessary in future
to sustain a high level of business investment, and to promote maximum
employment and production, will hinge not only upon the proportion
of total disposable income in the hands of consumers, but also upon the
trend of current saving. In 1949, as table 15 shows, the rate of saving
reached 7.5 percent of disposable income, compared with 3.8 percent in
1939 and about 5 percent during the 1920's. It may well be that a higher
rate of saving than in the prewar period will characterize postwar prosperity, and this may create a problem of finding adequate investment
outlets. Earlier in this report, however, we noted the fact that the proportion of saving to income decreases at the lower ends of the income structure.
As the national income grows, a trend toward relatively greater increases in
income for families in the lowest brackets of the income structure would
therefore give an extra stimulus to demand for consumption goods.
Thus greater relative gains by those groups who at present share least in
the benefits of our economy not only serve fair social objectives, but also
tend to improve the balance in the relationship between intended saving
and intended investment. Such a development contributes to the stability
and growth of the whole economy, and thus is beneficial to all groups
in the long run. This offers a wide area for agreement and cooperation
throughout the country, as the people look to free enterprise and free government for continuous improvement in the functioning of the economic
system.




IV. Needed Policies
The early reversal of the downturn in 1949 was accomplished with the
aid of a composite of private and public policies. The Council has stressed
the importance of policies in the business world itself, coupled with our
confidence that as these policies constantly improve there will be progressively less likelihood of the drastic Government action which follows from
the emergence of critical conditions.
Government should also exert an affirmative influence if we are to accomplish the objective of steady economic growth. The Government has become
a large partner in the modern productive process by contributing to the
development of resources, transportation, research, and the productivity
of labor, all of which are essential to an expanding economy. Tax and
credit programs have an immense impact upon the flow of incomes and
funds, and upon the decisions of business and consumers.
The following treatment includes an appraisal of some of the measures
which are significant for economic growth and stability under current and
foreseeable circumstances. This treatment does not attempt to be all-inclusive. For example, other programs (such as those involving the power to
deal broadly and flexibly with credit developments through the Federal
Reserve System) should be made available to be used if conditions sufficiently change to call for them. Still others may need to be developed
if deficiencies in market adjustments unfold.
What is recomended now might appear as a piecemeal approach, were
not each piece appraised in the perspective of the current economic situation and of the general objectives defined for the years immediately ahead.
T H E FUNCTION OF PRICES

Our economy is sometimes called a price economy. This means more
than that changes in particular prices influence the decisions which determine the kinds and volumes of goods which are produced. It also means
that the price factor exercises so important an influence upon levels of real
profits and real wages and other incomes that it vitally affects the economic
balance between investment and consumption which is essential for a high
level of general activity.
The current price level in general is now high enough to sustain a generally
rewarding level of profits, if activity is high, and this level of profits would increase substantially if the volume of sales approaches the levels required to
sustain maximum production. For this reason, there would be no justification for a general upward movement of prices, and neither the current nor




99

shortly prospective relationship between supply and demand is likely to
force general prices upward. While our economy is so complex that a
few isolated upward adjustments may seem justifiable, every effort should
be made to avoid them, because they will not add to stability or confidence
and will make it harder to achieve a level of sales consonant with maximum
production and employment.
There are some prices which are too high to permit continuance for a long
period of the current volume of sales. These prices will need to be reduced or production and employment will eventually suffer. These prices
are in the field of the administered-price industries where price policy is
firmly controlled; but it may be expected that managers in these industries
will not fail to reach for the larger market demand which will follow price
adjustments.
The Council believes that in general—and noting the exceptions mentioned above—the price level is now within a range where stability should
be feasible at workable levels. By workable levels, we mean those which
will enable buyers, as incomes rise gradually in a growing economy, to
increase their purchases sufficiently so that maximum production and employment will be achieved and maintained. We feel that, with respect to
the general situation, it will be safer for the immediate future to depend
mainly upon income adjustments rather than upon sweeping and widespread
price adjustments to enlarge the volume of demand.
This is not to say that a long-run downward trend of some prices in those
areas where technological gains are unusually great, or where productivity
increases with extraordinary rapidity, is not one of the best ways of enabling
these gains to be enjoyed by the whole population instead of merely by a
specific group of income recipients. Such trends in some prices have appeared in the past and will appear again, and they are all to the good. Nonetheless, as a general proposition serving as a guide to economic policy, the
practical dynamics of our economy indicate that a fairly stable general price
level and a rising level of money income as productivity increases are more
conducive to business confidence and to the expansion of enterprise than a
generally declining price level.
The Council is mindful of the critical problems confronting those whose
incomes have remained at low or moderate levels fixed since before the war.
But without a serious and prolonged downturn throughout the economy, the
price level could not conceivably be reduced to the point where these people would find themselves in a satisfactory position. And that very process
of downturn would hurt many of them as much as anybody else. These
people, if they are to progress, must look to income gains.
T H E FUNCTION OF WAGES

With a growing potential for national output, the only way to translate
this potential into actuality is to distribute more goods. If the price level




100

is reasonably stable, then the increasing purchasing power necessary for
expanding markets must come mainly in the form of money incomes rising
in accord with improved productivity. And since wages constitute the bulk
of personal income, the soundest general formula, once wages, prices, and
profits are in a workable relationship, is for money wages to increase with
productivity trends in the whole economy.
Such a general wage principle does not, however, imply that all wages
will or should move at the same rate, any more than the general desirability
of a stable price level implies that individual prices should not move either up
or down. What this general wage principle does imply is that wage changes
should cluster around a norm determined by the over-all productivity developments of the economy. It is also recognized that there will be business
concerns with productivity gains which justify wage increases above the
norm, while others cannot afford to go as high as the norm. Widely divergent rates of growth in productivity in particular industries should also be
reflected in shifts in some relative prices. The detailed process of adjusting
individual wages and prices to productivity must necessarily be pragmatic.
Over a long time span, it appears that wage increases as a whole and
productivity increases for the Nation as a whole have tended to move closely
together. But this should not blind us to the fact that there have
been periods when wage trends and productivity trends have gotten out of
line, and this has been a factor contributing to general economic instability.
Now, when we are not immediately threatened either by inflation or by
deflation, management and labor have a most challenging opportunity to
develop some broad economic principles for wage negotiation which take
account both of the over-all national situation and of widely differing situations in different areas, industries, and businesses.
In view of the powers which reside in strong employers and in strong
labor organizations, which make it possible now for one and then for the
other to force adjustments which are not in accord with the interests of
the whole economy, a twofold program is called for. In the first place,
increasing study of what constitutes sound wage policy should bring larger
conformity to it, because basically both management and labor are propelled by the desire to pursue a reasonable course. In the second place, we
are exploring conference techniques, so that representatives of management, labor, and agriculture may make further progress on joint study of the
conditions and actions underlying a stable and growing economy.
AIDS TO BUSINESS INVESTMENT

The primary influences upon business investment are to be found in
the market place. If markets are broad and rewarding, funds will find
their way into productive investment. And whether these markets will
be broad and rewarding mainly depends upon the functioning of the wageprice system in the distribution of purchasing power.




101

Nonetheless, there are some special problem areas in the investment field.
The rapidly growing volume of insurance and pension funds raises the
problem of facilitating absorption of personal and institutional savings into
productive investment, by making a somewhat larger part of these savings
available to business as venture capital. The influence of direct Federal
action on this problem, however, is limited. To a large extent, the solution
appears to involve liberalization in State regulatory standards and valuation concepts, and in the policies of many of the fiduciary institutions
themselves.
New and small businesses are at a marked disadvantage in seeking to
obtain equity capital. They also find difficulties in obtaining long-term
loans. The commendable efforts of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to mitigate the financial problems of small and medium-sized concerns
would be aided if the maximum maturity period on loans were increased;
and if the agency could expand its capacity to provide loan applicants
with technical assistance, thereby increasing the effectiveness of its lending
operation and improving the borrowers' ability to repay. Also, more expeditious and less costly means should be found to provide very small
business concerns with loan assistance.
In treating of investment needs, the Council has pointed out that housing
investment needs stimulation more than any other type, whether measured
by the opportunities which this would afford to business enterprise or by the
people's needs for shelter. With a well established and nation-wide program for subsidized low-rent housing under way, the outstanding problem now relates to housing for middle-income groups. Further reductions in housing costs, and further income gains in an expanding economy,
would both contribute toward the solution of this problem. Important
revisions are being proposed in existing Federal Housing Administration
programs, to encourage production of housing at lower rents and lower sales
prices and of a size commensurate with family needs. These changes, however, will not provide a complete solution. Even with the new aids, adequate funds are not available for this kind of housing investment at sufficiently low interest rates and for a sufficiently long period of amortization,
since most investors require a greater degree of security than is offered by this
kind of investment. Legislation should therefore be enacted to place the
credit of the Government, directly or indirectly, in back of private ventures
into cooperative or nonprofit housing built under adequate standards.
Since the housing shortage continues, rent control is still needed.
Although the present business tax structure has not interfered generally
with high over-all levels of business investment in the postwar period, some
tax adjustments offer possibilities for encouraging over the long run an
adequate and regular flow of business investment. The Council hopes that
before too long, general revision of the tax structure will become more
feasible than it is just now.




102

FISCAL POLICY

In its Fourth Annual Report to the President, published last month, the
Council stressed the contribution which a reasonably stable fiscal policy
could make toward general economic stability and growth. But we recognized that drastic changes in expenditure and tax programs of Government
had been necessitated by the appearance of wars and depressions. We also
recognized that the large tax changes in 1948, the condition of the Federal
budget, and the rapid shifts in business trends in 1949, call for some tax
changes very soon. Further, some improvements in the tax structure are
needed before a sound base will be established on which to rest a long-range
effort to achieve more stability in fiscal policy.
The level of taxes did not prevent a magnificent record of postwar economic achievement. A valuable result of the Government surpluses in
1947 and 1948 was in helping to restrain the forces of inflation. The subsequent downturn in business activity during the first half of 1949 was not
due to excessive taxation. Nor did the level of taxation prevent the upturn
in business activity from coming sooner after the beginning of the downturn
than in any comparable period in the past. Turning to the expenditure
side, while the high outlays necessitated by the international situation complicated the inflationary problem until early 1949, the steadiness of these
outlays cushioned the downturn very substantially. On the other hand,
the Council at midyear 1949 did not recommend increases in public spending for the purpose of stimulating the economy, and our confidence in its
internal recuperative forces has thus far proved justified.
An examination of the outlook for Federal finances is relevant to the
current concern over the appearance of a substantial Federal deficit and to
the justified belief that its enlargement or even its long continuance would be
most undesirable.
Effect of general economic conditions upon Federal finance
The Federal cash position, measured in terms of the consolidated cash
budget (see the explanatory note on page 59), shifted from an 8-billion-dollar cash surplus in calendar 1948 to a cash deficit of about 1.7 billion dollars
in the calendar year 1949, and an estimated deficit of approximately 5.7 billion dollars for 1950. This shift is explained by the following factors: (1)
the Revenue Act of 1948 resulted in very large reductions in tax payments;
(2) the mild recession of 1949 was marked by a considerable decline in corporate profits as reported for tax purposes. This depressing effect upon
receipts will be felt most sharply during the calendar year 1950, when
most taxes upon 1949 corporate profits will be paid; (3) certain Government programs, such as unemployment compensation and farm price supports, rose sharply in 1949 under the impact of recessionary tendencies;
(4) other major expenditure commitments, particularly for veterans' programs and foreign aid, reach a peak in 1949 or 1950 and will decline there-




103

after. One major item for 1950, the national service life insurance dividend, of which 2.6 billion dollars will be paid in that year, will not recur
in that amount.
An examination of these causes for the deficit reveals certain trends
which would be reversed in a growing economy. Along with the effect
which a continuation of the current upward movement of the economy
would have in reducing certain expenditures, it would also have
an effect in increasing Federal revenues. This report has already discussed the secular growth of the economy since 1890, and long-range
policies, especially fiscal policy, should take into account the probability
that over the next few years this secular trend will continue at a rate
slightly increased on account of the very large new capital investment
of recent years plus the extraordinary technical improvements of the
war and postwar periods. An increase in gross national product at the
rate of approximately 3 percent a year would raise the annual product by
1954 to 300 to 310 billion dollars, contrasted with the 1949 level of 259
billion. The exact effect of this increase upon Federal revenues will
depend upon the distribution of national income among the several groups
of recipients. The effect upon the budgetary situation will also depend
on the rate of expenditures.
Expenditure policy
The prime purpose of Federal expenditure is to furnish those services
which cannot be provided effectively in any other way, and which are necessary to our national security, welfare, and progress. Examination of the
Federal Budget indicates that outlays are reasonable by this test. Outlays
for national defense and international affairs are higher than they would
be in a more peaceful world, but the fact must be accepted that their
present level is determined by security reasons. Growing international
stability will permit a progressive decline in these types of outlays. The
proposed increases in social insurance programs and in other welfare and
developmental programs reflect recognized needs and conform to the
clearly expressed purpose of the people.
The level of current and proposed public outlays will not impose an
undue inflationary strain upon the economy as a whole. Our economy is
now functioning at high levels, but considerably below maximum employment and production or full utilization of its resources, and in the Council's
judgment there is no presently foreseeable prospect that a renewal of general
inflation will require that Government programs be cut below essential
requirements. On the other hand, we do not now believe that current and
proposed Government programs should be expanded above their contemplated rate merely in order to take up the slack in employment. We should
instead rely upon the recuperative forces now at work.
There is no previous experience with an economy of the size that ours




104

has now reached, from which there may be drawn any firm rule as to the
proportion of the national income which may safely in the long run be channeled back into the economic stream through the Government. But
the Council's whole approach focuses upon the objective of economic expansion through the enlarging activity of consumers and of business, and this
means that Federal expenditures should be held as low as the requirements
of programs essential to national growth and welfare will permit.
Because so large a proportion of present Government programs is devoted
to purposes which, while essential to national security and world political
stability, make little direct contribution to increased standards of living, we
wish to emphasize the desirability of working toward lower levels of expenditures as rapidly as international conditions permit. We also wish to
emphasize the importance of constant vigilance against the dangers of waste
and inefficiency everywhere and at all times. Measures of economy, however, must not be so distorted in application as to involve the sacrifice of
essential objectives.
For this reason, we have expressed the hope that world conditions will
make it possible to make a steady reduction in national security and other
extraordinary expenditures related to the international situation, for it is
here and in related activities arising from the war that there lies the greatest
opportunity for future reduction in the Federal budget.
Tax policy
Current and prospective tax policy should be considered in the light of
the foregoing discussion.
While general reduction in personal or corporate income taxes always has
some stimulating effect upon business and consumption, such reduction at
this time would enlarge the deficit, and would be justified only if found
necessary to fortify business against a serious recessionary threat. At
midyear 1949, in the face of a far more unfavorable business situation
than now exists, the Council did not favor general tax reductions. The
upturn since then makes them even less desirable in the present budgetary
situation. Analysis earlier in this report indicates that there is no general
lack of funds for business enterprise, and that the main influence which
should be relied upon to accelerate business advance resides in adjustments
within the price-income structure which will promote an increasing demand
for the products which business produces. In spite of existing problems
in some areas, business investment in general can go ahead on a sufficiently
large scale under the current tax structure, if business managers grasp fullv
the prospects offered to them by the expansive quality of the economy.
Balancing the budget by attaining a surplus in periods of high business
activity to offset deficits which might appear under less favorable conditions
is, in our opinion, an important policy. Further, the national debt should
be reduced. Business continued throughout 1949 at a reasonably prosperous level despite recessionary tendencies. Now that business is advane-




105

ing again, we are sharply challenged to apply the principle of budget
balancing. We cannot avoid answering the question: If a balanced budget
is ever to be attained, why not at once at the current level of the economy?
Our answer is that the economy is indeed strong. We also feel that it was
unfortunate that tax rates were reduced in 1948, and that if the higher rates
had remained in effect they would not be such a burden that business
recovery would not continue. But the tax rates were reduced, countless
personal and business relationships are now based upon the lower rates, and,
if taxes were now raised sufficiently to attain an immediate budget balance,
the process itself would involve disturbing maladjustments. The real questions is this: to what extent may there be some tax increases at this stage of
business recovery without impeding business progress enough to defeat the
purpose of the tax program?
It is important that action be taken to reduce the deficit, and to move
as rapidly as the need to maintain business progress will permit toward
attaining a surplus to apply upon the Government debt. For this purpose,
some increases in taxes may be made, without threatening the recovery of
business now under way. The revision of some taxes should be sufficient
to achieve a net increase in revenue, even while making certain other adjustments in taxes to improve the equity of the structure and to provide some
stimulus to business investment and consumer buying.
There is urgent necessity that a review of the whole tax structure be
completed at the earliest possible date, toward the end of initiating longrange improvements as soon as compelling short-range problems are
disposed of.
FARM POLICY

Recent trends in agriculture present one of the most dramatic illustrations
of the expanding consumption capacity of a growing economy. In the
years immediately before the war, there were farm "surpluses"; in the postwar years, with farm output 35 percent above the prewar levels, there were
shortages. Exports played an important part in this amazing shift, but the
central cause was rising standards of living at home. The paramount fact
about the agricultural situation today is that we shall need more total output—and not less—if we are to achieve a 300-billion-dollar economy within
a few years.
The farm program must give increasing attention to the maintenance
and enlargement of markets for agricultural products. We must give
greater emphasis to improvements in the marketing and distribution of
these products, including nutritional education and special measures to
improve the diets of school children and low-income families. We must
also cooperate closely with other nations in developing satisfactory techniques for maintaining a continuing flow of farm products into international
trade without demoralizing world markets. The World Wheat Agreement




T06

is one example of what can be done along this line. But it is only a beginning. Our Government has recently expressed the purpose to continue to explore fully with other producing and consuming nations any
feasible way of making better use of the world's supplies of food and
fiber, to help stabilize world prices, and to improve world standards of
nutrition.
The expansion of farm output above prewar levels has been accomplished
with only a minor enlargement of cropland, and with a substantial reducCHART 26

FOOD PRODUCTION AND UTILIZATION
Even with a large increase in food exports since prewar years, the
expansion of over '/3 in food production has raised domestic food
supplies almost 3 0 percent, enough to provide 10 percent more
food per capita to a population 15 percent greater than before the war.
PERCENT OF 1935-39

PERCENT OF 1935-39
AVERAGE PRODUCTION

AVERAGE PRODUCTION

150

150

140

140

130

130
FOOD PRODUCTION-^

120

120

110

100

1935 3 6
J / PRODUCTION

37

FOR SALE AND FOR FARM HOME CONSUMPTION.

2 / INCLUDES CHANGES

IN STOCKS.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT

OF AGRICULTURE

tion in the number of farm workers. It reflects in part more favorable
weather. But it has resulted chiefly from widespread application of
new technology. This has included new and improved machines; new
varieties of crops and improved breeding of livestock; the more advantageous use of fertilizers and lime; the better control of pests and diseases;
and the development of new systems of farming to apply these new techniques toward more efficient production and more conservative use of soil
and water resources.
868148—50-—~8




107

With a growing national income in real terms, consumption has grown
along with production. For the 3 years 1945-47, per capita consumption of food averaged 16 percent above the period 1935-39, and
population was larger. The quality and composition of diet have vastly
improved. Meats and dairy products, fresh fruits and vegetables have
found their way to more and more tables. The per capita consumption
of eggs rose from less than 300 per year before the war to nearly 400 in
1945. Since 1946, per capita food consumption has been cut back from
119 percent to 110 percent of the prewar level. Some of this resulted
from changes in the income structure relative to prices. But another
important factor was the imbalance of production among different commodities, relative to the wants and needs of consumers. This was caused partly
by short feed supplies in 1947-48. People would have continued to buy
larger quantities of meat and milk if these products had been available.
A fully producing agricultural plant in the years ahead would not result
in production increases as rapid as those which have occurred in recent
years. The new technology has already made itself felt. But an economy
moving toward the over-all growth objectives which have been outlined for
the next few years would require an increase of 1 to V/2 percent a year
in total farm output. This increase is feasible, and can be absorbed by an
economy functioning at maximum employment. Domestic disappearance 5 years ahead, in comparison with the past 2 years, might be expected
to increase 25 to 30 percent for fruit; 15 to 20 percent for dairy products;
and 10 to 15 percent for meat, vegetables, and food fats. Tobacco consumption would probably continue to rise. Domestic utilization of cotton
and wool should be much higher than in 1949. The use of food grains
and potatoes may continue about stable, at least in terms of total food use.
The level of per capita food consumption involved in these estimates
would be about 5 percent above the present level—still a little below the
wartime peak, but 17 percent above the average for 1935-39. Even these
estimates take into account the inadequacy of purchasing power which
serves as a barrier to adequate nutrition for many families. Raising such
families to an adequate dietary level would require increasing the supplies
of meat and dairy products another 5 percent, and of poultry products,
fruits and vegetables in smaller proportions. Such supplementary consumption would raise the per capita level to about 20 percent above prewar.
With a 20 percent larger population, this would mean within a few years
total domestic food disappearance about 45 percent above the average during
the immediate prewar years. In addition, substantial possibilities for
increased consumption of farm products are being revealed by research
to develop and demonstrate new uses for them in industry.
The necessities of war, and trends in the immediate postwar period, have
driven our farm production into a pattern which is unsuited to the
requirements of the future. The acreage devoted to wheat and cotton is




108

higher than necessary to fill prospective domestic and foreign requirements.
Production of milk, meat, fruits and vegetables should be substantially
expanded, if diets are to be improved and the objective of a 300-billiondollar economy realized. Some temporary curtailment of feed-grain production may be desirable until livestock production catches up. These
shifts are in line not only with the requirements for consumption, but also
with the requirements for conservation. A substantial part of the acreage
plowed for wheat in recent years should be returned to sod; a good deal
of land in the cotton South has been used too intensively and should be
turned into pasture or farmed under more conservative systems of rotation.
In general, the shift of land from tilled crops to pasture and forage for
livestock will help maintain the soil for the use of future generations.
The speed and efficiency with which wartime shifts in production were
accomplished show that the Nation can certainly devise the methods for
desirable peacetime shifts. But the commodity goals and market supports,
which sufficed when more of everything was needed, are not adequate to
the more complex task of combining expansion in some areas with moderate
or drastic contraction in others. New methods are needed for new times.
The present price-support legislation offers the most definite assurance
with respect to returns from the basic cash crops, somewhat weaker assurance for dairy products, and no certain assurance at all to other livestock
enterprises except wool. Relatively more emphasis in price-support legislation should be placed upon livestock items if a positive, forward-looking
farm program is to be developed.
Needed adjustments in production and consumption will require important changes in land use. Not only are these changes necessary in order
to avoid persistent surpluses and to obtain a better balance of agricultural
output in line with the demands potential in a growing full-employment
economy; they are also needed to bring about better conservation of our
soil resources. And in most instances they should, in the long run, prove
more profitable for farmers themselves. Major reliance in bringing about
adjustments must therefore be placed, not on price support alone, but also
upon gearing together research and education, conservation payments and
technical aids, and farm credit, in an aggressive program to encourage and
enable farmers to make the shifts in land use that are desired.
A primary purpose of farm price supports is to achieve parity of income
for agriculture. The need for support from this standpoint, however,
chiefly arises out of recessionary economic developments originating outside
agriculture. Farm support programs are essentially supplementary. Their
benefits are secondary, compared with the benefits flowing from a prosperous
and growing economy. A prosperous and growing economy would not
only expand the market demand of consumers, but would also make possible
effective programs for improving nutrition, expanding distribution, and de-




109

veloping new uses, in which there lie wide opportunities for a desirable expansion of consumption of farm products.
At the same time, a properly designed farm support program can contribute toward overcoming recessionary developments and maintaining the
kind of economy in which these opportunities may be realized. It can do
this by helping to maintain purchasing power in the rural areas of the
economy, particularly in those areas which are the temporary victims
of maladjustments like those with which many farmers are now faced.
A proper adjustment of the support program from this standpoint involves, as previously indicated, a structure of supports which will help to
encourage the basic shifts needed in production, rather than to perpetuate maladjustments. It involves also the provision of greater variety
in the methods of support. It has been possible for the Government to
maintain prices through purchases or loans which enable farmers to hold
supplies off the market. But such operations involve many difficulties of
storage and disposal, especially of livestock products and other perishables.
The desirable alternative method of supporting farm returns from livestock and other perishables involves payments to farmers when market prices
fall below desired levels. This method has important economic advantages.
By permitting market prices of foods or other farm products to be determined by normal demand factors when supplies are abundant, it passes
on to consumers the benefits of such abundance and gets larger amounts
moved into consumption. Support of market prices, on the other hand,
impedes this desirable consumption response. In addition, market-price
support maintains an upward pressure on prices at numerous points in the
economy, where costs of production of other goods are directly or indirectly
affected by the prices of farm products. The reductions in prices which
become possible where payments are used relieve such upward pressures
and permit readjustments which may tend, over a period of time, to bring
about more stable price relationships and hence to reduce the cost and
the difficulty of the support program itself.
Either direct supports or payments may prove costly in certain periods,
and may need to be supplemented by programs to hold down the
production or marketings of commodities that are in surplus. But it is
important to recognize that such restrictive measures, though they may
be temporarily effective, are no substitute for a positive adjustment program
to bring about enduring shifts that are needed in production. So long
as there are too many farmers engaged in the wrong kind of production, the pursuit of parity of income for agriculture will not provide a
complete solution. But if accompanied with measures to adjust agricultural production to the needs of a growing economy, the objective
of income parity for agriculture means a better balance throughout our
whole national economy. It means protection of a vital sector of the
economy against the extraordinary fluctuations in income which have pe-




IIO

culiarly affected it in the past; and it means a more stable and expanding
demand in rural communities for the products of industry.
In the final analysis, programs to reach and maintain parity of income
for agriculture will not fully meet the objective of adequate farm purchasing
power unless they include a direct attack upon the special problem of lowincome farmers. In 1948, the per capita income of the farm population was
estimated at $905, compared with $1,572 for nonfarm people. During the
same year, one-fourth of our 6.7 million farm families received cash incomes
of less than $1,000. Although this figure omits the value of nonmoney income from home production, it nonetheless indicates the plight of these families, and their low position in the market for commercial goods and services.
While not all of the low-income people on farms are farmers in a strict
occupational sense, there were in 1945 nearly 1 million small holdings whose
operators apparently derived their main income from the farm. In addition, more than V/2 million small family farms turned out products valued
annually at between $1,200 and $3,000. These two groups accounted for
more than 44 percent of the farms reported, and nearly 43 percent of the
population on farms.
Many of these farmers, having little to sell, receive little benefit from
price-support programs. In addition, there are some 4,000,000 hired farm
workers, whose average wages, including perquisites, are substantially below
the levels of most urban employment.
A frontal attack upon farm poverty involves many measures. It should
include increased emphasis upon the provision of credit and other aids
to small farmers in enlarging, improving, and equipping their farms.
This program should be tied in closely with production adjustment measures, with soil conservation activities, and with management advice and
guidance. For families whose best opportunities lie outside farming, stress
should be placed upon vocational adjustment, help in locating new jobs,
and financial aid during their period of training and relocation. These
undertakings would be facilitated if nonfarm employment opportunities in
rural areas were expanded through regional development and rural industrialization activities.
Foremost among those programs which will be of general benefit to
farmers, particularly those of low income, will be further improvements in
education. The consolidation and improvement of rural schools would
broaden the opportunities for vocational training. Measures to improve
health and housing in rural areas, and to extend to rural people a fuller
participation in our social security programs, are of comparable importance.
The advancement of a prosperous and secure agriculture, measuring up
to the requirements and benefiting by the richness of an economy functioning
at maximum levels of employment and production, is one of our major
economic tasks. That task calls for all the resources of thought and of
material things that can be made available. The time to move resolutely
in that direction is now.




Ill

DEVELOPMENT OF PHYSICAL AND HUMAN RESOURCES

Economic growth depends on what people do with land, water, minerals,
transport, and plant and machinery. What they can do in turn is measured
by the care with which they have conserved and utilized their physical
resources. It rests equally upon general health standards, and upon the
level and kind of education they have. Increases in our total national
production to more than 300 billion dollars in 1954, and maintenance of a
2 to 2% percent annual rate of increase in productivity over the next few
years, would require expanded and improved developmental programs in
the two broad areas of physical and human resources.
To attain the prosperous economy which is within our reach, plans
relating to natural resources development, transportation, urban development, education, and health must be correlated. In nearly every one
of these areas, construction and nonconstruction or service activities
are interrelated. Soil-conservation techniques are useless unless farmers
have an appreciation of their value and an understanding of how to use
them. New schools and hospitals are of little consequence without trained
staff personnel. Developmental and works programs, such as land reclamation, hydroelectric power development, intercity and interregional highways,
and better housing, hospitals, and schools, should be viewed in long-range
perspective in terms of socially desirable and economically feasible standards.
It is highly significant that achievement of the balanced economic
growth envisaged earlier in this report requires a level of expenditure
for the foregoing developmental activities rising at least about 20
percent above that of 1949 within five years. This increase is about the
same as the potential increase in total output projected for that period of
years, but is less than half the rate of growth which would be desirable if
other elements in the budget were not so extraordinarily large. As
economic objectives become better defined, the magnitude of these programs should be reviewed continuously to assure their maintenance at
adequate levels. The discrepancy between the minimum and desirable
levels of growth illustrates that, with present budget commitments for
national security, progress in these programs must of necessity be limited.
On the other hand, an insufficient allowance for the development of our
natural and human resources would do irreparable damage, and would
impair our ability to produce for peace or defense.
Physical resources
The importance of the development of our natural resources in the
economic progress of our country has been so well known that the "Winning
of the West" has been a favorite and romantic theme in the school histories
of American children. Our pride in the ability, intelligence, and industry
of our forefathers has not concealed from us the fact that the speed of




112

economic growth has been possible because the human forces of production
were applied to a bountiful supply of undeveloped natural resources.
The primitive stage in which the individual could create his own field
of work and production lasted a long time. As late as the close of the
nineteenth century, the single enterpriser was setting up his mill and waterwheel, the farmer was establishing himself on a productive homestead, the
prospector was hunting unknown ledges, and the wildcatter was drilling
shallow wells for oil or gas. Even the numerous projects for the exploitation of natural resources, which were beyond the financial capacity of such
individuals, were generally small enough to be supported by capital supplied
by a few persons, often by a single capitalist backer of the entrepreneur.
The twentieth century has seen the continuous replacement of individual enterprise by large corporate enterprise in the development of
natural resources. The simple prospects have been exploited, and the
opportunities have been increasingly in projects requiring large capital.
The place of small business has grown progressively smaller in an
industrial environment of 500,000-dollar oil wells, 10-million-dollar ore
treating plants, 50-million-dollar hydroelectric stations, and timber factories
which reproduce as well as cut down the forests. And even while large
corporate enterprise has expanded its operations in the development of
natural resources in the past 50 years, it has become increasingly clear
that some projects which must be undertaken in an adequate program are
beyond the field of private enterprise. Only the Government can meet the
problems of high cost and of exceedingly long periods of amortization of
investment which are usually combined in these undertakings.
This historical trend is well illustrated by our unfolding policies and programs in the field of land reclamation by irrigation. One of the first
actions by the Federal Government in this direction was the passage of the
Reclamation Act in 1902. Irrigation development began with the one-field
ditch, became a neighborhood group project, and then moved into the
stage of corporate operations, which the Government assisted where public
lands were involved by furnishing free reservoir sites and free rights-of-way
for canals, and by restricting land acquisition to persons buying water
rights.
The Reclamation Act was passed because these aids were not adequate
to enable private capital to construct the larger and more expensive projects
which would extend the limits of irrigation beyond the narrow zones near
the streams and would establish a water supply, despite the earlier overappropriation of the natural flow of a river, by constructing great reservoirs.
In the beginning, the moving idea was that the Government could easily
finance a project which a corporation would find had little chance of attracting private investors, and that the Government could extend very
long credit to the buyers of water rights. Much later, there came Congressional recognition that the establishment of a prosperous, growing com-




munity, for so many of which the reclamation programs have been responsible, brings great benefits to the state, not only in an increase in its general
well-being, but also in direct financial gains affecting its revenue. The private corporation cannot realize such benefits. The Federal Government
does secure them, and it may take them into account in determining whether
to undertake a project the cost of which will be recovered only in part
from those directly served.
Great opportunities still lie before private capital for the further development of natural resources, and Federal legislation is specifically directed, in
many respects, to assisting private enterprise engaged in such projects. But
the ability of the Nation to benefit as greatly from our natural resources in
coming years as in the past depends also upon enormous undertakings which
private capital cannot attempt. We have made a beginning of Government projects, especially in the Tennessee and other river valleys, and
other possibilities are so many that they surpass the possible limit of Federal
expenditure. Appropriations must be allocated between resources development and other Government purposes, and between projects affecting
natural resources and those affecting human resources. Some of the
factors which should influence the decisions are indicated in the following
discussion.
Programs for the conservation and development of natural resources need
to be expanded at a rate somewhat greater than the secular growth of the
economy. The public expenditures involved are investments which result in
the production of goods and specific services indispensable to economic
growth, nationally and regionally. They make available, for the benefit of all
the potentials which exist in our regions. For example, if the well-established
trend of increasing use of electricity is to continue, the production of lowcost electrical energy will have to expand more rapidly than the increase in
national product. River basin development programs can account for a considerable portion of the 6,000,000 kilowatts of additional power capacity
needed annually for some time into the future. In the West, these programs
contribute to meeting needs imposed by great population increases. In the
more mature area of northern New York State and New England, the economic prospects can be improved by making available the low-cost power
potential in the St. Lawrence seaway and power project. By the time the
seaway can be completed, we may be heavily dependent upon imported
ore to keep our steel industry operating at capacity. For reasons of
national security as well as economic development, the seaway is an urgently
needed link between the inland centers of our iron and steel industry and
foreign sources of ore.
We should speed up the gathering of geologic, topographic, hydrologic,
and other basic data upon which so many resources development projects
rest. Forest resource and soil surveys should also be pushed vigorously.
Continued emphasis on the synthetic liquid fuels program and the under-




114

ground coal gasification programs are desirable as a part of the Government's long-range effort to develop new techniques and alternative sources
of supply in the interest of conservation of diminishing resources. Exploration for scarce minerals should also be encouraged.
About one-fourth of our cropland is being damaged at a rapid rate, while
another 25 percent is deteriorating, although at a less serious rate. These
lands should be placed under good management at soon as possible, while
farmers generally need to give increased attention to soil-conserving techniques. Soil conservation and improvement work is not being done rapidly
enough, nor upon a scale broad enough to protect the soil. About one-half
of the western grazing lands are in poor condition and call for immediate
attention such as seeding, fencing, provision of stock water, and control of
noxious plants. More than 100,000,000 acres of public range need restorative work. Large tracts of marginal wheatland, for which adequate rainfall
cannot be counted upon, should be returned to range.
A flexible long-term forest development program should aim to build up
the annual growth of saw-size timber to about double the present rate. This
would allow for potential needs in a prosperous, expanding economy. Cutting and forestry practices on almost two-thirds of our private forest land
are detrimental to future growth.
We have standards permitting measurement of our present deficiency
in highways. A good highway costs less all around than a poor highway,
because of increased safety and savings in wear and tear on cars and tires.
More than half our major highways were built in the 1920's or early 1930's,
and have already served the major part of their useful lives. It would cost
more to maintain them over the next decade than to replace them; so
our choice is between building good roads and riding on them, or losing
the price of good roads by riding on poor ones. Out of a needed expenditure for highways of about 4 billion dollars a year over the next decade,
approximately one-half should be for replacement.
The atom represents a new resource of almost limitless opportunities,
the development of which we have scarcely begun. Through use of radioactive atoms, we are pushing back the boundaries of hitherto unknown mysteries of human life and plant growth, and we are gaining new knowledge
that has already improved industrial processes in textiles, chemicals, and
metals. In addition to gains in medicine, agriculture, and other fields,
radioactive atoms are leading the way toward new and better industrial
products, better assurance of profitable business operations, and higher
standards of productivity accompanied by higher returns to labor and
management. Construction has begun on several experimental atomic
energy power plants, which may prove to be the forerunners of a new age
in the application of electric power. The precise economic significance of
these developments can now be seen only dimly, but it cannot be doubted
that they will exert an increasing force in the growth of the American economy and in its several regions.




"5

Human resources
We shall fail to realize the potentials of our physical resources, unless we
remember always that it is people who translate these potentials into actual
goods and services. Ever-advancing health and educational programs should
be recognized as the necessary foundation for the improved technology and
social organization upon which economic growth depends. These developmental programs include construction of schools, hospitals, and other
facilities, as well as educational and health services.
The need for improved educational opportunities is persistent. The
more urgent problem is the enlargement of staff and facilities required by
the postwar growth in the juvenile population. Five years from now
elementary school enrollment will be 30 percent above the present level.
A similar expansion of secondary school enrollment will follow. Suffering as we now do from the overcrowded classrooms and the overburdened
teachers which are the nation-wide rule, we should add approximately
one-third to our elementary school plant capacity within a few years,
replace an additional third, and increase the number of elementary
teachers more than correspondingly. We shall have to expand secondary
school facilities, but not so rapidly. Another serious problem is found
in the current inability of a large proportion of our most capable youth
to obtain the post-high school education necessary to full realization of
their economic and cultural capacity. Additional thousands of doctors and
nurses should be professionally trained each year, as an essential part of
improved health programs.
The disparity of financial resources among the States of the Union is such
that the States with the greatest proportion of children of school age are
generally lagging in their provision for elementary and secondary education,
although they devote a larger part of the income of their people to this
purpose than do many wealthier States with much better educational facilities. It is now widely recognized that Federal aid is required,
to support enlarged educational programs which will meet the problems
of hard pressed areas, and which in addition will expedite the provision
of wider opportunities for higher education generally as well as the professional training of doctors and nurses throughout the country.
The need for greatly improved health services and facilities is also
a matter of common agreement. The economic costs of preventable
illness, of reduced physical and mental capacities, and of premature aging
are such that public expenditures in improved health are as much sound
economic investments as they are a major contribution to individual wellbeing.
To meet desirable standards, the Nation should double its present acceptable hospital facilities by 1960. This would mean more than 900,000
additional hospital beds. Public health service units should be made




n6

available in the more than 1,000 counties which now do not have them
on a full-time basis, and services in many existing units should be
strengthened. Improved access to competent medical attention should be
provided for the millions who are now without it. Vocational rehabilitation and medical research activities need expansion. Federal aid is essential
to the achievement of these standards in many areas of the Nation, as well
as for expanded training of medical and public health personnel.
The timing of developmental programs
Critical problems arise with respect to the flexibility and timing of these
programs. How much variation from year to year might be desirable and
feasible in these programs, in order to contribute in some measure to the
stability of the general economy? Even more troublesome has been the
problem of the extent to which these programs may be shaped to the varying
needs of different parts of the country.
The Council believes that these programs for the development of basic
physical and human resources should be primarily along lines of long-range
steady growth. By this approach, it should be feasible to arrive at determinations, partly but not purely economic in character, as to what part of
the resources of a growing economy should be allocated to these fundamental
objectives. This should contribute more to the stability of the general
economy than the treatment of these programs mainly as compensatory
devices. The economic outlook now—with neither inflation nor deflation
clearly in prospect—presents as good a time as any to develop these programs systematically and in close accord with the long-range needs of the
country. The Council believes that this is the sounder approach, not only
from the viewpoint of general economic policy, but also from the viewpoint
of the sound management of the Federal budget.
Economic trouble spots
Despite the high levels of employment throughout the Nation, there
are some areas with quite heavy unemployment, and with far less than
maximum levels of production and business activity. This presents a challenge because there cannot be maximum employment and production
throughout the Nation so long as some areas are relatively depressed; and
there is always danger that economic dislocations in spot areas may spread
if they are not remedied.
For more than a year, there has been a noticeable concentration of unemployment and distress in particular areas. According to the end-of-December reports, 12 of 100 labor market areas of major importance had an
estimated 12 percent or more of their labor force unemployed. In addition, this percentage is known to have prevailed in numerous smaller
labor market areas.
At midyear 1949, a program was initiated to provide aid to these trouble




117

spots through modification, within the limitations of existing laws, of procedures governing Federal procurement, construction, and lending operations.
Action along these lines should be continued. However, the more persistent
and fundamental aspect of the problem is the long-term or chronic unemployment so prevalent in many distressed areas. It should be recognized
that some New England textile areas, the cut-over section in the Northern
Lakes States, and various coal mining districts in Pennsylvania, Illinois, and
Indiana, have been in difficulty for 20 years or longer. This calls for even
more determined efforts, broader in scope and longer-range in character.
The search for solutions to these area problems is the joint responsibility
of Federal, State, and local governments, working with the private groups
concerned. Integrated programs of action need to be worked out to meet
the unique situation in each depressed area. The possibilities of more
vigorous retraining, lending, and capital development activities, should be
examined. These actions should contribute to permanent solutions, and not
only alleviate current difficulties.
Advance planning and program flexibility
Advance planning of developmental programs is necessary, if they are
to be directed more fully toward long-range economic objectives for the
Nation as a whole and for specific regions. In addition, such advance
planning will make such programs more effective in some of the economic trouble spots which exist even in times of general prosperity. And
if, despite all efforts, a dangerously inflationary or deflationary situation should develop, advance planning will make it easier to adjust developmental programs accordingly without loss of time or waste of funds. Such
planning would not be inconsistent with a decision to defer projects in
periods of threatening inflation, and it would assist their acceleration if
that should become necessary to halt serious deflation.
The following table summarizes the present status of advance construction planning for such projects as highways, various community facilities,
and dams and other stream improvements.
TABLE 16.—Status of plans for a public works reserve
[Billions of dollars]
Estimate of
Blueprints
construction
on hand,
in 1950
Dec. 31,1949

Item

State and local*
Federal
Total
1

Blueprints
in process

4.1
1.9

3.0
3.0

6.0

_-.

3.0
1.5
4.5

6.0

Based on data provided by the General Services Administration.

At the present time, State and local backlogs of drawings and specifications do not exceed 3 billion dollars. This is less than 6 months' work at
the level which should be maintained over the next few years. The Con-




n8

gress has renewed authority for the Federal Government to aid State and
local governments in building up their shelves of construction plans, and
this work should be pushed vigorously.
One major weakness is in the broad field of river basin development.
Existing programs, several involving hundreds of millions of dollars, lack
consistency and balance. In most of our major river valleys, we do not
now have satisfactory means for preparing and agreeing upon integrated
programs of development, including watershed land development as well
as construction along the stream. Thorough reexamination of the problems and presently authorized programs in a number of our major river
basins would be desirable. This is especially true of the Missouri Basin.
In addition, there should be continuing efforts to improve policies and
methods of program formulation, to assure that objectives for river basin
development are consistent with our national economic goals.
The preparation of advance plans requires consideration of the suitability of various programs for possible acceleration, both Nation-wide and
in specific areas. Examples of projects and programs which are susceptible
to prompt expansion include improvements in city streets, sewer- and waterline extension, school building additions, and maintenance and repair of
public buildings. Nonconstruction programs, including research, recreation, and public health services, are also susceptible to flexible expansion.
In rural areas, soil, range, and forest conservation work are examples of
the more flexible type of development programs. Public housing, hospital, and major highway construction requires more time to get under
way, but is still available within limits. Federal technical assistance for
State and local planning of nonconstruction as well as construction projects,
would go far toward making sure that such assistance as the Congress
might make available in time of need would be fitted in with carefully considered long-term needs and opportunities, nationally and in special areas.
Successful advance planning of developmental and works programs requires continuous efforts to coordinate the planning activities of the Federal
agencies concerned. Furthermore, it may well be desirable to provide for
a greater degree of discretionary authority over the timing and placing of
public development expenditures, as an aid in stabilizing the economy nationally and in particular areas. This subject is being studied by the Council.
SOCIAL SECURITY

In the 250-billion-dollar economy of today, the social security programs
are still adjusted largely to the 70-billion-dollar economy of 1935—the
year when the Social Security Act was adopted. The interests of the
Nation require that these programs now make an about-face and, instead
of looking backward, look forward to the 300-billion-dollar economy that
we can achieve within a few years and to the still larger economy which
should exist by the time that most of those who are now working reach
retirement age.




In its Annual Report to the President published last month, the Council
pointed out that social security programs should be measured primarily
against what a strong economy can afford to do. Workers are more productive when they live in the assurance of protection against foreseeable
hazards, rather than in dread of their incapacity to cope with them. Social
security programs also serve to cushion the effects of recessionary trends
whenever these may appear, because old-age payments constitute a steady
flow of income, and because unemployment insurance benefits and assistance
payments rise as other forms of income decline.
Unemployment insurance
Unemployment benefits are now replacing an average of only about 35
percent of the wage loss of covered workers, and the limitations on coverage
and duration greatly reduce their total effectiveness. In November 1949,
public unemployment benefits were being received by about two-thirds of
laid-off workers, and represented compensation for only 20 to 25 percent of
the Nation's total wage loss due to unemployment. In some of the areas
with severe and long-continued unemployment, only about one-third of the
laid-off workers were receiving benefits at the end of 1949.
The need for strengthening the Federal-State unemployment insurance
system through the establishment of minimum Federal standards is urgent.
Benefits should replace at least 50 percent of the wage loss due to unemployment up to a maximum of $30 a week for single workers, with additional
amounts ranging up to a total of $42 for workers with three or more dependents. Coverage should be expanded to include employers with one
or more employees; and benefits should be made payable for at least 26
weeks of unemployment. To guard against the danger that prolonged
unemployment may strain the solvency of the trust funds of individual
States, a Federal reinsurance system should be established. This would
assure that no State is forced into disproportionate taxation which would
further aggravate its economic problems.
Old-age, survivorship, and disability protection
The inadequacy of current systematic protection of the aged is set forth
vividly in this single contrast: the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance system
is now paying $26 a month to single workers and $41 to couples, at a time
when a minimum food bill alone for a retired couple is about $45 a month.
Furthermore, of 11.5 million persons in the country over 65 years of age,
only about 2.3 million are receiving public insurance benefits. Only 650,000
families are recipients of survivors' insurance benefits, and no social insurance protection is provided for families whose wage earners are disabled
for reasons not connected with their employment.
The Old-Age and Survivors Insurance program should be enlarged to
approach universal coverage, and the benefit level should be raised enough
to permit the aged worker a real choice between retirement and continued




120

work., and to provide widows and children and the disabled with a healthful
standard of living without dependence on public relief.
Employer-employee pension plans may serve as a legitimate private
supplementation to Government social insurance programs. Too great a
reliance on private plans, however, may interfere with desirable mobility of labor. Furthermore, private plans provide true protection only if
accrued and current pension liabilities are fully reflected in trust fund accumulations. Only public and nearly-universal social insurance programs
can be financed in a manner adjusted to the overall needs of the economy.
It is incumbent upon the Government to develop a sound and adequate
social insurance structure which, with continuing improvements as the
Nation's productivity increases, can satisfy basic needs for individual
security.
Health insurance
The gap in social insurance resulting from our continued failure to provide a national system for the prepayment of the costs of medical care also
creates hardship in many cases and is responsible for the fact that millions of
Americans remain without adequate medical care. Health insurance, with
the same nearly-universal coverage as Old Age, Survivors, and Disability
Insurance would make an ail-important contribution to the Nation's health,
with resulting long-range benefits to productivity and income.
Public assistance
The inadequacies of the insurance system have thrown a disproportionate load upon the relief agencies. Public assistance for the aged, the blind,
and dependent children on a means-test basis has outstripped social insurance received as a matter of right, whether measured by level of benefits
or by number of recipients. In a large number of communities, however,
only inadequate public funds are available for the needy individuals who do
not fall into the special categories for which Federal aid is available. The
public-assistance program should be bolstered by the extension of Federal
grants-in-aid for needy families not now eligible under the Federal-State
program. In the allocation of the public assistance grants, the differing
financial abilities of the States should be taken into account.
Social security costs
The Council in its Annual Report to the President last month pointed
out the distortion which results when the future cost of old-age benefits
is measured against the current size of the economy. For whatever method
of financing may be employed, the fact remains that the goods and services
consumed by those who retire some decades hence will be provided by the
economy of that time and not by the economy of today.
The following table illustrates, for the next quarter century, the probable
growth of the total aged population and of the numbers eligible for and receiving retirement benefits under proposed legislation. The estimates are




121

based on our belief that many aged individuals will not retire voluntarily in
an economy with abundant job opportunities. Accordingly, the number of
individuals receiving benefits is estimated to be well below the number
eligible under the insurance system.
TABLE

17.—Estimated proportion of the aged population eligible for and receiving old-age
insurance benefits, 1950-1975
Population aged 65 years and over
Eligible for benefits upon retire- Eetired and receiving benefits i
ment of earner l

Year
Total
(millions)

1950
1955
I960
1985
1970
1975

_
.

Percent
Percent
total Number of total
Number ofaged
aged
(millions) popula- (millions) population
tion

11.5
12.9
14.4
15.8
17.2
18.7

3.5
6.9
9.0
11.1
13.0
14.9

30
53
62
70
76
80

2.0
4.1
5.9
7.7
9.5
11.2

17
32
41
49
55
60

Percent
of total
eligible

57
59
66
69
73
75

* Assumes prompt adoption of administration program and intermediate population and labor force
estimates.
Source: Federal Security Agency, Social Security Administration.

Under the broadened social insurance coverage illustrated above, and
with the benefit levels proposed by the President, ranging up to a family
maximum of 150 dollars a month, the total cost of old-age insurance would
approach 83/2 billion dollars 25 years from now. Existing and presently
proposed programs of insurance for survivors, the disabled and the unemployed, and for the payment of the costs of medical care, together
with the public assistance programs of the Federal, State, and local governments, might require an additional 14 to 16 billion dollars in benefit
payments. Thus the total costs of all presently recommended programs
in the fields of social insurance and public assistance, including the costs
of State and local governments, might range up to 25 billion dollars a
quarter of a century from now, or 20 billion dollars above the current level.
This is a very large figure. It should be viewed, however, in the light of
the total national income and production which would flow from a growing
economy. The rate of growth which would result from fairly constant
maximum production and employment would mean a total national output
of 500 to 600 billion dollars 25 years from now, or in the range of 300
billion dollars above the present level. The prospective increase of 20
billion dollars in social welfare costs would thus represent less than 7 percent
of the total increase in national output. This would be only a moderate
proportion of its increasing income for a prosperous democracy to devote to
the aid of those least able to protect themselves against economic risks. Furthermore, these costs should not be regarded as entirely new costs. Much




122

of the expenditure would occur in the complete absence of social security,
but its burden would then be distributed unevenly among relatives, friends,
medical practitioners, and creditors.
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES

For some time, the broad long-range purpose of American international
economic policies has been to expand international trade and investment,
and thus to contribute to our own economic well-being and to peace and
freedom throughout the world. The immediate postwar situation, which
has forced us to adopt extraordinary programs of foreign grants, should
not divert us from this long-range purpose. Expanding trade and investment between the United States and other countries will aid world political
stability and reduce the need for extraordinary grants. The problem is
no longer a long-range one of moving gradually toward a purely economic
goal. It is an urgent problem of both security and economics.
The problem arises from the intensity of foreign demand for our goods
and services, which since the war has vastly exceeded what foreign countries could finance by selling goods and services to us or by attracting private
United States capital. The surplus of our exports over our imports of
goods and services in the four postwar years 1946-49 has totaled 31 billion
dollars, and even this amount was inadequate to meet foreign needs. This
excess demand for American goods has been general, and by no means confined to Europe. As appendix table C-36 shows, about half of our export
surplus in the postwar period has been with countries other than those of
Western Europe and their dependencies. In 1949, dollar deficits were a
world problem.
Two years ago, difficulties created by the war were regarded as at the root
of the payments problem. Although it was recognized that many specific
factors were involved, some of which would be permanent, it was obvious
that the immediate necessity was to expand production in foreign countries above prewar levels and to eliminate their internal inflationary pressures and the overvaluation of their currencies. Great progress has been
made along these lines, but further steps are now necessary if the European
countries are to become self-supporting at satisfactory standards of living,
thus eliminating the need for further large extraordinary aid from the
United States.
The dollar problem
The problem of overcoming the shortage of dollars with which to pay
for American goods must be attacked from several directions.
One method is to increase our total imports of goods and services, and
total Western European exports. This was one of the principal objectives
of the devaluation of the British pound sterling in September 1949, which
was followed by devaluation of many other currencies. It is too early to
868148—50




9

123

determine the effects of these devaluations, but certainly they alone will
not provide an expansion of world trade sufficient to overcome the dollar
shortage.
We, as well as others, have barriers to imports which we have the power
to remove or reduce. With the maintenance of vigorous domestic demand,
the value of our imports could be substantially increased in the coming
years with benefit to our standards of living and without injury to domestic
industries. Despite recent tariff reductions, imports are still hampered by
tariffs which may safely be reduced by reciprocal trade agreements negotiated in the conferences to begin next September. Burdensome customs
procedures should be modified. Other legislative restrictions upon imports
of goods and services should be limited or eliminated as far as practicable,
except to the extent that they are required for our national security or
other domestic objectives; and they should be made consistent with the
proposed charter for the International Trade Organization. This charter,
which provides a code of rules and a mechanism for dealing with international trade problems, has been negotiated and placed before the Congress
for approval.
Important though these measures are, a solution which placed the entire
burden upon increasing American imports between now and the end of
the European Recovery Program would not be desirable from the point of
view of foreign or domestic policy, even if it were feasible. The cutting
off of our present net contribution to the resources of foreign countries, by
eliminating our export surplus in less than 3 years, would mean severe
limitations on their domestic development or living standards. Both alternatives would involve serious dangers of political instability in many parts
of the world which would be harmful to our national security. In this
country, so sharp a rise of imports within a few years might create difficulties for particular industries, and also have some generally unfavorable
economic effects.
Nor should the solution be sought in a drastic reduction of American
exports. This would be disastrous for many foreign countries throughout
the world if it occurred before their requirements could be supplied from
other sources. It would also have a serious effect upon the markets for
many United States products, and would aggravate our problem of agricultural surpluses. In the fiscal year 1948-49, we exported to Europe 21
percent of our total raw cotton production, 21 percent of our leaf-tobacco
production, and 26 percent of our total wheat and wheat-flour production.
The Point Four Program
In January 1949, the President proposed what has become known
as the Point Four Program to assist the underdeveloped areas of
the world in raising their standards of living and creating an environment favorable to the maintenance and development of freedom
and democracy. The expanded flow of capital under the Point Four




124

Program would create new international markets. A substantial flow of
dollars, which the underdeveloped countries could spend where they choose,
would provide the countries of Western Europe with the opportunity of
finding new outlets for the export of capital goods and other products by
an expansion of total world markets, rather than by a self-defeating struggle
for present limited markets. Thus, the export of capital under the Point
Four Program, which is a basic element in our foreign policy, would contribute greatly to the supply of dollars needed by foreign countries to
purchase essential supplies in the United States.
The Point Four Program proposes, in the first instance, to furnish technical
assistance and to expedite the flow of capital to the countries which have
made little progress in development. Legislation to provide technical assistance, and to provide guaranties to private capital against risks peculiar to
foreign investment, has been recommended and is under consideration by
the Congress. The investment of private capital is being encouraged
through the negotiation of treaties to assure private capital against discriminatory treatment. It is also desirable to revise certain provisions of
the tax laws dealing with the taxation of income from foreign investment.
The present volume of requests for soundly based loans from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Export-Import
Bank has been limited, because development plans of many underdeveloped
countries have not been translated into sufficiently concrete projects. The
United States should provide positive assistance to the underdeveloped countries in formulating such projects, through its technical assistance programs
and through its support of those of the United Nations. At a later time,
it may be necessary to increase the lending authority of the Export-Import
Bank so that it can increase substantially its guaranty and direct lending
activities.
In the underdeveloped countries, there is an enormous potential demand
for the products of Western Europe and of the United States which will
become active as their resources are more efficiently used and the standards
of living of their people raised. It is the purpose of the Point Four Program to activate these powers of economic growth. In doing so, it will also
expand the opportunities for world trade. Here lies the opportunity for the
countries of Western Europe to escape from the limitations of existing world
markets in which they are now confined, and within which they find little
room for adjustment. Our own policies under the Point Four Program,
and the business policies of Western Europe, should be directed to permit
them to participate in this expansion of world trade. They will then
find an outlet for their increasing production, and will begin to create a new
source of dollars to support their purchases in the United States.




125




Appendix A
The Nation's Economic Budget
Contents
Page

The Nation's Economic Budget
Consumer account
Business account
International account
Government account

128
130
131
132
134
Tables

A-l.
A-2.
A-3.
A-4.
A-5.
A-6.

The Nation's Economic Budget, 1948-49
Consumer account, 1948-49
Business account, 1948-49
International account, 1948-49
Government account (Federal, State, and local), 1948-49 .
Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing,
1948-49
A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function, 1948-49 .
A—8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and
transaction, calendar years 1948 and 1949 . . . . . .




127

129
131
132
133
136
137
137
138

The N a t i o n ' s Economic Budget
The Nation's Economic Budget is designed to give a synoptic picture oi
the economy. It shows the magnitudes of income and expenditure of major
economic groups, net additions and absorption of saving by these groups, and
the gross national income and product. Statistics for the Nation's Economic
Budget are drawn from various sources and are made as comparable as
possible. Statistics relating to the private sectors of the economy are based
on the "National income and product" accounts of the Department of Commerce,1 while the Government account is based mainly on "Gash receipts
from the public" and "Cash payments to the public" as compiled by the
Bureau of the Budget.2
The gross national product or income includes all those receipts or payments arising from current production. Other types of receipts or payments
represent transfers of claims, using the term in the broadest sense. For example, the Government transfers purchasing power to the recipients of veterans'
pensions. Such payments have an important bearing both on Government
outlays and on the spending and saving of individuals. In order to portray
the role of Government payments in the economy, it was necessary in the
Nation's Economic Budget to include the main flows of transfer payments
in addition to the flows associated with current production. To indicate the
distinction, the former are in italics and the latter in roman type. Obviously,
only the latter may be totaled to arrive at the gross national product.
Referring to table A-l, Government expenditures for goods and services
are shown in line 15, and all other Government cash payments in line 16
(italics). The receipts of transfers to individuals and Government interest
are shown in line 2, and included in consumer disposable income. Government cash loans to the "rest of the world" have also been entered as a
receipt in the international account (line 9) because they increase the
purchasing power of the "rest of the world." For various reasons, indicated later, unilateral transfers to foreign countries (gifts, etc.) are
1
Estimates of national income and product and related series are published in the July
1949 Survey of Current Business, Department of Commerce.
2
Federal cash receipts from the public and payments to the public represent a consolidation of the United States budget with the government trust and corporation accounts.
All intragovernmental and noncash transactions have been eliminated. A detailed explanation of this consolidation may be found in the Budget of the United States Government
for the fiscal year 1950, p. 1375. A summary of the derivation of cash receipts and payments from budgetary receipts and expenditures for calendar year 1948 was presented in the
Annual Review of the Council of Economic Advisers, January 1949, pp. 89 and 90.




128

T A B L E A - l . — T h e Nation's

Economic Budget, calendar years 1948 and 1949

[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
1949, first half

1948
Economic group

()

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

CONSUMERS
Disposable income relating to current production
Government transfers to individuals and net interest payments
Disposable personal income
Expenditures for goods and services
Personal savings (+)
_
BUSINESS
Retained business receipts from current production
Gross private domestic investment
Excess of receipts (+) or investment (—)
_
INTERNATIONAL
Government loan transfers abroad
Net foreign investment
Excess of receipts (+) or investment (—)
--.
G O V E R N M E N T (Federal, State, and local)
Tax payments or liabilities
Adjustment to cash basis
Cash receipts from the public
.-.
Purchases of goods and services
Government transfers
Cash payments to the public
Excess of receipts (+) or payments (—).
ADJUSTMENTS
For receipts relating to gross national product..
Other adjustments
Total: Gross national product..
1

1949, second half *

Excess of
Excess of
Excess of
receipts
receipts
receipts
Receipts Expend(+)or Receipts Expend- (+)or Receipts Expend- (+)or
itures
itures
itures
deficit
deficit
deficit

175.8
U.9
190.8

26.8

()

()

175.5
16.0
191.5

178.5
15.9
178.8

45.0

194.4
+12.0
28.3
-18.2

1.8

178.8

178.2

+15.6
27.0

8.5

35.0
-10.2

.4

1.2

-1.2

—s
60.2
-.8
59.9

36. 7
16.0
52.7

-.4

262.4

262.4

56.0
+1.6
57.6

+7.2
-1.2
-1.6
26L6

+18.2

-8.0

+1.6

56.6

+.9

43.2
16.7
69.9

57.5

-2.8
-1.2
-1.6

261.6

43.8
17.4
61.2

-3.2

-3.2

+.1

255.9

,-8.7

255.9

0

Estimates based on incomplete data. See Part I, table 12 for 1949 totals.
NOTE.—Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics; they
are not included in the gross national product.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Based on data from the Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget




excluded from this category; they are considered as a direct goods and
service expenditure of either consumers or Government and do not appear
at all in the international account.
In order to show the equivalence of income derived from current production with gross national product or expenditure, some adjustments
must be made. For example, "subsidies, less the surplus on current account
of Government enterprises" is included in national income, but not in
the gross national product. A deduction from income is therefore necessary. This adjustment, plus the statistical discrepancy (i. e., the difference
between largely independent estimates of income and product) is shown
in line 19. Remaining Government payments not included anywhere
in receipts (e. g., net loans to business, purchases of existing assets, etc.3)
were netted against adjustments on the receipts side of the account, line 20.
Adjustments are required in receipts because of a lack of comparability
in the method of estimating Government and private receipts. Discrepancies arise from the fact that in calculating consumers' disposable income,
for example, or corporate income after taxes, taxes were reckoned on a
liability basis whereas actual collections by the Government enter into the
Government account. Government tax receipts lag behind liabilities; in
the case of corporations the lag is as much as a year. The identity of
income and expenditure is thus destroyed by the different bases of the tax
estimates, unless an adjusting item is introduced.
The magnitude and nature of the adjustments required to go from the
income and product basis of accounting to cash receipts and payments is
shown in table A-5, the Government account. Some remarks on this account
follow the discussion of the composition of the private sectors of the economy
below.
Consumer account
Table A-2 shows personal income and its principal components, personal
taxes, and a break-down of expenditures by important classifications. Consumer income includes the net profits of unincorporated businesses after
adjustment for inventory valuation and farm proprietors5 income. Expenditures for new dwellings are considered as a business investment but other
durable goods purchases are included in consumption expenditure. Personal saving is a residual figure derived by deducting consumption expenditures from disposable income.
3
However, one very large category of loans, crop-secured loans, is included in Government expenditures for goods and services. Such loans are included in farm income at the
time they are made.




130

TABLE A-2.—Consumer account, calendar years 1948 and 1949
[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
1949
Receipts or expenditures

1948
Total i

Personal income arising from current production of goods and
services
Wage and salary receipts and other labor income
Proprietors' and rental income
Dividends and private interest
Business transfer payments
Plus: Net interest paid by Government
Government transfer payments to individuals
Equals: Total personal income
Less: Personal tax and nontax payments.
Equals: Disposable personal income
Less: Consumer expenditures
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Services
Equals: Personal saving..
Addendum
Personal income arising from current production
Less: Personal tax and nontax payments
Equals: Disposable income arising from current production.

First
half

Second
half*

196.9

195.8

197.3

194.3

135.1
49.5
11.7
.6
4.4

136.8
45.7
12.7
.6
4.6
11.4

136.9
47.2
12.6
.6
4.6
11.3

136.7
44.2
12.8
.6
4.6
11.4

211.7

213.1

210.3

18.8

18.8

18.8

192.9

194.4

191.5

178.5

178.8

178.2

24.8
97.7
56.0

23.4
99.7
55.6

26.2
95.8
56.4

12.0

14.4

15.6

13.2

196.9
21.1
175.8

195.8
18.8
177.0

197.3
18.8
178.5

194.3
18.8
175.5

10.5
211.9
21.1
190.8
178.8
23.5
102.2
53.1

* Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.

Business account
Business income includes undistributed corporate profits after adjustment
lor inventory valuation, plus capital consumption allowances on corporate
and noncorporate capital, including residences. Gross investment includes
noncorporate and corporate investment, including residential construction.
Profits are included after inventory valuation adjustment in business
receipts in accordance with the national income and product basis of
accounting. The gross national output or product for any period includes
only the real change in inventories (net change in physical volume valued
at current prices) rather than the change in the book value. (In table A-2,
proprietors' income is shown after inventory valuation adjustment.)




TABLE A-3.—Business account, calendar years 1948 and 1949
[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
1949
Receipts or investment

1948
Total i

First
half

Second
half*

Corporate profits before tax

34.8

27.6

27.9

27.2

Less: Corporate profits tax liabilitiesDividends
Equals: Corporate undivided profits. .

13.6
7.9
13.2

10.9
8.4
8.3

11.0
8.4
8.4

10.7
8.4
8.2

15.7
-2.2
26.8

16.6
2.7
27.6

16.4
3.4
28.3

16.8
2.0
27.0

Plus: Capital consumption allowances-..
.__
Corporate inventory valuation adjustment 2
Equals: Retained business receipts from current production..
Less: Private domestic gross investment

45.0
17.9
9.1
8.8
20.7
6.5
5.1
-18.2

Construction
Residential (nonfarm)
Nonresidential
Producers' durable equipment
Change in inventories
Nonfarm only
Equals: Excess of receipts (40 or investment (—)

38.5
17.2
8.8
8.5
20.0
-.4
-1.0
-9.2

35.0

16.6
8.0
8.7
20.8
1.1
0.1
-10.2

17.8
9.4
8.4
19.2
-2.0
-2.0
-8.0

1
2

Estimates based on incomplete data. Profits by the Council of Economic Advisers.
This adjustment is required because corporate income is reckoned inclusive of changes in the book
value of inventory, as is customary in business accounting, whereas only the value of the real change in
inventories is counted as current output in the gross national product.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.

International account
In the international account, United States Government net cash longterm loans abroad and cash subscriptions to the International Monetary
Fund or International Bank for Reconstruction and Development are included as a receipt of the "rest of the world." Investment consists of the
net balance of payments on current account (or net foreign investment),
which excludes that part of the export surplus financed by net United States
gifts, public or private. Thus exports financed under European Recovery
Program grants or other unilateral aid programs or by private remittances
are not represented in the international account. They are included as a
direct public or consumer expenditure for goods and services. The excess
of receipts or investment (line 11, table A-l) thus shows that part of the
surplus of exports of goods and services not financed through public or
private gifts or by Government cash loans or subscriptions.
From many points of view this treatment is unsatisfactory. It would
perhaps have been preferable, in view of the fact that there is more interest
in the volume of real exports than in the net balance of payments on current
account, to show the entire surplus of exports of goods and services as
investment, and the entire means of finance made available by the United
States Government and private remittances as a receipt. In this case, net
United States grants and private gifts would be deducted from Government expenditures for goods and services and consumer expenditures,
respectively.
Receipts from Government sales abroad are included in net foreign
investment at the time of sale, although commodities transferred have




132

already been recorded in the output of current or preceding periods. In
order to avoid overstating current gross national product, a compensating
deduction is made in current Government expenditures for goods and
services at the time a receipt from sales abroad is recorded in the balance
of payments. (See footnote 5, table A-5.)
Table A-4 shows the derivation of net foreign investment from the export
surplus; the estimates of net unilateral transfers are from official balance
of payment statistics published by the Department of Commerce; loans and
subscriptions are on a Daily Treasury Statement or cash payments basis.
Thus, "Payments to the International Monetary Fund and International
Bank" represent the cash payment to these organizations by the United
States on subscriptions.
Tables A-7 and A-8 give a more comprehensive picture of the expenditures of the United States Government relating to international affairs
broadly conceived. Table A-7 breaks down all Federal cash payments
according to major governmental function. The "International affairs
and finance" function includes cash disbursements for foreign aid, including
grants whether rendered in cash or in goods, and long and short-term loans;
expenses connected with the administration of such programs; subscriptions
to the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund; membership in other international organizations such as the United Nations, Food
and Agriculture Organization, et al., State Department expenditures, etc.
It is to be noted, however, that substantial amounts of credit have been
extended foreign countries not involving current outlays of cash, e. g.,
surplus property and lend-lease pipe-line credits.
TABLE A-4.—International account, calendar years 1948 and 1949

[Billions of dollars, annual rates]
1949
Receipts or investment

1948
Total i

Receipts:
Net long-term loans 2
.
__ _
Payments to the3 International Monetary Fund and International Bank

._ .
__ .

Excess of receipts (+) or investment (—)

1.0

0.5

0.8

0.2

.4

.2

.1

.2

.7

.9

.4

6.3

Investment:
Surplus of exports of goods and services

Equals: Net foreign investment

Second
half*

1.3

Total Government loan transfers abroad...

Less: Net unilateral transfers
Government *
Private __ _ _

First
half

5.8

7.3

4.2

3.8
.6

5.2
.6

5.5
.6

5.0
.5

1.2

-1.2

+.7

-.3

+1.6

1.9
-.6

1 Estimates based on incomplete data.
2
Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. Does not include noncash transactions such as
lend-lease and surplus property credits.
3 Cash payments on subscriptions.
4
Does not agree with unilateral aid included in table A-8 which is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.




133

Government account
The Government account reconciles cash receipts from and payments to
the public with the Government revenue and expenditure estimates which
have been incorporated in the national income and product accounts. It
also provides a break-down of Government receipts and expenditures into
Federal and State and local components.
In the cash payments series, the receipts of the Government corporations
have been offset against the expenditures and only the net expenditure
has been included. The same treatment is accorded the Post Office because
of the quasi-commercial character of its operations. Ideally, Government
corporations expenditures should be broken down into strictly administrative
and quasi-commercial functions and only the latter included on a net basis.
So far, this has not been feasible, due to the complexity of the operations
of the corporations.
Grants-in-aid to State and local governments are included as a cash
payment of the Federal Government and are not counted as either a cash
receipt or payment of the States and localities.
The major revenue sources of the Federal Government are shown in
table A-6, Gash receipts from the public other than borrowing. Expenditures according to major governmental function are shown in table A-7,
Cash payments to the public. Table A-8, Federal cash payments to the
public by type of recipient and transaction appears for the first time in its
present form in this report. It differs from the table, Federal cash payments
to the public by type of recipient, which has appeared in previous reports, in
containing some additional detail and some rearrangement of the data.
Both changes are intended to facilitate the assessment of the economic
impacts of Government programs. The basic purpose governing the major
groupings of the new table has been to distinguish between those Government programs which, on the one hand, represent a direct allocation of
resources by decision of the Federal Government; and those under which
this allocation depends in part or in whole on the decisions of individuals,
business, and agriculture, or of foreign governments. The volume and
character of defense expenditures, for example, and hence their impact on
industry and the labor force, are directly determined by the Federal Government. By way of contrast, while the Government determines the
amount of old-age or disability pensions, it has no control over the way in
which they are spent, or, indeed, over whether they are spent at all. Hence
the economic impact of pensions depends in large part on the decisions of
those who receive them.
Direct cash payments for goods and services: This category includes: (a)
wages and salaries of Federal personnel, including military pay; (b)
grants-in-aid to State and local governments for performance of specified
services in such fields as public health, education, administration of employment offices, and unemployment compensation, etc.; (c) purchases of goods




134

and services from business, embracing such fields as defense and housekeeping purchases, and contract construction on Federal public works; (d)
grants-in-aid and loans to State and local governments for public works;
and (e) purchases of goods and services from abroad, of which stock-piling
purchases are the most important component, and payment of membership
fees in international institutions.
The general concept underlying this category is similar to the national
income concept of "Government purchases of goods and services" but there
are major differences. Two large items, farm price support expenditures
and unilateral aid to foreign countries, which are included in the latter, are
placed elsewhere in table A-8 on the ground that neither represents a direct
allocation of resources by decision of the Federal Government, which is
what the present category is intended to show. The acquisition of commodities by the Federal Government in the course of farm price-support
operations is an incidental result of a program whose main purposes are
to support farm income at equitable levels, and to provide incentives to
individual farmers to change their farm operations in directions needed
for agricultural readjustment. The character of commodities purchased
in the United States by foreign governments with the help of unilateral aid
programs is largely determined by the economic needs of the countries
concerned. Grants to States and localities for public works, here included
as a Federal expenditure, would be included in the national income
accounts as a State-local expenditure. There are other less significant
differences between the two concepts.
Loans, transfer and interest payments to individuals: The title of this
category is almost self-explanatory. In addition to direct Federal payments
to individuals, including social insurance and veterans' benefits, it includes
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments for payment to individuals under public assistance programs.
Loans, transfer, interest and incentive payments to business and agriculture: This category includes: (a) the net result of farm price-support operations, whether involving a net acquisition of commodities by the Federal
Government or a net acquisition of price-support loans from private banks;
(b) loans and direct subsidies to farmers; (c) loans to, or purchases of mortgages or other claims from, private business firms and financial institutions;
(d) interest payments thereto; and (e) the subsidy arising from the postal
deficit, of which business firms are the chief beneficiaries.
Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions: This category includes all direct foreign aid programs of the United
States Government, whether the aid takes the form of loans or of grants, as
well as cash payments on subscriptions of the United States Government to
such international institutions as the International Monetary Fund, the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the International Refugee Organization. Payments for stock-piling purchases
abroad, for the costs incurred abroad of American embassies and other mis-




135

sions, and for participation in the continuing activities of international
organizations are included under "Direct payment for goods and services."
The special analysis of investment, operating and other budget expenditures: The Budget document for fiscal 1951 (part III) contains for the
first time a "Special analysis of investment, operating, and other budget
expenditures." This analysis segregates expenditures which are recoverable or which represent the acquisition of assets which will give returns in
future years from other expenditures.
TABLE A—5.—Government account {Federal, State, and local), calendar years 1948 and 1949
[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
1949

Keceipt or expenditure

1948
Total i

Keceipts:
Tax and nontax payments or liabilities:2
Federal
.
_
. . .
State and local
_
_.
Total
Adjustment to cash basis:
Noncash receipts •
Excess of cash receipts over tax liabilities or payments *.
Cash receipts from the public
Expenditures:
Purchases of goods and services:
Federal * _
_
_
State and local—Total
Other Government payments:
Transfers to individuals
Cash interest payments to the public6
Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to the
International Bank and International Monetary
7
Fund

All other »
Total

Second
halfi

44.6
15.6
60.2

39.5
16.8
56.3

39.4
16.6
56 0

39 6
17.0
56 6

—1.2
.9
59.9

—1.8
3.0
57.5

—1 7
3.3
57.6

—1 9
2.8
57.5

20.9
15.8
36.7

25.6
17.8
43.5

25.7
17.4
43.2

25.6
18.2
43.8

10 5
4.2

11.4
4.4

11 3
4.2

13 4
4.5

1.3

.6
.8
17.1

.9
.4
16.8

4
1.1
17.4

16.0

Cash payments to the public

First half

52.7

60.6

59.9

61.2

+7.2

-3.0

-2.3

-3.7

44.9
36.9

+8.0

Cash surplus (+) or deficit (—)

41.4
43.1
-1.7

41.7
42.7
-1.0

41.2
43.5
-2.3

15.0
15.8
-.8

16.1
17.5
-1.4

15.9
17.2
-1.3

16.3
17.7
-1.4

Addendum

Federal:
Cash receipts
Cash payments
Surplus (+) or deficit (-)

State and local:
Cash receipts
Cash payments
Surplus (+) or deficit (—)

-

_

_

1
8

Estimates based on incomplete data.
Personal and indirect business tax payments, corporation tax liabilities and contributions for social insurance.
' Consists of deductions from Government employees' salaries for retirement funds, and Government
contributions to retirement funds, National Service Life Insurance and Government life insurance funds.
* Includes excess of corporation tax receipts over liabilities and excess of personal tax receipts over payments. Cash receipts also include some items of miscellaneous internal revenue not included in tax and
nontax payments, such as receipts from sales of surplus property.
* Government sales of $600 million in 1948 and $300 million in each half of 1949 have been deducted from
gross expenditures.
< Does not agree with net interest paid by Government (table A-2) which is on an accrual basis.
»
7
See table A-4, International account.
8
Includes all other cash payments less noncash payments for goods and services. Other cash payments
include net payments by Government corporations (except capital formation), net prepayments, and the
excess of checks paid over checks issued. Noncash purchases of goods and services include deductions from
Government employees' salaries for retirement funds and the Government contribution to such funds.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.




136

TABLE A-6.—Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing, calendar years 1948 and
1949
[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
1949
Cash receipts from

1948
Total i

Direct taxes on individuals *
_
Direct taxes on corporations
Employment taxes
Excises and customs
Surplus property receipts.__
_
Deposits by States, unemployment insurance.
Veterans' life insurance premiums
Other
_
_
Refunds of receipts

20.9
11.1
2.5
7.9
1.2
1.0
.4
2.1
-2.2

18.4
12.0
2.5
8.0
.5
1.0
.4
1.4
-2.8

Total Federal cash receipts from the public.

44.9

41.4

First
half
18.7
12.0
2.5
7.9
.7
.9
.4
1.4
-2.8

41.7

Second
halfi
18.2
12.0
2.5
8.0
.3
1.1
.4
1.4
-2.8
41.2

1
Estimates based on incomplete data.
* Includes personal income taxes and estate and gift taxes.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of roundinp.

TABLE A-7.—Federal cash payments to the public by junction^ calendar years 1948 and 1949
[Billions of dollars, annual rates, seasonally adjusted]
1949

Function

1948

Totall

National defense
International affairs and finance
Veterans' services and benefits
._
Social welfare, health, and security
Housing and community development
_..
Agriculture and agricultural resources
Interest on the public debt
Other
„._
Deduction from Federal employees' salaries for retirement
Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports
Total Federal cash payments to the public




Second
halfi

11.2
5.7
6.8
2.3
.3
1.4
3.9
5.7

12.9
6.8
7,0
2.7
.4
2.8
4.1
7.0

12.9
7.3
7.2
2.5
(2)
2.8
4.0
6.6

12.9
6.2
6.9
2.9
.8
2.8
4.2
7.4

-.3
o

-.4
-.3

-.3
2

-.4
-.4

36.9

43.1

42.7

43.5

* Estimates based on incomplete data.
Less than $50 million.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding

3

First
half

TABLE A-8.—Federal cask payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction^ calendar
years 1948 and 1949
[Billions of dollars]
Payment

1948

Direct cash payments for goods and services:
Payments to individuals for services rendered:
Military 2
Civilian wages and salaries (excluding Post Office):3
Defense
Other Federal
Grants and loans in aid for performance of specified services, net *
_
Total..
Payments to business for goods and services:
Public works:
Defense
Other Federal
Grants-in-aid and loans for public works 6
Other goods and services:
Defense
Civilian e
Payments to foreign countries and international institutions..
Total
Loans and transfer payments to individuals:
Social insurance and public assistance:
Federal employees' retirement benefit payments
Old-age and disability benefit paym ents
__
Unemployment insurance benefit payments
Grants-in-aid for public assistance
Readjustment benefits, pensions, and other payments to veterans 7
Loans to8 homeowners, net
Interest
Other
___
_
TotalLoans, investments, subsidies, and other transfers to business and agriculture:
Farmers:
Price support, net (including supply programs)
International wheat agreement
___
Other loans and direct subsidies to farmers
Business:
Home mortgage purchases fromfinancialinstitutions
Loans, net
Direct subsidy payments
Subsidy8arising from postal deficit
__.
Interest
„.
TotalLoans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions:
European Recovery Program loans and grants
Other loans (net withdrawals)
Other grants
Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund 10
Total—

3.5
2.4
2.1
.4

3.9

8.4

9.0

.2
1.2
4.3
1.7

5.7
1.0
1.1

8.7

10.1

.2

.2
1.0
1.9
1.0
5.4
-.1
1.3
.4

5.7
-.1
1.1
.4

11.1

)

Total Federal cash payments to the public

1.8
.6
.7
.1

)
.4
2.9

.5
2.8

4.6

6.5

1.8
.5
2.8
.4

.1
1.9

5.5

Clearing account and adjustment to Daily Treasury Statement

2.5
2.2
.4

-.2

6.5
-.3
43.1

* Based on incomplete data.
2
Excludes terminal-leave pay and food and clothing allowances which are primarily paid in kind. Includes family allowances and reserve pay.
s Excludes pay-roll deductions for Federal employees' retirement and Post Office wages and salaries.
4
Includes all grants-in-aid and loans to public bodies for purposes other than public works and public
assistance.
* Includes Rural Electrification Administration loans for public works which are not made to State and
local governments but primarily to private cooperatives.
* Equals the excess of total cash payments to the public over all items shown separately. Includes primarilytpurchases of goods and services.
7
Includes cashing of terminal-leave bonds, mustering-out pay, and National Service Life Insurance and
Government life insurance refunds and benefits in addition to veterans' readjustment benefits and
pensions.
s Includes a small amount of interest on tax refunds in addition to interest on the public debt. Interest
figures in this table are not comparable with those in table A-2 which are on an accrual basis. Includes
about $100 million of interest payments to State and local governments in both years.
8
Less than $50 million.
i° Cash withdrawals.
NOTE.—Detail does not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.




138

Appendix B
Statistical Tables Relating to the Distribution
of Income and Personal Saving
CONTENTS
Page

B-l. Distribution of families and single persons not in families, by
income level, 1948
B-2. Sources and uses of personal funds, 1939 and 1946-48
B-3. Sources and uses of funds by consumers and nonprofit organizations, 1946, 1947, and 1948
B-4. Net income and net saving of each fifth of spending units,
1941 and 1945-48
B-5. Positive and negative saving of each fifth of spending units,
1941 and 1945-48
B—6. Median income, median saving and percent of income saved by
each fifth of spending units, 1948
B-7. Positive and negative savers within each fifth of spending
units, 1941 and 1948
B-8. Proportion of money income allocated to taxes, saving, selected
durable goods, and other consumer expenditures, by each
fifth of spending units, 1948
B-9. Distribution of money income, taxes, disposable income, and
expenditures by income fifth groups, 1948

868148—50




10

I39

140
141
143
144
144
145
145

145
146

Statistical Tables Relating to the Distribution
of Income and Personal Saving
TABLE B-l.—Distribution of families and single persons not in families, by income level, 1948
Percent of all families and
single persons
1

Income size classes

"Unadjusted
distribution
17.4
16.0
19.6
18.4
11.1
15.1
2.4

Under $1,000
$1,000 to $2,000...
$2,000 to $3,000...
$3,000 to $4,000._.
$4,000 to $5,000...
$5,000 to $10,000._
$10,000 and over.
All income groups.

Adjusted
distribution
9.8
16.7
16.3
17.7
13.6
21.2
4.7

100.0

100.0

$2,840

Median income

$3,420

i Income includes money income of the civilian noninstitutional population.
Sources: Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, (unadjusted distribution) and Council of
Economic Advisers (adjusted distribution).

The unadjusted income distribution compiled by the Bureau of the
Census comprises the results of a sample survey of about 25,000 families
made in April 1949, but covering incomes for the year 1948. The results
of this survey will be published in full in the Current Population Reports
of the Bureau of the Census.
An estimate of the total money income of the civilian population can be
derived from the statistics of national income for each year. For any year,
this estimate of income will be in excess of that yielded by a sample survey
of income, since some income always fails to be reported by persons interviewed. The degree of under-reporting varies according to the income
source, wages and salaries being more completely reported than entrepreneurial or other types of income.
In 1948, the degree of under-reporting of income in the Census survey,
as indicated by comparison with an estimate derived from the national income aggregate, was sufficient to justify making a statistical adjustment to
distribute the unreported income by income levels. Separate adjustments
were therefore made in the three types of income for which separate estimates of income coverage in the survey were available: wages and salaries,
net entrepreneurial income, and "all other" income, raising each of these
to the appropriate aggregate for that source. The effect of this adjustment
was to raise incomes somewhat all along the income scale; however, the
percentage increases in the lower and upper segments of the distribution
were somewhat greater than in the middle-income groups.




140

The family, as defined in these distributions, includes two or more related
persons living in one dwelling. Single persons living alone are also included
in the distributions. It should be noted that the family differs from the
"spending unit/ 5 the unit of measurement used in tables B 4 through
—
B-9. The spending unit consists of related persons living together who
pool their income for major items of expense. A family may include
more than one spending unit; for example, a young couple dwelling with
parents may manage their finances separately from the parents. Since there
are more spending units than families, the average income is lower.
The distribution of income by fifths of families and single persons ranked
by size of income, shown in the table appearing on page 97 of the text of
this report, is consistent with the distribution of families and single persons
by income levels shown above. For information concerning the quintile
distributions for 1941 and 1935-36 appearing in the text, see the Economic
Report of the President, January 1949, appendix B.
T A B L E ' B - 2 . — S o u r c e s and uses of personal funds, 1939 and

1946-48^

[Billions of dollars]
USE OF FUNDS
Use or source
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
T,
M
N
0
P
a

T
U
V

w
X
Y
7

Personal cons uinption expenditures and taxes
Durable commodities _
Nondurable commoditiesServices
Personal taxes
Other nonfinancial uses
Purchases of 1-4 family nonfarm dwellings
New construction by nonprofit organizationsNew construction and producers' durable equipment expenditures:
Farms
Other unincorporated businesses 2 - Additions to inventories (net) *
Farms
_
Other unincorporated businesses... _ _
Purchases of existing tangible assets (net)
Financial uses (net) *Adding to liquid asset balances (net):
Currency and deposits 8__ _
Insurance reserves 6
Security portfolios:
U. S. Government securities 7__ _
Other 8

1939

1946

1947

69.9

166.6

188.5

199.9

6.7
35.3
25.5
2.4

16.5
86.8
44.5
18.8

22.0
96.2
48.8
21.5

23.5
102.2
53.1
21.1

1948

5.9

12.3

15.2

20.6

2.9
.2

4.1
.4

6.2
.5

8.0
.9

1 2
1.4

2 6
4.2

3 7
4.8

4 9
4.5

.1
.1

.9

4 8

15.4

11 5

7.8

3.1
1.7

11.8
3 4

4.1
3 7

3.5

.3

2.4
1.4

1.5
2.9

4.8
.1

15.4

11.5

7.8

.1

1 3
1.0

Retirement of debt (net):
Mortgages on 1-4 family nonfarm dwellings
Othftr ooTjpnmfir debt

Subtotal of above net additions to liquid assets and net retirement of debt
Farm mortgage and other farm debt
Other unincorporated business debt to banks
Other unincorporated business debt to corporations
Total of above uses of funds
Net uses not accounted for

80.7

194.3

215.3

a

228.3

b
c

Total uses of funds ._
__
Memorandum: Liquid saving, adjusted » (line V minus V )

80.7
3.1

194.3

215.3
4.2

228-3
1.2

Footnotes at end of table, p. 142.




Q C

o. o

TABLE B—2.—Sources and uses oj personal funds, 1939 and 1946-48—Continued

SOURCE OF FUNDS
Use or source
A'
TV

C
D'
E'
F'
G'
H'
I'
J'
V
V
M'
N'
0'
P'
%
8'
T'
U'
V
W
X'
Y'
Z'
a'
b'
c'

72.6

176.9

193.5

211.9

45.7
11.3
12.7
3.0

__

Wages, salaries, and other labor income
Net income of unincorporated business and farms
Rental, dividend, and interest income
Transfer receipts
Other nonfinancial sources
Depreciation charges:
Residential property
Nonprofit organization property
Farm equipment and property. _
Other unincorporated business equipment and property..
Drawing down inventories (net): l
Farms
Other unincorporated businesses
Sales of existing tangible assets (net).
.
_ _
Financial sources (net) *._
Drawing upon liquid asset 8
balances (net): 1
Currency and deposits
fl
Insurance reserves
Security portfolios:
U. S. Government securities7
Other 8
Adding to debt (net):
Mortgages on 1-4 family nonfarm dwellings
Other consumer debt

111.0
35.0
19.4
11.4

122.0
38.5
21.3
11.7

135 1
42.9
22.8
11.1

6.6

8.9

6.9

1.5
.2
1.1
.9

1.8
.2
2.2
1.1

1.9
.2
2.7
1.2

2.1
.2
3.3
1.3

2

22

1948

"7

2.1

9.3

11.6

7.9
(3)

_
.2
.5

4.1
3.3

4.1
2.5

1.7

67
.2
2.1
.3

74
.8
2.2
1.2

65

.1
.3

191.7
2.6

214.0
1.2

226.7
1.6

194.3

215.3

228.3

2.7

.__

Personal saving * (line A' minus A)
o

3.2
3.3

80.7

Total of above sources of funds
Net sources not accounted for

.5
.8

78.4
2.3

Subtotal of above net reductions in liquid assets and net
additions to debt. _Farm mortgage and other farm debt
__
Other unincorporated business debt to banks
Other unincorporated business debt to corporations

_

1947

3.7

Personal income

Total sources of funds

1946

1939

10.3

5.1

12.0

.6
g

1
Consumers, unincorporated business, farms, and nonprofit organizations are included in the table.
Inventories and income are included after adjustment for inventory revaluation.
3 Includes purchase of used plant and equipment from the U. S. Government,
a Less than $50,000,000.
• Financial sources and uses are shown on a net basis. In arriving at the totals shown for financial sources
and uses of funds, a net addition to holdings of a particular type of asset is shown as a use, and a net decrease
in holdings of a particular type of asset as a source. Also, additions to cash balances by some individuals
are net of withdrawals by other individuals, borrowings by some individuals are net of repayments by
other individuals.
6
Includes shares in saving and loan associations.
• Excludes additions to Government insurance and pension reserves.
7
Excludes armed forces leave bonds.
8
Includes changes in holdings of State and local government, foreign, corporate, and other securities.
• This corresponds to liquid saving as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission, except that
armed forces leave bonds and changes in Government insurance and pension reserves are excluded.
io This equals personal saving, national income concept. Personal saving may also be obtained as follows:
(F-F')-r-(N-N0+(a-a0=A'-A.

NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Compiled by Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System from data published by the
Department of Commerce and the Securities and Exchange Commission. A discussion of a similar table
may be found in an article entitled "Measurements of Savings", Federal Reserve Bulletin, November
1949. The present table incorporates revised estimates for 1948 and includes saving and loan shares with
currency and deposits rather than with "other securities".




142

T A B L E B—3.—Sources and uses of funds

by consumers and nonprofit organizations,
1948
1946

1947

___

149.1

165.3

175.1

Expenditures for consumer nondurable goods and services less
estimated expenditures of incidental landlords
Personal taxes.-.
_
__

130.3
18.8

143.8
21.5

154.0
21.1

20.9

28.6

32.2

16.2

21.7

23.2

4.0
.2
.4

6.1
.3
.5

7.8
.3
.9

14.4
14.4

12.0
12.0

9.4
9.4

184.3

205.9
.2

216.7

184.3

206.1

216.7

174.6

196.8

207.9

111.0

122.0

135.1

12.3
11.4
2.3
37.6

13.8
11.7
2.3
47.0

15.1
11.1
2.4
44.2

Source or use

A
B

C
D
E

F
G

H
T
J
K"

a
b
A'
B'
O
TV
E'

1946, 1947, and

USE OF F U N D S :
Personal consumption expenditures and taxes

Other nonfinancial uses
Expenditures for consumer durable goods less estimated expenditures of incidental landlords
Purchases of 1-4 family nonfarm dwellings less purchases for
tenant occupancy
___
_ _ _ _ _ _ _
Purchases of farm dwellings _
Nonorofit organization construction. _
Financial uses (net)
_
_
Net additions to liquid asset balances. __
Total above uses
Net uses not accounted for

_ __

... _

Total uses of funds
SOURCE OF F U N D S :
Personal income received by consumers
Wages, salaries and other labor income
Dividend and interest income, less receipts by noncorporate business
Transfer payments
Imputed income from owner-occupied dwellings. .
Net entrepreneurial withdrawals l

1948

G'

Other nonfinancial sources

1.7

2.0

2.2

H

Depreciation on owner-occupied farm and nonfarm dwellings
and nonprofit institution properties
._
Financial sources (net)
_

1.7
6.4

2.0
7.3

2.2
6.5

P

Net additions to debt, excluding mortgage debt, on tenant-occupied property
_
Is"'
a'

Total above sources_
Net sources not accounted for

b'

_

Total sources of funds

_ _

6.4

7.3

6.5

182.7

206.1

216.6

206.1

216.7

.1

1.6

184.3

1
Total funds available for withdrawal by owners from unincorporated businesses and farms less the estimated capital formation of businesses and farms, landlord purchases of consumer durable goods and of
residential construction for tenant occupancy, and net money advanced through financial channels.
NOTE.—Details will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Based on data from the Department of Commerce, Securities and Exchange Commission, and
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




143

T A B L E B—4.—Net income and net saving of each fifth of spending units,1 1941 and 1945-1948
1947

1946

1945

1941

1948

Spending units ranked by size of income
Percentage of net income accounted for by each fifth
Lowest fifth
Second fifth.
Third fifth
Fourth fifth. _
Highest

4
11
16
24
45

4
11
16
22
47

4
10
16
22
48

4
11
16
22
47

100

fifth

3
9
16
22
50

100

100

100

100

_.

All groups

Percentage of net saving accounted for by each fifth
Lowest fifth
Second fifth.
Third
fifth
Fourth fifth
Highest fifth

<y

0
6
9
21
64

-8
3
5
21
79

-13
1
7
12
93

-24
-3
7
21
99

100

_

0
8
11
88

100

100

100

100

_

All groups

i The spending unit consists of all persons living in the same dwelling and belonging to the same family
who pool their income to meet major expenses. See notes to table B-l.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Estimates for the years 1945 through 1948
are based on the Survey of Consumer Finances which is conducted annually by the Survey Eesearch
Center of the University of Michigan for the Board of Governors. The year 1941 was estimated from information obtained in Family Spending and Saving During Wartime (Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin
No. 822), April 1945. The findings of the Survey of Consumer Finances are published each year in full
in the Federal Reserve Bulletin.
Savings distributions by income level as well as by deciles or quintiles for 1948, with comparative data for
earlier years, may be found in the Bulletin for January 1950, in an article entitled, "1949 Survey of Consumer
Finances, Distribution of Consumer Saving in 1948." Components of saving and dissaving have varied
somewhat from year to year as explained in the appendix to this article. In general, these variations are
not believed to affect inter-year comparability to any great extent for the years 1946 through 1948. Comparisons of later years with 1945, however, are limited by substantial changes in definitions and methodology.

T A B L E B-5.—Positive and negative saving of each fifth of spending units, 1941 and 1945—1948
Percentage of saving
Spending units ranked by size of income
1945

1941

Spending units with negative saving:
Lowest
fifth
Second fifth
Third fifth
Fourth fifth
Highest fifth

_

1947

1948

25
15
24
IS
18

21
12
17
20
30

27
15
16
18
24

100

100

100

100

3
9
12
20
56

3
7
11
20
59

2
6
1]
15
66

3
6
12
19
60

100

_

25
19
28
14
14

1
5
10
15
69

....

23
17
14
25
21
100

All groups
Spending units with positive saving: 2
Lowest fifth
Second fifth
Third
fifth__
_.
Fourth fifth
Highest fifth
All groups

1946

1

100

100

100

100

1
Spending units with negative saving are those whose expenditures for consumer durables (excluding
homes;, nondurable^, and services, exceed current money incomes.
2
Spending units whose current money incomes exceed expenditures for consumer durables (excluding
homes), nondurables, and services.
Source: See table B-4.




144

TABLE B—6.—Median income^ median saving, and percent of income saved by each fifth of spending
units, 1948
Median
income

Spending units ranked by size of income

Median percent of income saved

Median
saving

Lowest fifth
Second fifth
Third fifth
Fourth fifth
Highest fifth....

2,000
2,840
3,750
6,000

All groups

0.0
1.0
4.0
6.0
10.0

$2, 840

$0
85
115
235
610

3.5

Source: See table B-4.

TABLE B-7.—Positive and negative savers within each fifth of spending units, 1941 and 1948
Percent of spending units in each fifth
1941

Spending units ranked by size of income
Positive
savers
Lowest fifth
Second fifth _ .
Third fifth
Fourth fifth
Highest
fifth
All groups

.

.

38
57
66
69
80
62

1948

Zero
savers

Negative
savers

19
5
1
1

0)
5

Positive
savers

43
38
33
30
20
33

44
61
66
69
74
63

Zero
savers

Negative
savers

20
7
3
1
6

36
32
31
30
26
31

1

Less than one-half of 1 percent.
Source: See table B-4.

TABLE B-8.—Proportion of money income allocated to taxes, saving, selected durable goods, and
other consumer expenditures, by each fifth of spending units, 1948
Percent of total income
Type of expenditure or saving
All spending units

Federal income tax l
Automobiles and other selected durable
2
goods

Other consumer expenditures 3
Net saving
Total
Percent of income saved by positive savers *

Lowest
fifth

Second
fifth

Fourth
fifth

Third
fifth

Highest
fifth

9

1

4

5

6

13

9
76
7

8
121
-31

8
90
-2

9
83
3

10
78
6

8
65
14

100

100

100

100

100

100

19

15

12

15

17

2

1

Estimated Federal personal income tax liability, apart from capital gains and losses. See the appendix
to part III, the 1949 Survey of Consumer Finances, Federal Reserve Bulletin, July 1949, for a description of
the methods used in estimating the tax liability.
2 Includes automobiles, furniture, radios, and household appliances such as refrigerators, ranges, washing
machines, vacuum cleaners, home freezers, and miscellaneous other appliances. Expenditures for automobiles are net of trade-in allowances.
3
This is a residual item covering expenditures for all goods and services not included in selected durable
goods (see footnote 2). Includes food, housing, clothing, medical care, other living costs. State and local
taxes, recreation, transportation, and education, as well as expenditures for durable goods such as floor
coverings, jewelry, fur coats, and other miscellaneous durable items are also included.
* Total saving of positive savers as percent of their income.
NOTE: Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table B-4.




145

T A B L E B-9.—Distribution of money income, taxes, disposable income, net saving, selected durable
goods expenditures, and other consumer goods expenditures by income fifth groups, 7948
[Percent!

Spending units ranked by
size of income l

Lowest fifth . . _
Second fifth
Third fifth
Fourth fifth
Highest fifth
All groups

Total
money
income
before
taxes

Total
selected
durable
goods
expendi*
turss*

Total Federal personal
income
tax 2

Total disposable
income 8

4
11
16
22
47

1
5
9
16
70

5
12
17
22
44

4
10
17
2.5
44

8
13
18
22
39

—24

100

100

100

100

100

100

1
2

Total other
consumer
expenditures 8

Total net
saving

7
21
99

Annual money income before taxes in 1948.
Estimated Federal personal income-tax liability, apart from capital gains and losses.
* Disposable income is defined as money income less estimated Federal personal income-tax liability.
* Includes automobiles, furniture, radios, and household appliances such as refrigerators, ranges, washing
machines, vacuum cleaners, home freezers, and miscellaneous other appliances. Expenditures for automobiles are net of trade-in allowances.
* This is a residual item covering expenditures for all goods and services not included in selected durable
goods (see footnote 4). Includes food, housing, clothing, medical care, other living costs, State and local
taxes, recreation, transportation, and education, as well as expenditures for durable goods such as floor
coverings, jewelry, fur coats, and other miscellaneous durable items.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table B-4.




I46

Appendix C
Statistical Tables Relating to Employment,
Production, and Purchasing Power
CONTENTS
National income or expenditure:
Page
C - l . Gross national product or expenditure, 1929-49
149
C-2. Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-49
150
C - 3 . Gross private domestic investment, 1929-49
151
C-4. National income by distributive shares, 1929-49
152
C-5. Personal income, 1929-49
153
C - 6 . Relation of national income and personal income, 1929—49 . . . .
154
C-7. Disposition of personal income, 1929-49
155
C-8. Per capita disposable income in current and 1948 dollars, 1929-49 . .
156
Employment and wages:
C-9. Labor force, employment, and unemployment, 1929-49
157
C-10. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-49
158
C - l l . Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929-49 . . .
159
C - l 2 . Average hourly earnings in selected industries, 1929-49
160
C - l 3. Average weekly hours in selected industries, 1929-49
161
Production and business activity:
C-l 4. Physical production index of goods and selected services, 1929—49. .
162
C-15. Industrial production, 1929-49
163
C - l 6. New construction activity, 1929-49
164
C - l 7 . Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1929-50 . . .
165
G—18. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade, 1939—49
166
C - l 9 . Manufacturers' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to
sales, 1946-49
167
C—20. Sales, stocks, and outstanding orders at 296 department stores,
1939-49
168
Prices:
C-21. Consumers'price index, 1929-49
169
C-22. Wholesale price index, 1929-49
170
C—23. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity
ratio, 1929-49
171
Money, banking, and credit:
C-24. Consumer credit outstanding, 1929-49
172
C-25. Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting
member banks, 1929-49
173
G-26. Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks, 1929-49 .
174
C-27. Estimated ownership of Federal securities, 1939-49
175
C-28. Bond yields and interest rates, selected years, 1929-49
176




147

Corporate profits and
finance:
Page
C-29. Profits before and after tax, all private corporations, 1929-49 . .
177
C-30. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations, 1939-49 . .
178
C-31. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity, private manufacturing corporations, by industry groups, 1948-49 . .
179
G—32. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales, private manufacturing corporations, by industry groups, 1948-49
180
G-33. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity and
to sales, all private manufacturing corporations, by size classes,
1948-49
181
G-34. Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1946—49
182
International transactions:
C-35. The international transactions of the United States, 1946-49 . . .
183
G-36. United States exports and imports of goods and services, by area,
1937 and 1946-49
184
C-37. United States Government aid to foreign countries, 1946-49 . . .
185
C—38. Export price indexes of selected countries converted to dollars, 1937—
40 and 1946-49
186
G—39. United States merchandise exports, including reexports, by areas,
1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-49
187
G-40. United States domestic merchandise exports, by economic classes,
1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-49
188
C-41. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes, 1936-38 quarterly average
and 1947-49
189
G-42. United States general merchandise imports, by areas, 1936-38
quarterly average and 1947—49
190
G-43. United States merchandise imports for consumption, by economic
classes, 1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-49
191
C-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption, by economic classes, 1936-38 quarterly
average and 1947-49
192
Summary:
C-45. Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 1948 and during
1949
193




I48

Statistical Tables Relating to Employment,
Production, and Purchasing Power
TABLE C-l.—Gross national product or expenditure, 7929-49
[Billions of dollars]

Period

Gross
national
product

GovernGross
Personal
ment purconsumpNet foreign chases of
private
tion exdomestic investment goods and
penditures investment
services

1929.

103.8

78.8

15.8

0.8

1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934

90.9
75.9
58.3
55.8
64.9

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9

10.2

.7

5.4
.9
1.3
2.8

.2
.2
.2
.4

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

72.2
82.5
90.2
84.7
91.3

56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

6.1
8.3

11.4
6.3
9.9

-.1
—.1
.1
1.1
.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

101.4
126.4
161.6
194.3
213.7

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

13.9
18.3
10.9

1.5
1.1
-.2

5.7
7.7

-2.2
-2.1

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

215. 2
212.6
235.7
262.4
258.7

123.1
147.8
166.9
178.8
178.5

10.7
29.5
31.1
45.0
36.8

-1.4
4.7
8.9
1.9

9.2
9.2
8.1
8.0

11.7
11.6
12.8
13.1
13.9
24.7
59.7
88.6
96.5
82.8
30.7
28.8
36.7
43.5

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted
1948—First half
Second half
1949—First half
Second half i
1948—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter.
Fourth quarter.

256.5
268.4

177.0
180.6

42.4
47.6

3.4
.4

261.6
255.9

178.8
178.2

38.5
35.0

1.1
-1.2

43.2
43.8

251.4
261.6
266.5
270.3

175.2
178.7
180.3
180.9

40.7
44.2
47.1
48.0

3.9
2.8
-.1
1.0

31.5
35.9
39.2
40.3

1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter.
Fourth quarter

263.5
259.6
256.3
255.5

178.6
178.9
178.5
178.0

41.6
35.4
35.0
35.0

1.0
1.2
-.8
-1.5

1

Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




149

33.7

42.3
44.0
43.6
44.0

TABLE G—2.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-49
[Billions of dollars]

Period

Nondurable goods
Durable goods
Services
Total
exAutopendimotures Total biles Other Total Foodi Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other
ing s
ings
and
parts

1929

78.8

9.4

3.2

6.1

37.7

19.7

9.2

8.9

31.7

11.4

20.2

1930_
1931_
1932.
1933.
1934_.

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9

7.3
5.6
3.7
3.5
4.3

2.2
1.6
.9
1.0
1.4

5.1
4.0
2.8
2.5
2.9

34.1
29.0
22.7
22.3
26.7

18.1
14.8
11.4
11.5
14.3

7.9
6.8
5.0
4.6
5.6

8.1
7.4
6.4
6.2
6.9

29.5
26.6
22.8
20.6
20.9

11.0
10.2
9.0
7.8
7.5

18.5
16.4
13.8
12.7
13.4

1935.
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.

56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

5.2
6.4
7.0
5.8
6.7

1.9
2.3
2.4
1.6
2.1

3.3
4.1
4.6
4.1
4.6

29.4
32.9
35.2
34.0
35.3

16.3
18.5
20.0
19.0
19.3

5.9
6.5
6.7
6.6
7.0

7.2
7.9
8.6
8.4
8.9

21.7
23.3
24.9
24.7
25.5

7.6
7.9
8.4
8.7

14.1
15.4
16.5
16.0
16.5

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

7.1
6.8
7.1

2.7
3.3
.7

5.2
6.4
6.4
6.0
6.2

37.6
44.0
52.9
61.0
67.1

20.7
24.4
30.5
35.3
38.9

7.4
8.8
11.0
13.7
15.3

9.5
10.8
11.4
11.9
12.9

26.6
28.5
31.2
34.4
37.4

9.2
9.9
10.6
11.1
11.7

17.4
18.7
20.6
23.3
25.7

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949 f

123.1
147.8
166.9
178.8
178.5

8.5
16.5
22.0
23.5
24.8

1.1
4.4
7.2
8.2
10.4

7.4
12.1
14.8
15.3
14.4

74.9
86.8
96.2
102.2
97.7

43.0
51.0
57.8
61.1
58.8

17.1
18.6
19.1
20.0
18.4

14.8
17.1
19.3
21.1
20.5

39.7
44.5
48.8
53.1
56.0

12.2
13.1
14.5
15.9
17.0

27.5
31.4
34.2
37.2
39.0

Annualrates/seasonally adjusted
1948—First halfSecond half
1949—First half
Second half*...
1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter.
1949—First quarter. _.
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

177.0 23.2
180. 6 23.8

7.7
8.6

15.5
15.2

101.8
102.6

61.1
61.1

19.8
20.2

21.0
21.3

51.9
54.2

15.6
16.2

36.3
38.0

178.8
178.2

23.4
26.2

9.5
11.2

13.9
14.9

99.7
95.8

59.8
58.0

19.2
17.6

20.7
20.2

55.6
56.4

16.8
17.2

38.9
39.2

175.2
178.7
180.3
180.9

22.7
23.8
24.8
22.9

7.5
8.0
8.7
8.5

15.2
15.8
16.0
14.4

101.2
102.4
101.8
103.3

61.0
61.2
60.5
61.7

19.3
20.2
19.9
20.5

21.0
21.0
21.4
21.2

51.3
52.5
53.7
54.8

15.4
15.8
16.0
16.3

35.9
36.7
37.7
38.4

178.6
178.9
178.5
178.0

23.1
23.8
25.8
26.5

9.2
9.8
11.0
11.5

13.9
13.9
14.8
15.0

100.1
99.3
96.5
95.0

60.0
59.5
58.4
57.5

19.3
19.1
17.7
17.4

20.7
20.7
20.4
20.1

55.4
55.9
56.2
56.5

16.6
16.9
17.1
17.3

38.8
39.0
39.1
39.2

1
2
3

Includes alcoholic beverages.
Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel.
Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




150

TABLE C-3.—Gross private domestic investment, 1929-49
[Billions of dollars]

Year

Nonfarm producers'
Net change in business inventories
Total plant and equipment Farm Kesigross
equip- dential Other
pripriment conNonvate
and struc- vate
farm
domescontion strucCon- conafter
tic
Equip- struc(non4
invest- Total ment 2 tion i i struc- farm) ] tion 5 Total revalu- Farm
tion
ation
ment
adjustment

1929

15.8

5.7

4.1

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

10.2
5.4
.9
1.3
2.8

7.6
4.6
2.5
2.3
3.1

4.3
2.8
1.6
1.6
2.2

3.4
1.8
1.0
.7
.9

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

6.1
8.3
11.4
6.3
9.9

3.8
5.2
6.6
4.7
5.7

2.9
3.9
4.7
3.4
4.0

1.0
1.3
1.9
1.4
1.7

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

13.9
18.3
10.9
5.7
7.7

7.4
9.3
5.8
4.6
6.3

5.3
6.6
4.1
3.5
4.7

2.1
2.7
1.7
1.1
1.6

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

10.7
29.5
31.1
45.0
36.8

8.7
16.0
20.6
24.7
23.2

6.3
10.8
14.6
17.3
16.4

2.4
5.2
6.0
7.4

7

2.8

0.5

1.6

1.8

1.4
1.2
.5
.3
.4

.5
.4
.2
.1
.1

-1.4
-2.6
-1.6
-1.1

-1.7
-2.6
-1.3

.7
1.1
1.4
1.5
2.7

.1
.1
.2
.2
.2

.9
1.0
2.3
-1.0
.4

.4
2.1
1.8
-1.1
.3

.5
—1.1
.5
.1
.1

1.0
1.3
1.0
.9
1.2

3.0
3.4
1.8
1.0

.2
.3
.1

2.3
3.9
2.1

2.0
3.4

.2
.5
1.3
-.4
-.5

1.4
2.0
3.1
3.9
4.0

1.1
4.1
6.6
9.1
8.8

.2
.6
.7
1.0
1.2

-.7
6.7
.1
6.5
-.4

6.9
2.2
5.1
-1.0

1.1

.6
1.0
.8

-0.3

-.2
.3

-1.3

-.3

-.1
-.2
-2.2
1.3

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted
1948—First half
Second half

42.4
47.6

24,2
25.1

17.0
17.6

7.2
7.5

3.8
4.0

9.0
9.2

.8
1.1

4.7
8.2

4.0
6.2

.7
2.0

1949—First half
Second half 7 ._.

38.5
35.0

24.2
22.3

17.2
15.6

7.0
6.6

4.0
4.0

8.0
9.4

1.2
1.2

1.1
-1.9

.1
-2.0

1.0
.1

1948—First quarter-..
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter.

40.7
44.2
47.1
48.0

23.7
24.6
25.1
25.1

16.7
17.3
17.5
17.7

7.0
7.3
7.6
7.4

3.5
4.0
4.0
4.0

8.7
9.4
9.5
8.8

.8
.9
1.0
1.2

4.1
5.3
7.4
9.0

4.2
3.8
5.4
7.1

-.1
1.5
2.0
1.9

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

41.6
35.4
35.0
35.0

24.5
23.8
23.4
21.2

17.4
16.9
16.6
14.7

7.1
6.9
6.8
6.5

4.2
3.9
3.9
4.1

8.0
7.9
8.9
10.0

1.2
1.1
1.2
1.3

3.6
-1.4
-2.4
— 1.5

2.3
-2.1
-2,6
-1.5

1.3
.7
.2

i Items for 1939 and subsequent years are not comparable to those for earlier years, since they include
certain outlays incident to construction which have not yet been estimated for years prior to 1939. For
further details see Survey of Current Business, July 1949, p . 7.
3
Total producers' durable equipment less "farm machinery and equipment" and farmers' purchases of
"tractors" and "business motor vehicles." These figures assume that farmers purchase 85 and 15 percent,
respectively, of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes.
3 Industrial buildings, public utilities, gas and oil well drilling, warehouses, office and loft buildings,
stores, restaurants, garages, and hotels.
* Farm construction (residential and nonresidential) plus "farm machinery and equipment" and farmers'
purchases of "tractors" and "business motor vehicles." (See footnote 2.)
6 Includes religious, educational, social and recreational, hospital and institutional, and miscellaneous
nonresidential.
e Less than $50,000,000.
' Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to total because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




151

T A B L E C—4.—National income by distributive shares, 7929-49
[Billions of dollars]
Business and proCorporate profits
fessional income
and inventory
and inventoryvaluation
valuation
adjustment
adjustment
InTotal Comcome Rentof al innation- penNet
sation
InIn- farm come
al
InCor- ven- interof
of eminest
come ven- pro- perpotory prietory
come i ployof
ees 2
rate valuunin- valu- tors sons
Total corpo- ation
Total prof- ation
its
adrated adbefore justenter- justtax 3 ment
prises ment

Period

1929..

87.4

50.8

8.3

8.1

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6

46.5
39.5
30.8
29.3
34.1

7.0
5.3
3.2
2.9
4.3

6.3
4.7
2.9
3.4
4.3

.6
.3
-.5

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939..

56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5

37.1
42.7
47.7
44.7
47.8

5.0
6.1
6.6
6.3
6.8

5.0
6.2
6.7
6.1
6.9

-.1
- .4 1
()
.2
2

1940..
1941..
1942-.
1943..
1944..

81.3
103. 8
137.1
169.7
183.8

51.8
64.3
84.9
109.2
121.2

7.7
9.6

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949 «.

182.7
179.6
201.7
226.2
222.5

123.0
117.0
127.6
140.3
142.2

0.1

i

10.3

9.8

0.5

6.5

6.6
4.8
3.3
3.6
1.6 - . 8
2.5 - 2 . 0 - 3 . 0
2.0 - 2 . 0
.2
2.1
1.1
1.7

3.3
2.4
1.0
-2.1
-.6

6.2
5.9
5.4
5.0
4.8

-.2
- .4 7
()
1.0
-.7

4.5
4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2

5.8
3.9
2.9
1.7
2.3
2.3

2.3
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.5

3.0
4.9
6.2
4.3
5.8

12.6
15.0
17.2

10.2
12.9
15.1
17.2

-.'6
-.4
-.2
-.1

4.9
3.9
5.6
4.4
4.5
4.9
6.9
10.5
11.8
11.8

3.6
4.3
5.4
6.1
6.5

14.6
19.9
24.3
24.0

9 3 -.1
17! 2 -2.6
21.1 -1.2
25.1 - . 8
24.3 - . 3

4.1
4.1
3.9
3.4
3.1

18.7
20.8
23.1
24.5
24.1

18.8 - . 1
22.7 -1.9
24.7 - 1 . 6
24.9 - . 4
23.4
.7

12.5
14.2
15.4
18.4
15.0

6.3
6.2
6.5
6.6
6.6

19.2
18.3
25.6
32.6
30.3

19.7
23.6
31.6
34.8
27.6

-5.2
-6.0
-2.2
2.7

3.0
3.0
3.4
3.8
4.3

7.8

1

9.2

3.2
5.7
6.2
3.3
6.5

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted
1948: First half
Second half
1949: First half
Second half»
1948: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1949: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter«
Fourth quarter«

18.1
18.6

6.6
6.6

30.8
34.5

34.0 - 3 . 2
35.6 - 1 . 0

3.6
4.0

1.1
.4

16.4
13.6

6.7
6.5

31.4
29.3

27.9
27.2

24.2
24.6
24.5
24.5

25.1 - . 9
25.3
n
25.9 - L 4
23.1
1.4

17.1
19.1
18.8
18.5

6.6
6.7
6.6
6.7

28.5
33.0
33.3
35.7

33.0 - 4 . 5
35.0 - 2 . 0
36.6 - 3 . 3
1.2
34.5

4.2
4.4
3. 6
3.7
3.9
4.1

__

24.0
24.1
24.2
24.0

22.9
23.1
23.6
23.8

17.1
15.7
13.8
13.5

6.7
6.7
6.5
6.5

31.8
30.9
31.5
27.1

29.4
26.4
28.0
26.5

4.2
4.3
4.3
4.4

220.0
232.4

136.4
144.1

24.4
24.5

25.2
24.5

224.8
220.2

-

142.1
142.2

24.0
24.1

23.0
23.7

215.1
224.9
230.4
234.3

135.1
137.7
143.3
144.9

226.3
223.4
222.5
217.8

142. 5
141.8
142.2
142.3

-.8

1.1
1.0
.6
.2

3.4
2.0

2.3
4.5
3.5
.6

1 National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals of businesses. The concep t
of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods.
2
Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income (see appendix table C-5), and employer and
employee contribution for social insurance.
3
See appendix table C-29 for corporate tax liability (Federal and State income and excess profits taxes)
and corporate profits after taxes.
< Less than $50,000,000.
« Estimates based on incomplete data; profits and total national income for third quarter and all items for
fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




152

TABLE 0-5.—Personal income, 1929-49
[Billions of dollars]

Total
personal
income

Period

Salaries,
wages,
and other
labor
income *

Proprietors' and
rental
income 2

Dividends
and
personal
interest3
income

Transfer
payments

Nonagricultural
personal
income 4

1929

85.1

50.5

19.7

13.3

1.5

76.8

1930
1931
1932
1933 _
1934

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

46.3
39.2
30.5
29.0
33.8

15.7
11.8
7.4
7.2
8.7

12.6
11.1
9.1
8.2
8.6

1.5
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.2

70.0
60.1
46.2
43.0
49.5

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

36.8
42.1
45.9
42.8
45.7

12.1
12.6
15.4
14.0
14.7

2.4

10.1
10.3
8.7
9.2

3.5
2.4
2.8
3.0

53.4
62.8
66.5
62.1
66.3

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9

49.5
61 5
81.4
104.5
116 2

16.3
20.8
28.4
32.8
35.5

9.4
9.9
9.7
10.0
10.6

3.1
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.6

71.5
86.1
109.4
135.2
150.5

171.9
176.9
193.5
211.9
211.7

116.9
111.0
121 9
135.1
136.8

37.5
41.2
45.1
49.5
45.7

11.4
13.2
14.8
16.2
17.3

6.2

11.4
11.7
11.1
12.0

155.7
158.5
173.5
188.8
192.0

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

.

_
__

1940 _
1941
1942
1943 _
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 «

_

_
_

8.6

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted
1948: First half
Second half

207.7
216.0

131.3
138.9

49.2
49.8

15.7
16.6

11.5
10.8

184.9
192.4

1949: First half
Second half 6 _-

213.1
210.3

136.9
136.6

47.2
44.2

17.2
17.4

11.9
12.0

192.0
192.0

1948: First quarter. _.
Second quarter, .

Third quarter
Fourth quarter. _

205.1
210.3
215.4
216.6

129.9
132.7
138.3
139.5

48.0
50.4
49.9
49.7

15.6
15.8
16.3
16.9

11.6
11.4
11.0
10.5

183.4
186.4
191.8
193.1

1949: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter. _ .
Fourth quarter 6

213.7
212.5
210.6
210.0

137.1
136.7
136.6
136.7

47.8
46.5
44.5
44.0

17.1
17.2
17.3
17.5

11.7
12.1
12.2
11.8

191.9
192,1
192.2
191.9

1
Differs from "compensation of employees" in appendix table C-4, in that it excludes employer and
employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income—
compensation for injuries, employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds, pay of military
reservists not on full-time active duty (pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries),
directors' fees, jury and witness fees, compensation of prison inmates, Government payments to enemy
prisoners of war, marriage fees to justices of the peace, and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims.
2
See appendix table C-4, for major components.
3
See appendix table 0-29, for dividend payments.
4
Equals personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises, farm wages, agricultural net rents, agricultural net interest, and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations.
« Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




153

TABLE C-6.—Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-49
[Billions of dollars]
Less:
CorpoExcess
rate
of
Nation- profits Contri- wage
al
and in- butions acincome vento
tory social cruals
valu- insur- over
disation ance burseadjustments
ment

Period

1935 .
1936
1937
1938
1939

Net
interBusi- Equals:
perest
ness
paid Divi- trans- sonal
income
dends
fer
payGovernments
ment

__
_

0.9

1.0

5.8

0.6

85.1

.3
.3
.3

1.1

.3
.3

1.0
2.0
1.4
1.5
1.6

1.0
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

.5
.6
.7
.7
.6

76 2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

3.0
4.9
6.2

.3
.6
1.8

4.3
5.8

2.0
2.1

1.8
2.9
1.9
2.4
2.5

1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.2

2.9
4.6
4.7
3.2
3.8

.6
.6
.6
.4
.5

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

81.3
103.8
137.1
169.7
183.8
.

0.2

6.6
1.6
—2.0
-2.0

56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5

.

10.3

75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6

.

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
19491

Government
transfer
payments

87.4

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

Plus:

9.2
14.6
19.9
24.3
24.0

2.3
2.8
3.5
4.5
5.2

2.7
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.1

1.3
1.3
1.5
2.1
2.8

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5

78.3
95.3
122. 7
150.3
165.9

182.7
179.6
201.7
226.2
222. 5

19.2
18.3
25.6
32.6
30.3

6.1
6.0

5.6

3.7
4.4

4.7
5.8

.5
.6

7.0
7.9

.6
.6

8.4

.6

171.9
176.9
193.5
211.9
211.7

.2
-.2

10.8
11.1
10.5
11.4

5.6
5.1
5.4

4.4
4.4
4.6

Annual rates , seasonally adjusted
10.9
10.2

4.5

7.6

.6

8.1

.6

207.7
216.0

—.1

11.3
11.4

4.6
4.6

8.4
8.4

.6
.6

213.1
210.3

5.1
5.0
5.2
5.3

.1
.1
-.1
.1

11.0
10.8
10.4
9.9

4.4
4.4
4.5
4.5

7.6
7.7
7.9
8.3

.6
.6
.6
.6

205.1
210.3
215.4
216.6

5.2
5.4
5.6
5.6

.1
-.3

11.1
11.5
11.6
11.2

4.5
4.6
4.6
4.6

8.4
8.4
8.4
8.5

.6
.6
.6
.6

213.7
212.5
210.6
210.0

1948—First half
Second half

220.0
232.4

30.8
34.5

5.0

.1

1949—First half
Second half *

224.8
220.2

31.4
29.3

5.3
5.6

1948—First quarter . .
Second quarter
Third quarter . . .
Fourth quarter

215.1
224.9
230.4
234.3

28.5
33.0
33.3
35.7

226.3
223.4
222.5
217.8

31.8
30.9
31.5
27.1

1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter __.
Fourth quarter *

__

5.2

4.4

* Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




154

TABLE C-7.—Disposition of personal income, 1929-49
Less:
Equals: Personal
Equals:
Persona] Personal Disposacontax and
ble
Personal
income
nontax personal sumption
net
expendi
saving
payments income
tures

Period

Net
saving as
percent
of disposa ble
income

Billions of dollars
1929

85.1

2.6

82.5

78.8

3.7

4.5

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
63.2

2.5
1.9
1.5
1.5
1.6

73.7
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9

2.9
1.8
-1.4
-1.2
-.2

3.9
2.9
-2.9
-2.7
-.4

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

1.9
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.4

58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2

56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

1.8
3.6
3.9
1.0
2.7

3.1
5.4
5.5
1.5
3.8

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9

2.6
3.3
6.0

17.8
18.9

75.7
92.0
116.7
132.4
147.0

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

3.7
9.8
25.6
30.2
35.4

4.9
10.7
21.9
22.8
24.1

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

171.9
176.9
193.5
211.9
211.7

20.9
18.8
21.5
21.1
18.8

151.1
158.1
172.0
190.8
192.9

123.1
147.8
166.9
178.8
178.5

28.0
10.3
5.1
12.0
14.4

18.5
6.5
3.0
6.3
7.5

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted
1948: First half
Second half

207.7
216.0

22.0
20.3

185.8
195.7

177.0
180.6

8.8
15.2

4.7
7.8

1949: First half
Second half *_._
1948: First quarter._
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

213.1
210.3

18.8
18.8

194.4
191.5

178.8
178.2

15.6
13.2

8.0
6.9

205.1
210.3
215.4
216.6

23.2
20.7
20.2
20.4

181.9
189.6
195.2
196.2

175.2
178.7
180.3
180.9

6.7
10.8
15.0
15.3

3.7
5.7
7.7
7.8

1949: First quarter __
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

213.7
212.5
210.6
210.0

18.8
18.7
18.8
18.9

194.9
193.8
191.9
191.1

178.6
178.9
178.5
178.0

16.3
14.8
13.3
13.1

8.4
7.6
6.9
6.9

i Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

868148—50




11

155

TABLE C-8.—Per capita disposable income in current and 1948 dollars, 1929-49

Period

Disposable Population Consumers'
personal
(thou- price index,
income
1948=100
sands) 1
(billions of
dollars)

Per capita disposable
personal income
Current
dollars

1948

dollars »

82.5

121,770

71.6

678

947

1930.
1931.
1932.
1933.
1934.

73.7
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6

123,077
124,040
124,840
125,579
126,374

69.7
63.5
57.0
54.0
55.9

599
508
383
360
408

859
800
672
667
730

1935.
1936.
1937.
1938.
1939.

58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2

127, 250
128,053
128,825
129,825
130,880

57.3
57.9
60.0
58.9
58.1

456
516
552
505
536

796
891
920
857
923

1940.
1941.
1942.
1943.
1944.

75.7
92.0
116.7
132.4
147.0

131,970
133,203
134, 665
136,497
138,083

58.5
61.4
3 68.7
3 73.8
3 75.8

574
691
867
970
1,065

981
1,125
1,262
1,314
1,405

1945.
1946.
1947.
1948.
1949

151.1
158.1
172.0
190.8
192.9

139, 586
141,235
144,024
146, 571
149,215

3 77.9
3 83.4
3 93.1
100.0
98.8

1,082
1,119
1,194
1,302
1,293

1,389
1,342
1,282
1,302
1,309

Annual
rates,
seasonally
adjusted

Not adjusted for
seasonal
variation

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted

1948—First half....
Second half-

185.8
195.7

146,007
147,358

98.8
101.2

1,273
1,328

1,288
1,312

1949—First half
Second half 4_
1948—First quarter
Second quarter..
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter..
1949—First quarter....
Second quarter..
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter4

194.4
191.5

148,639
149.947

99.1
98.5

1,308
1,277

1,320
1,296

181.9
189.6
195.2
196.2

145,713
146,293
146,937
147,724

98.0
99.6
101.8
100.7

1,248
1,296
1,328
1,328

1,273
1,301
1,305
1,319

194.9
193.8
191.9
191.1

148,337
148,919
149, 578
150,304

99.2
99.0
98.7
98.2

1,314
1,301
1,283
1,271

1,325
1,314
1,300
1,294

1 Estimated population of continental United States, including armed forces overseas; annual data as of
July 1 and quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period, interpolated from published monthly
estimates.
2 Current dollars divided by the consumers' price index on the base 1948=100 to give a rough measure of
changes in buying power of disposable income.
3 The consumers' price index has been roughly adjusted to take account of the understatement during
the price-control period. This adjustment is in line with the report of the Technical Committee (better
known as the Mitchell Committee) on the consumers' price index. The unadjusted index will be found in
appendix table C-21.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Sources: Department of Commerce (disposable income and population) and Department of Labor
(consumers' price index).




156

TABLE C-9.—Labor force, employment and unemployment, 1929-49
[Thousands of persons, 14 years of age and over]

Period

Total
labor
force
(including
armed
forces) l

Civilian labor force
Armed
forces i

Total
civilian
labor
force

Employment 2
Total

Nonagricultural

Unemployment
Agricultural

Monthly average:
1929

49,440

260

49,180

47,630

37,180

10,450

1,550

1930..
1931..
1932..
1933.

50,080
50,680
51,250
51,840
52,490

260
260
250
250
260

49,820
50,420
51,000
51,590
52,230

45,480
42,400
38,940
38,760
40,890

35,140
32,110
28,770
28,670
30,990

10,340
10,290
10,170
10,090
9,900

4,340
8,020
12,060
12,830
11,340

19351936193719381939..

53,140
53,740
54,320
54,950
55,600

270
300
320
340
370

52,870
53,440
54,000
54,610
55,230

42,260
44,410
46,300
44,220
45,750

32,150
34,410
36,480
34,630
36,140

10,110
10,000
9,820
9,690
9,610

10,610
9,030
7,700
10,390

19401941..
1942..
19431944-

56,030
57,380
60,230
64,410
65,890

390
1,470
3,820
8,870
11,260

55,640
55,910
56,410
55,540
54,630

47,520
50,350
53,750
54,470
53,960

37,980
41,250
44,500
45,390
45,010

9,540
9,100
9,250
9,080
8,950

8,120
5,560
2,660
1,070
670

1945..
19461947..
1948..
1949..

65,140
60,820
61,608
62,748
63,571

11,280
3,300
1,440
1,307
1,466

53,860
57,520
60,168
61,442
62,105

52,820
55,250
58,027
59,378
58, 710

44,240
46,930
49,761
51,405
60,684

8,580
8,320
8,266
7,973
8,026

1,040
2,270
2,142
2,064
3,395

1,240
1,374

60,531
62,352

58,317
60,439

50,754
52,057

7,564
8,382

2,214
1,914

1949—First half. _ _
Second half_

61,771
63, 726
62,732
64, 411

1,483
1,450

61,249
62,961

58,060
59,359

50,120
61,247

7,940
8,112

3,189
3,601

1948—January
February. _
March
April
May
_
June
July
August
September.
October
November.
December—

60,455
61,004
61,005
61,760
61,660
64,740
65,135
64,511
63,578
63,166
63,138
62,828

1,241
1,226
1,236
1,236
1,238
1,261
1,293
1,325
1,366
1,391
1,414
1,453

59,214
59,778
59,769
60,524
60,422
63,479
63,842
63,186
62,212
61,775
61,724
61,375

57,149
57,139
57,329
58,330
58,660
61,296
61,615
61,245
60,312
60,134
59,434

50,089
50,368
50,482
50,883
50,800
51,899
52,452
52,801
51,590
51,506
51,932
52,059

7,060
6,771
6,847
7,448
7,861
9,396
9,163
8,444
8,723
8,627
7,961
7,375

2,065
2,639
2,440
2,193
1,761
2,184
2,227
1,941
1,899
1,642
1,831
1,941

1949—January
February- _
March
April
May
June
July
August
September .
October
November.
December..

61,546
61,896
62,305
62,327
63,452
64,866
65,278
65,105
64,222
64,021
64,363
63,475

1,468
1,508
1,491
1,492
1,469
1,468
1,463
1,468
1,459
1,445
1,436
1,430

60,078
60,388
60,814
60,835
61,983
63,398
63,815
63,637
62,763
62,576
62,927
62,045

57,414
57,168
57,647
57,819
58,694
59,619
59,720
59,947
59,411
59,001
59,518
58,556

50,651
50,174
50,254
49,999
49,720
49,924
50,073
51,441
51,254
51,290
51,640
51, 783

6,763

2,664
3,221
3,167
3,016
3,289
3,778
4,095
3,689
3,351
3,576
3,409
3,489

1948—First half. __
Second half-

7,393
7,820
8,974
9,696
9,647
8,507
8,158
7,710
7,878
6,773

i Data for 1940-49 exclude about 150,000 members of the armed forces who were outside the continental
United States in 1940 and who were therefore not enumerated in the 1940 census. This figure is deducted
by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with 1940 data.
a Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation,
illness, bad weather, temporary lay-off, and industrial disputes.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Survey on which labor force data are based is made during the week including the 8th of the month.
Sources: Department of Labor (1929-39) and Department of Commerce (1940-49).




T A B L E C—10.—Number of wage and salary workers in nonagi'{cultural establishments, 1929—49 1
[Thousands of employees]
GovManufacturing
TransTotal
ernCon- portawage
ment
Min- tract tion Trade FiServ- (Fedand
2
con- and
nance ice
Dura- Non- ing struc- public
salary
eral,
work- Total ble duraState,
tion utilible
goods goods
ers
and
ties
local)

Period

Monthly average:
1929

31,041 10,534
9,401
8,021
6,797
7,258
8,346

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

29,143
26,383
23,377
23,466
25,699

1935
1936
1937
19381939-

26,792 8,907
28,802 9,653
30, 718 10,606
28,902 9,253
30,287 10,078

—
—
-

<•>

«

1,078

1,497

3,907

6,401

1,431

3,127

3,066

(S)

(5)

1,000

(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)

(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)

864
722
735
874

1,372
1,214

3,675
3,243
2,804
2,659
2,736

6,064
5,531
4,907
4,999
5,552

1,398
1,333
1,270
1,225
1,247

3,084
2,913
2,682
2,614
2,784

3,149
3,264
3,225
3,167
3,298

(3)

(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)

888
937

912

(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)

882
845

1,145
1,112
1,055
1,150

2,771
2,956
3.114
2,840
2,912

5,692
6,076
6,543
6,453
6,705

1,262
1,313
1,355
1,347
1,382

2,883
3,060
3,233
3,196
3,228

3,477
3,662
3,749
3,876
3,987

(3)

(3)
(8)
(3)
(")
(3)

916
947
983
917
883

1,294
1,790
2,170
1,567
1,094

3,013
3,248
3,433
3,619
3,798

7,055
7,567
7,481
7,322
7,399

1,419
1,462
1,440
1,401
1,374

3,362
3,554
3, 708
3,786
3,795

4,192
4,622
5,431
6,049
6,026

(3)

1,006

970
809
862

32,031
36,164
39,697
42,042
41,480

10,780
12,974
15, 051
17,381
17,111

40,069
41,412
43.371
44,201
42,936

15,302
14,461
15, 247
15, 288
14,152

8.373
8,315
7,479

6,874
6,970
6,673

826
852
943
981
932

1,132
1,661
1,982
2,165
2,162

3,872
4,023
4,122
4,151
3,984

7,685 1,394
8,815 1,586
9,196 1.641
9,491 1,716
9, 370 1,761

3.891
4,408
4,786
4,799
4,785

5,967
5.607
5,454
5,613
5,791

1948—First half
Second half..
1949—First half....
Second half«.

43,633 15,200
44,769 15,371

8,320
8,311

6,881
7,060

964
998

2,010
2,320

4,114
4,188

9,318
9,664

1,702
1,729

4,778
4,819

5,546
5,680

42,993 14,307
42,867 13,965

7.713
7,200

6,595
6,766

981
873

2,045
2,303

4,016
3,945

9,358
9,385

1,752
1,772

4,760
4,814

5,776
5,809

1948—January
Febrary
March
April
May
_
June
_
July
August
September...
October
November.-.
December. __

43,639
43,350
43,632
43,352
43,704
44,119
44,164
44,494
44,946
44,915
44.815
45,282

15,406
15,345
15,369
15,028
14,947
15,107
15.155
15,400
15,617
15,514
15,368
15,174

8,429
8,367
8,414
8,292
8,221
8,196
8,232
8,271
8,360
8,393
8,352
8,258

6,977
6,978
6,955
6,736
6,726
6,911
6,923
7,129
7,257
7,121
7,016
6,916

974
966
980
870
989

1,005

1,002

1,929
1,792
1,877
2,019
2.153
2,289
2,348
2,384
2,369
2,334
2,287
2,200

4,094 9,325
4,113 9,239
4,117 9,312
4,054 9,301
4,127 9,340
4,181 9,389
4,212 9,363
4,213 9,366
4,189 9,522
4,188 9,654
4,166 9,807
4,158 10,273

1,674
1,683
1,696
1,708
1,717
1,736
1,742
1,742
1,725
1,720
1,721
1,724

4,746
4,728
4,742
4,789
4,816
4,848
4,866
4,850
4,849
4,811
4,782
4,757

5,491
5,484
5,539
5,583
5,615
5,564
5,504
5,533
5,668
5,694
5,685
5,994

1949—January
February
March
April
May
_.
June
July
August
September ^ _
October*
November *.

43,449
43,061
42,918
42,966
42,731
42,835
42,573
42,994
43,464
42,607
42,695

14,782
14,649
14,475
14,177
13,877
13,884
13, 757
14,114
14,312
13,903
13,741

8,044
7,923
7,819
7,656
7,441
7,392
7,255
7,302
7,416
7,006
7,019

6,738
6,726
6,656
6,521
6,436
6,492
6,502
6,812
6,896
6,897
6,722

991
986
981
984
974
968
943
956
948
583
927

2,016
1,926
1,947
2,036
2,137
2.205
2,277
2,340
2,341
2,310
2,245

4,054
4,024
3,975
3,991
4,021
4,031
4,007
3,992
3,959

1,731
1,735
1,749
1,757
1,763
1,774
1,780
1,780
1,770
1,767
1,764

4,723
4,712
4,720
4,768
4,804
4,834
4,851
4,836
4,832
4,792
4,760

5,764
5,737
5.761
5,775
5,813
5,803
5,738
5,763
5,893
5,866
5,783

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949*...

-

—

i(333)
()

()

(3)

974

1,006
1,007
1,000
999

3,873
3,896

9,388
9,292
9,310
9,478
9,342
9,336
9,220
9,213
9,409
9,503
9,579

i Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked
or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors, selfemployed persons, domestic servants, and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates
of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce (appendix table C-9) which include proprietors, self-employed persons, and domestic servants; which count persons
as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes, bad weather, or temporary lay-offs
and which are based on an enumeration of population, whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports
from employing establishments.
1
Data for the trade and service divisions, beginning with January 1947, are not comparable with data
shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the
service divtson. In January 1947, this industry amounted to approximately 230,000 employees.
*Not available.
< Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau
of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance data through 1947, and have been carried forward from 1947 bench
mark levels, thereby providing consistent series.
Source: Department of Labor.




158

TABLE C—11.—Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929—49
Manufacturing
Period
Total
Monthly average:
1929

Bitumi- Buildnous ing concoal strucDura- Nonble durable mining tion
goods goods

Class I
steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels
(year
sale
rail- phone trade trade round) i
roads

$25.03

$27.22

$25.72

$28.49

<*>

23.25
20.87
17.05
16.73
18.40

24.77
21.28
16.21
16.43
18.87

22.21
17.69
13.91
14.47
18.10

27.76
26.76
23.34
23.09
24.32

(»)
(2)

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

20.13
21.78
24.05
22.30
23.86

21.52
24.04
26.91
24.01
26.50

19.58
22.71
23.84
20.80
23.88

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

25.20
29.58
36.65
43.14
46.08

28.44
34.04
42.73
49.30
52.07

24.71
30.86
35.02
41.62
51.27

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 7

44.39
43.82
49.97
54.14
54.78

49.05
46.49
52.46
57.11
57.85

$46.96
50.61
51.32

52.94
55.26

55.47
58.60

54.64
54.95

1948—January
February--.
March
ApriL__.
May
June..
July...
August
September,.
October
November. _
December...
1949—January
February
March
April...
May
June
July....
August
September".
October i..._
November K

1930
1931.
1932
1933
1934

_
_

1948—
First half--.
Second half..
1949—
First half__ _
Second half 7.

8
$

26.76
28.01
29.20
30.26

8
2
(00)

31.55
34.25
38.65
43.68
46.06

32.44
32.74
33.97
36.30
38.39

52.25
58.03
66.59
72.12
63.92

$22.97
24.51
27.01
30.14
29.19
30.39
31.70
35.14
41.80
48.13
52.18
53.73
56.^4
63.30
s 68.85
71.05

45.69
* 51. 22
54.22
e 59. 27
60.70

44.04
44.77
48.92
51.48

$51.99
55.58
57.43

$40.66
43.85
45.96

()

()
$29.36
31.41
32.68

49.88
51.32

69.61
73.42

66.62
70.83

6 58.71
8 59.57

48.15
49.66

54.88
56.18

43.06
44.60

30.81
31.96

57.90
57.78

50.80
51.95

70.94
53.40

70.80
71.42

60.39
61.33

50.90
52.34

57.23
57.73

45.56
46.58

32.60
32.80

52.86
52.58
52.92
52.56
52.83
53.87
53.97
55.06
55.16
55.60
55.60
56.14

55.46
55.04
55.53
55.15
55.10
56.54
56.54
58. 50
58.28
59.50
59.11
59.67

49.56
49.76
49.80
49.50
49.98
50.67
50.85
51.07
51.64
50.91
51.63
51.84

75.15
70.55
74.54
8 49. 79
74.27
73.38
64.70
76.48
74.11
76.24
72.73
76.28

65.51
65.16
65.87
66.45
67.22
69.53
70.47
70.91
71.29
70.59
69.39
72.33

59.60
60.54
58.94
56.86
57.24
59.05
58.22
59.17
59.48
59.92
60.42
60.19

48.20
47.71
47.45
47.77
48.93
48.82
49.23
48.42
49.21
49.85
51.42
49.85

53.90
55.02
54.21
54.88
55.79
55.45
55.77
55.87
55.83
56.28
56.48
56.87

42.49
42.95
42.48
43.11
43.28
44.04
45.06
45.33
44.70
44.17
43.99
44.36

30.29
30.89
30.50
30.86
31.12
31.19
31.38
31.85
31.78
32.06
32.35
32.35

55.50
55.20
54.74
53.80
54.08
54.51
54.63
54.70
55.72
55.26
54.45

58.83
58.49
57.83
57.21
57.21
57.82
57.31
57.89
58.84
58.03
56.85

51.35
51.33
51.07
49.67
50.41
50.97
51.55
51.31
52.59
52.51
51.78

76.32
73.56
70.54
72.33
72.98
8 59.90
« 47. 94
8 49. 51
9 52. 77
8 63.39

70.88
70.53
69.83
70.33
71.81
71.44
71.28
71.95
70.69
71.76

60.21
61.64
60.00
62.51

49.84
50.84
50.82
50.58
51.84
51.46
51.90
51.57
52.57

57.24
56.82
56.88
57.12
57.83
57.49
58.18
57.10
57.39
58.26

45.51
45.14
44.95
45.31
45.98
46.45
46.95
46.87
46.42
46.06

32.41
32.47
32.53
32.35
32.99
32.85
32.90
32.93
32.71
32.65

()

1
a
3

57.27
60.37
62.64

$29. 81
31. 53
31.94

()

(2)

()

Money payments only; additional value of room, board, uniforms, and tips not included.
Not available.
Not available. Series beginning April 1945 includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor
Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning
June 1949 data relate to nonsupervisory employees.
* Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in monthly averages.
* Not strictly comparable with previous data.
* Preliminary average; does not include any retroactive wage payments.
7 Estimates based on incomplete data.
*
9 Data reflect work stoppages.
3-day work week.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly-rated employees in railroads, and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for pay roll periods ending closest
to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay roll and employmentfiguresare used.
Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau
of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance data through 1947, and have been carried forward from 1947 bench
mark levels, thereby providing consistent series.
The monthly average for each year except 1949 has been weighted by man-hours and therefore [does
not agree with the straight arithmetic average of the monthly or half year data.
Source: Department of Labor.




159

TABLE C-12.—Average hourly earnings in selected industries',1929-49
Manufacturing
Period
Total
Monthly average:
1929

$0,566

(2)

$0.795

(2)

.745
.794
.856
.878
.886

.815
.824
.903
.908
.932

.651
.659
.676
.712
.714

$0,774
.816
.822

.883
.993
1.059
1.139
1.186

.958
1.010
1.148
1.252
1.319

.717
.751
.824
.897
.938

.827
.820
.843
.870
.911

1.379
1.478
1.681
51.848
1.931

.942
* 1.116
1.171
8 1 . 283
1.371

1.124
1.197
1.248
1.338

(2)

to
(2)

$1.171
1.278
1.324

1.240
1.401
1.636
1.898
1.938

$1,268
1.359
1.412

$1,009
1.088
1.138

$0,650
.709
.740

1.369
1.451

1.253
1.303

1.837
1.954

1.800
1.891

6 1.272
61.296

1.235
1.262

1.344
1.374

1.072
1.105

.695
.722

1.402
1.399

1.468
1.469

1.324
1.325

1.943
1.932

1.928
1.934

1.346
1.421

1.325
1.358

1.409
1.417

1.132
1.146

.737
.744

1.302
1.308
1.310
1.314
1.324
1.340
1.356
1.373
1.386
1.390
1.397
1.400

1.356
1.359
1.361
1.365
1.374
1.396
1.417
1.441
1.457
1.462
1.463
1.466

1.236
1.247
1.248
1.250
1.262
1.273
1.284
1.293
1.304
1.302
1.317
1.319

1.842
1.823
1.845
1.817
1.843
1.853
1.937
1.961
1.971
1.945
1.955
1.956

1.766
1.791
1.786
1.804
1.815
1.836
1.862
1.874
1.895
1.892
1.906
1.915

1.279
1.302
1.262
1.258
1.272
1.259
1.263
1.278
1.293
1.297
1.322
1.320

1.239
1.236
1.226
1.228
1.242
1.236
1.237
1.229
1.249
1.262
1.305
1.288

1.321
1.342
1.332
1.345
1.364
1.359
1.367
1.366
1.365
1.376
1.381
1.387

1.057
1.063
1.062
1.075
1.082
1.090
1.099
1.103
1.112
1.107
1.108
1.098

.690
.688
.690
.695
.701
.704
.710
.711
.724
.727
.732
.732

1.405
1.401
1.400
1.401
1.401
1.405
1.408
1.399
1.407
1.392
1.389

1.467
1.466
1.464
1.467
1.467
1.475
1.477
1.473
1.482
1.458
1.454

1.327
1.323
1.323
1.321
1.323
1.324
1.332
1.319
1.328
1.326
1.321

1.947
1.941
1.938
1.934
1.946
1.951
1.910
1.897
1.940
1.981

1.918
1.930
1.933
1.934
1.930
1.924
1.922
1.932
1.940

1.333
1.343
1.318
1.359
1.367
1.354
1.369
1.354
1.540

1.298
1.317
1.327
1.324
1.343
1.340
1.348
1.343
1.362
1.378

1.403
1.403
1.401
1.407
1.421
1.416
1.426
1.403
1.410
1.428

1.132
1.123
1.121
1.127
1.141
1.147
1.148
1.146
1.149
1.143

.735
.738
.731
.732
.738
.745
.746
.745
.745
.742

.550
.556
.624
.627
.633

.577
.586
.674
.686
.698

.661
.729
.853
.961
1.019

.724
.808
.947
1.059
1.117

. .

1.023
1.086
1.237
1.350
1.401

1.111
1.156
1.292
1.410
1.468

1948:—First half_ —
Second half.-

1.316
1.384

1949:-Firsthalf...Second half7-

1935 .
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945_
1946
1947.
1948
1949 7 - _

_...

1948:
January
February
March
April
May. .
June
July
August
September
October _
November
December
1949:
January
February _ ...
March
April
May.
_.
June
July.
_.._
August ..
September7
October"
November/

(2)

.644
.651
.600
.595
.602

$0,497
.472
.556

__

$0,636

$0,681

2

.552
.515
.446
.442
.532

1930..
1931
1932
1933
1934..

Bitumi- Build- Class I
nous ing con- steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels
(year
sale
rail- phone trade trade ound)i
roads

Dura- Noncoal strucble
durable mining tion
goods goods

()

to
to

.684
.647
.520
.501
.673

(2)

%

«

to
(2)
(2
(2
%

(2)

1
2
3

(2)
(2)

1.943

(2)

to

(2)
(2)

to
m
2
(2)
(2)
(2)

()

i(22)
()

1

(2)
(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

8
(2)
(2)
(2)

8

8
8
(2)

(2)

Money payments only; additional value of room, board, uniforms, and tips not included.
Not available.
Not available. Series beginning April 1945 includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning
June 1949 data relate to nonsupervisory employees.
4
8 Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in monthly averages.
6 Not strictly comparable with previous data.
7 Preliminary average; does not include any retroactive wage payments.
Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly-rated employees in railroads, and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for pay roll periods ending closest
to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay roll and employment figures are used.
Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau
of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance data through 1947, and have been carried forward from 1947 bench
mark levels, thereby providing consistent series.
The monthly average for each year except 1949 has been weighted by man-hours and therefore does not
agree with the straight arithmetic average of the monthly or half year data.
Source: Department of Labor.




160

TABLE C-13.—Average weekly hours in selected industries, 7929-49
Manufacturing

Period

Bitumi- Build- Class I
ing
steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels
nous
(yearsale
conrailcoal
NonDurable durable mining struc- roads phone trade trade round)
Total goods
tion
goods

Monthly average:
1929

44.2

0)

0)

38.4

0)

44.8

0)

(0

0)

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

42.1
40.5
38.3
38.1
34.6

0)
(0
32.6
34.8
33.9

0)
0)
41.9
40.0
35.1

33.5
28.3
27.2
29.5
27.0

0)
0)
0)
(0
28.9

43.1
41.1
38.9
38.8
40.4

8
0)
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
1
C)
0)

1
C)
0)
0)
0)
1
C)

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

36.6
39.2
38.6
35.6
37.7

37.3
41.0
40.0
35.0
38.0

36.1
37.7
37.4
36.1
37.4

26.4
28.8
27.9
23.5
27.1

30.1
32.8
33.4
32.1
32.6

41.1
42.5
43.2
42.5
43.4

(9
0)
38.8
38.9
39.1

0)
0)
0)
1
C)
0)

(0
0)
0)
0)
0)

1940

1941
1942
1943
1944

38.1
40.6
42.9
44.9
45.2

39.3
42.1
45.1
46.6
46.6

37.0
38.9
40.3
42.5
43.1

28.1
31.1
32.9
36.6
43.4

33.1
34.8
36.4
38.4
39.6

44.0
45.6
46.9
48.7
49.1

39.5
40.1
40.5
41.9
42.3

0)
0)
(0
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 4

43.4
40.4
40.4
40.1
39.1

44.1
40.2
40.6
40.5
39.4

42.3
40.5
40.1
39.6
38.8

42.3
41.6
40.7
37.7
32.9

39.0
38.1
37.6
3 37.3
36.8

48.5
45.9
46.3
46.1
44.4

(2)

39.4
37.4
39.2
38.5

0)
0)
41.0
40.9
40.7

0)
0)
40.3
40.3
40.4

1948—First half___
Second half...

40.2
39.9

40.5
40.4

39.8
39.4

37.9
37.6

37.0
37.5

46.2
46.0

39.0
39.4

40.8
40.9

40.2
40.4

1949—First half....
Second half *_

39.0
39.3

39.5
39.3

38.4
39.2

36.5
27.6

36.7
36.9

44.9
43.4

38.4
38.6

40.6
40.8

40.3
40.6

1948—January
February
March
April
May
June
_
July
August
September. _.
October
November...
December....

40.6
40.2
40.4
40.0
39.9
40.2
39.8
40.1
39.8
40.0
39.8
40.1

40.9
40.5
40.8
40.4
40.1
40.5
39.9
40.6
40.0
40.7
40.4
40.7

40.1
39.9
39.9
39.6
39.6
39.8
39.6
39.5
39.6
39.1
39.2
39.3

40.8
5 38.7
40.4
5 27.4
40.3
39.6
5 33.4
39.0
37.6
39.2
37.2
39.0

37.1
36.4
36.9
36.7
37.0
37.9
37.8
37.8
37.6
37.3
36.4
37.8

46.6
46.5
46.7
45.2
45.0
46.9
46.1
46.3
46.0
46.2
45.7
45.6

38.9
38.6
38.7
38.9
39.4
39.5
39.8
39.4
39.4
39.5
39.4
38.7

40.8
41.0
40.7
40.8
40.9
40.8
40.8
40.9
40.9
40.9
40.9
41.0

40.2
40.4
40.0
40.1
40.0
40.4
41.0
41.1
40.2
39.9
39.7
40.4

1949—January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September 4 .
October*
November 4_

39.5
39.4
39.1
38.4
38.6
38.8
38.8
39.1
39.6
39.7
39.2

40.1
39.9
39.5
39.0
39.0
39.2
38.8
39.3
39.7
39.8
39.1

38.7
38.8
38.6
37.6
38.1
38.5
38.7
38.9
39.6
39.6
39.2

39.2
37.9
36.4
37.4
37.5
5 30.7
6 25.1
6 26.1
6 27.2
«32.0
0)

37.0
36.5
36.1
36.4
37.2
37.1
37.1
37.2
36.4
36.9
0)

45.2
45.9
45.5
46.0
44.4
42.3
44.1
46.4
39.6

38.4
38.6
38.3
38.2
38.6
38.4
38.5
38.4
38.6
38.7
0)

40.8
40.5
40.6
40.6
40.7
40.6
40.8
40.7
40.7
40.8
0)

40.2
40.2
40.1
40.2
40.3
40.5
40.9
40.9
40.4
40.3
0)

8

1 Not available.
2 Average for year not available because new series was started in April 1945. Beginning with June
1949 data relate to nonsupervisory employees only.
3
Not comparable with previous data.
4
Estimates based on incomplete data.
5 Data reflect work stoppages.
6
3-day workweek.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly rated employees in railroads, and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for pay roll periods ending closest
to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay roll and employment figures are used.
Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau
of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance data through 1947, and have been carried forward from 1947 bench
mark levels, thereby providing consistent series.
The monthly average for each year except 1949 has been weighted by man-hours and therefore does not
agree with the straight arithmetic average of the monthly or half year data.
Source: Department of Labor.




161

TABLE G-14.—Physical production index of goods and selected services, 1929-49
[1935-39=100 i]
Production of
selected services

Production of goods

Nonagricultural production
Total
Agripro- cultural
Indus- Con- Electric Transporduction protrial
of
r
duction Total produc- struc- and gas tation
tion utilities
goods
tion

Period

Weights: 2
Total
Nonagricultural
1929
1930 —
1931
1932
1933.- .
1934

.

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939 —
1940.—
1941
1942—
1943
1944

__

_ ..

5.8
7.2

no"
91
75
58
69
75

180
153
124
79
53
58

88
87
84
76
77
81

317
104
89
73
76
83

110
106
101
91
84
86

85
103
112
90
110

87
103
113
89
109

69
101
106
101
123

87
97
104
100
111

88
101
110
95
106

90
98
102
102
108

-

110
114
128
125
130

126
164
201
227
218

125
162
199
239
235

133
182
202
112
60

123
141
158
183
191

117
146
185
220
230

115
126
135
143
147

_

1945
1946—
1947
1948
1949 *

129
134
129
140
138

190
169
187
195
184

203
170
187
192
175

68
128
147
174
182

187
188
214
243
247

217
198
208
209
191

158
182
196
207

196
196

192
192

171
179

242
244

210
208

187
180

181
170

172
191

249
245

197
185

19.5

78.0
100.0

97
95
104
101
93
79

116
97
81
62
68
73

87
99
111
93
110

96
85
108
105
106

123
154
187
207
201
178
162
176
184
175

_

(5)

1948—First half .
Second half
1949—First half
Second hah* a

9.0
11.1

100.0
112
96
85
69
72
74

..

(«)
(4)

._.

65.6
81.6

Telephone
and
telegraph

8

(4)
(4)

.8'

1 All half year data have been seasonally adjusted except the electric and gas utilities for which no satisfactory adjustment factor is available.
»-i&*
&•&•&• fes*
2
Computed from the Department of Commerce national income data. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the 5 industries. The agriculture weight excludes net rents paid by landlords living on farms, imputed rents and subsidy payments. T h e weight
for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry, the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction. Manufactures and minerals of the industrial production index were weighted into the total indexes separately
but only the total industrial production index is shown here. See appendix table 0-15 for the individual
components of the index of industrial production.
5
Estimates based on incomplete data.
* Not available.
6
Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production, only an annual index has been
computed.
NOTE.—A composite index of production of goods and services has not been compiled because of the
inadequate data for measuring the production of services. The only service production data used were for
transportation and for communications by telephone and telegraph. Data for measuring such services
as wholesale and retail trade, finance, insurance, real estate, government, and communication other than
telephone and telegraph were inadequate for separate indexes and for an index for all services other than
transportation, telephone, and telegraph.
Sources: Based on the following data:
Agricultural production: Department of Agriculture index of farm output which measures the physical
volume of farm production for human use.
Industrial production: Federal Reserve index of industrial production.
Construction: Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of
construction costs and converted into relatives with 1935-39 as 100.
Electric and gas utilities: Based on the following series: Electric power produced by utilities as reported
by the Federal Power Commission, and sales of manufactured and mixed gas to consumers as reported by
the American Gas Association. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period
1935-39 as 100. The relative series are combined into an index with electric power given a weight of 85
and gas 15. the respective percentages of the revenues of each of the utilities to the total revenues produced
by both in the base period 1935-39.
Transportation: Department of Commerce index of transportation.
Telephone and telegraph- Based on Department of Labor production indexes for 1935-48 and on a series
of Works Progress Administration for 1929-34. These indexes are for class A telephone carriers and the
principal wire-telegraph and ocean-cable carriers which file annual reports with the Federal Communications Commission.




162

TABLE C-15.—Industrial production index, 1929-49
[193.5-39=100, seasonally adjusted]

Period

Monthly average:
1929

Total
industrial
production

Manufactures
Total

Durable

Nondurable

_.
_.

110

132

93

107

90
74
57
68
74

98
67
41
54
65

84
79
70
79
81

93
80
67
76
80

87
103
113
89
109

87
104
113
87
109

83
108
122
78
109

90
100
106
95
109

86
99
112
97
106

125
162
199

1935
1936...
1937
1938
1939

110
91
75
58
69
75

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

139
201
279
360
353

115
142
158
176
171

117
125
129
132
140

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

235

126
168
212
258
252

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949^

_..

203
170
187
192
175

214
177
194
198
183

274
192
220
225
201

166
165
172
177
168

137
134
149
155
134

1948—First half-..
Second half-.

192
192

199
198

224
226

178
176

153
157

1949—First half-..
Second half l

181
170

188
178

214
188

167
169

143
126

1948—January
February
March
April
May
June
-.
July
August
September...
October
November...
December. . .

193
194
191
188
192
192
186
191
192
195
195
192

201
201
200
195
197
198
192
197
199
202
201
199

229
226
229
217
221
222
219
223
225
231
229
231

178
180
177
177
178
179
169
177
178
179
178
173

154
155
142
147
162
159
153
159
156
158
161
156

1949—January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August-,....
September...
October
November l .
December *..

191
1S9
184
179
174
169
161
170
174
166
171
176

108
196
193
184
179
176
168
177
184
176
177
184

227
225
223
212
201
194
185
193
199
175
180
199

175
173
168
162
161
161
154
165
172
177
175
172

149
149
136
148
145
133
123
129
119
112
139
131

1

Estimates based on incomplete data.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




163

TABLE C-16.—New construction activity, 1929-49
[Value put in place, millions of dollars]
Public construction

Private construction

Period

By source of
funds

Resi- NonTotal
dennew
resicon- Total tial
build- denstruc- pritial
ing buildtion i vate
(non-2 ings
farm)

Public
utility
and
farm

Total
pubFeder- State
lic
and
al
local

By type of construction
Military
and fed- High- Other
erally fi- ways pubnanced
lic
industrial

1929...

9,873

7,476

2,797

2,822

1,857

2,397

237

2,160

19

1,254

1,124

1930...
1931...
1932...
1933—
1934—

8,042
5,967
3,290
2,376
2,805

5,265
3,375
1,467
1,012
1,235

1,446
1,228
462
278
361

2,099
1,104
499
404
455

1,720
1,043
506
330
419

2,777
2,592
1,823
1,364
1,570

338
451
510
552
720

2,439
2,141
1,313
812
850

29
40
34
38
58

1,505
1,351
G61
809
826

1,243
1,201
828
517
686

1935...
1936...
1937...
1938...
1939...

3,230
4,836
5,487
5,186
6,307

1,676
2,550
3,390
3,076

665
1,131
1,372
1,511
2,114

472
712
1,088
764
785

539
707
930
801
909

1,554
2,286
2,097
2,110
2,499

828
1,262
1,154
989
1,257

726
1,024
943
1,121
1,242

39
33
39
74
148

709
927
902
858
867

806
1,326
1,156
1,178
1,484

1940...
1941...
1942...
1943...
1944. „

7,042
10,490
13,412
7,784
4,136

4,390
5,426
3,007
1,744
1,823

2,355
2,765
1,315
650
535

1,028
1,486
635
232
350

1,007 2,652
1,175 5,064
1,057 10,405
862 6,040
938 2,313

1,397
3,853
9.544
5,614
1,912

1,255
1,211
861
426
401

549
2,900
8,453
4,218
1,344

882
800
616
420
346

1,221
1,364
1,336
1,402
623

1945...
1946...
1947...
1948...
1949*..

4,808
.0,464
.4,324
.8, 775
.9,329

2,716
8,253
11,179
14,563
14,059

684
3,183
5,260
7,223
7,025

1,014
3,346
3,131
3,578
3,178

1,018
1,724
2,788
3,762
3,856

1,558
1,096
1,181
1,339
1,588

534
1,115
1,964
2,873
3,682

1,160
272
229
157
120

386
778
1,300
1, 585
1,670

546
1,161
1,616
2,470
3,480

2,092
2,211
3,145
4,212
5,270

Totals for period, not adjusted for seasonal variation
8,159
1948—First half
Second half... 10,616

6,519
8,044

3,257
3,966

1,640
1,938

1,622
2,140

1,640
2,572

521 1,119
818 1,754

559
81
76 1,026

1,000
1,470

1949—First half
8,413
Second half *__ 10,916
1948—January
1,180
February
1,049
March
1,226
1,378
April
1,572
May
1,754
June
1,874
July.
1,934
August
1,901
September
1,814
October
1,646
Isovember
1,447
December

6,184
7,875

2,870
4,155

1,594
1,584

1,720
2,136

2,229
3,041

658 1,571
930 2,111

49
71

633
1,037

1, 547
1,933

974
875
1,001
1,099
1,222
1,348
1,423
1,454
1,427
1,355
1,256
1,129

500
410
490
550
625
682
707
720
707
670
615
547

270
263
266
263
275
303
321
329
331
327
325
305

204
202
245
286
322
363
395
405
389
358
316
277

206
174
225
279
350
406
451
480
474
459
390
318

67
54
71
87
112
130
143
154
156
146
123
96

139
120
154
162
238
276
308
326
318
313
267
222

14
12
13
15
14
13
13
14
13
13
13
10

54
40
57
89
140
179
206
220
200
186
131
83

138
122
155
175
196
214
232
246
261
260
246
225

1949—January
_
February
March
__.
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November *..
December*..

1,002
905
951
989
1,108
1.229
1,301
1,343
1,368
1,343
1,295
1,225

475
400
420
445
530
600
650
675
710
715
715
690

285
271
262
251
257
268
269
264
263
261
266
261

242
234
269
293
321
361
382
404
395
367
314
274

291
267
316
381
468
506
532
560
554
536
472
387

81
72
91
113
144
157
166
174
174
166
140
110

210
195
225
268
324
349
366
386
380
370
332

7
7

68
52
68
100
160
185
200
215
200
185
145
92

216
208
239
273
299
312
322
333
340
337
315
286

1,293
1,172
1,267
1,370
1,576
1,735
1,833
1,903
1,922
1.879
1,767
1,612

277

9
8
9
9
10
12
14
14
12
9

i Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling, and, therefore does
not agree with the new construction expenditures in the gross national product.
21939 and subsequent years are not comparable to nonfarm residential construction in table C-3 since
this series excludes certain outlays incident to construction which have been included in gross private
domestic investment.
3 Excludes farm and public utility; for 1929-32 includes negligible amount of public industrial and commercial building not segregable.
4
Estimates based on incomplete data.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Department of Labor.




164

T A B L E C—17.—Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1929—50
[Millions of dollars]
Manufacturing and mining Transportation
Period

Total i
Total

Other

and gas
utilities

840

(4)

»

865
360
164
101
218

i((*44))
()
i i

Manufactur- Mining Railroad
ing

1929..

9,165

3,596

1930-.
1931..
1932..
1933..
1934..

7,610
4,712
2,608
2,137
3,080

2,541
1,435
930
992
1,460

1935..
1936..
1937..
1938..
1939-.

3,738
5,077
6,730
4,520
5,200

1,790
2,450
3,330
1,830
2,310

(3)

1940..
1941..
1942..
1943..
1944..

6,490
8,190
6,110
4,530
5,210

3,140
4,080
3,170
2,610
2,890

2,580
3,400
2,760
2,250
2,390

1945..
1946..
1947..
1948..
1949 «.

6,630
12, 040
16,180
19, 260
17,910

3,650
6,470
8,150
9,140
7,860

3,210
5,910
7,460
8,340
7,130

«
$3
(3)
(3)
()
(3)
(3)

1,930

83
(3)
()
8
(3)

Commercial
and
miscellaneous 2
4,729

0)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)

4,204
2,917
1,514
1,044
1,402

380

166
306
525
238
280

280

480

1,782
2,321
2,875
2,452
1,850

560
680
410
360
500

440
560
540
460
580

390
340
260
190
280

550
710
680
540
490

1,980
2,490
1,470
730
970

440
560
690
800
730

550
570
910
1,320
1,340

320
660
800
700
510

630
1,040
1,900
2,680
3,160

1,480
3,300
4,430
5,390
5,040

Annual rates, not adjusted for seasonal variation
1948—First half.
Second half.

17,980
20,480

8,640
9,660

7,880
8,820

760
840

1,160
L,460

740
680

2,280
3,080

5,160
5,600

1949—First half.
Second half»

18, 240
17,580

8,220
7,500

7,460
6,800

760
700

1,480
]1,200

540
480

2,920
3,380

5,100
5,020

1948—First quarter
Second quarter..
Third quarter. _.
Fourth quarter. .

16, 680
19, 280
19,320
21,640

7,920
9,360
9,160
10,160

7,200
8,560
8,360
9,280

720
800
800
880

1,080
1,240
L, 280
1,640

720
760
680
680

2,000
2,560
2,760
3,400

4,960
5,360
5,440
5,760

1949—First quarter
Second quarter. .
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter 5.

17,840
18,640
17,440
17,720

8,160
8,280
7,480
7,520

7,400
7,520
6,760
6,840

760
760
720
680

1,440
1,520
1,240
1,160

520
560
520
440

2,720
3,120
3,160
3,600

5,040
5,160
5,040
5,000

1950—First quarter «...

15,280

6,720

6,080

640

880

320

2,960

4,440

1
2

Excludes agriculture.
Commercial and miscellaneous includes trade, service, finance, and communication for all years shown.
Prior to 1939, miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad, and electric and gas utilities
which are not available separately for these years.
fe 3 Not available separately for years prior to 1939.
¥, * Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to 1939.
wp Estimates for fourth quarter of 1949 and the first quarter of 1950 are based on anticipated capital expenditures of business.
NOTE.—These figures do not agree with those shown in column 2 of table C-3 and included in the gross
national product estimates of the Department of Commerce, principally because the latter cover certain
equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for 1929-44 are Federal Reserve
Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest $10,000,000.
Sources: Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce (except as noted).




165

TABLE G—18.—Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade, 1939-49
[Adjusted for seasonal variation]
Manufacturing

Period

Wholesale trade

Ratio of
Millions of
average
dollars
inventories to
month
Sales 2 ly sales 3 Inven- Sales 2
tories1

Millions of
dollars
Inventories l

Retail trade

Ratio of
Millions of
average
dollars
inventories to
month- Invenly sales3 tories * Sales *

Ratio of
average
inventories to
monthly sales3

1939-

11,465

5,100

2.11

3,175

2,505

1.21

5,532

3,504

1.53

1940..
1941..
1942..
19431944..

12,819
16,960
19, 287
20,098
19,507

5,852
8,168
10,425
12,822
13, 788

2.06
1.78
1.77
1.51
1.45

3,325
4,182
3,858
3,684
3,980

2,802
3,620
4,012
4,273
4,561

1.16
1.03
1.02
0.86
0.86

6.040
7,630
7,868
7,361
7,400

3,866
4,624
4,803
5,277
5,735

1.47
1.46
1.71
1.38
1.31

1945....
1946....
1947....
1948....

18,390
24, 818
29,818
34,066

12,883
12,841
17,076
18,998

1.48
1.65
1.64
1.68

4,638
6,665
8,653
9,511

4,983
6,601
7,754
8,355

0.82
0.81
1.03
1.09

7,543
11, 226
13, 221
14,969

6,315
8,358
9,909
10, 837

1.20
1.11
1.22
1.32

1948—First half....
Second half..

32, 211
34,066

18,686
19,310

1.65
1.72

8,926
9,511

8,378
8,353

1.05
1.13

14,349
14,969

10, 742
10,932

1.30
1.35

1949-Firsthalf....

33, 250

17,980

1.89

9,002

7,662

1.22

14,182

10,696

1.36

1948—January
February...
March
April..
May
June
July__
August
SeptemberOctober
November..
December..

30,044
30,318
30,686
31,040
31,491
32, 211
32, 580
32,841
33,380
33,528
33,810
34,066

18,229
18,470
18, 761
18,631
18, 574
19,454
18,972
19, 652
19,902
18,978
19, 288
19,065

1.64
1.63
1.63
1.66
1.68
1.64
1.71
1.66
1.66
1.76
1.75
1.78

8,695
8,719
8,669
8,773
8,811
8,926
9,177
9,420
9,581
9,730
9,714
9,511

8,352
8,146
8,433
8,415
8,240
8,685
8,630
8,522
8,489
8,083
8,236
8,158

1.04
1.07
1.03
1.04
1.07
1.02
1.05
1.09
1.12
1.19
1.18
1.18

13,662
14,006
14, 253
14,156
14,089
14,349
14,372
14, 490
14, 877
14,937
15,027
14,969

10,590
10, 597
10, 809
10, 962
10,640
10, 855
10,949
11,030
10, 961
10,899
10,763
10,987

1.27
1.31
1.31
1.30
1.33
1.31
1.31
1.31
1.34
1.37
1.39
1.37

1949—January
February
March
April.
_.
May
June
July_
August
September...
October *
November *_.

34,409
34,408
34, 223
34,018
33, 565
33, 250
32,367
31,638
31,060
30, 754
30, 700

17, 880
18,175
18,451
17,643
17, 741
17,990
17,114
18,945
18, 866
16,805
18,000

1.91
1.89
1.86
L.93
L.90
L.86
L.92
L 69
]L. 66
L. 84
]L.71

9,464
9,479
9,293
9,330
9,153
9,002
9,091
9,061
9,186
9,220

7,723
7,680
7,890
7,422
7,539
7,718
7,158
7,697
7,572
7,166

1.23
1.23
1.19
1.25
1.23
1.18
1.26
1.18
1.20
1.28

14, 659
14,479
14, 700
14, 458
14,139
14,182
13, 862
13.932
14,355
14,478

1.40
1.36
1.36
1.35
1.33
1.33
1.33
1.31
1.31
1.35

(*)

(«)

10, 592
10, 686
10, 705
10, 790
10, 738
10,663
10, 521
10, 644
10,824
10, 647
10,630

1
2
3

(s)

(«)

(8)

Book value, end of period.
Monthly average shown for year and half year and total for month.
Average inventories based on centered averages of month-end figures.
< Estimates based on incomplete data.
1
Not available.
NOTE.—The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of "change in business inventories" included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all
business, and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation.
Source: Department of Commerce.




166

TABLE C-19.—Manufacturers'' inventories by stage of fabrication'and as ratios to sales, 1946-49
[Not adjusted for seasonal variation]
Durable goods industries

Period

Book value of
inventories at
end of period
(billions of
dollars)

Ratio of average inventories
to monthly
sales i

Materials
and
goods
in
process

Finished
goods

Materials
and
goods
in
process

1946.
1947.
1948.

9.0
10.3
11.4

2.7
3.8
4.7

1.58
1.45
1.37

1948—First h a l f - Second half..

10.7
11.4

4.2
4.7

1.38
1.36

1949—First half—.

10.4

5.2

1948—January
February—
March
April
May
June
July
_
August
September..
October
November..
December..

10.3
10.4
10.4
10.5
10.7
10.7
11.0
11.1
11.2
11.2
11.3
11.4

3.9
4.0
4.1
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.7

1949—January
February.March
April
May
June
July
August
SeptemberOctobers...

11.6
11.5
11.4
11.3
10.8
10.4
10.1
9.9
9.5
9.4

4.9
5.0
5.2
5.2
5.3
5.2
5.1
4.9
4.7
4.5

167

Book value of
inventories at
end of period
(billions of
dollars)

Ratio of average inventories
to monthly
sales i

Materials
and
goods
in
process

Finished
goods

Materials
and
goods
in
process

0.50
.50
.53

8.8
10.3
10.8

4.5
5.6
7.3

0.92
.92
.95

0.47
.51
.58

.53
.53

10.5
10.8

6.4
7.3

.95

.54
.61

1.48

.67

10.0

7.2

1.03

.72

1.45
1.44
1.27
1.36
1.42
1.34
1.54
1.38
1.30
1.30
1.36
1.32

.54
.55
.49
.54
.57
.53
.59
.53
.50
.51
.54
.53

10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.6
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.6
10.9
10.8
10.8

5.8
5.8
5.8
5.8
6.1
6.4
6.7
6.8
7.0
7.0
7.2
7.3

.94
.97
.92
.97
1.00
.95
1.02
.92
.90
.90
.96
.99

.52
.55
.51
.53
.56
.56
.63
.59
.58
.59
.63
.67

1.56
1.56
1.40
1.49
1.51
1.38
1.54
1.27
1.21
1.36

.65
.67
.62
.68
.72
.68
.78
.63
.60
.65

10.7
10.6
10.4
10.2
10.2
10.0
10.0
9.9
9.7
9.7

7.4
7.3
7.3
7.2
7.1
7.2
7.1
7.1
7.0
7.2

1.05
1.06

.72
.73
.67
.72
.73
.73
.78
.64
.62
.64

1 Ratios based on centered averages of month-end figures.
Estimates based on incomplete data.
Source: Department of Commerce.

2




Nondurable goods industries

Finished

.96

1.04
1.04
1.02
1.09
.90
.87
.87

Finished
goods

TABLE C-20.—Sales, stocks^and outstanding orders at 296 department stores, 7939-49
Millions of dollars 1

Period

standing
orders
(end of
month)

Eatio of
stocks
to sales

Ratio of Ratio of
orders
orders
to sales to stocks

Sales
(total for
month)

Stocks
(end of
month)

128

344

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944.

136
156
179
204
227

353
419
599
509
535

108
194
263
530
560

2.60
2.69
3.35
2.50
2.36

1.24
1.47
2.60
2.47

0.31
.46
.44
1.04
1.05

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 3

255
318
337
353
314

563
715
826
912
877

729
909
552
465
359

2.21
2.25
2.45
2.58
2.79

2.86
2.86
1.64
1.32
1.14

1.29
1.27
.67
.51
.41

1948—First half...
Second half.

317
388

895
929

462
467

2.82
2.39

1.46
1.20

.52
.50

1949—First half...
Second half

306
325

864
892

301
427

2.82
2.74

.98
1.31

.35
.48

1948—January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November..
December- _

272
264
356
333
339
337
270
296
359
389
415
599

799
890
954
943
918
868
835
899
947

629
571
416
357
338
460
550
537
539
507
379
292

2.94
3.37
2.68
2.83
2.71
2.58
3.09
3.04
2.64
2.60
2.55
1.37

2.31
2.16
1.17
1.07
1.00
1.36
2.04
1.81
1.50
1.30

.79
.64
.44
.38
.37
.53
.66
.60
.57
.50
.36

1949—January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September-.
October
November 3

267
255
320
347
328
318
238
288
342
350
406

388
378
310
236
210
286
399
413
510
454
361

2.96
3.34
2.87
2.61
2.73
2.59
3.26
2.84
2.58
2.79
2.49

1.45
1.48

Monthly average:
1939

1,011
1,057

821
790
852
918
907
894
824
775
817
881
975
1,011

1
2

(2)

2.69

(2)
0.79

.91
.49

.97
.68
.64
.90
1.68
1.43
1.49
1.30

.89

.49
.44
.34
.26
.23
.35
.51
.51
.58
.47
.36

Not adjusted for seasonal variation.
Not available.
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—These figures represent retail sales, stocks, and outstanding orders as reported by a sample of
296 of the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates
of total sales, stocks, and outstanding orders for all department stores in the United States. Data are not
available prior to 1939.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




168

TABLE C-21—Consumers' price index, 1929-49
For moderate-income families in large cities
[1935-39=100]

Period

All
items

Food Apparel

Eent

Fuel,
elec- House
furtricity,
Misceland re- nish- laneous
frigerings
ation

1929

122.5

132.5

115.3

141.4

112.5

111.7

104.6

1930.
1931
1932
1933
1934

119.4
108.7
97.6
92.4
95.7

126.0
103.9
86.5
84.1
93.7

112.7
102.6
90.8
87.9
96.1

137.5
130.3
116.9
100.7
94.4

111.4
108.9
103.4
100.0
101.4

108.9
98.0
85.4
84.2
92.8

105.1
104.1
101.7
98.4
97.9

1935
1936.
1937
1938
1939...

98.1
99.1
102.7
100.8
99.4

100.4
101.3
105.3
97.8
95.2

96.8
97.6
102.8
102.2
100.5

94.2
96.4
100.9
104.1
104.3

100.7
100.2
100.2
99.9
99.0

94.8
96.3
104.3
103.3
101.3

98.7
101.0
101.5
100.7

100.2
105.2
116.5
123.6
125.5

96.6
105.5
123.9
138.0
136.1

101.7
106.3
124.2
129.7
138.8

104.6
106.2
108.5
108.0
108.2

99.7
102.2
105.4
107.7
109.8

100.5
107.3
122.2
125.6
136.4

101.1
104.0
110.9
115.8
121.3

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 i

128.4
139.3
159.2
171.2
169.3

139.1
159.6
193.8
210.2
202.3

145.9
160.2
185.8
198.0
190.5

108.3
108.6
111.2
117.4
120.7

110.3
112.4
121.1
133.9
137.3

145.8
159.2
184.4
195. S
189.3

124.1
128.8
139.9
149.9
154.6

1948—First half
Second half..
1949—First half
Second half i_
1948—January 15. _ _
February 15__
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15.
October 15. -_
November 15.
December 15.

169.1
173.3

208.3
212.1

195.7
200.2

116.4
118.4

130.8
137.1

193.9
197.7

147.0
152.9

169.6
168.8

202.6
202.0

193.3
187.2

120.2
121.2

137.4
137.2

192.4
185.6

154.3
154.9

168.8
167.5
166.9
169.3
170.5
171.7
173.7
174.5
174.5
173.6
172.2
171.4

209.7
204.7
202.3
207.9
210.9
214.1
216.8
216.6
215.2
211.5
207.5
205.0

192.1
195.1
196.3
196.4
197.5
196.9
197.1
199.7
201.0
201.6
201.4
200.4

115.9
116.0
116.3
116.3
116.7
117.0
117.3
117.7
118.5
118.7
118.8
119.5

129.5
130.0
130.3
130.7
131.8
132.6
134.8
136.8
137.3
137.8
137.9
137.8

192.3
193.0
194.9
194.7
193.6
194.8
195.9
196.3
198.1
198.8
198.7
198.6

146.4
146.4
146.2
147.8
147.5
147.5
150.8
152.4
152.7
153.7
153.9
154.0

1949—January 15 _..
February 15. .
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15.
October 15. . .
November 15.

170.9
169.0
169.5
169.7
169.2
169.6
168.5
168.8
169.6
168.5
168.6

204.8
199.7
201.6
202. 8
202.4
204.3
201.7
202.6
2C4.2
200.6
200.8

196.5
195.1
193.9
192.5
191.3
190.3
188.5
187.4
187.2
186.8
186.3

119.7
119.9
120.1
120.3
120.4
120.6
120.7
120.8
121.2
121.5
122.0

138.2
138.8
138.9
137.4
135.4
135.6
135.6
135.8
137.0
138.4
139.1

196.5
195.6
193.8
191.9
189.5
187.3
186.8
184.8
185.6
185.2
185.4

154.1
154.1
154.4
154.6
154.5
154.2
154.3
154.8
155.2
155.2
154.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

1

_..

Estimates based on data available through November 15,1949*

Source: Department of Labor,




169

TABLE C-22.-—Wholesale price index, 1929-49
[1926«1OO]

Other than farm products and foods

3
0}
C 3
O

Period

II

l!
Monthly average:
1929

i

95.3 104.9

99.9

91.6 109.1

90.4

83.0 100.5

95.4

94.0

94.3

82.6

86.4
73.0
64.8
65.9
74.9

88.3
64.8
48.2
51.4
65.3

90.5
74.6
61.0
60.5
70.5

85.2 100.0
75.0 86.1
70.2 72.9
71.2 80.9
78.4

80.3
66.3
54.9
64.8
72.9

78.5
67.5
70.3
66.3
73.3

92.1
84.5
80.2
79.8
86.9

89.9
79.2
71.4
77.0
86.2

88.7
79.3
73.9
72.1
75.3

92.7
84.9
75.1
75.8
81.5

77.7
69.8
64.4
62.5
69.7

1935...
1936...
1937...
1938...
1939...

80.0
80.8
86.3
78.6
77.1

78.8
80.9
86.4
68.5
65.3

83.7
82.1
85.5
73.6
70.4

77.9
79.6 95.4
85.3 104.6
81.7 92.8
81.3 95.6

70.9
71.5
76.3
66.7
69.7

73.5
76.2
77.6
76.5
73.1

86.4
87.0
95.7
95.7
94.4

85.3
86.7
95.2
90.3
90.5

79.0
78.7
82.6
77.0
76.0

80.6
81.7
89.7
86.8
86.3

68.3
70.5
77.8
73.3
74.8

1940..
1941..
1942..
19431944..

78.6
87.3
8
103.1
104.0
105.8
121.1
152.1
165.1
154.9

83.0
89.0
95.5
96.9
98.5

100.8
108.3
117.7
117.5
116.7

73.8
84.8
96.9
97.4
98.4

71.7 95.8 94.8
76.2 99.4 103.2
78.5 103.8 110.2
80.8 103.8 111.4
83.0 103.8 115.5

77.0 88.5
84.4 94.3
95.5 102.4
94.9 102.7
95.2 104.3

77.3
82.0
89.7
92.2
93.6

99.7
109.5
135.
151.0
147.3

118.1
137.2
182.4
188.8
180.5

1930...
1931...
1932...
1933...
1934...

1945—.
1946....
1947....
1948...
1949...

67.7 71.3
82.4 82.7
105.9 99.6
122.6 106.6
123.3 104.9
128.2
148.9
181.2
188.3
165.5

106.2
130.7
168.7
179.1
161.4

100.1 84.0 104.7 117.8
116.3 90.1 115.5 132.6
141.7 108.7 145.0 179.7
149.8 134.2 163.6 199.1
140.5 131.6 170.0 193.4

95.2
101.4
127.3
135.7
118.8

104.5
111.6
131.1
144.5
145.2

94.7
100.3
115.5
120.5
112.4

1948—First half....
Second half..

163. 190.4 176.9 148.8 190.6 151.0 131.5 156.4 195.3 137.3 142.2 121.6
166.6 186.4 181.3 153.1 187.0 148.8 136.9 170.8 202.8 134.1 146.8 119.4

1949—First half....
Second half..

157.4 170.5 163.2 149.4 180.9 142.8 133. 172. 197.6 120.5 147.1 114.7
152.5 160.5 159. 145.1 180.0 138.2 130.0 167.7 189.2 117. 143.3 110.0

1948—January
February
March

165.9
161.0
161.6
163.0
164.2
166.4
168.8
169.8
168.9
165.4
164.0
162.4

199.2
185.3
186.0
186.
189.1
196.0
195.2
191.5
189.9
183.5
180.8
177.3

179.8
172.4
173.8
176.
177.4
181.4
188.3
189.8
186.9
178.2
174.
170.2

148.6
147.9
148.1
149.0
149.5
149.9
151.4
153.3
153.6
153.4
153. 6
153.1

200.9
193.3
186.3
187.0
188.4
187.
189.
188.4
187.4
185.5
186.2
185.3

149.4
150.0
151.1
151.7
152.1
151.4
150.8
150.4
149.3
148.3
147.4
146.

130.0
130.9
130.9
131.5
132.6
133.1
135.9
136.4
136.9
137.3
137.6
137.

154.3
155.3
155.9
157.2
157.1
158.6
162.2
171.0
172.0
172.4
173.3
173.8

194.1
193.5
193.9
195.7
197.0
197.4
200.0
203.8
204.1
203.7
203.1
202.

139.9
135.7
137.
137.5
136.3
137.2
135.7
133.2
134.5
135.5
134.4
131.1

141.3
141.8
142.0
142.3
142.6
143.
144.5
145.4
146.6
147.5
148.
148.4

123.6
120.1
120.8
121.8
121.5
121.5
120.3
119.7
119.9
119.0
119.2
118.5

160.6
158.1
158.
156.9
155.7
154.5
153.5
152.9
153. 6
152.2
151.6
151.2

172.5
168.3
171.5
170.5
171.2
168.8
166.2
162.
163.1
159.6
156.8
155.2

165.8
161.5
162.9
162.9
163. 8
162.
161.3
160.6
162.0
159.6
158.9
155.7

152.9
151.8
150.
148.9
146.8
145.6
145.0
145.0
145.3
145.0
145.0
145.4

184.8
182.
180.4
179.9
179.
178.8
177.8
178.9
181.1
181.3
180.8
180.2

146.1
145.2
143.8
142.
140.5
139.2
138.0
138.1
139.0
138.0
138.0
138.4

137.1
135.9
134.3
132.0
130.1
129.9
129.9
129.7
130.0
130.5
130.0
130.0

175.6
175.5
174.4
171.8
168.4
167.5
167.9
168.2
168.2
167.3
167.3
167.4

202.3
201.5
200.0
196.5
193.9
191.4
189.0
188.2
189.4
189.2
189.5
190.0

126.3
122.8
121.1
117.7
118.2
116.8
118.1
119.
117.
116.0
116.1
115.6

148.1
148.3
148.0
147.0
146.
145.1
143.0
142:9
142.9
143.0
143.4
144.

117.3
115.3
115.7
115.6
113.5
111.0
110.3
109.8
109.6
109.0
109.7
111.4

April
May
-June.._
July
August
September..
October
November..
December. _
1949—January
February. _
_
March
April
May
June
July
August
SeptemberOctober
November..
December..

Source: Department of Labor.




170

T A B L E G—23.—Indexes of prices received and prices paid
1929-49

by farmers

Prices
received

Period

and parity

ratio,

Prices paid
(including
interest and Parity ratio t
taxes)

August 1909July 1914=* 100 1910-14=-100

Monthly average:
1929
_

149

167

89

1930
1931
1932...
1933
1934

128
90
68
72
90

160
141
124
120
129

80
64
55
60
70

1935
1936
1937 . .
1938
1939 .

109
114
122
97
95

130
127
133
126
124

84
90
92
77

1940
1941 . .
1942
1943
1944

100
124
159
192
195

125
132
150
162
169

80
94
106
119
116

202
233
278
287
251

172
193
231
249
244

117
121
120
115
103

1948—First half
Second half

291
283

250
249

116
114

1949—First half
Second half

259
244

246
241

105
101

1948—January 15
February 15
March 15
April 15 .
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15
October 15
November 15
December 15

307
279
283
291
289
295
301
293
290
277
271
268

251
249
248
249
250
251
251
251
250
249
248
246

122
112
114
117
116
118
120
117
116
111
109
109

1949—January 15_. . .
February 15
March 15 __
April 15
May 15_ _ June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15
October 15
November 15 .
December 15

268
258
261
260
256
252
249
245
249
243
239
236

248
245
246
246
245
245
244
243
242
239
240
240

108
105
106
106
104
103
102
101
103
101
100
98

1945 .
1946
1947 .
1948...
1949

-_

1

Ratio of prices received to prices paid (including interest and taxes).
Source: Department of Agriculture.

868148—50




12

171

77

TABLE C-24.—Consumer credit outstanding, 1929-49
[Millions of dollars]

End of period

Total
consumer
credit

Instalment credit
Total

Automobile
sale credit

Charge
accounts
Other i

Other
consumer
credit 2

1929

7,628

3,158

1,318

1,840

1,749

2,721

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

6,821
5,518
4,085
3,912
4,389

2,688
2,204
1,518
1,588
1,860

928
637
322
459
576

1,760
1,567
1,196
1,129
1,284

1,611
1,381
1,114
1,081
1,203

2,522
1,933
1,453
1,243
1,326

5,434
6,788
7,480
7,047
7,969

2,622
3,518
3,960
3,595
4,424

940
1,289
1,384
970
1,267

1,682
2,229
2,576
2,625
3,157

1,292
1,419
1,459
1,487
1,544

1,520
1,851
2,061
1,965
2,001

9,115
9,862
6,578
5,378
5,803

5,417
5,887
3,048
2,001
2,061

1,729
1,942
482
175
200

3,688
3,945
2,566
1,826
1,861

1,650
1,764
1,513
1,498
1,758

2,048
2,211
2,017
1,879
1,984

1945
1946—
1947
1948—
1949 3

6,637
10,191
13, 673
16,319
18, 700

2,364
4,000
6,434
8,600
10,900

227
544
1,151
1,961
3,200

2,137
3,456
5,283
6,639
7,700

1,981
3,054
3,612
3,854
3,800

2,292
3,137
3,627
3,865
4,000

1948—First half.—
Second half..

14,669
16,319

7,533

1,602
1,961

5,931
6,639

3,352
3,854

3,784
3,865

1949—First half
Second half3

16,124
18,700

9,123
10,900

2,499
3,200

6,624
7,700

3,274
3,800

3,727
4,000

1948—January
February—
March
April
May
June...
July
August
September—.
October
November—
December

13,374
13,302
13,805
14,059
14,311
14,669
14, 723
14,916
15,231
15,518
15, 739
16,319

6,548
6,821
7,094
7,318
7,533
7,738
7,972
8,190
8,233
8,322
8,600

1,202
1,254
1,367
1,468
1,536
1,602
1,689
1,781
1,858
1,889
1,922
1,961

5,266
5,294
5,454
5,626
5,782
5,931
6,049
6,191
6,332
6,344
6,400
6,639

3,240
3,061
3,275
3,236
3,245
3,352
3,185
3,130
3,227
3,457
3,557
3,854

3,666
3,693
3,709
3,729
3,748
3,784
3,800
3,814
3,814
3,828
3,860
3,865

1949—January
February
March
April
May...
June
July
August
September...
October 4 . 3 November 3_.
December ..

15,748
15,325
15,335
15,595
15,843
16,124
16,198
16,453
16,801
17, 220
17,823
18,700

8,424
8,339
8,429
8,630
8,888
9,123
9,335
9,622
9,897
10,162
10, 450
10,900

1,965
1,996
2,105
2,241
2,386
2,499
2,610
2,761
2,876
2,986
3,095
3,200

6,459
6,343
6,324
6,389
6,502
6,624
6,725
6,861
7,021
7,176
7,355
7,700

3,457
3,169
3,121
3,232
3,235
3,274
3,123
3,064
3,123
3,197
3,454
3,800

3,867
3,817
3,785
3,733
3,720
3,727
3,740
3,767
3,781
3,861
3,919
4,000

1935
1936....
1937
1938
1939

_._-..

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

\m

1 Includes other sale credit and repair and modernization loans insured b y Federal Housing Administration.
2
Includes single-payment loans of commercial banks, and pawnbrokers and service credit.
3 Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
« Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




172

TABLE G—25.—Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks,
1929-49
[Billions of dollarsj
Weekly reporting
member banks

All commercial banks

Investments
End of period i

1929—June2

Total
loans
and
investments

Loans

Total

U. S. Government
obligations

Other
securities

Total
loans

Commercial, industrial, and
agricultural loans

49.4

35.7

13.7

4.9

8.7

16.7

1930—June 2
1931—June 2
2
1932—June2
1933—June
1934—Junes

44.9
36.1
30.4
32.7

34.5
29.2
21.8
16.3
15.7

14.4
15.7
14.3
14.0
17.0

5.0
6.0
6.2
7.5
10.3

9.4
9.7
8.1
6.5
6.7

16.9
14.5
11.3
8.9
8.5

1935—June2
1936
1937
1938
1939

34.6
39.5
38.3
38.7
40.7

14.9
16.4
17.1
16.4
17.2

19.7
23.1
21.2
22.3
23.4

12.7
15.3
14.2
15.1
16.3

7.0
7.8
7.1
7.2
7.1

43.9
50.7
67.4
85.1
105.5

18.8
21.7
19.2
19.1
21.6

25.1
29.0
48.2
66.0

17.8
21.8
41.4
59.8
77.6

7.4
7.2
6.8
6.1
6.3

8.0
9.2
9.4
8.4
8.8
9.4
11.4
10.3
10.8
13.0

124.0
114.0
116.3
114.3
119.9

26.1
31.1
38.1
42.5
43.5

97.9
82.9
78.2
71.8
76.4

90.6
74.8
69.2
62.6
66.2

7.3
8.1
9.0
9.2
10.2

15.8
16.7
23.3
25.6
24.9

•13.7

1948—January
February...
March
April
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November..
December. _.

116.6
115.5
113.6
114.3
114.6
113.9
114.8
115.1
113.6
114.1
114.2
114.3

38.2
38.7
38.9
38.8
39.5
39.9
40.1
40.6
41.7
41.6
42.3
42.5

78.4
76.9
74.7
75.5
75.0
74.0
74.6
74.5
71.9
72.5
71.9
71.8

69.4
67.9
65.5
66.3
65.9
64.8
65.3
65.1
62.5
63.3
62.8
62.6

9.0
9.0
9.3
9.2
9.2
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.4
9.2
9.1
9.2

23.4
23.6
23.5
23.2
23.6
23.7
23.9
24.1
24.9
24.6
25.2
25.6

14.7
14.6
14.4
14.2
14.2
6 14.3
14.5
14.8
15.2
15.4
15.5
15.6

1949—January
February...
March
_
April.
May
June
July.
August
September..
October
November 4«.
December _

114.5
113.4
112.5
112.5
113.4
113.8
114.8
117.9
118.8
119.8
120.2
121.0

42.4
42.0
42.4
41.3
40.9
41.0
40.5
41.2
41.8
41.9
42.9
43.2

72.0
71.4
70.1
71.2
72.5
72.7
74.3
76.7
77.0
77.9
77.3
77.8

63.0
62.2
60.9
62.0
63.2
63.2
64.4
66.7
66.8
67.7
67.1
67.5

9.1
9.1
9.2
9.2
9.3
9.5
9.8
10.0
10.2
10.2
10.2
10.3

25.3
24.9
25.0
24.0
23.7
23.9
23.0
23.5
24.0
23.9
24.6
24.8

15.4
15.2
14.9
14.2
13.6
13.2
12.9
13.0
13.4
13.7
13.8
13.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

_..

1945
1946
1947
1948.
1949*

_

4.6
3.8
4.4
5.0
6.7
6.1
6.4
6.5
7.3
10.3
14.6
15.6

1
Reporting date nearest end of period.
2 June data are used because complete end-of-year data prior to 1936 are not available for U. S. Government
obligations.
3
Not available prior to May 12,1937, when the loan classification was revised.
* Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
«Beginning June, reported gross, i. e., before deduction of valuation reserves, instead of net as previously
reported.
6
Estimates based on incomplete data.

NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




TABLE G-26.—Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks, 1929-49
[Billions of dollars]
Total
deposits
adjusted and
currency
outside
banks

End of period *

Demand
deposits
adjusted 2

Time
deposits»

Currency
outside
banks

1929

54.6

22.8

28.2

3.6

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

53.2
47.9
44.9
41.5
46.3

21.0
17.4
15.7
15.0
18.5

28.7
26.0
24.5
21.7
23.2

36
4.5
4.7
4.8
4.7

51.3
56.4
55.8
58.1
63.3

22.1
25.6
24.0
26.0
29.8

24.2
25.4
26.2
26.3
27.1

4.9
5.5
56
5.8
6.4

70.0
76.3
91.3
112.4
130.2

34.9
39.0
48.9
60.8
66.9

27.7
27.7
28.4
32.7
39.8

7.3
9.6
13.9
18.8
23.5

150.8
164.0
170.0
169.1
169.1

75.9
83.3
87.1
85.5
85.6

48.5
54 0
56.4
57.5
58.4

26.5
26 7
26.5
26.1
25.1

168.9
167.1
164.0
165.0
165.1
165.7
166.0
166.7
166.9
168.1
168.1
169.1

86.6
84.6
81.5
82.7
82.8
82.7
83.3
83.8
83.9
85.1
85.2
85.5

56.5
56.8
56.9
56.9
56.9
57.4
57.3
57.3
57.3
57 3
57.0
57.5

25.8
25.7
25.6
25.4
25.4
25 6
25.5
25.6
25.7
25 7
25.9
26.1

168.2
166.3
164.2
165.5
165.7
165.6
166.3
166.9
166.6
168.0
168.6
170.1

85.4
83.4
81.1
82.4
82.6
82.2
83.1
83.4
83.3
84.6
85.5
86.7

57.6
57.8
58.0
58.1
58.2
58.4
58.4
58.3
58.4
58 4
58.0
58.2

25.2
25.1
25.1
24.9
25.0
25.0
24.9
25.1
24.9
24 9
25.1
25.2

_

-

.
_

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

—
-

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949 4

-

_

...

—_

- -

-

__

1948—January _ . _
February March
April
May
June . _ . .
July
August
September
October
November
December
1949—January
February. _
March
April
May
June
July __
August
September
October
November 8
December *__

.

. __

_
__

._

1
Reporting date nearest end of period.
* Includes demand deposits, other than interbank and U. S. Government, less cash items in process of
collection.
8
Includes deposits in commercial banks, mutual savings banks, and Postal Savings System.
* Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




174

TABLE C-27.—Estimated ownership of Federal securities, 1939-49
[Billions of dollars—par values *]
Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding

Held by public
Held by
U.S.
Nonbank
Governprivate
Total 2
ment
State
Total and local Com- Federal corpoIndiagencies
4
and trust held by govern- mercial Reserve rations viduals*
and
funds public ments 3 banks banks associa8

E n d of period

tions

1939

47.6

6.5

41.1

0.4

15.9

2.5

12.0

10.4

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

50.9
64 3
112.5
170 1
232.1

7.6

.5

17.3
21.4
41.1
59 9
77.7

2.2

12.2
16 9
21.7

43.3
54 7
100.2
153 2
210.5

11.5
18.8

2.3
6.2

12.5
16.3
27.4
41.2
56.0

10.9
14.1
24.5
38.4
53.5

1945
1946
1947. ._1948
1949*

278.7
259.5
257.0
252 9
257.0

27.0
30.9
34.4
37 3
39.5

251.6
228.6
222.6
215 6
217.5

6.5

90.8
74.5
68.7
62.5
67.0

24.3
23.3
22.6
23.3
18.5

65.3
59.5
57.5
54.4
54.5

64.8
64.9
66.6
67.6
69.5

256.7
254.7
253.1
252.3
252.3
252.4
253.4
253.1
252.7
252.5
252.6
252.9

34.6
34.9
35.0
34,8
34.9
35.7
36.4
36.5
36.8
36.8
37.0
37.3

222.1
219.8
218.1
217.5
217.4
216.7
217.0
216.6
215.9
215.7
215.6
215.6

7.3
7.4
7.8
7.8
7.7
78
7.9
80

69.0
67.4
65.1
66.1
65.6
64.6
65.1
64.8
62.4
63.0
62.4
62.5

21.9
21.0
20.9
20.3
20.7
21.4
21.3
21.6
23.4
23.0
23.2
23.3

57.2
57.2
57.6
56.4
56.6
55.9
55.4
55.0
54.8
54.3
54.5
54.4

66.6
66.7
66.8
66.8
66.9
67.0
67.3
67.4
67.4
67.5
67.5
67.6

252.7
252.7
251.7
251.6
251.9
252.8
253.9
255.9
256.7
256.8
257.0
257.2

37.4
37.5
37.7
37 5
37.5
38 3
38.5
38.8
39.4
39.3
39.3
39.4

215.3
215.2
214.0
214.0
214.4
214.5
215.4
217.1
217.3
217.5
217.7
217.8

7.8

62.7
62.2
60.5
61.8
62.7
63.0
64.7
66.5
66.5
67.4
66.9
67.0

22.1
22.3
21.7
21.1
19.7
19.3
18.5
17.5
18.0
17.3
17.7
18.9

54.8
54.7
55.3
54.7
55.2
55.2
55.1
55.7
55.4
55.4
55.6
54.4

67.9
68.3
68.6
68.5
68.8
68.9
69.1
69.2
69.2
69.3
69.4
69.5

1948—January __
February
March
April -_May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
1949—January
February
March... _
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November'
December *

_.

_

9.5

1
2

,7
1.0

21
4.3

6.3
7.3
7 9
8.0

7.8
7.8
7.9

7.9
7.9

7.9
7.9
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.1
8.1
8.1
8.1
8.0

United States savings bonds, series A-D, E, and F, are included at current redemption values.
Securities issued or guaranteed by the U. S. Government, excluding guaranteed securities held by the
Treasury.
3
Includes trust, sinking, and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies, and
Territories and insular possessions.
4
Includes commercial banks, trust companies, and stock savings banks in the United States and in
Territories and insular possessions. Figures exclude securities held in trust departments.
« Includes insurance companies, mutual savings banks, savings and loan associations, dealers and brokers
and foreign accounts in this country. Beginning with December 1946, the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary
Fund in special noninterest bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June 30,1947,
includes holdings of Federal land banks.
6
Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts.
' Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Treasury Department (except as noted).




175

TABLE C-28.—Bond yields and interest rates, selected years, 1929-49
[Percent per annum]

U. S. Government security
yields

Period

9-12
Long-term bonds
month
certifiAaa
cates of
bonds
indebted- Partially 15 years
taxand over,
ness
exempt 2 taxable

1929 average
1933 average
1935 average
1937 average
1939 average

Baa
bonds

(0
(l)
0)
0)
0)

3.60
3.31
2.79
2.74
2.41

4.73
4.49
3.60
3.26
3.01

5.90
7.76
5. 75
5.03
4.96

(0

1941 average
1943 average
1945 average
1946 average
1947 average
1948 average...
1949 average 8

High grade corporate bond
yields
(Moody's)

2.05
1.W8

2.47

2.77
2.73

4.33
3.91

2.37
2.19
2.25
2.44
2.31

2.62
2.53
2.61
2.82
2.67

3.29
3.05
3.24
3.47
3.42

0.75

_

.81
.82
.88
1.14
1.14

1.66

C5)
(5)

Bank
Bankers
rates on acceptances 90
shortterm
daysNew
business
loans
York

(3)
(3)
(3)
00

Federal
Eeserve
Bank
discount
rateNew
York

2.1

5.03
.63
.13
.43
.44

5.16
2.56
1.50
1.29
1.00

2.0
2.6

.44
.44

1.00
4 1.00

2.2
2.1
2.1
2.5
(3)

.44
.61
.87
1.11
1.13

<1.00
4 1.00
1.00
1.34
1.50

1948—First quarter
Second quarter. _
Third quarter. __
Fourth quarter..

1.09
1.09
1.14
1.22

2.45
2.42
2.45
2.44

2.85
2.77
2.83
2.82

3.53
3.40
3.42
3.52

2.4
2.47
2.60
2.64

1.06
1.06
1.13
1.19

1.22
1.25
1.38
1.50

1949—First quarter
Second quarter. _
Third quarter. _.
Fourth quarter«_

1.22
1.20
1.06
1.10

2.40
2.38
2.24
2.20

2.71
2.70
2.63
2.60

3.46
3.45
3.41
3.35

2.70
2.74
2.63
(3)

1.19
1.19
1.06
1.06

1.50
1.50
1.50
1.50

1 Tax exempt prior to March 1, 1941; taxable thereafter.
2
Average of yields on all outstanding partially tax-exempt Government bonds due or callable after 12
years, in 1929 and 1933; and after 15 years, from 1935,
3 Not available.
« From October 30, 1942 to April 24, 1946, a preferential rate of 0.50 percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in 1 year or less.
« No partially tax-exempt bonds due or callable in 15 years and over.
6
Estimates based on incomplete data; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Sources: Treasury Department, Moody's Investors Service, and Board of Governors of the Federal Eeserve System (except as noted).




176

TABLE C-29.—Profits before and after tax, all private corporations, 1929-49
[Billions of dollars]
Corporate profits after tax

Corporate
profits
before
tax

Corporate
tax
liability i

1929..

9.8

1.4

8.4

5.8

2.6

1930-.
1931_.
1932..
1933-.
1934..

3.3
-.8

2.5

-3.0
.2
1.7

.8
.5
.4
.5
.7

—1.3
-3.4
-.4
1.0

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

-3.0
-5.4
-6.0
-2.4
-1.6

1935-.
1936-.
193719381939-.

3.2
5.7
6.2
3.3
6.5

1.0
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.5

2.3
4.3
4.7
2.3
5.0

2.9
4.6
4.7
3.2
3.8

19401941_.
1942..
1943_.
1944-.

17.2
21.1
25.1
24.3

2.9
7.8

11.7
14.4
13.5

6.4
9.4
9.4

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

2.4
4.9
5.1
6.2
6.1

1945-.
]946_
19471948-.
1949 3.

19.7
23.6
31.6
34.8
27.6

12.5
13.6
10.9

4.7
5.8
7.0
7.9
8.4

3.8
8.1
12.1
13.2
8.3

Period

9.3

Total

10.6
10.8

11.2

8.5

9.6

13.9
19.1
21.2
16.7

Dividend
payments

Undistributed
profits

-.3

g
ll 2

Annual rates, seasonally adjusted
1948—First half._
Second half

34.0
35.6

13.2
14.0

20.8
21.6

7.6
8.1

13.1
13.4

1949-First half
Second half 3__.

27.9
27.2

11.0
10.7

16.8
16.6

8.4
8.4

8.4
8.2

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter.

33.0
35.0
36.6
34.5

12.8
13.7
14.4
13.6

20.2
21.3
22.2
20.9

7.6
7.7
7.9
8.3

12.6
13.6
14.3
12.6

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter 3.
Fourth quarter

29.4
26.4
28.0
26.5

11.5
10.6
11.0
10.4

17.9
15.8
17.0
16.1

8.4
8.4
8.4
8.5

9.5
7.4
8.6
7.6

1
Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes.
2 Minus $8,000,000.
3 Estimates based on incomplete data; third and fourth quarters by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table C-4 for
profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




177

TABLE C—30.—Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations^ 1939—49
[Millions of dollars]
Durable goods industries
(106 corporations) l
Period

Nondurable goods industries
(94 corporations) *
Profits

Profits
Sales

Sales
Before taxes After taxes

Before taxes After taxes
6,748

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

-

1945
1946
1947
1948

597

3,843

476

400

1,226
2,175
2,326
2,389
2,192

830
982
782
755
726

4,257
5,485
6,408
7,607
8,263

617
980
1,069
1,293
1,339

443
538
438
506
529

18,161
12,623
19.831
23,818

-

734

8,750
12,806
15,362
20,633
22,085

1939

1,288
607
2,312
3,107

574
295
1,355
1,836

8,371
8,940
11,313
13,364

1,133
1,426
1,787
2,208

555
908
1,167
1,474

Totals for period, not adjusted for seasonal variation
1948—First half
Second half

11,154
12,664

1,360
1,746

1949—First half

12,545

1,660

5,440
5,714
5,991
6,673

672
688
788
958

6,153
6,392
6,323

840
820
862

498
491
504

1948—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter.

_..
_
_.
-

803
1,034

6,508
6,856

1,099
1,108

989

6,294

901

584

395
408
470
564

3,219
3,289
3,324
3,532

546
553
543
565

356
362
362
394

3,245
3,049
3,179

501
400
451

325
259
295

718
756

1
See Federal Eeserve Bulletin, June 1949 and subsequent issues, for similar data for the following industry
groups: primary metals and products, machinery, automobiles and equipment, foods and kindred products,
chemicals and allied products, and petroleum refining.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published
reports of various industrial corporations.




178

TABLE C—31.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders9 equity, private
manufacturing corporations, by industry groups, 1948-49
Percentage ratio of profits (annual rate) to stockholders'
equity
Industry groups

1948

Total
Third
for year quarter

1949

Fourth
quarter

First
quarter

Second
quarter

Third
quarter

Before Federal taxes
25.6

25.2

25.2

20.4

16.8

18.8

Food
Tobacco manufactures
Textile mill products
Apparel and finished textiles
Lumber and wood products

All private manufacturing corporations...

21.3
21.9
30.9
20.5
30.4

24.0
28.0
26.8
23.6
30.8

20.8
25.6
23.6
9.2
19.2

16.8
18.4
16.8
17.6
14.8

20.0
20.8
8.4
10.0
14.4

23.2
22.0
10.8
16.0
12.8

Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing (except newspapers) - _.
Chemicals and allied products
Products of petroleum and coal

26.8
26.7
24.0
25.0
26.7

23.2
24.8
26.0
25.2
24.0

22.4
22.8
18.0
24.4
22.4

16.0
19.6
23.2
22.8
18.0

12.4
14.0
19.6
16.8
14.8

13.2
14.8
21.2
22.4
14.0

Rubber products
Leather and leather products
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary nonferrous metal industries
Primary iron and steel industries

21.5
17.8
24.3
22.3
23.8

20.8
20.0
27.6
21.2
24.0

21.6
14.0
25.2
24.8
30.0

13.6
11.6
18.8
21.6
25.6

11.6
7.6
21.2
8.0
17.6

10.8
12.8
24.4
9.2
14.4

Fabricated metal products
_.
Machinery (except electrical and transportation).
Electrical machinery
_.
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)
Motor vehicles and parts

27.5
27.3
27.6

28.0
24.8
22.8

28.0
27.6
32.0

20.0
23.6
22.0

14.0
20.4
16.4

20.4
17.2
17.6

14.2
34.7

11.6
36.4

18.8
42.0

15.2
33.6

11.2
36.0

11.6
46.8

22.6

21.6

26.8

20.8

19.2

19.2

20.7

23.6

19.6

16.0

5.2

13.6

Instruments; photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including ordnance)

After Federal taxes
16.1

16.0

15.6

12.8

10.4

12.0

._.

12.9
13.7
18.8
12.2
19.3

14.8
17.6
16.0
14.4
19.2

12.4
15.6
14.4
5.2
12.4

9.6
11.6
10.0
10.4
8.8

12.4
12.8
4.4
5.2
9.2

14.4
13.6
6.4
9.6
8.0

Furniture and fixtures..
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing (except newspapers). _.
Chemicals and allied products
Products of petroleum and coal
_.

16.0
16.4
14.6
15.8
19.8

13.6
15.2
16.8
16.0
18.0

13.2
14.0
10.0
16.0
18.0

9.2
12.0
14.4
14.0
13.2

6.4
8.4
11.6
10.0
11.6

7.2
9.2
13.2
14.0
11.2

Rubber products.
Leather and leather products
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary nonferrous metal industries.
Primary iron and steel industries

12.4
10.4
15.0
14.1
14.7

12.0
11.6
17.2
13.6
14.8

12.8
7.6
15.2
15.2
18.4

8.0
6.4
11.2
13.6
14.8

7.2
3.6
13.2
4.0
10.0

6.8
7.2
15.2
5.6
8.4

17.0
16.6
16.1

17.2
14.8
14.0

17.2
16.8
18.0

12.0
14.0
12.4

7.6
12.4
10.0

12.0
10.4
10.8

8.2
19.8

6.8
21.2

10.8
22.8

9.6
19.6

6.8
20.8

7.2
27.2

14.0

13.2

16.8

12.4

11.6

11.2

12.2

14.8

11.2

10.0

2.0

7.6

All private manufacturing corporations-..
Food-.
Tobacco manufactures
Textile mill products
Apparel and finished textiles
Lumber and wood products

_

Fabricated metal products
Machinery (except electrical and transportation).
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)
_
_
Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks
__.
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including ordnance)

Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




179

TABLE C—32.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales, private manufacturing corporations, by industry groups, 1948—49
Profits in cents per dollar of sales
1949

1948

Industry groups
Total for
year

Third
quarter

Fourth
quarter

First
quarter

Second
quarter

Third
quarter

Before Federal taxes
All private manufacturing corporations
Food-.
Tobacco manufactures
Textile mill products
Apparel and finished textiles
Lumber and wood products

11.1
5.6
8.3
13.5
5.1
15.4

11.0
6.1
9.7
12.8
5.8
15.1

10.9
5.5
10.1
11.3
2.3
11.0

9.9

8.5

9.5

4.6
7.7
8.9
4.8
10.4

5.6
8.2
4.9
3.1
9.2

6.5
8.5
5.9
4.3
8.1

Furniture and fixtures..
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing (except newspapers)
Chemicals and allied products
Products of petroleum and coal

9.2
13.8

8.3
12.8

7.5
12.0

6.5
11.5

5.2
9.1

5.7
9.5

8.5
13.9
17.4

9.4
14.5
16.4

6.2
13.3
15.2

9.1
13.2
13.8

7.7
10.8
11.8

14.5
11.6

Rubber products
Leather and leather products
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary nonferrous metal industries
Primary iron and steel industries

8.2
5.6
13.9
14.2
12.2

7.8
6.2
15.5
12.6
12.5

8.4
4.5
14.1
16.2
14.2

6.2
4.1
12.3
15.2
13.4

5.0
2.9
14.0
7.5
10.8

4.5
4.3
15.7
8.8
9.9

Fabricated metal products
Machinery (except electrical and transportation)
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)
Motor vehicles and parts.-

11.5

11.4

11.2

9.8

7.1

9.5

12.0
10.1

11.5
9.0

12.0
10.7

11.8
9.0

10.7
7.1

10.2
7.9

7.0
12.0

5.3
12.5

8.6
13.7

7.2
12.0

5.5
12.1

6.1
15.4

12.5

12.3

13.0

12.0

11.3

11.5

9.5

10.8

8.7

8.4

2.7

6.9

Instruments; photographic and optical
goods; watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including
ordnance)

After Federal taxes
All private manufacturing corporations

7.0

6.9

6.8

6.1

5.2

6.0

Food
Tobacco manufactures
Textile mill products
Apparel and finished textilesLumber and wood products..

3.3
5.1
8.2
3.0
9.8

3.7
6.1
7.7
3.6
9.5

3.3
6.1
6.9
1.3
7.2

2.7
4.8
5.3
2.9
6.4

3.4
5.0
2.7
1.6
5.8

4.0
5.3
3.5
2.5
5.2

Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing (except newspapers)
Chemicals and allied products
Products of petroleum and coal__

5.5
8.4

4.8
7.8
6.1
9.2
12.2

3.7
7.0
5.7
8.1
10.3

2.7
5.5

5.2
8.8
12.9

4.4
7.4
3.4
8.7
12.2

4.6
6.5
9.2

3.1
5.7
5.4
9.1
9.1

4.7
3.3
8.6
9.0
7.5

4.5
3.7
9.6
8.1
7.7

4.9
2.5
8.7
10.0
8.7

3.7
2.2
7.2
9.5
7.9

3.1
1.4
8.6
3.9
6.2

2.9
2.5
9.7
5.6
5.7

7.1

7.0

7.0

5.8

3.8

5.7

7.3
5.9

6.9
5.5

7.2
6.0

7.1
5.1

6.4
4.5

6.2
4.8

4.0
6.9

3.0
7.3

4.9
7.4

4.5
7.1

3.3
7.1

3.7
9.0

7.8

7.6

8.2

7.2

6.9

6.7

5.6

6.8

5.0

5.2

1.1

3.9

Rubber products
Leather and leather products
Stone, clay, and glass products.
Primary nonferrous metal industries
Primary iron and steel industries

__

Fabricated metal products
Machinery (except electrical and transportation)
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)
Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical
goods; watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including
ordnance)

Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




180

TABLE C-33.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders9 equity and to sales, all
private manufacturing corporations, by size classes, 1948—49
1949

1948
Assets class (thousands of dollars)

Total for
year

Third
quarter

Fourth
quarter

First
quarter

Second
quarter

Third
quarter

Ratio of profits before Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders'
equity
25.6

_.

25.2

15.5
23.8
24.8
26.4
26.1

All sizes
1 to 249
250 to 999
1,000 to 4,999
5,000 to 99,999
100,000 and over

23.2
23.2
25.2
25.6
26.4

25.2 1
2.8

16.4
19.6
26.0
27.6

20.4

16.8

18.8

14.4
17.2
17.2
20.0
22.4

10.4
12.8
15.2
16.0
18.8

14.0
16.0
16.0
17.2
30.8

Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales
11.1

All sizes
1 to 249
250 to 999
1,000 to 4,999 _
5,000 to 99,999
100,000 and over.

..

11.0

10.9

9.9

8.5

9.5

4.0
7.4

5.8
7.3

0.7
5.2

4.0
6.2

7.1
11.1
14.1

7.0
9.7
12.2

2.8
4.8

6.5

o o

3.8
6.0
6.9
8.9

10.5

11.9

9.0
11.3
13.2

_.

9.2
11.1
12.8

Ratio of profits after Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders'
equity
16.1

All sizes _ _ - .
Ito249.._
250 t o 999
1,000 to 4,999
5,000 to 99,999

___

..

_.

100,000 and over

16.0

15.6

12.8

10.4

12.0

8.8
14.2
14.8
16.1
16.9

15.2
14.0
15.2
15.6
17.2

-0.8
9.2
11.6
16.0
18.0

8.4
9.6
10.0
12.0
14.4

4.8
6.8
8.8
9.6
12.0

8.4
9.2

9.2
10.4
13.6

Profits afte r Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales
All sizes
1 to 249
250 to 999
1,000 to 4,999
5,000 to 99,999
100,000 and over

.

7.0

._
_ _

6.9

6.8

6.1

5.2

6.0

2.3

3.8

-0.2
3.0
4.2
6.8
9.2

2.4

1.3

2.3
3.4
4.0

4.4
5.4
7.0
8.6

4.4
5.6
6.8
8.3

3.5
4.0
5.9
7.8

Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




181

2.5
3.7
5.0
6.7

5.5
7.6

TABLE C-34.—Sources and uses oj corporate fundst 1 946-49l
IBillions of dollars]
1946

Source or use of funds
Sources:
Internal:
Retained profits and depletion allowances __ _
Depreciation allowances

__ ... __

Total internal sources...

_.

External:
Change in trade debtChange in Federal income tax liability.
Other current liabilities Change in bank loans. __
Change in mortgages
Net new issues
Bonds. __
__
Stocks,

_
__ _

_._

.

.

1947

1948

1949»

7.7
4.2

11.4
4.9

12.5
5.5

7.5
6.2

11.9

16.3

18.0

13.7

4.0

2.6
2.7
.6
2.6
.8
4.4
3.1
1.3

.9
.9

-.2
-2.4

.

1*8
3.3
.6
2.3
1.0
1.3

_. . . __
_

(3)

1.2
.7
6.0
4.8
1.2

(3)

-1.6
.5
5.1
3.7
1.4

10.4

13.7

9.7

1.4

Total sources

22.3

30.0

27.7

15.1

Uses:
Plant and equipment outlays .
Inventories (change in book value)
Change in customer receivables
Cash and deposits .
United States Government securities
Other current assets

11.6
11.2
4.8
1.1
-5.8
-.7

15.0
8.9
5.7
1.3
-1.5
-.1

17.3
6.3
2.3
—.1
.1

16.0
—3.7
.7
1.0
1.5
—.4

22.2

29.3

25.9

15.1

1

—.7

-1.8

Total external sources

Total uses.._

_

_

_
._

Discrepancy (uses less sources)

-

1

Excludes banks and insurance companies.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data.
3 Less than $50,000,000.
Sources: Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other
financial data.




182

TABLE G-35.—The international transactions of the United States, 7946-49
[Millions of dollars]
1949
1946

1947

1948

Exports of goods and services:
Recorded goods *
Other goods 8
-

10,186
1,688

15,230
826

12,615
830

11,925
579

3,286
167

3,356
138

2,683
134

2,600
140

Total goods
Services
Income on investments

11,874
2,272
820

16,056
2,611
1,074

13,445
2,083
1,263

12,504
2,061
1,261

3,453
550
263

3,494
570
350

2,817
516
298

2,740
425
350

14,966

19,741

16,791

15,826

4,266

4,414

3,631

3,515

4,933
235

5,756
315

7,124
573

6,618
596

1,790
173

1,601
140

1,477
143

1,750
140

5,168
1,783
216

6,071
2,165
227

7,697
2,493
291

7,214
2,584
277

1,963
564
81

1,741
624
57

1,620
786
64

1,890
610
75

_

7,167

8,463

10,481

10,075

2,608

2,422

2,470

2,575

Surplus of exports of goods and
services:
Recorded goods*
Other goods*
-

5,253
1,453

9,474
511

5,491
257

5,307
-17

1,496
-6

1,755
-2

1,206
-9

850

6,706
489
604

9,985
446
847

5,748
-410
972

5,290
-523
984

1,490
-14
182

1,753
-54
293

1,197
-270
234

850
-185
275

7,799

11,278

6,310

5,751

1,658

1,992

1,161

940

1,968

4,513

857

-42

-28

330

106

-450

464
297

196
176

83
47

32
8

18
g

3
11

30
20

2,279
2,774

1,812
3,901

3,761
897

5,243
618

1,273
292

1,490
110

1,215
161

1,265
55

598
335

568
727

648
1,017

537
374

147
115

141
53

124
91

125
115

7,954

12,282

7,552

6,860

1,839

2,150

1,711

1,160

-155 -1,004 -1,242 -1,109

-181

-158

-550

-220

Type of transaction

Total exports
Imports of goods and services:
Recorded goods
Other goods »

_.

Total goods
Services
Income on investments
Total imports

_

Total goods
Services
Income on investments
Total surplus of exports
Means of financing surplus of exports
of goods and services:4
Liquidation of gold and dollar
assets by foreign countries
Dollar disbursements by:
International M o n e t a r y
Fund
International Bank
United 8
States
Government
sources:
Grants
Long- and short-term loans.United States private sources:
Remittances
Long- and short-term capital.
Total means of financing.. Errors and omissions

First Second Third Fourth
Total» quarter quarter quarter quarter^

1 Estimates based on incomplete data.
2
Figures for recorded exports of goods in 1946 and 1947 have been adjusted to include goods shipped to
United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas in order to make them
comparable with figures for 1948 and 1949. Such shipments are included in exports as recorded by the
Bureau of the Census in 1948 and 1949 but were not so included in prior years.
* Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United
States customs area and other adjustments.
* All figures for means of financing are on a net basis.
« For detail see table C-37.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Departments of Commerce.




183

TABLE C-36.—United States exports and imports of goods and services, by area, 1937 and
7946-49
[Billions of dollars]
Annual rates
Area

1937

1946

1948

1947

1949

First Second Third Fourth First Second
quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter
Export surplus:
E R P countries.
E R P dependencies, _
Europe, except E R P
countries.
Canada and Newfoundland._
Latin-American Republics _
Other *
Total»
Exports of goods and services:
E R P countries
E R P dependencies
Europe, except E R P
countries
Canada and Newfoundland
Latin-American RepublicsOther i
Total 2

0.28
-.31

4.18
.30

5.36
.33

4.68

3.40
.20

3.07
.05

-.03

.85

.34

.19

-.03

-.03

.05

07

.68

1.16

.56

.70

-.08

.39

.57

1.11

.63
1.16

2.00
2.09

.96
1.19

1.22
1.30

.78
1.03

1.23
1.68

.75
1.63

.78
2.05

.28

7.80

11.28

7.58

6.79

4.82

6.08

6.63

7.96

1.60
.18

5.62
.68

7.25
.92

6.86
.82

5.76
.85

5.61
.74

5.42
.78

6.19
.92

6.18
.93

.13

1 08

.56

.44

.20

22

22

22

23

1.94

2.66

2.13

2.53

2.42

2.63

2.35

3.04

2.88
2.77

4.74
3.61

4.32
3.09

4.35
3.24

3.64
3.15

4.24
3.52

3.88
3.50

3.62
3.65

14.97

19.74

17.66

16.93

15.78

16.81

17.06

17.65

1.44
.38

1.89
.59

2.18

2.36
.65

2.54
.69

2.66
.76

2.66
.82

2.49
.67

.34

2.64

4.55

Imports of goods and services:
E R P countries
1.33
E R P dependencies
.50
Europe, except E R P
countries.
.15
Canada and Newfoundland
Latin-American RepubI 2.29
lics
Other i
Total 2

4.27

.23

.22

1.26

1.50

2.25
1.61

2.74
1.52

7.17

8.46

.82

3.53
.10

3.69
.26

.23

.25

.22

.17

.16

1.57
3.36
1.90

1.83

2.50

2.24

1.78

1.93

3.13
1.94

2.86
2.12

3.01
1.84

2.84
1.60

10.08

10.14

10.96

10.73

3.13
1.87
10.43

.25

1 Includes international institutions.
2 Includes income on investments.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.




2.76
.02

9.69

TABLE C—37.—United States Government aid to foreign countries, 1946—49
[Millions of dollars]
1949
1947

1946

1948
Total i

UNRRA and post-UNRRA.
Civilian supplies distributed
by the armed forces
Transfers to3Philippines
Chinese aid
Greek-Turkish aid
International Refugee Organizations
Interim aid
EuropeanRecovery Program.
Other

Total unilateral payments.
Less unilateral receipts
Equals net unilateral payments
B. Long-term loans and investments (net):
Lend-lease credits
Surplus property including
ship sales
Export-Import Bank loans...
United Kingdom loan.
._
Subscription t o International Bank
International Monetary
Fund
European Recovery Program.
Other
Total long-term loans and
investments
Less repayments
Equals net long-term loans
and investments, including
International Bank and
International Monetary
Fund
Less subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund..
Equals net long-term loans
and investments, excluding
International Bank and
International Monetary
Fund
C. Outflow of short-term capital
(net)
Total net unilateral payments,
loans, and investments, excluding International Bank and
International Monetary Fund
(A-fB-f-C)

209
1,524

761

85

539
60
15

980
96

1,280
130
168
349

74
17
12

18

18

17

905
47

1,122
50

940
29

244
44
55
43

330
62
13
43

170

332

89
546
1,388
115

2,517
238

2,272
460

4,150
389

5,692
449

1,372
99

1,576
86

1,434
219

1,310
45

2,279

1,812

3, 761

5,243

1,273

1,490

1,215

1,265

50

42

35

280
29

98
28

16
22

600

2
274
796
2,850

210
454
300

8
8

(2)

2

841
945
600

8

317

318

5

2,745

12

80

486
22

3,320
90

7,065
174

1,474
332

695
203

359
63

168
56

73
44

95
40

3,230

6,891

1,142

492

296

112

29

55

322

3,063

2,908

3,828

1,142

492

296

112

29

55

-134

73

-245

126

-4

-2

132

5,053

5,713

4,658

5,861

1,565

1,600

1,376

* Estimates based on incomplete data.
* Not available.
Includes Korean aid in 1949.
Source: Department of Commerce.

3




1

243
53
53
53

33

A. Unilateral payments (net):
Lend-lease

First Second Third Fourth
quarter quarter quarter quarter^

3333

Type of aid

185

1,320

TABLE G-38.—Export price indexes of selected countries converted to dollars, 1937-40 and 7946-49
[1937 -100]
Period
1937
1938
1939..
1940

-

United
States i

United
Kingdom

France *

Sweden

Belgium *

100
99
97
106

100
101
91
99

100
87
80
89

100
86
80
100

100
100
60

1946
1947...
1948

152
178
189

162
186
203

193
212
177

153
201
226

247
259
255

1949—January...
FebruaryMarch
April
May
June
July
August
September.
October...

189
186
184
185
181
182
177
177
178
175

209
207
207
207
209
209
209
211
»181
145

221
215
215
211
210
215
209
214
'192

217
214
209
200
196
192
188
187
3 160
139

260
259
282
276
271
263
266
262

* Unit value offinishedmanufactures other than foodstuffs.
2 Unit value of exports.
»National indexes converted to dollar equivalents on basis of average of old and new exchange rates.
Source: Based on data obtained from Department of Commerce and International Monetary Fund.




186

TABLE C-39.—United States merchandise exports, including reexports, by areas, 1936—38 quarterly
average and 7947-49
Total
Other
exports
Westinclud- Canada ern
ing reHemiexports
sphere

Period

ERP
countries i

Other
Europe Asia i

Australia
Africa
and
Oceania

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
742
3,835
3,163
2,990

113
519
479

138
1,027
848

282
1,324
1,046

31
118
49

122
562
507

23
80
38

32
205

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quart er.
Fourth quarter.

3,315
3,237
2,937
3,162

425
493
485
511

913
902
738
840

1,140
1,059
966
1,018

84
33
38
40

513
508
486
520

42
34
30
47

197
207
194
186

1949— First quarter...
Second quarter
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

3,324
3,358
2,683
2,600

464
566
472

843
742
671

1,159
1,186
840

42
46
35

599
581
474

54
50
47

163
187
143

1936-38

1947.
1948
1949 2

Percentage of total
Quarterly average:
100
100
100

15.2
13.5
15.1

18.6
26.8
26.8

38.0
34.5
33.1

4.2
3.1
1.5

16.4
14.7
16.0

3.1
2.1
1.2

4.3
5.3
6.2

1948—First quarter
Second quarter..
Third quarter...
Fourth quarter..

100
100
100
100

12.8
15.2
16.5
16.2

27.5
27.9
25.1
26.6

34.4
32.7
32.9
32.2

2.5
1.0
1.3
1.3

15.5
15.7
16.5
16.4

1.3
1.1
1.0
1.5

5.9
6.4
6.6
5.9

1949— First quarter...
Second quarter .
Third quarter. _

100
100
100

14.0
16.9
17.6

25.4
22.1
25.0

34.9
35.3
31.3

1.3
1.4
1.3

18.0
17.3
17.7

1.6
1.5
1.8

4.9
5.6
5.3

1936-38.-19471948.

1 Turkey is included with E R P countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the three western zones.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data.
3 Not available.
NOTE.—Data in this table cover all merchandise, including reexports, shipped from the United States
customs area to foreign countries including, in 1947 to 1949, goods destined to United States armed forces
abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.

868148—50-




-13

T A B L E C-40.—United States domestic merchandise exports, by economic classes, 1936—38 quarterly
average and 1947—49

Period

Total
Crude
domestic materials
exports

Crude
foodstuffs

Manufactured
foodstuffs

Semimanufactures

Finished
manufactures

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947..
1948
1949 1

3,791
3,132
2,960

167
400
372
(2)

34
337
316
(2)

42
439
329
(2)

130
446
342
(2)

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

3,283
3,205
2,909
3,133

329
327
373
459

322
245
358
341

341
369
310
296

381
357
314
316

1,910
1,906
1,554
1,722

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

3,288
3,327
2,656
2,575

466
549
330
(2)

396
349
325
(2)

256
270
175
(2)

385
386
310
(2)

1,785
1,773
1,517

Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948

100
100
100

22.8
10.6
11.9

5.7

10.1

17.8
11.8
10.9

49.0
57.2
56.6

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

100
100
100
100

10.0
10.2
12.8
14.7

12.3
10.9

11.6
11.1
10.8
10.1

58.2
59.5
53.4
55.0

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter-

100
100
100

14.2
16.5
12.4

12.0
10.5
12.2

11.7
11.6
11.7

54.3
53.3
57.1

731

4.7
8.9
98
.
76
.

11.6
10.5
10.4
11.5
10.7

94
.

78
.
81
.
66
.

358
2,168
1,773

(2)

(2)

1 Estimates based on incomplete data.
2 Not available.
NOTE.—Data in this table cover all domestic merchandise shipped from the United States customs area
to foreign countries including, in 1947 to 1949, goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.




188

TABLE C-41.—Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports,
by economic classes, 1936—38 quarterly average and 1947-49
[1936-38=100]

Period

Total
domestic
exports

Crude
materials

Crude
foodstuffs

Manufactured
foodstuffs

Semimanufactures

Finished
manufactures

Quantity indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
_
19491...
____

100
275
214
224

100
123
100
126

100
397
362
457

100
478
350
306

100
203
143
158

100
332
257
254

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarterFourth quarter

220
217
198
218

87
86
100
124

323
265
407
429

353
388
319
335

160
149
130
131

275
275
225
252

1949—First q u a r t e r Second quarter.
Third quarter _.

232
242
199

129
155
93

495
438
439

317
366
236

162
167
144

262
266
234

Unit value indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947.—
194819491

100
188
200
188

100
195
223
213

100
248
255
227

100
218
223
181

100
169
184
176

100
182
193

1948—First q u a r t e r Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

204
202
201
196

227
229
222
220

290
269
256
231

230
225
230
209

184
185
186
186

194
194
193
191

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter
Third quarter.-

194
188
183

216
212
212

233
233
216

191
175
176

184
179
165

190
186
181

1

Average of three quarters.

NOTE.—The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes
in average price* has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average
prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics, including change in average
prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for 1947 to 1949 are
based on data which include goods destined to the United States armed forces abroad for distribution to
civilians in occupied areas.
Source: Department of Commerce.




TABLE C-42.—United States general merchandise imports, by areas, 1936-38 quarterly average
and 1947-49

Period

Other
Total
Westgeneral Canada ern
imports
Hemisphere

ERP
coun- Other
tries i Europe

Asia*

Australia
Africa
and
Oceania

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38- —
1947__
1948
1949 2

1,439
1,781
1,655

86
274
388
(3)

145
576
636
(3)

152
174
244
(3)

30
45
49
(3)

183
249
324
(3)

10
39
41
(3)

17
82

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter _.
Fourth quarter.

1,810
1,710
1,729
1,875

328
355
410
461

705
630
586
625

232
232
234
280

53
48
49
43

328
321
301
346

48
34
48
34

116
90
102
85

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter

1,791
1,601
1,477
1,750

366
374
340
(3)

676
589
569
(3)

250
190
175
(3)

34
33
33

328
302
265
(3)

34
39
22
(3)

103
74
73

622

(3)

Percentage of total

Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948__

100
100
100

13.8
19.0
21.8

23.3
40.0
35.7

24.4
12.1
13.7

4.8
3.1
2.8

29.4
17.3
18.2

1.6
2.7
2.3

2.7
5.7
5.5

1948—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..
Fourth quarter.

100
100
100
100

18.1
20.8
23.7
24.6

39.0
36.8
33.9
33.3

12.8
13.6
13.5
14.9

2.9
2.8
2.8
2.3

18.1
18.8
17.4
18.5

2.7
2.0
2.8
1.8

6.4
5.3
5.9
4.5

1949—First quarter...
Second quarter.
Third quarter..

100
100
100

20.4
23.4
23.0

37.7
36.8
38.5

14.0
11.9
11.9

19
.
2.1
2.2

18.3
18.9
17.9

1.9
2.4
15
.

5.8
4.6
4.9

1 Turkey is included with E R P countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany in the postwar
period relate almost wholly to imports from the three western zones.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data.
3
Not available.
NOTE.—Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign
countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising
channels, plus entries into bonded customs warehouses.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce




[QC

T A B L E C - 4 3 . — United States merchandise imports Jor consumption, by economic classes, 1936—38
quarterly average and 7947—49
Total imports for
consumption

Period

ManufacCrude ma- Crude food- tured foodterials
stuffs
stuffs

Semirnanuufactures

Finished

manufactures

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949 i

_

615
1,416
1,773
1,650

190
441
537

85
254
318

95
164
183

126
311
408

120
246
327

1948—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

1,785
1,682
1,754
1,871

577
506
543
520

346
287
271
367

161
180
199
190

396
384
419
434

304
323
322
359

1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter i

1,759
1,590
1,501
1,740

504
451
426

340
304
287

182
198
194

397
333
303

336
304
289

Percentage of total
Quarterly average:
1936-38

100
100
100

30.9
31.1
30.3

13.8
17.9
17.9

15.4
11.6
10.3

20.5
22.0
23.0

19.5
17.4
18.3

1948—First quarter
Second quarter. _
Third quarter.
Fourth quarter

100
100
1.0G
100

32.3
30.1
31.0
27.8

19.4
17.1
15.5
19.6

9.0
10.7
11.3
10.2

22.2
22.8
23.9
23.2

17.0
19.2
18.4
19.2

1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter

100
100
100

28.7
28.4
28.4

19.3
19.1
19.1

10.3
12.5
12.9

22.6
20.9
20.2

19.1
19.1
19.3

1947 .
1948

-

1

Estimates based on incomplete data.
Not available.
NOTE.—Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels, plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption;
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
2

Source: Department of Commerce.




191

TABLE C—44.—Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for con~
sumption, by economic classes, 1936—38 quarterly average and 1947—49
[1936-38= 100]

Total
imports
for consumption

Period

Crude
materials

Crude
foodstuffs

Manufactured
foodstuffs

Semimanu
factures

Finished
manufactures

Quantity indexes
Quarterly average:

100
108
123
116

100
129
139
122

100
96
109
114

100
83
91
99

100
130
149
132

100
84
103
99

1948—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter.

126
117
119
128

154
132
136
132

117
100
91
127

81
89
99
95

153
142
151
152

96
101
102
113

1949—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter

121
115
111

129
119
117

121
116
104

93
105
100

139
128
129

105
98
94

1936-38
1947
1948 l
1949

.-

Unit value indexes
Quarterly average:
100
213
235
226

1936-38
1947
1948
1949 l

1948—First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1949—First quarter.
Second quarter
Third quarter

_.

100
180
203
199

100
311
343
320

100
208
212
203

300
191
217
207

100
245
266
262

230
234
239
238

197
202
210
207

347
338
349
338

210
214
212
212

206
215
221
227

266
268
265
267

236
224
219

206
199
192

330
307
324

205
199
205

227
208
187

267
261
258

1

Average of three quarters.
NOTE.—The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes
in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average
prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics, including changes in average
prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade.
Source: Department of Commerce.




192

TABLE C-45.—Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 1948 and during 1949
Percentage
change 2

1939=100
Source:
Appendix
table
No.

1949
1948
Total i First
half

C-l

Gross national product
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investment
Net foreign investment
Government purchases of goods and
services
_.

287
265
455
211

283
264
372

280

332

National income
.._
Compensation of employees.

312
294

307
297

310
297

C-7

Personal income
Disposable personal income.
Personal net saving

292
272
444

292
275
633

0-8

Per capita disposable personal income:
Current dollars
_.

243
141

Labor force, including armed forcesCivilian labor force
Employment
Nonagricultural
Agricultural..
Unemployment

C-4

C-ll

0-14

C-15

C-l 6

1949,
first
half to
1949,
second
halfi

-1.4
-.2
-18.2

-2.2
-.3
-7.8
-1.1

+18.5

+1.4

-1.6

297

+1.4

-2.0

294
277
578

290
273
489

-.1

+1.1
+20.0

-1.3
-1.5
-15.4

241
142

244
143

238
140

-.7

-2.4
-1.8

113
111
130
142
83
22

114
112
128
140
84

113
111
127
139
a3
34

116
114
130
142
84
38

-1.1
-1.4

+2.7
+2.8
+2.2
+2.2
+2.2
+12.9

Average gross weekly earning
Manufacturing.._
Bituminous coal mining..
Building construction

227
302
227

230
268
234

229
297
233

230
224
235

Physical production index of goods and
selected services:
Total
.--.
Agricultural
Nonagricultural

167
132
177

159
130
167

()

170

Industrial production: Total..,
Durable manufactures
Nondurable manufactures,.
Minerals
_.

176
206
162
146

161
184
154
126

New construction: Total
Private

298
382
342
456
414

370

1948 dollars

C-9

281
265
389
122

Second
halfi

1948
to
1949

264
359
-133
334

+.5
+1.3
+1.1
+.7
+64.5
+1.2

+.6
+.9

-11.4

-24.7

164

-4,9
-1.4
-5.6

-3.7

166
196
153
135

156
172
155
119

-10.7
-5.1
-13.5

306
369
332
405
424
211

133
162
136
203
189
89

173
207
197
202
235
122

344

+3.2

+3.0

()

-6.1
-12.2

+1.2

-11.9

Business expenditures for new plant and
equipment __

C-18

Inventories:
ManufacturingWholesale trade.
Retail
Sales:
Manufacturing—
Wholesale trade.
Retail.

+2.5
+25.1

+29.8
+27.3
+44.8
-.6
+24.2
+36.4

351

-6.9

-3.6

290
284
256

()

373
334
309

C-17

-3.5
-2.7
-11.2

297
300
271

Residential
Nonresidential
Public utility and farm _
Public

353
306

8

C-21

Consumers' price index: All items..
Food-.
Apparel
.-Rent

172
221
197
113

170
212
190
116

171
213
192
115

170
212
186
116

+2.8

C-22

Wholesale price index: All commodities
Farm products
Foods.Other than farm products and foods

214
288
254
186

201
253
229
181

204
261
232
184

198
246
227
178

-6.2
-12.1
-9.9
-2.5

See footnotes at end of table, p. 194.




+.1

193

-1.1
-3.8
-3.8

T A B L E G—45.—Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 7948 and during

Percentage
change 2

1939 = 100
Source
Appen
dix
table
No.

1949—Con.

1949

Economic series
1948
Total i

First
half

Second
half i

1948
to
1949

1949,
first
half to
1949,
second
half i
-5.9

Prices received by farmers
Prices paid by farmers (including interest
and taxes).

302

264

273

257

-12.6

202

197

198

195

-2.5

-1.5

C-24

Consumer credit outstanding, end of period..

205

235

202

235

+14.6

+16.0

C-29

Corporate profits:
Profits before taxes
Profits after taxes
Dividend payments
Undistributed profits

535
424
208
1,100

425
334
221
692

429
336
221
700

418
332
221
683

-20.7
-21.2

-2.5
-1.2

C-23

.-.

+6.3

-37.1

-2.4

C-39

Merchandise exports, including reexports 4~ _

426

403

450

356

-5.5

-20.9

0-42

General merchandise imports 4

286

266

273

259

-7.1

-4.8

_

1
2

Estimates based on incomplete data.
Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed
from the indexes shown here.
3
Not available.
* 1936-38 average=100.




194

U. S. GOVERNMENT

PRINTING

OFFICE: 1 9 5 0










