The Midyear Economic
Report of the President
TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS

? 73

1952

Together With a Report to the President
THE MIDYEAR 1952 ECONOMIC REVIEW




By the

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




The Midyear Economic
Report of the President
TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS
July 19, 1952

Together With a Report to the President
THE MIDYEAR 1952 ECONOMIC REVIEW
By the

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS

. - .
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON : 1952




Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. G.
Price of single copy, 50 cents




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL
THE WHITE HOUSE,,
Washington, D. C., July 19,1952.
The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE,
The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
SIRS: I am presenting herewith a Midyear Economic Report to the
Congress. This is supplementary to the Economic Report of the President
of January 16, 1952, and is transmitted in accordance with section 3 (b)
of the Employment Act of 1946.
In preparing this report, I have had the advice and assistance of the
Council of Economic Advisers, members of the Cabinet, and heads of
independent agencies.
Together with this report, I am transmitting a report, the Midyear 1952
Economic Review, prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers
in accordance with section 4 (c) (2) of the Employment Act of 1946.
Respectfully,




HI




Contents
Page

THE MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT
The facts of our economic strength
Building for the future
Outstanding immediate problemsCarrying forward the defense program
Protection against inflation
The financial affairs of Government
Liabor-management relations
Economic relations with the free world
Summary of economic developments in the first half of 1952
THE MIDYEAR 1952 ECONOMIC REVIEW (a report to the President
by the Council of Economic Advisers)




1
2
6
9
9
10"
12
13
14
16
23




To the Congress of the United States:
This Midyear Economic Report appears at a time when the 82nd Congress has adjourned., and when the Congress may not again be in session
until January 1953. For this reason, the Report does not contain specific
legislative recommendations.. It is limited to a broad view of the Nation's
economy, its current condition of strength, and its prospects and problems
for the future.
It is highly desirable that these matters now be placed before the American
people and their representatives. During the coming months, issues of
economic policy will be widely discussed throughout the land.
Nobody can expect, and it would not be desirable, that everybody view
these problems in the same light or propose identical solutions. The strength
of our free institutions rests upon free debate and free decisions by the
people.
But in these trying times, while some issues will continue to divide us,
we must seek out and stress those things which hold us together.
We face a common danger in the world—the communist menace. We
share common aspirations for our domestic economy—stability, justice,
and advancing prosperity.
There are certain facts that we should all know and accept. These
facts converge upon one inescapable conclusion: America has the economic
strength, while fulfilling its domestic responsibilities, to build with other free
nations the conditions for a more enduring peace. America cannot afford
to relax in this effort, in the false fear that we do not have the strength to
carry through.
This country, from the time of its formation, has passed successfully
through many trying times. This success has not come through doubting
our own ability. It has not been achieved by trying to get by with lower
exertions and costs than were necessary to do the job.
Yet every day one hears some expression of opinion that our security
efforts are weakening us at home, and that we must reduce them in order
to save ourselves. Many who hold this view are entirely sincere. The
trouble is that they have not examined all the facts. I am confident that,
when they do so, they will join in the realization that danger lies in believing wrongly that we are weak. Our strength commences with knowing that
we are strong—and becoming stronger.
The facts reveal beyond question that the security programs now being
undertaken are not even threatening—much less depleting or impairing—
the strength of our domestic economy. Despite the burden of these pro-




grams—and they are a real burden—our business system has been doing
better and our people have been living better than ever before.
Our just pride in these facts should be tempered by the sobering realization that the burden of resistance to aggression is pressing very heavily
against the living standards and productive opportunities of other free peoples. They are just as desirous of achieving freedom and security as we
are. But the resources they can devote to building economic and military
strength are much more limited than ours, because they have far less of
a margin above the absolute necessities of life. Under these circumstances,
the help we give them can return many times its cost in greater security for
them and for us. The record of the recent years shows that this is true—and
the contrast between our own economic situation and that of other free
peoples shows how fallacious is any claim that we are doing more than our
part.
The people of the United States have proved that they could stand up
under adversity whenever the need arose. But we also draw inspiration
from achievement. It speeds us forward to even greater achievement. The
facts about the strength and progress of the American economy since the
Korean outbreak should be made clear to all. These facts can provide the
clearest guide to the actions we should take.
The presentation of these facts can also strengthen our position in the free
world. Communist propaganda is founded upon the false idea that the
American economy cannot maintain its strength. Even some of our friends
abroad are concerned about the future of the American economy—which
they regard as the bulwark of the hopes of free men everywhere. The
truth about our economic situation should also be brought home to them.

The Facts of Our Economic Strength
In previous Reports, I have reviewed the economic progress of the
United States since the period before World War II. Comparing 1939
with the annual rate for the first half of 1952, our total output has increased
by almost 90 percent. Industrial output has approximately doubled. The
output of our farms, despite a declining number of farmers, has increased
about one-third. Business investment in construction and equipment,
measured in 1951 prices, has risen from an annual rate of 14 billion dollars
to an annual rate of almost 38 billion. Civilian employment has risen from
less than 46 million to an average of about 61 million for the half year just
ended. The per capita income of the people, even after adjustment for
price change and computed after taxes, has risen about 40 percent. (See
chart 1.)
In this Report, it is even more pertinent to consider the changes in economic conditions which have taken place since two years ago, when the
aggression in Korea forced us to a great expansion of our security programs.
The facts since then do not reveal any impairment of our general economic




CHART 1

PROGRESS SINCE 1939
EMPLOYMENT- CIVILIAN-17
MILLIONS

20

60

40

80

1939

PRODUCTION
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS - 1951 PRICES-

o

100

200

300

400

TOTAL OUTPUT (GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT)

INDEX, 1935-39* 100

50

100

150

200

250

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION-

AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION

PURCHASING POWER - PER CAPITA DISPOSABLE INCOME, 1951 PRICES^
DOLLARS

0

500

1,000

1,500

•^1952, FIRST HALF NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION.
^1952, FIRST HALF ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION. DOLLAR AMOUNTS ARE AT ANNUAL RATES.
^INCLUDES PRODUCERS' DURABLE EQUIPMENT AND NONRES1DENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
^1952, FIRST HALF NOT AVAILABLE. 1939 AND 1951 SHOWN.
SOURCES: VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES. SEE APPENDIX B.




2,000

strength. On the contrary, they show that the most important elements in
that strength have continued to grow. (See chart 2.)
During the last two years, our total output, measured in 1951 prices, has
risen from an annual rate of about 300 billion dollars in the second quarter of
1950 to almost 340 billion in the second quarter of 1952. This increase in
total output has been greater than the expansion of all our security programs,
which during the same period of time have risen from an annual rate of
about 19 billion dollars to an annual rate of 50 billion. The net consequence of this is plain. It means that today, despite the expanded security
programs, we are producing more for other purposes than we were two
years ago.
Within the same period of time, opportunities for business investment have
continued to grow. Private business investment in construction and equipment, also measured in 1951 prices, has risen from an annual rate of 35
billion dollars to an annual rate of about 38 billion. This very high level
of business investment includes a greatly increased concentration in those
areas which add to the strength of the whole economy both in peace and
in war, such as steel, electric power, oil refining, and transportation.
The general conditions of civilian life have also continued to improve.
The annual rate of personal incomes, after taxes, measured in 1951 prices,
has risen 10.5 billion dollars since the second quarter of 1950. The annual
purchase of goods and services by consumers—again in 1951 prices—has
risen by 5 billion dollars. Yet, because incomes after taxes have risen
CHART 2

GROWTH SINCE KOREA
PERCENT INCREASE- I960, 2nd QUARTER TO 1952, 2nd QUARTER-^
•H5

TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS
AND SERVICES (1951 PRICES)

+ 10

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
BUSINESS INVESTMENT
(1951 PRICES)-^

PERSONAL INCOME AFTER TAXES
(1951 PRICES)

+ 5

CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT

JL/

INCLUDES PRODUCERS' DURABLE EQUIPMENT AND NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.

SOURCES: VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES. SEE APPENDIX B.




more than expenditures, the annual rate of saving has increased from less
than 5 percent to about 7 percent of income after taxes.
There is now a good supply of all important types of civilian goods.
People are enjoying not only more of the necessities, but also more of the
comforts of life. From early 1951 to early 1952, American homes were
equipped with an additional 2 million washing machines, almost 2 million
additional refrigerators, about 3J/2 million additional radio receivers, and
more than 4 million additional television receivers. More than a million
new homes will be built this year.
In fact, there are some who now maintain that the defense program
should be larger and faster. The size and pace of the defense program has
been adjusted to the best available estimates of our security needs. If these
needs should appear to.be greater, there is ample strength in our economy
to support larger and faster programs. But the controlling fact that we
should all bear in mind now is this: there is no justification for wavering
even a moment from the pursuit of our programs for world peace, on the
ground that they are hurting us at home. Never did the facts point more
clearly to the opposite conclusion.
There are some who challenge the significance of these facts. They point
out that there has been a long-run decline in the value of the dollar; that
the level of taxation is very high; and that the Government is running a
deficit. These are important problems, and I shall refer to them again later
on in this Report.
But it is a complete distortion to center attention so exclusively upon these
problems as to create the impression that general economic conditions are
deteriorating or that our economic strength is being undermined.
True, the long-term trend of prices has been upward since before the start
of World War II, which means that the purchasing power of the dollar has
declined. Nonetheless, the growth in business investment and in the people's consumption of goods and services—which I have cited above—has
been growth in real terms, after adjusting for price change. Because the
economy has vastly expanded the production of goods and services, the
standard of living has risen, and the number of dollars in the hands of the
people has increased much more rapidly than the decline in the purchasing
power of a single dollar. Over the years, the Nation has achieved a more
equitable distribution of goods and services and dollars among individuals
and among major economic groups, although the long-term rise in prices
has hurt some. Furthermore, since early 1951, the anti-inflation program
and other conditions have brought about a leveling off of prices.
For these reasons, it is wrong to assert that the economy in the long run has
moved down-hill, simply because prices have moved up-hill. If there were a
depression, prices would fall and the value of the dollar would rise. But
most of the people, in that event, would have so few dollars compared with
what they now have that they would be much worse off, although each dollar
could buy more. Let us always remember, that the time when a single




dollar could buy the most, during the whole period from World War I until
now, was in 1932—at the very bottom of the great depression.
It is also true that taxes have been high in recent years. But the incomes
of the people have increased enough to pay these high taxes and to support
a higher level of consumption and a higher level of saving at one and the
same time. Likewise, the profits of business have been high enough, after
taxes, to induce a high and expanding level of investment.
Viewing the whole period from the start of the fiscal year 1947—the first
year after demobilization—until the close of the fiscal year which ended June
30, 1952, the Federal Government has operated at a net budget surplus of
3.8 billion dollars. The cash surplus was several times as large. This surplus was achieved despite the extraordinary problems the country has faced.
The budget deficit of 4.0 billion dollars for the fiscal year 1952 just ended
brought the national debt to 259.2 billion dollars. This amount is no
higher than on December 31,1946, and is entirely manageable in an economy
as vast and productive as ours. The current and prospective deficit should
not prevent the maintenance of economic stability—if the current caution
of businessmen and consumers is combined with adequate controls.
Taxes, prices, and the Government deficit are important problems. We
must keep on working towards satisfactory solutions of these problems.
But these problems should not obscure the fact—the far more important
fact—that employment, investment, and production of goods and services
for both civilian purposes and for national defense, have been moving upward toward new heights. The truth is that the economy is strong—and
is growing stronger.
These are the controlling facts, as the American people consider whether
they shall step backward or move forward in their practical efforts to
achieve a free and peaceful world.

Building for the Future
The current strength of the economy is our starting point today. We must
move forward to advance that strength year by year. This kind of progress
has always been desirable. The present world situation makes it imperative.
Within this decade—by 1960—we can make great further gains in our
economic strength.
We have the best trained and most highly skilled labor force in the world,
the finest industrial and agricultural plant, and the most enterprising business management. These assets are all reinforced by the strength of our
free institutions. Producers are provided with adqquate incentives and
rewards by our economic system.
Within this decade—by 1960—we can add at least 4 million to the
62 5/2 million employed in civilian pursuits in June 1952. This can be done,
even if world conditions should require us to maintain our armed forces at
near their present size. (See chart 3.)




CHART 3

GROWTH IN THE DECADE 1950 -1960
PERCENT

200

TOTAL
PRODUCTION-^
150

CIVILIAN
EMPLOYMENT

1950

O

JOO

50

June 1952

I960
GOAL

1952, 2nd

I960
GOAL

I/ GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT, 1951 PRICES.
2/ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATE.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

With our science, inventiveness and technology, if we keep their advantages open to all, and with a fast-growing population, we can during this
decade register even larger annual gains in production than those of preKorean years.
The worker of today, with better training, better tools, and higher morale,
is producing more per hour than ever before, and his productivity is increasing each year.
The farmer, with more mechanization and better fertilizers, is growing
more per acre, and within this decade can greatly expand production for
industrial use and for food, both for the domestic market and for export.
Within this decade—by 1960—we can lift our total annual output from
the current level of about 340 billion dollars to nearly 100 billion dollars
higher—in real terms.
We can do this, not by any ventures that would be strange to our economic
or political institutions, but by conserving what is best in responsible free
enterprise and responsible free government.
Our free enterprise system has undergone a transformation in outlook
within a generation. We have come to recognize that depressions are
avoidable; that a steadily expanding economy is attainable; that investment
opportunity and consumer markets can grow simultaneously through the
intelligent balance of production and distribution. Both employers and




employees have come to realize that production policies, price policies, and
wage policies can be adopted which will combine economic stability with
economic growth.
Not yet perfectly, but quite workably, our free enterprise system has
been applying such policies in recent years. The proof of this lies in the
progress of the economy. A still better job, with less friction, is attainable
in the future.
While our major reliance should continue to be upon our enterprise
system, the process of growth also requires vigorous public policies. The
central purpose of such policies, in the economic field, is to help make the
economy more productive and more dynamic, and to assure that none who
are deserving are excluded from opportunity to play their full part and to
earn a just reward.
We have found from experience that programs serving this purpose are
needed in these main categories:
To make agriculture more productive, by conserving and improving the
soil, by making credit readily available, by improving work opportunities
for farm labor, and by protecting the farmer from the price and income
hazards peculiar to his work.
To make small business more productive, by keeping open its access to
credit on reasonable terms, and by an antitrust policy which protects efficient small businesses from any disadvantages which might result just
because they are small.
To make all business more productive, by stimulating the expanding
markets which are essential to business growth and profits.
To make the worker more productive, by protecting him from fear of
unemployment and of unmerited want in old age, and by assuring free collective bargaining.
To make the underpaid more productive, by setting a floor below which
wages shall not fall, until industrial development and self-development
can further lift their productiveness and their standards of living.
To make the citizen more productive, through improving education,
housing, and health services.
To make our natural resources more productive, by protecting them
from exploitation or deterioration through such means as flood control and
forest management, and by developing them for such purposes as navigation
and power.
To make the whole economy more productive in the long run, by using
monetary and fiscal measures, along with other policies, to stabilize and
expand the economy, and to protect it against depression.
None of these programs can be neglected in the course of national defense, because they are all essential to our total national strength. Some
of them, because of their direct bearing upon national defense, have had
to be speeded up. Others, because of the cost of national defense, have had
to be carried forward at a slower rate than would otherwise have been
desirable.
8



As the productive expansion of the economy lightens the defense burden,
we must look forward to increasing these programs to the rate which our
general national interest requires.
Because we have the economic capacity to raise our current annual
product of about 340 billion dollars to nearly 100 billion dollars higher
within this decade—by 1960—we can well afford ,to devote a portion of
this gain to advancing these essential programs.
In fact, it is only by carrying forward these essential programs that we
can assure this high rate of economic progress. For economic progress in
our type of society is closely linked with economic justice. Only through
enabling all to share equitably in the products of our farms and factories,
and in our bountiful natural resources, can we maintain the expanding
demand to match our expanding productive power.
If the satisfaction of human wants does not keep pace with our productive power, depression results.
The years since World War II have demonstrated that our economic
system, reinforced by public policy, has been able lo avoid depression by
keeping production and consumption reasonably in balance. Some maladjustments have occurred, but they have been remedied in time to prevent
calamity.
Under these circumstances, it is unworthy of this great Nation to regard
another depression as unavoidable. Through neglect, we could have one.
But we know what it would cost. We are determined to take all necessary
steps to avoid that cost.
The expansion of the economy which we can achieve within this decade
is of a size sufficient, while supporting any foreseeable security programs
short of total war, to enable us at the same time to lift progressively the
standard of living, to come near to wiping out poverty within our own
boundaries., and to make our proper contribution toward a more prosperous
and more peaceful world.
It is neither idle nor irrelevant to think and work toward this future.
It is these hopes for the future which provide goals and the courage to
work toward them, at a time when so many hard and immediate problems
confront us. Those who say that our current efforts are so large and so
costly as to rob us of these hopes for the future, are not protecting the
future. On the contrary, they are endangering the future by misjudging
the needs of today.

Outstanding Immediate Problems
To achieve a better future, we must meet correctly the pressing problems
of the present.
Carrying forward the defense program
We have not yet achieved the necessary build-up of our defensive strength,
but notable progress has been made. Outlays for major national security




programs, which were running at an annual rate of 19 billion dollars (in
terms of 1951 prices) in the second quarter of 1950, were running at a rate
of 50 billion in the second quarter of this year, and will rise to an annual
rate between 60 and 65 billion next year. (See chart 4.)
These very substantial increases show not only an impressive record in
the quantity, but also an impressive improvement in the quality, of the
weapons and other materials we are buying. We must set our sights high,
because we want our fighting men to have the best equipment we know how
to make. We have been hastening the latest designs off the drawing boards
and into production. This course has magnified the early technical difficulties of the programs. But it is now beginning to pay off in volume deliveries of aircraft, tanks, and other equipment which will more than hold
their own against any enemy. The flow of such key hard-to-produce items
will increase during the coming months.
Already, in contrast to the first year of the present defense program, in
the 12 months just passed most of the increased spending has been for "hardware" and military construction. Soft goods procurement has stabilized
on the plateau required for maintaining the present size of the armed forces.
As we proceed to develop the security program, the problems which must
be resolved will continue to be complex. But the experience of the last 2
years now enables us to face them with growing assurance. We must
continue to maintain a series of balances—a balance between volume production and further improvements; a balance among different types of
weapons and forces, as technology and strategic considerations change; a
balance between armed strength at home and aid to armed strength abroad;
and a balance between the devotion of resources to defense purposes and
their devotion to civilian uses. Moreover, we must continue to effectuate
practical economies without yielding to superficial pleas for short-sighted
economy at the price of safety.
Protection against inflation
Although the long-term rise in prices since before the start of World War
II has not prevented the great economic progress which has been made
since then, we would now be even better off if the price level had been
more firmly held. During the war, considering the size of the effort, the
record of price stabilization was very good. The premature abandonment
of controls after the war permitted the cost of living to rise 30 percent
from the middle of 1946 to the middle of 1948—the great bulk of the rise
since the war. This illustrates the danger of weakening controls now, when
the expansion of the defense program is still under way. A further inflation of the price level or diminution in the value of the dollar can and
should be avoided.
Despite a rapidly rising defense program, the general price level has been
held remarkably stable since early 1951. This has been due to several
main causes—increases in production since the Korean outbreak, a high
degree of caution on the part of businessmen and consumers, and a well-




10

CHART 4

INDIOVTORS OF DEFENSE PROGRESS
SINCE K(DREA
TOTAL AR MED FORCES

<3

1

I

MILLIONS OF PERSONS
2
3

I

4

y

5

1

|

8
1

1

10
1

1

NOW

KOREAN ?/
OUTBREAK

MILITARY DELIVERIES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

c>

2
1

4
I

6
I

5/
NOW

KOREAN I/
OUTBREAK

MAJOR NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM EXPENDITURES
PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1951 PRICES
PERCENT
C)

5

10

15

20

25

1

1

1

1

1

NOW

1

KOREAN I/
OUTBREAK

•^JUNE 1952.
£/JlWE I960.
?/ 1952, SECOND QUARTER.
tl I960, SECOND QUARTER EXCEPT MILITARY DELIVERIES, WHICH ARE FOR 1950, THIRD QUARTER.
SOURCES: DEPA RTMENT OF DEFENSE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

rounded though not completely adequate anti-inflationary program. The
maintenance of price stability depends upon the further expansion of
production, continued caution in buying, and the maintenance of an adequate anti-inflationary program at least for another year or two.
Unfortunately, the anti-inflationary program was weakened rather than
strengthened by the Congress this year, and I believe that it will be the
duty of the Congress next year to strengthen it. In the meantime, the
209722^-52




2

II

Government will exert every resource available to control inflation. The
outlook for the next few months is favorable, if neither business nor consumers resort to excessive buying, which would be foolish in view of the
fundamental adequacy of most lines of supply.
The financial affairs of Government
We would all like to live in a world where public expenditures could be
reduced and taxes correspondingly reduced. But the issue now is not so
simple as that. The issue is whether we could reverse the upward course of
public outlays and correspondingly lighten the tax burden, without suffering
disadvantages which would far outweigh the benefits.
The plain facts are that we cannot afford to reduce the size of our efforts
in the pursuit of world peace either at home or abroad. These efforts,
along with the costs of past wars (veterans' benefits and interest charges),
comprise more than 85 percent of the Federal Budget for the current fiscal
year. The nonsecurity outlays of the Government have already been cut
severely. Because of the long-run needs of an expanding economy and a
growing population, we cannot afford for long—although we have had to
risk it for a while—to hold outlays for such items as resource development
and slum clearance, education and health, at the current levels.
It was my view at the commencement of the defense emergency that, in a
period of full prosperity and partial mobilization, enough taxes should be
collected to balance the Budget. By January of this year, it was clear that
this principle had been departed from by the Congress to a degree which
made it impossible to avoid a deficit.
Whether the Government runs a surplus or a deficit is important, but it
is not of such decisive importance for the economy as to outweigh all other
considerations. There have been times when a Federal surplus did not
protect the economy against inflation, and other times when a Federal deficit
did not produce inflation. Over the next year or two, the inflationary problem would be easier to deal with if revenues were larger and the deficit
smaller. But the prospective deficit is not sufficiently threatening to our
economy to justify reducing it by gambling with our national safety.
The significance of the deficit should also be judged over a period longer
than one year, and in relation to the size and productive growth of the
economy as a whole.
During the current fiscal year 1953, the Government is likely to run a
budget deficit in the neighborhood of 10 billion dollars, according to
tentative calculations by the Council of Economic Advisers. This means
that for the entire 7-year period starting with the fiscal year 1947, which
was the first fiscal year succeeding demobilization after World War II, the
Government will have run a total budget deficit of about 6 billion dollars.
If we take into account the net excess of receipts in the trust and other
accounts, the fiscal years 1947 through 1953 will show an estimated cash
surplus of about 18 billion dollars. This has been a good performance. I
would have liked it to have been even better. But certainly these facts do




12

not justify fear of disaster in an economy which, during the same span of
years, will have lifted its total annual output from about 270 billion dollars
to 350 billion dollars or more, measured in 1951 prices.
With respect to the national debt, which stood at 258 billion dollars at the
end of the fiscal year 1947, and was reduced to its postwar low point of 252
billion dollars in April 1949, it is estimated that the debt may rise to almost
270 billion dollars by the end of the fiscal year 1953. It would have been
better to have avoided an increase of this size by more realistic tax legislation.
But it would be all out of perspective to say that, in order to hold this increase of the national debt to a few billion dollars less, we should jeopardize
the national security by slashing our defense expenditures.
To the extent that the Congress does not reduce the deficit through tax
action, the only available course is to seek the more gradual removal of
the deficit by (a) the leveling-off of security outlays at a maintenance rate
after the necessary build-up has been achieved, (b) the increase in revenues
resulting from the further expansion of the economy, and (c) the continuation of policies designed to eliminate waste and increase efficiency without
sacrificing essential objectives for national security and for economic
progress.
Labor-management relations
The steel dispute in a time of national emergency brings to the fore again
the problem of relations between employers and workers.
It has long been recognized that certain types of work stoppages affect
the whole national interest so greatly that a way must be found to bring
them to an end before irreparable damage is done. While various types of
public bodies may offer advice, this advice may be rejected by either party.
Any governmental authority of a more conclusive character would as a
practical matter have to include the authority to deal with the subject matter of the dispute. This is because any action by the Government requiring
resumption of operations, without touching upon the issues at stake, is an
intervention, regardless of the merits on the side of that party which desires
no change.
Present legislation does not meet this problem, in cases of nation-wide
disputes in major industries. In such cases, it allows the Government
only to achieve a delay in any threatened shutdown, either through the
method used in the steel case, or through use of the Taft-Hartley Act. The
steel case shows that delay is not enough. There must be a basic solution.
Nor is authority for the Government to make recommendations always
enough—though it has succeeded in settling nearly every case that has
arisen so far, except steel. In the steel case, the properly constituted Government agency—the Wage Stabilization Board—made recommendations
for settlement of the dispute. One of the parties has thus far refused to
agree to a settlement, even though the other party has indicated its willingness to accept considerably less than the Board recommended, and even
though the Government, in its earnest efforts to avoid a stoppage, indicated




13

that it would grant price concessions well in excess of any required under
existing law or justified because of the wage increases proposed. When
one party to a dispute which is critically affecting the national interest
recognizes no obligation to abide by the recommendations of the Government—although the Government is the only resort of the people when the
parties cannot agree—the need for more adequate! legislation is fully
demonstrated.
I have requested new legislation which would permit the Government
to maintain essential production, to be fair to both sides in the dispute,
and to retain the maximum degree of free collective bargaining. Such
legislation has not been enacted, and I hope that the Congress will recognize
the need for it.
At best, however, any such legislation can provide only a temporary or
interim solution. We all know that, in a democracy, under our kind of
economic system, differences between management and labor can be resolved
enduringly only by agreement and not by intervention.
I do not know, as this is written, how soon the steel dispute may be ended.
The only practical method now open for the settlement of the steel dispute
is bargaining between the parties. I have continuously urged that the
parties recognize the emergency confronting the Nation. It is imperative
that the parties settle their differences immediately, and resume the production of steel—the loss of which is now causing such great damage to the
national defense and to the civilian economy.
The parties must realize that collective bargaining is a precious liberty,
enjoyed by both employers and workers, and that the possession of liberty
involves not only rights but also duties on the part of both employers and
workers—including the duty so to exercise freedom that it does not encroach upon the freedom of others. The freedom of all the people is at
stake in the current emergency, and the production of steel is essential to
the support of that freedom.
This should be taken to heart, not only in the interest of the country,
but also because any failure to do so might ultimately cause the country
to place restrictions upon the economic freedom of management and labor
which would represent a new and perhaps a serious departure from our
way of life.
Economic relations with the free world
There is general agreement that we must join with the free world in the
development of military strength. But there is not yet in this country an
equally general understanding that the military security of the free world is
inseparable from its economic future. This is true because economic
strength is the source of military strength, and because no nation can maintain either the means or the morale to maintain a great defense effort in a
period short of total war unless its economic conditions are at least tolerable.
It is true for the even more important reason that the free peoples of the
world want not only to be secure from military attack; they also want to




live as free men should live. They want adequate food and clothing, housing, and medical care. They want to advance their industrial arts, so
that they will have the productive power to achieve these ends. These
aspirations are not only worthy; they are vital.
The United States would be in much greater danger, if the people of any
substantial portion of the free world should come to believe that we are not
interested in their human aspirations, but interested only in helping them
to arm in order to help defend ourselves. This would provide the communists with a propaganda weapon against which counter-measures would
be extremely difficult.
Recent actions by the Congress have displayed a failure to appreciate in
full the importance of these facts. But facts have a way of persisting, and
I am sure the time will come when the Congress will respond to them fully.
I can only hope that it will not be too late.
The people of the United States have gained more through the maintenance of freedom than any other people in the history of the world. Hence
we have the most to lose if freedom is lost, and we cannot enduringly remain
free unless freedom predominates in the rest of the world.
There is nothing in our own history, or in the history of all human
events, to indicate that freedom can be maintained without cost and effort.
It costs a lot to maintain freedom, in money and material things, in human
understanding, and sometimes in blood. To avoid an incalculable cost in
blood, we must be prepared to sustain a great effort in money and material
things and in human understanding.
The building of military security is only a first stage in this long effort.
We must be prepared, while that first stage is going forward, and increasingly after it is completed, to make our fair contribution toward a more
prosperous free world. And a more prosperous free world will mean a more
secure free world.
In this long effort, the kind of emergency aid which we have thus far
been extending will need to be supplemented and then increasingly supplanted by a more normal flow of capital from the United States to other
countries. This, in turn, will need to be accompanied by more realistic
appreciation that exports must in the long run be accompanied by imports.
It is disturbing to note that, despite the high level of employment in the
United States, pressures have been growing recently to restrict imports.
Embargoes on importation of foreign products, increases in duties on imported goods, and numerous requests for other increased duties, are some
examples of how these pressures for restriction of imports have manifested
themselves. The pressures for restrictionism have generally been exerted
with too little consideration for the effects that the measures have on our
security objectives, and on economic policies consistent with our position as
a creditor nation.
Trade restrictions have a direct impact on United States programs to
strengthen the free world. The joint defense effort must be built on a solid




foundation of strong nations acting together. We cannot consistently throw
up barriers here, while, at the same time, we urge the creation of a close
partnership in the North Atlantic community. Inconsistencies of this
sort undermine the basis on which our position of leadership rests. In
addition, the economies of our friends are much more dependent on foreign
trade than the economy of the United States. If they are unable to
earn dollars to pay for those essential commodities which they now purchase in the dollar area, they will be under additional pressure to secure
them in other areas of the world, including the Soviet bloc.
The encouragement of economic conditions which will enable the other
free nations to pay their own way is the goal that we must seek, as a transition
from the emergency conditions which have made it essential for us to extend temporary aid.
The way to get out of an emergency is not to pretend that the emergency
does not exist, but instead to remove the conditions which have produced the
emergency. Communist subversion will present no great threat to the free
world, as the free world achieves economic stability and further economic
progress. Communist aggression may still continue to be a threat, but the
free world will then have the clearly apparent power to resist any such
aggression. We must continue, with courage and vision, to help create the
conditions in the free world which will provide the only dependable foundation for lasting peace.

Summary of Economic Developments in the
First Half of 1952
At midyear 1952, the Nation had made further progress in acquiring the
greater economic and military strength which will enable it to continue to
meet, in company with the other countries of the free world, the threat of
communist aggression. (See chart 5.)
Substantial expansions of capacity in such basic industries as steel, aluminum, and electric power were well under way.
Deliveries of military goods and construction for the major national
security programs during the first half of 1952 reached a total of almost 15
billion dollars, 9 billion dollars above deliveries in the first half of 1951, and
12 billion dollars above the level in the second half of 1950.
Total output during the first 6 months of 1952 expanded at a moderate
rate. Measured in dollars of constant buying power, gross national product
was running at an annual rate (seasonally adjusted) about 1 percent higher
than in the preceding 6 months.
Industrial production, after regaining the small amount of ground lost in
the second half of 1951, slipped back in the second quarter, partly because
of work stoppages in steel and petroleum. For the half year, the index of
industrial production was 3 percent below the first half of 1951.




16

CHART 5

EC ONOMIC INDICATORS
CH/\NGES FROM FIRST HALF 1951 TO FIRST HALF 1952
PERC ENTA6E CHANGE

PERCENTAGE CHANGE

EMPLOYMENT

tio

+ 10

0
TOTAL
CIVILIAN

W(M\

TOTAL
CIVILIAN

wa*a

"—

NONAGRICULTURAL
EMPLOYMENT

EMPLOYMENT

\%%M
AVERAGE

HOURS
(MANUFACTURING)

-10

0

WM%

Up
'Mm,
«
_

-10

UNEMPLOYMENT

-20

-20

+ 30

t30

PRODUCTION
+ 20

+ 20

+ 10

+ 10

0

0
GROSS
NATIONAL
PRODUCT
(1951 PRICES)

fjg ^

AGRICULTURAL

BUSINESS

INDUS TFJIAL
PRODU C

PUBLIC

(1951 PRICES)-!/

w£w

NONFARM
HOUSING STARTS

-10

-10

INCOME

+ 10

+ 10

PI f! n i ^
i

0

(MANUFACTURING)

0
8§g£

-10

-10
CORPORATE
PROFITS
BEFORE TAX

-20

-20

+ 10

+ 10

PRICES
0

0
vS
COMMODITIES

-10

—

%^1

ALL
FOODS

(OTHER THAN FARM

FA

PROD UCTS

—

\wnni P^AI P —

J/ INC -UDES PRODUCERS' DURABLE
SOUR SES: VARIOUS




FOOD

EQUIPMENT

,.,...,.-.fc

AND NONRESIDENTIAL

GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.

SEE

-i*

r AM^I iMrn"*

CONSTRUCTION.

APPENDIX B.

>

-10

The civilian labor force during the past half year averaged about the same
as a year earlier, the increase in the total labor force being taken up by
growth of the armed forces.
Civilian employment in June totaled 62^4 million. Employment during
the first half of 1952 averaged about 300,000 above the first half of 1951, all
of the increase occurring outside agriculture. Agricultural employment
continued its downward trend. In manufacturing, there was a small decline
in average weekly hours of work, reflecting, in part, some weakness in the
markets for many consumer goods.
Unemployment during the first 6 months of this year was close to
300,000 below the same period a year earlier. In the last month of the
half year, unemployment was the lowest for any June since World War II.
Work stoppages caused more loss of working time than during the first half
of 1951, partly because of an increase in the number of stoppages and partly
because of the size of some of the industries involved.
Economic stability was well maintained during the past half year.
The monthly index of wholesale prices drifted downward in each month,
and in June was 2 percent below December 1951.
Consumers3 prices, after edging downward early in 1952, moved up
again by May to about the record level reached at the end of 1951.
Wages rose, but less rapidly than in the first half of 1951.
Average hourly earnings in all manufacturing industries, for example,
moved up 4 percent during the comparable period a year earlier, and only
1 percent in the latest half year.
The volume of money in private hands in June was 700 million dollars
below the December 1951 level.
Total bank loans and investments expanded 2 billion dollars, or 2 percent,
from December to June. Partly because of less strong demands for private
credit, the voluntary program of credit restraint and the controls over instalment credit were suspended, and the housing regulations were somewhat
relaxed. Legislative authority for the voluntary credit restraint programs
and for instalment credit controls was ended in the amended Defense
Production Act.
Personal incomes continued to rise, principally because of increases in
salaries and wages.
Disposable income—personal income after taxes—was at the seasonally
adjusted annual rate of 231 billion dollars during the first half of 1952,
2 billion dollars, or 1 percent, above the second half of 1951, and 10 billion
dollars, or 5 percent, above the first half of last year.
Consumer spending rose only a little more rapidly than earnings from the
second half of 1951, so that the proportion of disposable income saved, about
7 percent, was nearly as large as the high level of the preceding year. Moderation in consumer spending was one of the chief factors in the continued
stability of the economy.




18

Residential construction remained high. The number of housing starts
totaled 568,000 for the period January-June, which was only 4 percent
below the volume of starts during the first 6 months of 1951.
Consumer credit outstanding, after declining seasonally during the first
quarter of this year, climbed rather sharply in the second, paced by the rise
in instalment credit. The suspension of instalment credit regulations early
in May undoubtedly contributed to the increase. At the end of June, instalment credit was 600 million dollars, or 4 percent, above the level of December 1951. In contrast, during the first half of 1951, instalment credit
dropped 500 million dollars.
Agricultural marketings were about 6 percent above the level of the first
half of 1951, so that despite somewhat lower prices there was an increase
in cash receipts. However, net earnings were below 1951, because of the
rise in farm costs. Crop prospects, as of early July, were relatively good,
with current indications pointing to a total crop production second only to
the record year 1948.
Manufacturers turned out about the same amount of durable goods as
in the first half of 1951, production related to defense offsetting a decline
in the output of consumers' durable goods. However, production of nondurable goods by manufacturing industries was less than in the first 6
months of 1951.
Wholesale sales, seasonally adjusted, were below the level of the first half
of 1951, and slightly below the level of the second half of that year.
Retail sales, seasonally adjusted, rose above the first half of 1951.
The accumulation of business inventories occurred at a sharply falling
rate after the second quarter of 1951. From the first to the second quarter of this year, there was a decline in inventories. The decline in the
rate of investment in inventories was one of the major factors in promoting
economic stability during the past 12 months.
Business investment in construction and equipment has remained high,
reflecting the progress noted above in the expansion of productive capacity.
Outlays for these purposes were at the seasonally adjusted annual rate of
38 billion dollars during the first half of 1952, which was 3 percent above
the level of the first half of 1951, and 4 percent above the second half.
Business borrowing from commercial banks followed a more nearly normal seasonal course during the first 6 months of this year than a year
earlier, when the rapid accumulation of inventories stimulated the demand
for funds. Commercial and industrial loans fell 700 million dollars, or 3
percent, from December 1951 to June 1952. In contrast, during the comparable period a year before, total business loans expanded 1.8 billion dollars. Although business borrowing from commercial banks was less than a
year before, the demand for longer-term capital was greater, partly because of the high level of investment in plant and equipment.




The volume of corporate securities floated to obtain new capital during
the past 6 months was 700 million dollars, or 21 percent, above the level
of the first 6 months of 1951.
Corporate profits, before taxes, were running at an estimated seasonally
adjusted annual rate of 41 billion dollars during the first half of this year,
which was about 12 percent below the rate of the first half of 1951, but
slightly above that of the second half. Corporate profits after taxes were
about 13 percent below the first half of 1951, and slightly above the second
half of that year.
Total Federal expenditures, during the fiscal year just ended, rose to 66
billion dollars, 2U/2 billion above the fiscal 1951 total. The increase was
due primarily to purchases of goods and services for the major national
security programs.
Federal receipts for fiscal 1952, due to higher tax rates and the greater
dollar volume of business activity, rose to 62 billion dollars, 14 billion above
the total for the preceding year. The relatively greater growth in expenditures in fiscal 1952 resulted in a budget deficit of 4.0 billion dollars, compared
with a surplus of 3.5 billion in fiscal 1951. In fiscal 1952, the Federal
Government's cash budget was about in balance; in 1951, there was a cash
surplus of about 7.6 billion dollars.
In Federal public debt operations, the most notable developments during
the past 6 months were the announcement by the Treasury in April of
extensive changes in the types and terms of U. S. savings bonds intended
to increase their attractiveness to the public, and the highly successful
offer of a 6-year bond, the first marketable bond offered since World
War II for the purpose of raising new money.
State and local governments' receipts and expenditures have risen during the past 2 years, the latter in part because of a growth in outlays for
new construction. The increase in the latter has also resulted in a record
volume of new securities issues.
Many foreign nations^ largely as an aftermath to the world-wide postKorean surge in business, have experienced balance of payments difficulties.
Their expanding domestic production, rising incomes, and in many cases
inflation, have contributed to an increase in the imports of many foreign
countries abroad. Exports, on the other hand, have either failed to rise as
fast as imports, or (particularly in the case of countries exporting raw materials) have actually fallen in value. Corrective actions have been taken to
improve balance of payments situations, largely through such measures as
credit controls to restrict loan demand, fiscal measures, and increased import
restrictions. By the first half of 1952, there was evidence that, partly because of the use of the former measures, most countries in the free world
were achieving stability at high levels of production.
United States imports of merchandise during the first 5 months of 1952
were at a rate 11 percent higher than in the second half of 1951, although
they were still below the first half of that year. The recent rise in imports




was in large measure due to reduction in the large stocks of many commodities, which had been built up late in 1950 and early in 1951.
United States exports of nonmilitary goods, despite the increase in import
restrictions and other measures taken by many foreign countries, maintained
during the first months of 1952 the high levels of the last part of 1951.
Exports of military supplies increased.
HARRY S. TRUMAN.
JULY 19, 1952.




21




The Midyear 1952 Economic
Review




A Report to the President
By the

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS,
Washington, D. C.y July 16,1952.
The PRESIDENT:
SIR: The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report, The
Midyear 1952 Economic Review, in accordance with section 4 (c) (2)
of the Employment Act of 1946.
Respectfully,




' .f
Chairman.




Contents
Page

I. DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE FIRST HALF OF 1952
The economy in general
The security build-up
Production and employment
Economic stability
Trends within major sectors
Consumers
Business
Government fiscal operations
International developments
II. THE NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK
Government spending and fiscal operations
The security program
Deficit
financing
Nongovernment demand
Investment
Personal consumption expenditures
Personal saving
Foreign demand for United States products
Implications of the steel stoppage
The inflationary bias of the near-term outlook
III. IMMEDIATE POLICY ISSUES
The feasibility of the national security program
Stabilization policies
Fiscal policy
Credit policy
Price and wage stabilization
International economic policy
IV. THE LONGER-RANGE PROSPECTS FOR STABILITY AND GROWTH. .
Significance of experience from World War II to Korea..
The period from 1944 to 1946
The period from 1946 to mid-1950
Stabilizers built into our institutions
The 1944-50 record summarized
The problem ahead
Basic demand prospects
Available private policies
Available public policies
The factor of confidence
209722r—52




3

2

7

29
29
29
34
39
47
47
51
60
66
74
75
75
77
79
79
80
80
82
83
84
86
86
90
90
94
95
97
100
101
101
105
109
110
112
113
118
118
120

Pagf

APPENDIXES
A. The Nation's economic accounts
,
B. Statistical tables relating to employment, production, and
purchasing power
LIST OF TEXT TABLES AND CHARTS




28

123
123
137
187

I. Developments During the First Half of
1952
THE ECONOMY IN GENERAL
NNALISTS of the first half of 1952 could accent any one of several
characteristics as its most noteworthy economic feature.
Measured by intensity of public attention, which was attended by mounting apprehension as the year moved into the third quarter, the steel dispute
claimed first place.
Other commentators might stress the wide swings in business
sentiment. These shifts were produced by a variety of developments during the period. There was an improvement in the outlook for
scarce materials. There was a continued high rate of saving. National
security expenditures, while only moderately below the estimates made in
January, were much lower than the less realistic earlier estimates of the
pace and impact of the defense program which remained lodged in business
thinking. The combination of these and other events caused business
sentiment to swing indecisively between inflationary and deflationary
concern.
More fundamentally, if the most important characteristic of a period
is that which dominates the course of the whole economy, the continued
rise in expenditures for the national security programs was the outstanding
event.
And if the half year is to be described by the degree of success with which
the Nation achieved fundamental objectives, the central feature was the
continuance of a high degree of general stability while a rising share of the
output of an economy producing close to capacity was being devoted to the
security program.

A

The security build-up
Two years ago, the hostilities in Korea raised the question of how the
Nation's resources should be mobilized. The decision was based on the
assumption of a long-continuing threat to peace, rather than that of imminent full-scale war. Consequently, it was decided not to rush forward at
maximum speed toward the highest attainable production of weapons and
other military end-items. Such a course would not have been consistent
with the ambiguous character of the international situation, and would
have weakened the whole economy and the Nation by transforming the




29

CHART 6

CAP'ACITY EXPANSION
INESASIC INDUSTRIES
StEEL
CAPACITY^

ALUMINUM (PRIMARY)
CAPACITY^

MILLIONS OF NET INGOT TONS

c>

MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS

25

50

75

100

125

I

I

1

1

0

1

.25

.50

.75

1.00

1.25

1.50

1

1

1

1

1

1

I960

1

1951
1952

,•'

1954

:•' . - ' . . - " • ' -i' 1 "" '

ELECTRIC POWER
GENERATING CAPACITY-^

1950

25
1

50
1

,

. 1

PETROLEUM
REFINERY CAPACITY^

MILLIONS OF KILOWATTS

C)

-.''-.•'•-" ; r-'-fr';"'> v /

>... '... \

MILLIONS OF BARRELS (DAILY AVERAGE)

75
1

100
1

-

125
1

0

5

IO

1

1

15

1

1

195 1
1952

1954

".

•

'

1

-;^:::-":.;:V-l

U CAPAC TY AT BEGINNING OF YEAR.
2/ CAPAG TY AT END OF YEAR; EXCLUDES INDUSTRIAL.
NOTE: 1954 ESTIMATES ARE PROJECTIONS BY DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION.
SOURCES:

AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE, DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR,
FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION, AND DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION.

country into an armed camp. Instead, it was decided to undertake the
balanced development of our total national strength, both economic and
military, for the long pull. This involves two goals: to build a "mobilization" base rapidly, by expanding capacity both in basic industries and in
military production facilities; and to produce enough military equipment
to deal with foreseeable situations and to meet the first impact of a major
war if it should come.
At midyear 1952, progress made toward the first of these goals was impressive, although difficult problems remained unsolved. Substantial expansion of capacity was well under way in basic materials, electric power,
petroleum, electric machinery, chemical, transportation, and other industries. Programs to expand capacity, aided by accelerated amortization for .
tax purposes, totaled more than 22 billion dollars at the end of June. It is
estimated that about 54 percent of the capacity approved through the first
quarter was in place by the middle of this year, that two-thirds will be in




place by the end of 1952, and over nine-tenths by the end of 1953. Among
the basic metals, rapid expansion of the capacity to produce steel and aluminum is taking place. In copper, despite limited ore supplies, moderate
increases in domestic production are planned for the next few years, and a
further increase in imports seems likely in 1953 and 1954. (See chart 6.)
Supplies of such alloying materials as nickel, cobalt, and tungsten, upon
which the requirements of modern armament, especially jet engines, place
a heavy drain, are not available in significant quantities in the United States.
In the case of manganese, most of which must be imported and which is
necessary for the production of all carbon and manganese steels, both the
difficulties of increasing imports and the increasing rate of steel production
have prevented adequate stockpiling. Although the petroleum industry is
being expanded, the supply of sufficient petroleum products in the event of
a war remains a most critical problem. Despite some prospective expansion of scarce minerals production in other parts of the free world, and
despite some successes in using more plentiful substitutes, the situation for
several materials remains serious.
The other goal of the defense production program—an increasing level
of military end-item production—involves objectives for the size of the
armed forces, and the number of air wings, ships, and combat divisions.
The President's Budget Message submitted at the start of 1952 specifically
indicated that we were to build toward a goal of 21 full-strength army
divisions, 143 air wings, 16 Navy carrier air groups, and 408 major combatant ships. It was also indicated that, while we should move vigorously
and steadfastly toward these goals, the complex of military, economic, technological, and international factors would not make desirable nor even
permit their attainment as quickly as some had thought feasible at an
earlier time.
Chart 7 provides perspective on the procurement of end-items and
military construction by the Department of Defense, both for United
States forces and for our allies under the Mutual Security Program, during
the first 6 months of this year. In mid-1950, 7 billion dollars of military appropriations for procurement and construction purposes had been obligated
but not yet spent. Between July 1, 1950, and June 30, 1952, approximately
87 billion dollars were made available for obligation for these purposes. Of
this total, more than 75 billion dollars, or almost 90 percent, had been
obligated by the Defense Department by mid-1952. In the type of mobilization program now under way, involving frequent design changes and evergrowing complexity of equipment, a long lead time intervenes between
obligation of funds and delivery of many types of equipment. Expenditures
for procurement and construction rose from about 9 billion dollars in fiscal
1951 to an estimated 24 billion in fiscal 1952.
In the second quarter of 1952, purchases of goods and services for all
major national security programs were at an annual rate of 50.5 billion




dollars, an increase of 4.5 billion over the rate of the first quarter of the
year. The rate for the half year was 48.2 billion, 5.8 billion higher than
in the second half of 1951. Deliveries of military hard goods and military
construction in the second quarter of 1952 'were at an annual rate of
31.5 billion dollars, or about 5 billion above the first quarter annual rate.
Hard goods and construction expenditures have supplied most of the
increase during the half year, while soft goods procurement has stabilized
on the plateau required for maintaining the present size of the armed forces.
In seeking to account for a slower pace in the military build-up than had
been anticipated early in the defense period, some commentators have been
inclined to emphasize the scarcity of metal supplies. Actually, the prediction of severe shortages of major metals has not materialized. Major
metals were hoarded throughout late 1950 and most of 1951. This exaggeration of demand was compounded by the building up of inventories for
military production, sometimes in excessive quantities, partly because requirements per unit of produced equipment were overstated, and partly because reliance was placed on tentative schedules of military production which
were appreciably higher than the schedules which were subsequently officially approved. In the opening months of 1952, the simultaneous rescheduling of deliveries, the reduction of unit metal requirements, and the impact
of the Controlled Materials Plan which halted the scramble for metals
and assured defense contractors that necessary supplies would be forthcoming, all combined to reverse the predictions of severe shortages. Just
as in the preceding 18 months, lack of steel, copper, or aluminum, the
metals included in the Controlled Materials Plan, has not intervened as a
limiting factor on military production, at least prior to the steel strike.
Some have sought explanation of the pace of military production in
the notion that there has been "overly tender" consideration of the civilian
economy's demands for scarce materials. Whether there is merit in this
explanation depends upon the method of approach. On the one hand,
more scarce materials have been allocated to military production than
have been used in armament output, and the early 1951 military production
schedules upon which allocations to the civilian economy were based have
since undergone several downward revisions. From this viewpoint, it is
hard to find any evidence that the civilian "take" has cramped the growth
of the military program. On the other hand, both legislative and executive decisions about the size and pace of the security program have been
influenced in part by consideration of how much strain should be placed
upon the general economy in terms of calculated appraisal of the security
danger. From this viewpoint, the civilian economy would have had a
smaller proportion of our national output if the defense build-up had been
larger or faster, and the decision not to make it larger or faster was undoubtedly influenced to a degree by a consideration of how much the
civilian economy ought to have. Whether the proper balance has been
struck depends upon international appraisals beyond the scope of this




CHART 7

MILITARY PROCUREMENT & CONSTRUCTION
OBLIGATIONS AND DELIVERIES SINCE JUNE 1950
Military orders of 23 billion dollars in the first half of 1952
raised total funds obligated since Korea to 76 billion d o l l a r s .
Construction and deliveries have amounted to 33 billion dollars,
of which !4!/2 billion took place in the latest half year.
BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
80

80

OBLIGATIONS
(CUMULATIVE)

NEW OBLIGATIONS
DURING QUARTER"

70

60

50

40
CUMULATIVE
OBLIGATIONS,
BEGINNING OF
QUARTER

30

-

20

-

20

10

-

10

30

40

40
DELIVERIES ^
(CUMULATIVE)

30

1 DELIVERIES
I

-

_
- 30

DURING QUARTER-

20 ~
il
l

10

I i
Pm

..
.
_J

>

m»»mm!ffi^8&
3

4
1950

X

1

2

3

4

1951

2

1952

\J ORDERS PLACED.
ESTABLISHMENTS.

SOURCE: DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION.




1

33

CUMULATIVE
DELIVERIES,
BEGINNING OF
QUARTER

- 20

_

10

Review. The Council of Economic Advisers has recurrently expressed the
view that, while a heavier security burden should not be imposed unless it is
necessary, it is well within the general resources of the economy to support
a heavier burden without damaging strain if it should be deemed necessary.
Quite aside from general considerations of economy and materials
availability, the rate of progress toward military production goals depends
upon the nature of current mobilization strategy. The situation today, of
course, is different from that existing in World War II, when the major
objective of mobilization policy was the maximum possible output of
weapons and equipment. The goal of the current security program has
been to maintain a very high degree of flexibility in composition and quality
of equipment, so that the future course of equipment and armament policy
can be varied to meet changing needs. By focusing on continually evolving
and increasingly complex new equipment not far removed from the design
stage, emphasis on flexibility magnifies the impact of bottlenecks in special
purpose machinery, in specialized component parts, and in highly skilled
workers and technicians. Moreover, this strategic flexibility inevitably makes
the per unit cost of armaments much higher, both in resources and in dollars,
than would be the case if designs and schedules were frozen.
Production and employment
The economy continued to expand its total output of goods and services
at a moderate pace during the first half of 1952. Gross national product, when adjusted for price changes, was about 1 percent above the
second half of 1951, and about 3 percent above the first half of that year.
TABLE 1.—Production of goods and services: gross national product in constant prices
[Billions of dollars, 1951 prices, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
19 51

First half

Second half

1952, first
halfi

325.6

Gross national product: total
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investment
Net foreign investment ._ - __ _
.
Government purchases of goods and services -2
National security
Other 3

-

333.0

336.0

208.6
62.8
-1.61
55. 9S
31.0
24.9

207.4
54.4
2.0
69.2
42.4
26.8

211.2
47.7
1.3
75.8
47.8
28.0

1 Estimates based on incomplete data.
2
Includes expenditures for military services, international security and foreign relations (except foreign
loans), atomic energy, merchant marine, and promotion of defense production and economic stabilization;
excludes Federal Government sales.
3
Expenditures by the Federal Government for other than "national security" and total expenditures by
State and local governments.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix table B-2.

Most of the increase in output during the past year was used to meet
Government and business demands associated with the national security
program. Consumer expenditures, seasonally adjusted, rose moderately.




34

CHART

8

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION
In the first quarter of 1952, industrial production regained
the levels of a year earlier. It declined in the second quarter,
partly because of labor disputes in the steel and petroleum
industries. In spite of this drop, output for the first half of
this year was less than 3 percent below the first half of 1951.
INDEX, 1935-39*100*

INDEX, 1935-39 = 100*

1350

3501

300

300

DURABLE
^MANUFACTURES

250

250

200

200

150

150

100
J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

j F M A M j

D

1952

1950
*ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION.
SOURCE: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.

While most forms of private investment were maintained at levels somewhat
higher than a year ago, inventory accumulation, which had been declining
rapidly from the extraordinarily high rate of the second quarter of 1951,
was replaced by net inventory liquidation in the second quarter of 1952.
This conjuncture of rising output for national security with a slightly
reduced private demand for goods and services brought about a high level
of employment under conditions of general economic stability.
Industrial production. The index of industrial production, which had
dropped moderately in the second half of 1951, regained in the first quarter
the levels of a year earlier. The decline in the second quarter was partly
attributable to labor disputes in the steel and petroleum industries, but also
reflected reductions in the output of textiles, coal, and some other goods.
Production of nondurable goods in January-June 1952 averaged 7 percent
below the comparable period of the preceding year, when consumer buying
and growth in business inventories were keeping output at capacity levels.
Output of durable goods and minerals was about the same as the first half of
1951. (See chart 8 and appendix table B-16.)




35

CHART 9

CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE
The civilian labor force of 64.4 million persons in June
1952 was 600,000 above June a year ago. Both
agricultural and nonagricultural employment increased.
Unemployment at 1.8 million was slightly below June 1951.
MILLIONS OF PERSONS*
70

MILLIONS OF PERSONS*
70

1950

1952
60

60

NONAGRICULTURAL
EMPLOYMENT

1951

- 50

50 —

0Q

\

\

1

I ~ L

I

10

10

AGRICULTURAL
EMPLOYMENT

A

*14 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER.
SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




36

S

O

N

D

Employment. Although the total labor force averaged about 1 million
higher during the first half of 1952 than during the same period of 1951, the
civilian labor force averaged the same in both periods—62.3 million—as the
build-up of military manpower progressed toward its scheduled goal.
Civilian employment in the first 6 months of 1952 averaged 60.5 million,
300,000 higher than in the first half of 1951. The number of workers employed in June 1952 was 62.5 million, a new high for that month.
There was an increase in nonagricultural employment, accompanied by
a continuance of the long-run decline in employment in agriculture. Agricultural employment in the first half of 1952 averaged about 100,000 less
than in the first half of 1951, while the number of workers outside
agriculture increased about 400,000. However, the gain in nonagricultural
employment was far less than occurred from the first half of 1950 to the
first half of 1951, when the number of workers other than in agriculture
rose by 2.1 million, or 4 percent. (See chart 9 and appendix table B-ll.)
The rise in nonagricultural employment was due primarily 10 an increase
of Government employees, mostly in defense activities. In private employment, trends were mixed. Industries producing capital goods had more
workers, while those producing consumer goods, both durables and nondurables, had less. For all manufacturing industries, average employment
was 15.9 million in the first half of 1951 and 15.7 million in the first half
of 1952. (See table 2 and appendix table B-12.)
TABLE 2.—Changes in nonagricultural employment
1951, first
half

Industry

1952, first
half

Change
Amount
Percentage

(Thousands)
45,880

Total wage and salary workers.
Government (Federal, State, and local)
Finance
Trade
Durable goods manufacturing .
Transportation and public utilities
Service ..
Contract construction
.
Mining.
_
_
__
Nondurable goods manufacturing
.

..

46, 119

+239

6,246
1,859
9,660
8,927
4,116
4,729
2,432
923
6,997

6,544
1,943
9,730
8,954
4,123
4,734
2,418
895
6,779

+298
+84
+80
427
+7
+5
-14
-28
-218

+0.5
+4.8
+4.5
+.8
+.3
+.2
+.1
-.6
-3.0
-3.1

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Labor.

There was an increase in hours worked in such industries as ordnance and
machine tools, but most manufacturing industries operated with a shorter
workweek. During the half year, the average workweek of 40.4 hours in
manufacturing was one-half hour shorter than in the first half of 1951. (See
appendix table B-13.)
Unemployment. Unemployment averaged 1.8 million, or 2.9 percent
of the civilian labor force, in the first half of 1952, compared with 2.1 mil-




37

lion, or 3.3 percent of the civilian labor force, a year earlier. In June
1952, unemployment was at the lowest level for that month since World
War II. In addition to the low average level of unemployment during the
first half of this year, the proportion of the total who were unemployed for
15 weeks or more was also lower than during the first half of 1951.
Despite the low level of unemployment generally, the situation in many
labor markets was much easier than a year before. In July 1952, four labor
market areas in continental United States were designated by the Department of Labor as having serious shortages, compared with six in July 1951.
The number of areas with a substantial surplus of labor increased. There
were 18 labor market areas designated as having a substantial labor surplus
in July of this year, compared with 14 at mid-1951. The continuing depressed condition of the textile and apparel industries, and chronic unemployment in a number of coal mining districts, were responsible for the labor
surpluses in most of these areas. Unemployment in the automotive centers,
particularly Detroit, reached substantial proportions in the early months of
1952, but by May there had been a moderate decline in the number without
jobs, partly in consequence of new defense orders and the easing of restrictions on materials for automotive production.
The general adequacy of the manpower supply to meet defense and
civilian productidn needs is indicated by the fact that advances in defense
production over the past 6 months have been accomplished with no significant increase in employment or lengthening of the workweek. At the same
time there have been shortages of workers in a few areas, and industry's
needs for additional workers in such key occupations as engineering and
skilled machine shop jobs continue. There are indications, however, that
better utilization of workers in shortage occupations is helping to relieve
the shortage of skilled people.
Work stoppages. The number of work stoppages during the first 6
months of 1952, as well as the number of workers involved, was higher than
in the corresponding period of 1951, which was a year of relatively little
loss of working time because of strike activity. Total man-days of idleness
caused by work stoppages represented 0.6 percent of estimated working
time, and was 200 percent above the January-June period last year.
The brief industry-wide walkout of more than 500,000 steelworkers
at the end of April and the second walkout which began early in June
caused a significant portion of total strike idleness. By the first week of July,
many workers in other industries had been laid off because of steel shortages. About 70,000 workers in the petroleum industry went on strike at
the end of April. By the last week in May, wage contracts were signed
covering most of the industry, providing for a wage increase of 15 cents an
hour. Another extensive stoppage, involving more than 100,000 workers,
took place in the telephone industry, and a 7-week Western Union strike
involved 30,000 workers. Other large stoppages occurred in the lumber
and construction industries.




Economic stability
Mixed inflationary and deflationary pressures. During the first half of
1952, the private and public demand for goods and services held production
in general at a high level, but did not strain the capacity of the economy.
The modest rise in total demand kept the Nation's productive plant busy,
but less busy than it might have been in many areas. The leveling off, and in
some cases decline, in employment and in the average workweek in many
industries manufacturing goods for consumers, the slow rise in total production, and other indicators, both physical and financial, told of an economy that was pushing ahead at less than forced draft and with a high degree
of general stability.
But the stability that carried over from 1951 was an uneasy one, generating wide shifts and conflicts in business sentiment. The earlier fear that the
Nation was experiencing a calm before a new tempest of inflation was
increasingly challenged in the first quarter by the belief that a recession
would develop before defense spending reached its crest. As midyear
approached, the pendulum of expectations seemed to be swinging back
slowly in the direction of stability or some inflationary pressures.
Bank credit and money supply. Total loans and investments of commercial banks remained virtually unchanged during the first quarter of 1952,
but expanded more than 2 billion dollars during the second quarter. The
increase in bank loans for the half year was at about three-fifths the rate
of a year earlier, when loans expanded 2.6 billion dollars, or 5 percent.
Much of the growth during the past 6 months was accounted for by a'rise
in lending on Government securities, related in part to activities in the
securities markets arising from Treasury borrowing. There was no change
in commercial bank holdings of Government obligations during the first
half of 1952, compared with a decrease of 3.5 billion dollars, or 5.6 percent,
during the first half of the preceding year. (See table 3 and appendix table
B-26.)
TABLE 3.—Loans and investments of all commercial banks
Investment s

T ntal
loans
and
investments

Period

Loans
Total

U. S.
Government
securities

Other
securities

Billions of dollars, end of period:
126.7
126.0
132.6
134.8

52.2
54.8
57.7
59.4

74.4
71.2
74.9
75.4

62.0
58.5
61 5
61.5

12.4
12.7
13.3
13.9

-0.6
+5.2
+1.7

+5.0
+5 3
+2.9

—4.3
+5.2
+.7

-5.6
+5 1
.0

+2.4
+4.7
+4.5

+7.0

1950: Second half.
1951: First half..
Second half
1952: First half
Percentage change:
From end of preceding half year to end of:
1951: First half..
Second half
1952: First half
From end of 1951, first half, to end of:
1952: First half

+8.4

+5.9

+5.1

+9.4

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.




39

The total money supply, including Government deposits, after falling a
little during January and February from the December 1951 high of 189.8
billion dollars, rose moderately over the next three months as changes in
the volume of bank loans and investments, gold imports, and other factors
influencing the money supply underwent counterbalancing movements. In
June, however, the money supply jumped sharply upward, as the effect of
a rise in bank loans was added to that of the increase in bank investments,
particularly in U. S. Government securities, which had been under way for
some weeks. (See table 4 and appendix table B-27.)
TABLE 4.—Money supply
Deposit" and
currency including U.S.
Government
deposits *

Period

Privately-heldJmoney
supply
.Total

Demand
deposits,
. adjusted *

Pillions of dollar s, end of quarter:
1950: Fourth quarter

_ . - _

180.6

176.9

92.3

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

..

179.9
181.3

ias.8
189.8

172.5
174.7
177.9
186.0

89.0
89.0
92.0
98.2

188.7
191.3

182.9
185. 3

94.8
95.8

+2.4

+3.1

+4.9

-.4
+.8
+1.4
+3.3

-2.5
+1.3
+1.8
+4.6

-3.6
.0
+3.4
+6.7

-.6
+1.4

-1.7
+1.3

-3.5
+1-1

_

.

.

.

1952* First quarter
Second quarter*
Percentage change from end of preceding quarter to end of:
1950: Fourth quarter
1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

.... . .

_

1952: First quarter
Second quarter* _ .

* Includes U. S. Government deposit* at Federal Reserve banks and commercial and savings banks, an
U.'S. Treasurer'? time deposits, <irw»n account.
* Includes deposits of State and local governments.
* Includes demand deposits, other than interbank and U. S. Government, less cash items in process of
collection.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).

During the first quarter, there was the usual seasonal shift in the ownership of funds, as the privately-held money supply dropped about 3 billion
dollars or 1.7 percent, largely because of the excess of Treasury receipts over
expenditures. But during the second quarter, the privately-held money
supply increased about 2.4 billion, with the expansion of bank loans and
investments replacing Treasury cash receipts and disbursements as the
principal factor influencing the volume of funds in private hands.
Credit policy. Largely because private borrowing during the first months
of 1952 reflected scant evidence of current inflationary demand, several
credit controls which had been put into effect after the Korean outbreak were either suspended or eased during the period. The voluntary
program of credit restraint, undertaken by banks and other major classes of




40

financing institutions under the auspices of the Federal Reserve System to
curb lending for less essential purposes, continued actively during the first
few months of 1952. Early in May, the National Voluntary Credit Restraint Committee took action to place the program on a stand-by basis.
Also in May, the Federal Reserve Board suspended Regulation W, which
applied to consumer instalment loans, the regulation having already been
considerably relaxed at the end of July 1951 as a result of congressional action. Regulation X, which specifies minimum downpayments and maximum maturities for mortgage loans on new houses and commercial construction, and the terms of Government-insured or guaranteed loans on new
or old houses, was eased in June.
At the end of June, in renewing the Defense Production Act, the Congress
terminated the authority to impose controls on consumer credit. It also
provided that no future program of voluntary credit restraint could be
approved under the section of the Act which had supplied the legal basis
lor the voluntary campaign of credit curtailment conducted between March
1951 and May 1952. Furthermore, the amended Act limited the President's power to impose regulations on residential mortgage credit to periods
when the rate of housing starts exceeds 1.2 million units a year. The rate
CHART 10

WHOLESALE PRICES
Wholesale prices fell moderately throughout the first half of 1952.
Industrial prices declined steadily, while farm and processed food
prices fluctuated.
I N D E X , 1947-49 = 100

INDEX, 1947-49 = 100

130 -

-

120 -

- 120

110 —

-NO

100

130

100

J F M A M J

J F M A M J J A S O N D

I960

1952

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.




41

of housing starts during the first 6 months of 1952 was below that level.
There were no changes in Federal Reserve bank discount rates or in the
reserve requirements of member banks. Federal Reserve bank holdings of
Government securities declined 1.5 billion dollars from December 1951 to
the end of May, and then increased 0.6 billion during the following month,
reflecting in part the Federal Reserve System's effort to assist the Treasury's
extensive borrowing operations. (See appendix table B-28.) The weekly
average of Federal Reserve discounts during the first half of 1952 was 180
million dollars or nearly 70 percent above the first half of the preceding
year. Major factors in the increased use of the discount privilege by member banks were the larger reserves made necessary by the expanded volume
of deposits, and the reduced attractiveness of adjusting reserve positions
through sales of Government securities in consequence of changes in Federal
Reserve open-market policies.
Prices. The price record of the half year reflected substantial stability
on two counts: the narrowness of the range within which the more comprehensive indexes of prices moved, and the further return toward the
general price structure prevailing 2 years ago.
The prices of farm products, minerals, and other raw materials traded
on the organized markets, which as a group rose most in the post-Korean
and post-Chinese surges of 1950 and early 1951, fell most after inflationary
pressures abated in the spring of 1951. (See charts 10 and 12.) They
lost further ground during the first half of this year, as supplies of some
metals became more ample and some farm and food prices weakened
TABLE 5.—Changes in price indexes: spot primary market, wholesale, and consumers3
Percentage change
Index

February 1951 December 1951
June 1950
to
to
to
June 1952 1 June 1952 2
June 1952

Spot primary market pi ices (28 commodities) 3

+11.9

-24.6

-9.8

Wholesale prices: all co mmodities

+11.1

-4.5

-1.9

+13.5
+12.3
+10.2

-8.4
-3.7
-3.9

-3.6
-1.8
-1.7

Farm products
Processed foods
Other than farm an d foods (industrial)

June 1950
February 1951 December 1951
to
to
to
May 1952 1 May 1952 2
May 1952
Consumers' prices: all iterns
Food 4
Apparel
Rent
Fuel, electricity, an d refrigeration
H ousef urnishings
M iscellaneous

+11.0

+2.8

-0.1

+14.0
+9.6
+7.9
+4.0
+11.1
+10,9

+2.5
+.1
+5.4
+.5
-2.1
+5.0

-.3
-2.2
+1.5
-.2
-2.3
+1.4

1 Korean outbreak to latest month for which data are available.
2 General Ceiling Price Regulation to latest month for which data are available.
3 Percentage changes based on daily indexes for the middle of the month.
« Percentage changes to June 1952.
Source: Department of Labor. (See appendix tables B-21 and B-22).




moderately. In some markets, prices may once again have overreacted
to a change in the business situation, falling more than justified by the
underlying business situation. Evidences of this began to appear in selected
increases during May and June.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics' comprehensive monthly index of wholesale prices, which on average reflects a much more advanced stage of
processing and distribution than the daily index, continued to drift downward during the first 6 months of 1952. The prices of both industrial
products and processed foods participated in the slow decline. Farm
prices changed directions several times, but in June were still below the
January 1952 level.
As shown in chart 11, consumers' prices varied little during the first 6
months of 1952. After dipping in the first quarter, they registered slight
increases in April and May. Most of the variation at retail was in food
prices. Rents and miscellaneous items continued upward, while apparel
and housefurnishings prices declined perceptibly. (See appendix table
B-22.)
The interrelationships of prices in the successive raw material, processing, and distribution stages now conform more closely to the pre-Korean
CHART 11

CONSUMERS' PRICES
Aside from a slight drop in February 1952, consumers' prices thus
far this year have continued the slow uptrend which has
characterized the period since early 1951.
INDEX, 1935-39 = 100

INDEX, 1935-39 = 100

250

250
FOOD^^

^

225 —

— 225
APPAREL^^

x**""""~"

200

200

•••*

..•••"""
175

150

— 175

ALL ITEMS'^

_

150
RENT**.

-0—0—0—0—0

<>^<>-K>-<>--<^O-O--<^^

—

J25

!

100
J

1

1

t

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

|

1951

1950

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

209722—52-




1

1

!

1

1

\

1

1

1

1 1

F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J

43

1952

125

100

CHART 12

PRICE TRENDS SINCE KOREA
From June 1950 to early 1951, consumers' prices rose much less than
prices at earlier stages of production; since then, while consumers'
prices have risen further, other prices have fallen back into roughly
their pre- Korean relationship with prices at retail.
INDEX, JUNE 1950 = 100

INDE>(, JUNE 1950=100

150

150
/

^v,

1

140

SPOT PRIMARY ..
^MARKET PRICES-7

\

140

1
J

\

^

120

\

/CPR

1

130

130

1

1

^L

s*

~j^^
J

J

A

S

0

N D

120

V

_--—

110

100

\ -

WHOLESALE PRICES

s>

1

110

^CONSUMERS' PRICES
!

J

I960

1

F

1

M

1

A

1

M

1

J

1

J

1

A

1

S

!

O

1951

1

1

N

D

J

1

F

1

M A

I

1

M

100

J

1952

•^MID-11JONTH DAILY PRICE INDEX OF 2 5 SENSITIVE PRIMARY MARKET COMMODITIES.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

price pattern than was the case in January 1951, when price controls were
inaugurated. This is strikingly illustrated in chart 12. The fact that wholesale and retail prices are now at about the same level above June 1950 casts
doubt on the familiar notion that retail prices are due to fall soon because
of the general easing of wholesale prices since early 1951. On the other
hand, it does not follow that all of the post-Korean price distortions have now
been removed. Within given processing and distribution levels—that is, in
the "horizontal" dimension of the price structure—sharp differences in
prices continued during the first half of 1952, when measured against preKorean levels. Correspondingly, there were differences in the pressure
exerted on ceilings.
Price control during the first half of the year was primarily a matter of
adapting regulations to this mixed market experience. A Bureau of Labor
Statistics' study indicated that in March, for example, prices of commodities
representing 85 percent of the coverage of the consumers' price index,
including some prices not subject to control, were still at their post-Korean
peaks or within 5 percent of those peaks. In such tight market areas,
the Office of Price Stabilization continued generally to hold the line,
granting increases only when justified under its standards requiring a
limited amount of cost absorption. An increasing number of demands




44

for higher ceilings were denied under the chief of these standards, the industry earnings standard: where, as in the case of wholesale and retail grocers,
this standard required moderate increases, they were granted. In soft market areas, OPS developed a ceiling-suspension policy, which by midyear
had been used in about 20 cases, including fats and oils, hides and leathers,
wool, raw cotton, all textiles, and whiskey and wine. The suspension technique is described in the discussion of price and wage policy later in this
Review.
Wages. Wages continued to rise at nearly the same pace as during the
second half of 1951. The rise was considerably less than in the first half
of 1951. In June 1952, average hourly earnings in all manufacturing industries were about 1 percent above December 1951, and 4 percent above
June of that year, with wages in industries manufacturing durable goods
showing slightly greater gains. In building construction, hourly earnings
in May were less than 1 percent above the December 1951 average, while in
retail trade the increase for the period was 5 percent. The trend of hourly
earnings in current and constant prices is shown in chart 13 for selected
industries. (Also, see appendix table B-14.)
The Wage Stabilization Board, during the first 6 months of 1952, continued to review collective bargaining agreements for their consistency with
the stabilization program. It was successful in handling dispute cases—
with one notable exception. It was the exception, however—the steel
case—which captured public attention.
Wage and price problem in steel. By June, the steel dispute had already
overhung the economy for 6 months, and had finally resulted in the strike
which the Government had sought to avoid. The dispute's greatest threat
to the full-bodied operation of the economy and to the defense program, of
course, lay in the loss of steel. It is still too early to assess the full impact of
the stoppage in this regard.
On the wage side, the recommendations made by the Wage Stabilization
Board, which were announced in March, related to a number of different
issues involving both basic wage rates and fringe benefits. On the various
specific questions at issue, the recommendations of the Wage Stabilization
Board were deemed by it consistent with those made in other cases on
which it had previously passed. The steel wage demands approved by the
Board had counterparts in contracts already approved for other major industries; the fringe questions, for example, had not been open for bargaining
in the steel industry since 1947. The individual recommendations thus
could be more accurately interpreted as granting "catching up" increases
than as setting a new pattern.
On the price side, the stabilization program became an obstacle to
ready acceptance by the industry of the wage recommendations. The
industry earnings standard—the fundamental criterion used by the Office
of Price Stabilization for determining the amount of cost absorption that
it is fair to require of an industry—already had been used to deny general




45

CHART 13

AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS - SELECTED INDUSTRIES
Average hourly earnings have risen substantially since Korea,
but inmost industries they have barely kept pace with the cost
of living.

J

J

A S 0

I960

N 0

J

1951

F M A M

1952

LI EARNINGS IN CURRENT PRICES DIVIDED BY CONSUMERS1 PRICE INDEX ON BASE JUMC 1980*100.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL




46

OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

J

price increases in many instances involving higher costs resulting from
previous wage increases. The Government held that steel should be no
exception, particularly in view of the price increase that already was available under the Gapehart Amendment. An easy and sizable break-through
of the basic stabilization rules in the steel case would have swung open the
gate to a rush of demands for price increases for many other industries.
Nonetheless, the Government in its desire to end the stoppage offered price
concessions above those required by law or by the economics of the situation.
TRENDS WITHIN MAJOR SECTORS
Consumers
During the first half of 1952., consumers read about cuts in the output
of many goods because of materials shortages. But what they saw in
most shops and display rooms did not seem to confirm the reports. Consumers continued to place a high percent of their income in cash and other
liquid assets because they elected not to spend—the goods were to be had.
Personal income. Total personal income (annual rates, seasonally adjusted) continued to rise during the first half of 1952, although at a less rapid
rate than in either half of the preceding year. (See table 6, chart 14, and
appendix table B-7.) The rise during the past 6 months reflected primarily an increase in salaries and wages; business and professional incomes,
and dividends and interest, showed moderate gains. Farm income, however, dropped sharply from the level of the second half of 1951. Personal
income after taxes, at seasonally adjusted annual rates, fell slightly in the
first quarter of 1952. But in the second quarter, spendable earnings rose,
with the result that for the half year disposable personal income showed a
small gain over the second half of 1951.
However, the purchasing power of the average consumer was not significantly higher than a year earlier, when allowance is made for increased
taxes, higher prices, and the growth in population. In the second quarter
TABLE 6.—Changes in personal income
Billions of dollars, seasonally
adjusted annual rates
1951

Source of income
First
half

Second
half

1952,
first
half i

Percentage change

1951, first 1951, second
half to 1952, half to 1952,
first half
first half

249.0
Salaries, wages, and other labor income
Proprietors' income:
Farm
Business and professional
Rental income
__
Dividends and personal interest
Transfer payments -

259.0

263.5

+5.8

+1.7

167.4

174.0

178.2

+6.5

+2.4

15.0
27.4
9.4
21.0
12.5

+1.4
+5.0
+5.9
+5.0
+1.6

-8.5
+4.2
+2.2
+1.4
+.8

14.8
26.1
8.5
20.0
12.3

16.4
26.3
9.2
20.7
12.4

i Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




47

CHART 14

PERSONAL INCOME
During the first half of 1952, personal income increased at a slower
rate than in the preceding 6-month period. Most of the increase
was in wages and salaries. Other components of income were relatively
stable, except farm income, which declined.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*
300 1

'

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*
i 300

H250

250 r-

, H 200

200

150

150

100

100

J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

I960

F M A M

1952

^SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

of 1952, per capita disposable real income—average money earnings after
taxes, with adjustment for price changes—was about 0.2 percent above
that in the second quarter of 1951. (See appendix table B-10.)
In all manufacturing industries, average weekly money earnings were 3
percent above the first half of 1951, with durable goods industries showing
a greater increase than industries producing nondurable goods. Although
the average workweek in manufacturing was shorter than a year earlier, the
rise in hourly rates, though moderate, was still large enough to lift the earnings of this group of workers. An increase in the average workweek of those
employed in construction, together with a rise in average hourly pay, resulted
in an 8-percent growth in weekly earnings from the first half of 1951 to the




first half of this year. (See appendix table B-15.) During the same period, weekly earnings in wholesale and ictail trade increased 2.5 percent
and 5.0 percent respectively. (See table 7.)
TABLE 7.—Earnings and hours in manufacturing and building construction industries
195L
first
i;ar;

Item and industry

Weekly earning*:
All manufacturing industries

1

Change

1952,
frst
half i

Amount

Percentage

$64.42

$66. 77

+$2. 35

+3.6

Durable goods
Nondurable goods

69. 11
58. SO

71.94
59. 88

+2.83
+1.58

+4.1
+2.7

Building construction

79.37

85.79

+6.42

+8.1

_

Hourly earnings:
All manufacturing Industries

1. 575

1.652

+.077

+4.9

Durable goods
Nondurable goods

1. 655
1.466

1.7^9
1.529

+.084
+. 063

+5.1
+4.3

Building construction

2. 166

2.279

+.113

+5.2

Hours
Length of workweek:
All manufacturing industries

40.9

40.4

-0.5

-1.2

Durable goods
Nondurable goods

41.8
39.8

41.4
89 2

-.4
-.6

-1.0
.—1.5

36.6

37.6

+1.0

+2.7

-

Building construction
1

Estimates based on incomplete data.
Source: Department of Labor. (See appendix tables B-13, B-14, and B-15.)

Consumption expenditures. Although the steady rise in disposable personal income, which had begun in the fourth quarter of 1949, was interrupted in the first quarter of 1952, consumer spending at seasonally adjusted
annual rates rose moderately in both the first and second quarters. A
stronger demand for nondurable goods and for services accounted for all
the rise during the first quarter. During the second quarter, buying of
TABLE 8.—Personal consumption expenditures
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Period

Total

1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half 1
1951: First quarter .
Se'-ond quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1952: First quarter J
Second quarter

207 5
208 4

Durable
goods

Nondurable
goods

28.8
25 4

112.3
114 7

66.4
68 3

1

214.1

25 A

118.2

70.5

.
_. ___

210 5
204.0
206 4
210.5

31 3
26.3
25 5
25 3

113 3
111.3
113 2
116 2

65.9
66.9
67 6
69.9

213 2
215.0

25.2
25.5

118.0
118.5

70.0
71.0

-

-

...

.. ._ . _.

i Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




Services

49

durable goods also increased, partly perhaps because of the suspension of
instalment credit regulations early in May. But there was little in the
modest rise in consumer spending during the first 6 months of 1952 to
encourage merchants to reverse the policy of stabilizing inventories or of
letting them run down further from the worrisome heights of the second
quarter of 1951. (See table 8 and appendix table B-4.)
TABLE 9.—New housing starts
[Thousands of nonfarm dwelling units]
Total

Period
1950: Total
First half
Second half

._

1952: First half

Public

1,396

_ _ _ ._

...

g
35

1,020

71

590
601

.

44

696
656

1,091

_

1,352

706
690

1951: Total
First half
Second half

Private

529
491

61
10

568

524

44

NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Labor.

The demand for housing continued strong. Although the number of
houses started in January 1952 was substantially lower than in the same
month of 1951, the number of starts rose enough thereafter to make the
total for the first half of 1952 only about 4 percent below that for the comparable period of last year. (See table 9 and chart 15.)
Personal saving. Personal saving declined somewhat during the first half
of 1952, and in the second quarter was at the seasonally adjusted annual
rate of about 7 percent of disposable income, compared with more than
9 percent during the second half of 1951. The more rapid rise in consumer
debt, which is a form of dissaving, was an important factor contributing to
the increase in consumer spending relative to disposable income. There
was also less net investment by unincorporated firms and farms in tangible
business assets, especially in inventories. Investment by these enterprises
in plant, equipment, and inventories, less allowance for depreciation and for
debt incurred in acquiring the assets, is one of the components of personal
saving, as the term is generally used. (See appendix table B-9.)
Consumer debt and residential mortgage debt. Total consumer credit
declined, largely for seasonal reasons, during the first quarter, and expanded
at an accelerated rate in the second. Instalment credit, which largely
determines the movement of total consumer credit, fell about 350 million
dollars during the January-March quarter, and then climbed steadily,
reaching by the end of June a level nearly 600 million or 4 percent above that
of December 1951. The sharp upturn in instalment credit during the
second quarter was partly seasonal, but it reflected also the suspension of
Regulation W early in May. During the first half of 1951, consumer
credit had dropped more than 800 million dollars, or 4 percent, with instal-




CHART

15

NEW HOUSING STARTS
New housing s t a r t s in the first half of this y e a r came
to an estimated 567,500, e x c e e d i n g the last half of
1951 by a b o u t 13 p e r c e n t but falling about 4 p e r c e n t
below the f i r s t half of last y e a r .
THOUSANDS OF UNITS
2001

THOUSANDS OF UNITS
200
NEW NONFARM DWELLING UNITS

150

150

100

100

50

50

I
J

t
F

I
M

I
A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF LABOR.

ment credit accounting for 500 million dollars of the decline. (See chart
16 and appendix table B-25.)
Individuals continued to add to their nonfarm mortgage debt, at nearly
the same rate as in 1951. By the end of June, total mortgages of $20,000
or less were about 3.5 billion dollars, or 6.5 percent above December 1951.
The increase during the comparable period a year earlier was about 7.5
percent.
Business
Business as a whole was good in the first half of 1952. The general
condition was indicated by the total national output and employment
figures already cited: moderate expansion at high levels. Business continued to make longer-term investments at record rates, and found ample
funds to finance them. But as in the preceding half year, the prosperity
reflected in production, sales, and price data was not evenly distributed,
and in some industries downward adjustments were made in output and
employment. Moreover, reduction in the rate of inventory accumulation
helped to obscure the strength of final demand.
The economy, inherited from 1951, was a mixed terrain of hard and soft




CHART 16

CONSUMER CREDIT
Total consumer credit outstanding, after declining seasonally
during the first quarter of 1952, rose at an accelerating rate
during the second quarter. The increase was largely in
instalment credit.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

25

25

10

10

J

F

M

A

M

J

J

A

S

O

N

D

J

1950
PERCENTAGE CHANGES

-25

-20

-15

F

M

A

M

END OF MONTH

-10

0

-5

J

J

A

S

O

N

D

J

1951
+5

-HO

415

TOTAL CONSUMER CREDIT

<P DECEMBER 1950 TO JUNE 1951
JUNE 1951 TO DECEMBER 1951 (
t-ggy

' ] DECEMBER 1951 TO JUNE 1952
INSTALMENT CREDIT

THE TERMS OF REGULATION w WERE MADE MORE RESTRICTIVE IN OCTOBER 1950 AND
7

PERCENTAGE CHANGES BASED ON DATA FOR END OF PERIOD.
SOURCES: BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND
COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




M

A

M

J

1952

JUNE I960 TO DECEMBER I960 C

'

F

+20

425

markets, with hardness concentrated in fields most closely related to the
defense effort, and with softness conspicuous in some businesses-producing
consumers' goods. For the most part, this continued to be the situation
during the past 6 months, although some hard areas—which tended also
to be the "hard goods"—showed some signs of softening, while some
soft areas revealed an inclination to harden.
Production, sales, and prices in major business areas. In agriculture, the
present expectation is that the combined output of crops and livestock
products in 1952 will be from 3 to 5 percent higher than in 1951, a year
of near record production. Agricultural marketings in the first half of
1952 were about 6 percent higher than in the first half of 1951, with substantial increases for both crop and livestock products. Although prices
received by farmers averaged somewhat lower than a year earlier, cash
receipts were up about 3 percent because of the higher marketings. Farm
production costs rose fairly steadily throughout the past year. Prices paid
by farmers for production items, including interest, taxes, and wage rates,
averaged about 3 percent higher in the first half of 1952 than in the same
period of 1951. The parity ratio averaged 101 in the first half of this year,
compared with 110 in the first half of 1951, and 97 in June 1950. (See
appendix table B-23.)
The output of manufactured durable goods averaged about the same
during the first 6 months of this year as a year earlier. A high and steady rate
of sales was maintained in the first 5 months of 1952, averaging on a seasonally adjusted basis 6 percent higher than in the last half of 1951 and 3 percent
higher than in the first half of that year. The pace at which new orders
continued to reach producers of durable goods, especially manufacturers of
capital goods, has prevented any reduction of their record backlog of unfilled
orders, and serves as a base for near-peak production for several months
to come. Manufacturers' prices for most of these goods continued to press
against ceilings, and in some cases ceilings were increased slightly. Costs
also advanced moderately, although lead, zinc, and some other materials
previously in short supply became available at lower prices.
During the first half of 1952, both production and sales of manufacturers
of nondurable goods, seasonally adjusted, were lower than the year before,
but edged somewhat above the second half of 1951. Because of its central
place in 1951 soft market developments, the textile and apparel field
attracted much interest. There was evidence of a gradual recovery from
the low reached late in 1951. Wholesale prices for textiles and apparel,
however, continued to sag throughout the half year. This was the United
States manifestation of a world-wide slump in textiles.
Wholesale sales, seasonally adjusted, were below last-half of 1951 levels.
Retail sales were higher than in the first half of 1951. (See appendix table
B-19.) While there was no substantial difference between the behavior of
durable goods and nondurable goods, the markets for the former showed
relatively greater improvement in the second quarter. Retail food sales




53

CHART 17

BUSINESS INVESTMENT
During the first quarter of 1952 the rate of accumulation of
business inventories continued to fall, and during the second
quarter total inventories showed a net decline for the first
time since before the Korean outbreak.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

40

40

30

30
/PRODUCERS' DURABLE EQUIPMENT

20

20

-^

^....^•-•••••••v
w^-x
>^

10

/ * ^ N E T <CHANGE IN BUSINESS
NVENTORIES

/****

jX

/

1

\^

^V

1

-10

BUSINESS J/
/CONSTRUCTSN

Xv

1
2

1

1
3

4

1

1
2

I960

1

1
3

4

1951

1

-I 0

2

1952

( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.
"'TOTAL PRIVATE NEW CONSTRUCTION EXCLUDING NONFARM RESIDENTIAL BUILDING.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

advanced slightly as volume was maintained at high 1951 levels, and prices,
while moving erratically, tended upward, partly because of the continued
increase in food marketing costs during the past year.
Inventories. From the middle of 1951 through the first quarter of
this year, one of the principal dampeners in the economy was the swift
drop in the rate at which business was adding to inventories. (See chart
17.)
By the second quarter of 1952, when inventory accumulation was
replaced by liquidation, it seemed clear that this offset to the increasing
expenditures in other sectors of the economy had largely spent itself. The
counterinflationary action of the fall in the rate of inventory growth can
too easily pass unnoticed, if attention is focused only on the rate of accumulation of inventories in any period, and not on the interperiod changes in
the rate of accumulation. Both series are shown in table 10.
Generally speaking, the volume of business inventories seems to have
approached a more normal relationship to sales during the first half of
1952. During the first 5 months of the year, retail stocks showed little net
change. Wholesale inventories edged downward during the first half of




54

TABLE 10.—Accumulation of business inventories
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Net
business
inventory
accumulation

Quarter

1951* First quarter
Second Quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

-

_ _

_

10 3
16.3
8.9
58

—3 3
4-6.0
—7.4
—3.1

.6
—1 5

_ .-

1952: First quarter _
Second quarter *

Change
from
preceding
quarter

—5.2
—2.1

._

_

1

Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

1952, but manufacturing inventories remained fairly stable until the latter part of the second quarter, when steel inventories were drawn down
substantially. Examination of industry data suggests that the increase
was concentrated in defense industries, where, despite the excessive growth
of many materials stocks in 1951, the accumulation of goods in process
caused a net gain during the half year. As can be seen in table 11, by May
the ratios of inventories to sales (seasonally adjusted) in both wholesale
and retail trade were approaching the levels of December 1950, when the
second wave of heavy post-Korean inventory buying was only beginning.
The ratio of manufacturers' inventories to sales, although substantially
below that of last December, was well above the level of December 1950.
This is probably accounted for in large part by the growth of defense-related
inventories, particularly goods in process. (See appendix table B-19.)
TABLE 11.—Business inventories and sales
[Adjusted for seasonal variation]
1950

1951
Tl/Torr

Item
June

December

June"!

December

1952

Billions ofdottarx:
Inventories: * 'total

52 8

Manufacturing
Wholesale trade.
Retail trade

70.0

39 0
10.2
20 3

42.0
10.0
18.1

42.5

42 2

43 1

41.6

44 5

19.3

21.0
8.6
12.6

22.1
8.7
12.2

20.8
8.5
12.3

23.0

1.35

1.43

1.61

1.68

1.57

1.51
1.03
1.29

_ _

70 1

33 3
9.4
17.8

39 2

Sales: 2 total

69 4

8.1

_

60 4

29 1
15 6

Manufacturing
Wholesale trade
Retail trade

1.58
1.09
1.41

1.76
1.17
1.66

2.02
1.17
1.47

1.85
1.14
1.38

7.9

12.1

3

Ratio of inventories to sales: total.- _
Manufacturing
Wholesale trade...
Retail trade .

1 Book value, end of period.
2
Total for month.
3 Ratios based on unrounded data.
Source: Department of Commerce. (See appendix table B~19.)




55

9.5

18.1

8.4

13.1

CHART 18

NEW PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS
IN SELECTED MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

RATIO SCALE

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

DURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES

MOTOR VEHICLES
AND EQUIPMENT

TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT,
EXCLUDING AUTOMOBILES

NONDURABLE GOODS INDUSTRIES
PETROLEUM AND
COAL PRODUCTS

CHEMICALS AND
ALLIED PRODUCTS

MISCELLANEOUS
NONDURABLE GOODS

X

.2

ANNUAL RATES, NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION.

SEASONAL INFULENCES TEND TO

RAISE OUTLAYS IN THE FOURTH QUARTER AND LOWER THEM IN THE FIRST.
ANTICIPATED EXPENDITURES

REPORTED BY BUSINESS DURING THE SECOND QUARTER OF 1952.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.




56

Business Investment in construction and equipment. Business spending
on productive facilities remained high in the first half of 1952. Expenditures for producers' durable equipment exceeded those in the first half of
1951 somewhat and those in the second half slightly, with the gains appearing outside agriculture. Farm construction outlays during the past 6 months
were slightly below the level of 1951. Industrial construction declined
in the first half of 1952, but in the second quarter was still well above the
level of the second quarter of 1951. Expenditures for commercial and
recreational construction in the first 6 months of 1952 remained low. (See
chart 17 and appendix table B-5.)
Total "plant and equipment" outlays by nonagricultural business for the
first half of this year were 11 percent above the level of the first 6 months
of 1951, and there was only a small drop from the record reached in the
second quarter of that year. The course of capital outlays since 1950 in a
number of important industries is depicted in chart 18. (See appendix
table B-18.)
As noted in previous reviews, the sharp rise in investment in defense and
defense-supporting industries since the outbreak of the Korean war has
CHART 19

CONSTRUCTION
For the first half of 1952, new construction, expenditures, seasonally
adjusted, exceeded those of the second half of 1951 by about 8 percent. Private nonfarm residential construction has held fairly
steady during the first half of this year.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS^

30

30

PRIVATE INDUSTRIAL
^
AND UTILIJ.Y
- 5

1952
SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.
SOURCE^ DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




been assisted by the granting of rapid tax amortization and other Federal
aids to such industries, and by the channeling of necessary materials to them
through allocations. Table 12 shows the extent and status of programs
aided by accelerated amortization.
TABLE 12.—Progress on facilities projects aided by tax amortization
Necessity certificates
approved through
June 20, 1952

Status of projects (percentage of proposed
investment in place
at date shown) 1

Industry
Proposed Tax amorinvestment tization
(millions
(millions
of dollars) of dollars)

June 30,
1952

Dec. 31,
1951

21, 295

12, 411

36

54

3,726
182
3,485
144
1,203
195
1,133
2,938
673
1,023
2,276
746
140
3,431

All industries
Iron and steel
Coke and byproducts
Railroads
Great Lakes transportation
Petroleum refining
Welded and heavy riveted pipe _ _ _ _ — _
Aircraft, ordnance, and accessories
Electric light and power
_
Aluminum (primary refining)
Machinery
Chemicals (excluding synthetic
fibers)
_
Pulp paper, and allied products
Synthetic fibers
Allother

2,266
138
1,710
107
777
134
742
1,310
503
616
1,212
387
72
2,437

32
28
59
42
24
25
44
32
25
41
28
33
18
37

46
47
85
64
36
36
77
50
48
62
43
46
41
53

» Value put in place as estimated by reporting firm's at the end of March 1952.
Source: Defense Production Administration.

Expansion goals have been set for about 135 industries or products.
On the whole, progress has been encouraging, as may be seen in table 13.
The substantial progress made in iron and steel and aluminum was reflected
in increased allotments for the second quarter of 1952 to virtually the whole
range of nondefense industries. The problem of copper supplies remains
one of the most intractable. Supplies can be supplemented through
substitution programs, or increased through imports and longer-range discoveries and improvements in mining techniques. The recent limited
relaxation of price ceilings for copper products containing high-priced
imported Chilean copper indicates the continued pressing need for copper.
(See chart 19 and appendix table B-17, for consolidated data on total construction activity.)
TABLE 13.—Estimated increases in capacity for manufacturing industries
Percentage increase
from 1950 to—

Industry

1951
All manufacturing industries *__
Automobiles
Transport equipment
Electrical machinery
Other machinery
Chemicals
Steel
Petroleum refining

.

_ _
_ _

Also includes some industries not shown in this table.
Source: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company (February 1952).




7

_
. _

1

58

1952

16

11
14
9
15
10
3
4

20
52
24
30
22
12
8

Business funds from external sources. Business borrowing from commercial banks declined during the first half of 1952, in contrast with a
substantial rise in the comparable period of the year before. In the first
quarter of 1952, there was little change in outstanding commercial and
industrial loans. (See table 14.) Typically moderate seasonal repayments
by commodity dealers and manufacturers of food and tobacco products
were offset by increased lending to defense-related industries and, in March,
to firms needing funds to pay income taxes. During April and May, heavier
seasonal repayments, and a leveling off of loans to producers of metals and
metal products and other firms associated with defense activities, resulted
in a decline in outstanding business loans. The situation was reversed in
June, with borrowing for the payment of taxes the chief factor in a substantial rise in business loans, limiting the second quarter drop to 600
million dollars.
TABLE 14.—Business loans of all commercial banks1
Amount
(billions of
dollars)

End of period

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
_
Fourth quarter

_ _

Percentage
change from
preceding
period

1952* First quarter
Second quarter

23.7
23 7
24.5
25 9

+8.2
•0
4-3.4
-f-5 7

25 8
25.2

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ __ __

— 4
—2 3

* Excludes agricultural loans.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Eeserve System. (See appendix table B-26.)

During the first half of 1952, total uses of funds by nonfinancial corporations were less than half the volume in the first half of 1951, principally
because of the tremendous drop in investment in inventories, which alone
accounted for 80 percent of the decline in total uses. Partly reflecting the
change in the rate of inventory accumulation, corporations added only 0.2
billion dollars to their bank loans during the first 6 months of 1952, compared with 2.4 billion during the first 6 months of the preceding year.
However, because of larger outlays for plant and equipment, corporate net
issues of new securities during the past half year totaled nearly 4 billion
dollars, or 20 percent, more than in the first half of 1951. (See chart 20
and appendix table B-37.)
Business earnings. Total earnings, before taxes, of farms, unincorporated
businesses, and the professions, at seasonally adjusted annual rates, declined
moderately during the first half of 1952, returning to the level of the first half
of 1951. (See appendix table B-6.)
It is estimated that corporate profits before taxes (unadjusted for change
in the value of inventories) rose slightly during the first half of 1952, but
remained well below the level of the comparable period a year earlier.
Corporate profits, at seasonally adjusted annual rates, were about 41 billion
dollars during the past 6 months, around 6 billion dollars or 12 percent
209722—52




5

59

CHART 20

SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS
During the first half of 1952, inventory accumulation by corporations was nearly 8 billion dollars or 94 percent lower than
during the first half of 1951. On balance, external sources
supplied corporations with virtually no funds, compared with more
than 50 percent of the total funds used a year earlier.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

-5

10

5

15

SOURCES
J

RETAINED
EARNINGS

1951, 1st Half

1952, 1st Half-i/

DEPRECIATION
RESERVES

OTHER SOURCES
(EXTERNAL)

2/

USES
1951, 1st Half

PLANT AND
EQUIPMENT
OUTLAYS

1952, 1st Half

CHANGE IN
INVENTORIES

OTHER USES

I

_L

\J PROFITS ESTIMATES FOR FIRST HALF OF 1952 BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.
ZJ LESS THAN 50 MILLION DOLLARS.
NOTE: EXCLUDES FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS.

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA (EXCEPT AS NOTED).

below the record level of the first 6 months of 1951, but slightly above the
rate of the second half of that year. Corporate profits after taxes (unadjusted for change in the value of inventories) were, it is estimated, at about
the same annual rate in the first half of 1952 as in the second of 1951, but
2.7 billion dollars or 13 percent below the first half of last year. (See appendix table E-32.)
Government fiscal operations
The government sector of the economy continued to expand in both
absolute and relative size during the first half of 1952. Purchases of goods




60

and services by Federal, State, and local governments accounted for 22
percent of the gross national product in this period, compared with 21
percent in the previous half year, and about 15 percent in the first half of
1950 immediately preceding the Korean outbreak. These percentages are
exclusive of expenditures for interest on the public debt and other transfer
payments. Government revenues also increased in absolute amounts and
in relation to the gross national product. Throughout most of the period
since mid-1950, tax liabilities have been a higher percentage of the gross
product than at the peak of World War II. However, the percentage
represented by expenditures has remained at less than half the war peak.
Seasonal influences, combined with the tax increases imposed by the Revenue Act of 1951, were the chief factors which caused Federal receipts to
move up faster than expenditures in the first half of 1952. The result was
a surplus of 5.7 billion dollars in the consolidated cash accounts of the
Federal Government. (See appendix table B-31.) This surplus was slightly
larger than the cash deficit in the preceding 6 months. The receipts and
expenditures of State and local governments fluctuated within a rather
narrow range during the past year. Present estimates indicate a small cash
deficit at the State-local level during July-December 1951, and an even
smaller cash surplus in the first 6 months of 1952.
Review of fiscal year 1952. The Federal Government ended the fiscal
year 1952 with a budget deficit of 4.0 billion dollars, which is 4.2 billion less
than the estimate presented in the President's January Budget Message.
Budget expenditures totaled 66.1 billion dollars for the fiscal year, and
receipts 62.1 billion. These results were 4.8 billion dollars, or almost
7 percent, below the January estimate for expenditures, but they were within
0.6 billion dollars, or 1 percent, of the estimate for receipts.
Budget expenditures rose by 21.5 billion dollars, comparing the fiscal years
1951 and 1952, and receipts rose by 14.0 billion dollars. As shown in
chart 26, the national security programs accounted for almost the full rise
in total Federal expenditures. Budget expenditures for purposes other
than national security, veterans, and interest on the public debt, were higher
in the fiscal year 1952 than in 1951, but lower than in 1950. The growth
in budget receipts, comparing 1952 with 1951, reflected larger revenues as
a result of both the expansion of dollar volume of business activity and the
substantially higher tax rates imposed by the three revenue acts enacted
during the past 2 years. Altogether, these revenue measures increased tax
liabilities by about 15 billion dollars a year at calendar year 1951 income
levels, but some of the additional yield from the higher rates will not be received until the fiscal year 1953. All but about 1 billion dollars of the
estimated increase from the legislation in 1950 and 1951 is due to higher
taxes on individual and corporation incomes.
In tables 15 and 16, Federal cash payments to the public during the past
3 fiscal years are classified by major functions, and cash receipts from the
public are classified by the chief revenue sources. Apart from the large




61

TABLE 15.—Federal cash payments to the public by function *
[Billions of dollars]
Fiscal year 1952
Fiscal
year
1950

Function

Total Federal cash payments

____ .

Fiscal
year
1951

JulyJanuaryTotal 2 December June
1951
19523

43.2

Military services
.. _
International security and foreign relations
.
Veterans' services and benefits..
Social security, welfare, and health
Agriculture and agricultural resources . _
Interest
_
.
Other payments
Deductions from Federal employees' salaries for
retirement
--- -- _ _ _ .
Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports
Adjustment to Daily Treasury Statement 3

45.8

67.9

32.3

35.6

12.4
4.7
9.3
3.0
2.8
4.3
7.1

20.6
4.4
6.0
3.9
.6
4.1
6.8

39.0
5.4
5.7
4.6
1.1
4.1
8.1

17.8
2.5
3.0
2.3
.5
2.1
4.1

21.2
2.8
2.7
2.3
.6
2.0
4.0

-.4

-.4

-.4

-.2

-.2

-.5
.4

.2
-.5

.4

.1

.3

17.8

26.2

46.6

21.3

25.2

ADDENDUM

Major national security programs 4

_.

.

i Data for fiscal years 1950 and 1951 are obtained from the U. S. Treasury Combined Statement of Receipts,
Expenditures, and, Balances and are adjusted in total to the Daily Treasury Statement. Data for fiscal year
1952 are estimated directly from the Daily Treasury Statement.
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
* See footnote 1.
* Includes, in addition to cash payments for military services and international security and foreign relations, payments for the following programs, not shown separately in the table: atomic energy, merchant
marine, promotion of defense production and economic stabilization, and civil defense.
NOTE.— Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Bureau of the Budget.

increase in expenditures for the national security programs in the fiscal
year 1952 compared with the previous year, there were higher outlays for
social security and railroad retirement, and increases in agricultural payments. The latter payments, however, were less than two-fifths as large
as in the fiscal year 1950. In the case of receipts, the increases from 1951
to 1952 were centered in the direct taxes on individuals and corporations
TABLE 16. —Federal cash receipts from the public by source *
[Billions of dollars]
Fiscal year 1952
Fiscal
year
1950

Source

. _

53.4

68.0

26.8

41.2

18.1
10.9
2.9
8.0
1.1
.4
1.7
2.2

24.1
14.4
3.9
9.3
1.4
.5
1.9
2.1

30.7
21.5
4.6
9.4
1.5
.5
2.2
2.3

11.0
7.1
2.1
4.7
.8
.2
1.1
.3

19.7
14.3
2.5
4.8
.7
.2
1.1
2.0

i Data are on a Daily Treasury Statement basis.
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Bureau of the Budget.




JanuaryJulyTotal * December June
19522
1951

40.9

Total Federal cash receipts. .
Direct taxes on individuals
Direct taxes on corporations
Employment taxes
Excises and customs
Deposits by States, unemployment insurance
Veterans' life insurance premiums
Other
Less: Refunds of receipts -_
_
.

Fiscal
year
1951

and the employment taxes. The largest percentage change in cash receipts since the fiscal year 1950 has been in the direct taxes on corporations. This is accounted for by the substantial increases in both corporate
profits and tax rates.
Economic impact of Federal fiscal operations. The economic impact of
Federal fiscal operations cannot be gauged accurately from the changes
shown in the conventional administrative budget. This budget excludes in
receipts and expenditures the operations of the trust funds, which have had
a substantial net accumulation of funds during recent years. Moreover, the
administrative budget includes large noncash items, such as interest accruals
on outstanding U. S. savings bonds, interest paid on securities held by the
trust accounts, and transfers from the general accounts to the trust accounts.
The consolidated cash budget has the important advantage of presenting
the combined results of all cash income and outgo of the Treasury, apart
from sales and redemptions of Government securities. Transfers from one
Treasury account to another do not appear in the cash budget. For these
reasons, the cash budget provides a better indication of the impact of Federal fiscal operations on the flow of income and purchasing power than is
provided by the administrative budget. As shown in table 17, both receipts
and expenditures are higher on a cash basis than on the conventional budget
basis. There was a cash surplus of 0.1 billion dollars in the fiscal year 1952,
compared with a budget deficit of 4.0 billion. The difference of 4.1 billion
dollars represents mainly the net cash accumulation in the trust funds, and
the interest accrual on outstanding savings bonds.
TABLE 17.—Federal Government fiscal operations
[Billions of dollars]
Fiscal year-1952
Fiscal
year
1950

Item

Fiscal
year
1951

Total i

July- JanuaryDecemJune
ber 1951
19521

Administrative budget:
37.0
40.2

__

Surplus or deficit (— )

48.1
44.6

62.1
66.1

23.8
31.3

38.3
34.9

-3.1

Receipts
Expenditures

3.5

-4.0

-7.5

3.5

40.9
43.2

53.4
45.8"

68.0
67.9

26.8
32.3

41.2
35.6

-2.2

7.6

.1

-5.6

5.7

Consolidated^cash budget:
Cash receipts
Cash payments
Cash surplus or deficit (—)

_

_
.

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
Sources: Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget.

The near balance in the cash accounts in the fiscal year 1952 contrasts
with a cash surplus of 7.6 billion dollars in the preceding fiscal year. (See
chart 21.) During the 2-year period, therefore, there was a net shift of
substantial size in the cash budget position of the Federal Government. In




the fiscal year 1951, Federal taxes reduced private income by more than
Federal expenditures added to it; in the fiscal year just closed, the Government's fiscal operations seem to have been close to neutral in their effect
upon the availability of income for private spending or saving. However,
the effect of the substantial increase in Government expenditures in the
fiscal year 1952 was to augment the total demand for goods and services
produced by the economy.
Public debt operations. The public debt remained virtually unchanged
on balance in the first half of 1952. Most of the budget surplus was added
to the Treasury's cash balance in its general fund, in anticipation of the
substantial deficit estimated for the second half of the calendar year.
The Treasury engaged in substantial new borrowing activities during the
second quarter. The volume of 3-month Treasury bills was increased, and,
in May, 2^4 percent nonmarketable bonds of the type first issued in March
1951 were offered (with minor exceptions) to nonbank investors, who were
given the right to turn in certain marketable bonds in payment for up to
three-fourths of their subscriptions. In June, the Treasury offered, for cash
subscription only, a 2% percent marketable 6-year bond. The amount,
CHART 21

FEDERAL CASH RECEIPTS FROM AND
PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC
The virtual balance in the cash accounts in the fiscal year 1952
is in sharp contrast to the large cash surplus in the preceding
fiscal year. Cash receipts rose by almost equal amounts in
each year, but cash expenditures rose by much more in 1952
than in 1951.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

25

50

FISCAL
YEARS

1950

CASH PAYMENTS

1951

1952

SOURCES: TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND B U R E A U OF THE BUDGET.




64

75

initially announced as approximately 3/2 billion dollars, was the largest
cash offering of Government securities since the end of World War II
financing. It was heavily oversubscribed. Accordingly, the total offering
was expanded to 4*4 billion dollars in order to meet in full the subscriptions
of nonbank investors, and to allow commercial banks, which had been
permitted to make limited subscriptions, the minimum amount promised
them.
Effective in May, the Treasury also announced changes in the terms of
U. S. savings bonds to make the bonds more attractive to investors. The
changes, which involved the offering of three new series of savings bonds and
the discontinuance of two preexisting series, as well as a modification of the
terms of Series E bonds, had the general effect of raising the average rate
of interest on bonds held to maturity, and of increasing the rate of return
in the first years after purchase. In addition, the annual purchase limits
were doubled for the different series.
State and local finance. Both receipts and expenditures of State and
local governments edged upward during the past 2 years, with the rise in
receipts being slightly more rapid than that in expenditures. (See table
18 and appendix table B-31.) For State and local governments as a whole,
a cash deficit of 0.3 billion dollars is estimated for the year which ended
June 30, 1952.
The small increase in receipts during the past year is attributable more to
the increased yield of income and sales taxes, brought about by the expansion
in general business activity, than to change in tax rates. On the expenditure
side, the increase reflects widespread recent advances in pay rates for
TABLE 18.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public
[Billions of dollars]
Fiscal year 1952
Fiscal
year
1950

Receipts or payments

Fiscal
year
1951

Total i

JanuaryJulyDecemJune
19521
ber 1951

Total Government:
Cajsh receipts
Cash payments

58.3
61.7

Total cash surplus or deficit (— )

88.8
89.0

36.7
42.8

52.2
46.3

-3.3

7.1

-.2

-6.1

5.9

40.9
43.2

53.4
45.8

68.0
67.9

26.8
32.3

41.2
35.6

-2.2

7.6

.1

-5.6

5.7

17.4
18.5

19.3
19.8

20.8
21.1

9.9
10.4

10.9
10.7

-1.1

_

72.7
65.6

-.5

-.3

-.5

.2

Federal Government:
Cash receipts
Cash payments

__._-__

_

Federal cash surplus or deficit ( — )
State and local governments:
Cash receipts
Cash payments

_

. __

State and local cash surplus or deficit ( — )

i Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix table B-31.




65

teachers and other public employees, plus a rising volume of capital outlays
for construction projects. Much of the latter spending is being financed by
borrowing. The volume of new issues of State and local securities in the
first half of 1952 was considerably larger than in the corresponding period
of 1951.
International developments
United States commodity exports reached an all-time peak of about 16
billion dollars (annual rate) in the first half of 1952. The main events elsewhere which have affected United States trade are discussed in the following paragraphs.
International payments. The last months of 1951 and the first months
of 1952 found most countries of the free world reacting from the sudden
impact of the Korean war. Memory of wartime shortages, readily available credit, and expanded defense production, had brought a tremendous
increase in demand for goods at all stages of production, an expansion of
output throughout the world, and rapidly rising incomes and prices. The
prices of primary products had experienced the sharpest rises, increasing
the incomes of most of the countries exporting raw materials, but causing
a fairly severe worsening in the terms of trade of most of the industrialized
countries. Western Europe's balance of payments situation was further
aggravated by abnormally large imports of coal and oil from the United
States, necessitated by a lag in the output of coal behind industrial production and the cessation of oil exports from Iran. The United Kingdom
also lost earnings as a result of the impasse over Iranian oil.
Countries which had reacted earliest to changing market prospects
by heavy inventory accumulation, such as Belgium, The Netherlands, and
Germany, experienced balance of payments deficits in 1950 and early 1951,
and had already taken steps to remedy their position by the summer of
1951. In England and France, on the other hand, stocks were drawn
down after June 1950, and these countries then imported more heavily
at the high level of prices prevailing after the first quarter of 1951. Their
balance of payments troubles were further aggravated by a flight of capital
induced by fears of currency depreciation, and by the corrective measures
taken in some other countries which held down British and French exports.
Meanwhile, the slackening of consumers' and business purchases of
finished goods and raw materials, which started in the United States in
early 1951 and spread to other industrialized countries, led to declines in
the prices of many primary products. Countries exporting primary products suffered declines in export prices after the first quarter of 1951, while
in some cases imports continued to expand. As a result, payments surpluses were reduced, and in many cases were transposed into deficits and
loss of reserves by some of the countries of Latin America, Africa, Asia,
and the Pacific. By the end of 1951, the balances of payments of most
industrial countries had improved, but those of a number of raw material




66

producing countries and of the United Kingdom and France had deteriorated seriously.
Underlying many of the factors described above, and accentuating the
balance of payments problems of many deficit countries, was the general
expansion of their money demand and incomes. Open or suppressed
inflation, supported by the pressures of internal investment from both public
and private sectors, contributed to deterioration of balance of payments
positions, mainly because of its stimulating effect on imports.
It is important to note that the balance of payments deficits experienced
by England and France at the end of 1951 did not result from an absolute
decline in exports, but rather from a failure of exports to rise as rapidly
as imports, even though exports were reaching unprecedented levels. The
exports of both countries in the fourth quarter of 1951 were at an all-time
high in value, while the quantity of exports for the entire year 1951 also
set new records, and the volume of exports from the United Kingdom in
the first quarter of 1952 set a new high. On the other hand, in certain
countries exporting mainly primary products, notably Australia and Argentina, government policies of the last several years to encourage manufacturing industries contributed to actual reductions in supplies of foods
available for export.
Corrective measures. The steps taken to correct the balance of payments
situations in most countries of the world recognized the role of internal
monetary forces. Although direct controls over imports were made more
stringent, in general a larger role was given to internal credit and fiscal
measures than in the preceding postwar balance of payments crises. Interest rates were raised, and credit was restricted in an effort to keep effective
demand at levels consistent with the countries' resources. The increasing
reliance of Western European, and also other countries, on monetary and
credit controls was partially due to a reluctance or inability to tighten direct
controls further or to increase taxes, which in some cases are very high.
Even without import restrictions and active anti-inflationary policies, however, it is likely that the rate of imports of some nations would have declined,
because of a reduction in the abnormally high rate of inventory accumulation.
Developments in the first half of 1952. During the first half of 1952,
there was evidence that most of the free world had achieved or was achieving price stability at a high level of economic activity. By early spring,
most European countries and others in Asia and the Western Hemisphere
had experienced moderate declines in wholesale prices, although in certain
countries, for example, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, domestic wholesale prices reached new highs. In some countries, such as the
United Kingdom, Germany, and the Scandinavian nations, where the
peak in wholesale prices came near the end of 1951, cost-of-living indexes
rose somewhat further. (See appendix table B-24.) Industrial production,
which had expanded rapidly and continuously from June 1950 to the spring




6?

of 1951, leveled off in Western Europe and other industrial countries. (See
chart 22.) The leveling-off of industrial production was the net result of a
continued rise in defense expenditures and strength in markets for capital
goods, combined with weaknesses in markets for consumers' goods and
certain related raw materials. The prices of hides and wool, for example,
started to decline in the second half of 1951, and at the end of the first
quarter of this year reached a low which was considerably below their
pre-Korean level. Although these prices have since recovered somewhat,
they have recently fluctuated about a level substantially below that of June
1950. Prices of tin and rubber, much influenced by controlled buying in
the United States, have declined sharply from their post-Korean peaks,
the price of rubber in fact having fallen below the pre-Korean level. In
the first half of 1952, purchases of rubber, which had been made solely by
the General Services Administration, were returned to private buyers.
The leveling-off of consumer spending and business buying that accompanied the stabilization of prices and money incomes brought depressed
conditions to the textile industry throughout the free world, revealing a
CHART 22

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION IN
WESTERN EUROPE
Production in early 1952 exceeded the level reached a year
earlier, despite elements of weakness. In Europe production
is significantly affected by the Easter holidays, which in 1952
fell in April but in 1951 came in March.
INDEX, 1948 = 100

INDEX, 1948*100

1 160

160

150

150

1952
140

140

130

130

120

120

110

HO

100

J

I

100

NOTE; INCLUDES AUSTRIA. BELGIUM. DENMARK. FRANCE, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY. GREECE, ICELAND,
IRELAND, ITALY. LUXEMBOURG, NETHERLANDS, NORWAY, PORTUGAL, SWEDEN, TRIESTE, TURkEY,
AND UNITED KINGDOM.
'
'
'
SOURCES: ORGANIZATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND MUTUAL
SECURITY AGENCY.




68

basic structural problem in this industry. In almost every country, large
and small, industrialized or underdeveloped, the second half of 1951 and
the first of 1952 found unemployment and unused capacity in woolen mills,
and, to a smaller degree, in cotton mills. In part, this world-wide situation
is explained by the fact that rising raw materials prices in the last half of
1950 led to speculative purchases of textiles by dealers, with the result
that production soon outran sales, and inventories were built up. At the
same time, consumer demanded slackened, Germany and Japan reappeared
on the world market as textile exporters, and balance of payments deficits
in various parts of the world forced curtailment of imports, causing the
exports of large textile producers to be reduced.
Although these were the precipitating factors in certain countries, the
world-wide depression in textiles also reflects an older and more fundamental malaise than these short-run factors suggest. The secular development of synthetic fibers, which are being increasingly substituted for the
natural, affects not only the producers of cotton and wool throughout
the world, but insofar as the new fibers require new spindles and looms
also affects the manufacturers of other textiles. Furthermore, the worldwide growth of the textile industry, in both industrialized and underdeveloped countries, has caused an expansion of productive capacity in
certain lines beyond the level of demand at current prices, despite the
existence of great need.
The decline in textile production accounts for the preponderant part of
the recent increases in unemployment in Western Europe, as table 19 indicates, and for a proportion of total unemployment which is far greater
than the importance of the textile industries in their total economies.
TABLE 19.—Unemployment in selected countries of Western Europe
[Thousands]

1951, first
quarter

Country and industry

1952, first
quarter

Change

Great Britain:
Total unemployment- _ _. ._

304

402

+98

Textile industries
All other industries

11
292

87
315

+75
+23

...

1,680

1,770

+90

_.

75

111

1,605

1 659

+36
+54

158

129

—29

2
156

4
125

+2
—31

Germany:
Total unemployment

.

Textile industries
All other industries
France:
Total UTternploym@"nt
Textile industries.
All other industries
Belgium:
Total iinamploymp.nf;
Textile industries ._
All other industries
1

210

.-

291

+81

18
192

155

»+37
1 +44

* 236

Preliminary.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Organization for European Economic Cooperation and Mutual Security Agency.




Despite the depressed textile market and a leveling off of total industrial
production, there is no evidence of a general recession of demand in Europe
such as would have serious adverse effects on the United States economy.
The stability appearing in the index of industrial production for Western
Europe in the first part of 1952 reflects strong demand in the remainder
of the European economy, especially in the metal and metal-using industries.
In almost every country, output of metal products for the first quarter of
1952 was substantially above that for the same period of 1951; in particular,
steel production in the first 4 months of 1952 was 9 percent above the same
period of 1951 for the area as a whole. The easing of demand for consumers'
goods may be expected to facilitate a shift of manpower to industries where
it is urgently needed.
In other parts of the world, national economies were characterized by
similar developments. Textile production in India and Japan was larger
than sales in the second half of 1951 and in the first months of 1952, in part
because of reduced export demand. Increased activity in the metal industries of Japan caused the level of industrial production in the first quarter
of 1952 to be nearly 20 percent above 1951. In the underdeveloped countries, production of industrial primary products in general continued at high
levels.
Whether the increases in output and greater stability of prices achieved
by most countries of the free world in the first half of 1952 will be maintained depends to a considerable extent on developments in the United
States and other industrialized countries. Assuming no change in the international political outlook and the maintenance of a high rate of economic
activity in the United States, accompanied by a moderate expansion of imports and foreign aid expenditures, other countries are likely to be able to
maintain the improved over-all stability experienced in recent months.
United States imports. Commodity imports in the first 5 months of 1952,
although below the same period in 1951, were at a rate 11 percent higher
than during the last half of 1951. (See appendix tables B-43 and B-44
for data on merchandise imports, and appendix table B-38 for data
on all imports.) Most of the movement in imports between the first
quarters of 1951 and 1952 can be accounted for by 8 commodity groups:
coffee, cocoa, wool, sugar, tin, nonferrous ores and concentrates, rubber,
and gas and fuel oil. Although these commodities accounted for only 41
percent of the value of our total commodity imports in the first quarter of
1951, they accounted for 82 percent of the decline in the value of our
commodity imports from the first to the fourth quarter of 1951. Similarly,
from the fourth quarter of 1951 to the first quarter of this year, they accounted for 94 percent of the increase in the value of our commodity imports.
Only a part of these movements can be accounted for by seasonal changes; to
a considerable extent, they reflected the effect of the preceding consumption
of inventories, which made it necessary to increase imports to levels more
nearly in accord with current consumption.




70

After an agreement in January between the governments of the United
States and the United Kingdom providing for the purchase of steel by
the United Kingdom and of tin and aluminum by the United States, the
United States resumed purchases of tin which it had ceased to buy for
several months. A decline in the foreign price for lead and zinc, resulting
from greater world production and large foreign stocks, brought increasing
imports of these metals. Their foreign prices declined to the level of United
States ceilings, and then caused United States prices to fall below the
ceiling level. The first months of 1952 also brought increased imports
of natural rubber, as well as seasonally high imports of coffee, wool, sugar,
and cocoa.
Although the value of commodity imports in the first quarter of 1952,
an annual rate of about 11 billion dollars, was somewhat below the level of
the first quarter of last year, the resulting decline in the total of dollars available to foreigners was fully counterbalanced by an increase of 800 million
CHARt 23

EXPORTS AND IMPORTS
OF GOODS AND SERVICES
The export surplus in the first half of 1952, while smaller
than in the last half of 1951, was considerably larger
than a year before.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

25

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS*

25

10

-

— 10

5

-

- 5

* ANNUAL RATES.
I/ INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS.
SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




dollars (annual rate) in Government purchases of services abroad. Other
service imports remained about the same, with the result that total imports
of goods and services in the first quarter of this year were at an annual rate
of 15.6 billion dollars, approximately the same as a year earlier, and it is
believed that they remained close to this rate in the second quarter. (See
chart 23 and appendix table B-38.)
Other means of financing exports. United States Government aid, which
had declined after the second quarter of 1951, continued to decline in the
first quarter of 1952, but rose again in the second quarter to the level reached
in the same period of the preceding year. (See table 20 and appendix
table B-40.) This rise from the first to the second quarter was chiefly the
result of an expansion in military aid, although economic aid and defense
support increased somewhat. At the same time, there was an increase in
private capital exports between the first and second quarters of this year.
The increase in aid and in private investment, along with an apparent
decline in the flight of capital (unrecorded transactions), enabled foreign countries in the aggregate to stop the decline in their gold and
dollar assets which had been going on since mid-1951. According to
preliminary estimates, there was in fact some net accumulation in the
second quarter of this year, largely on the part of Canada and Indonesia,
TABLE 20.—Financing the exports of goods and services supplied to other countries
[Billions of dollars]
Means of financing
Exports
U.S.
of goods Imports
and
Governservices 1 of goods
ment
and
services * sources
(net) 2

Period

United
States
private
investment
(net)*

Liquidation of
Other
foreign means of
gold and financdollar
ing*
assets 3

14.7
19.8
17.0
16.0

7.0
8.3
10.3
9.6

5.3
•8.9
5.0
6.0

0.4
1.0
.9
.6

61.9

1.2
.1

0.5
-.3
-.4
-.3

1950
1951

14.4
20.2

12.1
15.1

4.3
4.7

1.3
1.1

-3.6
-.4

.3
-.2

Annual rates:
1951: First quarter
Second quarter.
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

17.5
21.1
20.2
22.1

15.7
15.7
14.7
14.4

4.4
5.3
4.6
4.3

.9
1.2
.0
2.1

-3.6
-.6
1.2
1.2

.0
-.6
-.3
.1

21.2
21.6

15.6
15.8

3.8
5.3

.9
1.4

1.5
-1.2

-.7
.4

1946
1947
1948 .
1949

1952: First quarter 7
Second quarter _ . _

..

1.6

i Includes income on investments.
* U. S. Government sources include subscriptions to the capital of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. United States private investment includes
purchases of obligations of the International Bank.
s Includes net sales of gold to the United States and net liquidation of foreign dollar assets, including those
held by international institutions.
< Includes errors and omissions and private gifts.
• Includes subscription to the capital of the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund of
3.1 billion dollars.
c
Consists of net increase in gold and dollar holdings of the International Bank and the International
Monetary Fund of 2.5 billion dollars, and liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries in the
amount of 4.4 billion dollars.
7
Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.




72

but with the gains distributed quite widely, in Europe as well as elsewhere.
The sterling area, which lost a very large volume of gold and dollar assets
in the first quarter of this year, maintained these assets substantially unchanged in the second quarter, partly with the help of a substantial increase
in United States aid.
United States exports. Despite the internal measures taken by several
nations to restrict effective demand, United States merchandise exports,
excluding military supplies, maintained during the first 5 months of 1952
the high levels achieved during the last part of 1951. If military supplies are included, exports were more than 12 percent above the level
of the same period of 1951. (See appendix tables B-41 and B-42 for
data on merchandise exports and appendix table B-38 for data on all
exports.) The failure of these measures to reduce the level of United
States exports up to now is in part the result of the fact that a decline in
imports of some goods from the dollar area was offset by a rise in imports
of foodstuffs and other essential goods; in part it is evidence of the lag
between the adoption of these measures and the appearance of their effects
in shipments data.




73

II. The Near-Term Outlook
At midyear 1952, the general strength of the economy had not been
seriously affected by the steel strike, however threatened it might become
if the production of steel were not soon resumed. Work stoppages in this
basic industry in the second quarter halted the increase in industrial production, which had restored the index in the first quarter of the year to the high
level of a year earlier. But with unemployment well below 2 million, the
level of economic activity was very high. Wholesale prices had been edging
downward since the first of the year, and consumers' prices in May were
back just below the January level, after a moderate dip. Inventories had
been stabilized, and orders were again flowing to many manufacturers whose
output had been held down during most of the preceding year by slack
demand.
In what manner this condition of large production, full employment, and
active but stable markets may change in the next 6 to 12 months will depend
upon conditions and events which are not only uncertain, but which as we
have learned are especially difficult to evaluate in this unique period of
semi-mobilization.
Thus, if there were a sudden or decisive change in the international
situation, the whole economic outlook would change. The appearance of
new armed conflicts undoubtedly would greatly accentuate inflationary
pressures, while the prospect of a peaceful settlement might lead
to expectations of lower Government spending and weaker inflationary
pressures. The long continuance of work stoppages in basic industries
might so disorganize the economy as to make expectations based on recent
developments and trends entirely untenable. These are excluded in the
current appraisal, but they cannot be excluded from the range of possiibilities.
Excluding such extreme assumptions, the economic developments of the
next few months will depend largely upon demands for goods and services,
and the capacity of the economy to supply these demands. Among the
factors of greatest importance, here mentioned in the order of their treatment below rather than in the order of relative importance, are Government
spending on the security program and the other fiscal operations of the
Treasury, the investment programs of business firms and the decisions of
consumers with respect to spending and saving, and the foreign demand
for United States products—all in the context of the availability of unused
resources to meet any increases in the various types of demand. The implications of the steel stoppage will also be considered.




74

GOVERNMENT SPENDING AND FISCAL OPERATIONS
The security program
The largest prospective change affecting the economy is in Government
expenditures for the several purposes which are combined in the security
program. Forecasts of military deliveries and other national security expenditures, even in the near future for which contracts have been let and
funds are available, cannot be precise due to the possibility of specification
changes, modification of delivery schedules, and many other factors. Nevertheless, procurement contracts already placed, together with already established patterns of personnel and operations, assure the continuance for the
next 12 months of a high and rising volume of security expenditures.
During the second quarter of 1952, purchases of goods and services for
major national security programs were at an annual rate of 50.5 billion
dollars. Keeping in mind the qualifications made above, increases are
expected under the present continuing program until a plateau is reached
sometime before the end of 1953 at a level between 60 and 65 billion
dollars.
Strategic metals fill a peculiarly crucial role in determining the impact of the military production programs on the remainder of the
economy. Although the defense program's draft on steel, copper, and
aluminum supplies will be heavy, the growth in supplies is expected to free
increasing amounts for civilian use from now on. However, the increase
in the availability of steel may be retarded, even into the first half of 1953,
by the current shutdown in that industry. Considering that 1950 was a
record year for the production of consumer durable goods, and a near
record year for the use of metals for producers' plant and equipment, it is
evident from chart 24 that, in the absence of labor controversies, major
metals for nonmilitary purposes will be in relatively favorable supply.
Nevertheless, some words of caution are appropriate with reference to the
easing of civilian supplies depicted in chart 24. In the first place, because of
the impossibility of projecting at this time the proportion of metal supplies
which will be stockpiled, these estimates assume no increased use for stockpiling purposes, except for a moderate amount of aluminum. However,
because the possible need for all-out mobilization dictates a policy of stockpiling critical materials where current production plus imports could not
meet full mobilization requirements, a significant part of any increased copper and aluminum supplies in 1953 may be absorbed in this fashion. Accordingly, the increased availability of copper and aluminum for civilian
use in 1953, as shown in chart 24, should be viewed as a maximum level
from which any increased stockpile requirements must be subtracted.
It should be noted that the increasing availability of the three
major metals does not in itself indicate that the need for the Controlled
Materials Plan is at an end. For one thing, as is evident from the chart,
copper for civilian use will still remain below the 1950 level. More impor209722—52




ft

75

CHART 24

METALS SUPPLY
Moderately decreasing defense requirements,coupled with
increasing total supplies,are expected to raise the availability
of steel, copper, and aluminum for nondefense use during the
next 18 months, barring sizable changes in defense programs,
STEEL
MILLIONS OF PRODUCT TONS

0

25

100

2nd Half

1953
1st Half
2nd Half

ALUMINUM
MILLIONS OF INGOT TONS'

0

1.0

.5
^DEFENSE USE

2.0

1.5

ALLOTHERx^

'l'.'."'.l.4TTOTAL SUPPLY

1950
1951

ESTIMATED - ANNUAL RATES
1952

1st Half
2nd Half
1953

1st Half

COPPER
BILLIONS OF POUNDS

0

2
^DEFENSE USE
TOTAL

1950

SUPPLY

1951

ESTIMATED-ANNUAL RATES
1952
1st Half

2nd Half
1953
I si Half

2nd Half

^INCLUDES PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES OF LOSS DUE TO STRIKE
^NOT AVAILABLE.
^INCLUDES PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PRODUCTION AND IMPORTS. ADJUSTED IN 1953 FOR POSSIBLE LOSSES
DUE TO POWER SHORTAGE AND FOR MODERATE ADDITIONS TO STOCKPILE

SOURCES1 DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION AND NATIONAL PRODUCTION AUTHORITY.




76

tant, the authority and machinery for allocating metals is part of the
structure of controls which needs to be continually available to keep the
Nation in readiness for the possibility of all-out mobilization. Although
relaxation of many controls may become increasingly warranted, we cannot
afford to be caught in the possible emergency of an all-out mobilization
without the authority and basic control organization necessary to divert
more resources to defense production.
Finally, the outlook for increasing the supply of alloying metals is not so
bright as for the major metals. Despite efforts to open up new sources both
here and abroad, continued emphasis must be placed on finding substitutes
for many critical alloying minerals, and on conserving the supply now
available.
Deficit financing
An important factor bearing on the funds available for business and
consumer spending is the surplus or deficit of the Federal Government, and
the manner in which the surplus is used or the deficit financed. Up to
mid-1952, increased Government expenditures for goods and services have
been wholly financed by taxation. In the first year of the defense program, budget expenditures increased from 40.2 billion dollars to 44.6 billion, but budget receipts increased much more, and there was a budget
surplus of 3.5 billion and a cash surplus of 7.6 billion. In the second year,
fiscal 1952, budget expenditures increased nearly 21.5 billion dollars, but
increasing tax receipts held the budget deficit to 4.0 billion, and there was
a small cash surplus. For the 2 years, the great increase in the cost of
the security program was more than matched by increases in Federal cash
receipts, and the publicly-held national debt was actually reduced.
Completely financing the expanding security program from taxes did
not mean that the program was not inflationary during the 2 years. Procurement contracts involving very large payments in the future and relatively small current payments were placed as rapidly as possible with manufacturers, who expanded their working force, entered upon ambitious programs to expand facilities, and multiplied their demand for the raw materials
needed in their work. The inflationary effect of this new demand for goods
was aggravated by the fact that the demand of manufacturers was not
spread over the whole market for commodities, but instead was concentrated upon a relatively few categories. The pressure was especially severe
at those points.
We enter fiscal year 1953 facing a continuing rise in expenditures for the
security program, which are scheduled to increase during the year by 11 to
12 billion dollars. This year will not be one in which the added flow
of Federal funds into the income stream will be offset by equivalent increase
in the flow of funds from taxpayers into the Treasury. There will be a
large cash deficit, nearly all of which will accumulate in the current half
year. It is estimated that, between the first of July and the middle of




77

December, the flow of funds from the Treasury into the income stream will
exceed total Federal cash receipts by more than 8 billion dollars.
The deficit during the current half year will have a substantial economic
impact, despite the fact that it will be followed by a half year in which
there will be a Treasury surplus. The inflationary tendency of the deficit
will be lessened, however, to the extent that the Treasury is able to borrow
funds from investors other than banks, thereby limiting the amount it
will have to secure by selling new Government securities to banks—a
process which by expanding the money supply may facilitate inflationary
developments.
One important source of nonbank funds arises from the prudent practice, common to many businesses, of investing funds accumulated as a result of tax accruals in tax anticipation and other short-term Government
securities. Under the present law, which is gradually shifting the payment
of corporate income taxes into the first half of the year, corporations are
required to pay only 30 percent of their taxes on 1951 profits in the second
half of 1952, and they will be required to pay 80 percent of their taxes on
1952 profits in the first half of 1953. During the current half year,
it is estimated that they will invest tax reserves to the extent of at least
3 billion dollars in special Government securities, which they will turn in on
their tax payments next March and June. This will make available to
Government large amounts which, if held as cash, would be available for
use as current working capital.
In June 1952, the Treasury offered a new issue of marketable 6-year bonds.
Subscriptions by nonbank investors were more than enough to absorb the
contemplated issue of 3.5 billion dollars, and, in order to honor its promise to
accept limited amounts of bank subscriptions, the Treasury found it necessary to issue an additional 500 million dollars' worth of bonds for the
commercial banks.
The relatively strong demand from nonbank institutional investors
for the Treasury bond issue seems to indicate that these investors believe
the expansion of private demand for capital is coming to an end,
and that the rapid increase of savings in these institutions will increase
the funds seeking investment in Government securities. If this view is
vindicated, the Treasury will be able to meet its borrowing requirements
largely from the savings of individuals. As a result, the Treasury would
find it necessary to resort very little to commercial banks in its deficit
financing in this half year.
Government deficits are an inflationary factor because Government expenditures are being made without an equivalent reduction being enforced
on private spending, which may indeed be encouraged by an expanding
money supply and easy credit caused by the method of financing the deficit.
Whether inflation will actually result from a deficit depends on
whether aggregate demand in the economy is in excess of aggregate supply.
This in turn depends not only on Government demand, but also on a wide




variety of factors which influence the spending, investing, and producing
decisions of consumers and businessmen. Whether the inflationary influence of a large and growing deficit will be augmented by other factors
moving in the same direction, or offset by factors pushing in an opposite
direction, is the crucial question. This necessitates looking carefully at
other sectors of the economy.
NONGOVERNMENT DEMAND
No foreseeable depressing force, or combination of forces, in other sectors
of the economy seems strong enough to counteract fully the effect of Government expenditures for the national security program.
Investment
Private investment which, together with Government outlays, is likely to
be the major factor causing changes in the flow of personal income, will in
all probability remain, at least into 1953., close to the high level of the first
half of 1952.
The 1952 survey of the intentions of businessmen with respect to investment in plant and equipment during the rest of this year, which was
made by the Commerce Department and the Securities and Exchange
Commission, indicates that plant and equipment investment will continue
above the levels of the first half of 1952 during the second half of this
year. And there are other indications that it will remain strong in the first
half of 1953. Such outlays by defense and defense-related industries,
mostly producers of durable goods, are expected to continue to show considerable increases in 1952 over 1951, with only a slight increase in industries turning out nondurable goods. Accomplishment of these plans has
been facilitated by the easing of metal supplies and the relaxing of some
credit controls.
Additional evidence that plant and equipment outlays will probably remain high for some time is to be found in the scheduled rate of completion
and estimates of "value-put-in-place" for activity covered by certificates for
accelerated amortization; the continued increase, at least until the steel
strike, in National Production Authority construction authorizations, which
will add to construction in the second half of 1952, and push into 1953;
and the still sizable volume of applications for certificates of necessity pending before the Defense Production Administration.
There are no indications that there will be any sizable change in investment in inventories during the rest of 1952 and on into 1953. While there
may be a further drop in inventories during the next few months, following several quarters in which the over-all rate of accumulation dropped
from record heights and became negative, the change in the rate of inventory accumulation has about lost the anti-inflationary influence it exerted
in the past year. A growing volume of consumer demand might, indeed,
lead to a renewed accumulation of inventories, thus adding to demand.




79

The volume of residential construction will probably stay near the current
level for another year at least. The number of housing starts in 1952 is
likely to be around 1 million units. The easing of mortgage credit regulations in June, and the fact that the regulations must be suspended under the
amended Defense Production Act whenever housing starts are running at
an annual rate below 1.2 million., support the belief that a high number
of starts will be realized this year, and that housing starts will continue to
be high well into 1953.
Personal consumption expenditures
The expansion of Government expenditures during the past 2 years has
led to an enlargement of personal incomes even greater than the substantial
increase in Federal income taxes, with the result that the general trend of
disposable personal income has been upward. There will be no additions
to Federal income tax rates to affect personal incomes during the second
half of 1952, and only extraordinarily rapid action by the next Congress to
increase tax rates would have any effect before the middle of 1953. The
sustained increase in expenditures for national security, with no offsets
expected from the private investment sector, will continue to drive personal
income upward, and this increase will be reflected in an increase in disposable income. The extent to which it enters the marketplace as active
demand for more goods and services will depend upon the decisions of consumers with respect to their individual saving.
A moderate increase in consumer spending would probably bring about
only a small rise in prices. Many consumer goods industries hold substantial inventories, and are running at less than full capacity. More important,
there has been a great expansion in the capacity to produce many kinds of
goods, both industrial commodities and those required by consumers, and
the market demand since the end of the buying wave early in 1951 has left
many industries producing consumers' goods with a substantial margin of
unused capacity. Despite the low national level of unemployment, there
is a considerable amount of underemployment in these industries. Manufacturers would quickly respond to any increase in demand by increasing
production. Unfortunately, this adjustability of output does not apply to
food, the supply of which for the next year will be determined largely by
the weather.
Personal saving
In the first 9 months after Korea, the choice of consumers was to increase their spending rather than their saving; since then, the choice has
been in favor of saving. A sharp reversal in the attitude of consumers
occurred after the first quarter of 1951. Despite an increase of 5.2 billion
dollars in the seasonally adjusted annual rate of disposable personal income
in the second quarter, there was a decline of 6.0 billion in the annual rate
of personal consumption expenditures. Thereafter, personal expenditures




80

CHART 25

PERSONAL INCOME, SPENDING,
AND SAVING
Personal consumption expenditures have risen steadily since
the second quarter of 1951, when there was a break from
post-Korean peaks. Saving fell from the exceptional rate of
more than 9 percent of disposable income in the second half
of 1951, to about 7 percent in the first half of this year.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS7*

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

300

300

250 -

- 250

200 -

200

NET SAVING
AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME

5 —

I

2

3

I960
* SEASONALLY ADJUSTED A N N U A L RATES.
SOURCES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




81

increased slowly, but the rate of saving remained steady until the first
quarter of 1952. For the first half of 1952 as a whole, the increase of
5.7 billion in the rate of expenditures was larger than the increase of 2.3
billion in disposable income, and the rate of saving thus declined. But the
rate of saving, about 7.3 percent of disposable income, was still much
above the average of the postwar years before Korea. (See chart 25.)
The high rate of personal saving in the recent past means that consumers have built up vast stocks of liquid assets, which may be used at any
time to increase spending. But the assets representing past personal saving
are not all available for consumption expenditures. They include net investment in homes, and the equity of nonincorporated business firms and
farmers in inventories and plant and equipment. They also include the
growing equity in insurance reserves which results from premium payments
under contracts which, once entered into, are not suspended or abandoned
lightly.
However, that part of savings held in the form of liquid assets has been
growing rapidly. Additions to such liquid assets as currency, deposits in mutual savings banks, demand and time deposits in commercial banks, shares in
savings and loan associations, and Government securities expanded about 8
billion dollars during 1951, to reach the total of 232 billion dollars. This is
the financial backlog which buttresses current personal disposable income,
now running at the annual rate of nearly 230 billion dollars. The existence of this large body of assets gives its owners a sense of security that
encourages them to spend their current income freely, while many of the
liquid assets would themselves be fuel for an inflationary blaze if one were
to start. That such a blaze would need to be ignited by new forces, and
not by this potential buying power itself, may be demonstrated by the
attitude today of consumers who prefer to build up their liquid savings.
But this is a barrier to spending which becomes progressively weaker as
liquid assets and other savings move upward.
Foreign demand for United States products
One possible factor affecting the Nation's total production may be
a decline in the demand for United States exports other than military
goods. Because of balance of payments difficulties, many nations have
imposed import restrictions which may not only reduce their direct purchases from the United States, but also may force other nations whose
earnings are impaired by the restrictions to take similar steps, with like effect
on their buying of our products. No significant influence of import curtailments on United States exports was shown by the statistics for the first
5 months of 1952; some may be felt in the months ahead. Our exports also
may be affected—in either reduced quantity or reduced prices—by increasing competition in foreign markets, both from countries trying to correct a
deficit position by export expansion, and by the re-emergence of Germany




and Japan as exporters of industrial products. The size of any likely cut
will, however, be relatively small when compared with total production,
although it could have a serious effect on some industries.
IMPLICATIONS OF THE STEEL STOPPAGE
Each additional week of the current steel dispute means a loss of more
than 1.8 million tons of steel. If the strike should continue during the
remainder of July, a total of 19 million tons of ingot steel will have been
lost to the economy. Another serious loss of steel output will be felt later,
as a consequence of the current restriction of iron ore production. Because iron ore must be shipped from the mines during the months when
the Great Lakes are open, curtailed production now means iron ore scarcity
next spring.
At the time the strike began, inventories of steel in the hands of steel
users were relatively high, in many cases above those required for current
production. Consequently, the first month of the strike did not cut deeply
into production or employment in steel-using industries. However, inventories were unbalanced, some types of steel being plentiful and others scarce.
But as the stoppage progressed into July, even producers with initially
heavy inventories began to feel the pinch.
Despite the agreements from both labor and management to produce
steel for direct military needs, the output of many important military items
was reduced during the quarter due to steel shortages. As a consequence,
resumption of steel production will mean that more steel must be diverted
to military and defense-supporting production than had originally been
planned, both to build up such inventories which might have fallen dangerously low, and to make up wherever possible for lost production. As ai
result, less steel will be allocated to civilian industries than originally
planned.
The drastic cut in steel production will affect investment programs, forcing a "stretch-out" beyond the completion dates originally contemplated
if the stoppage is not too protracted, but probably leading to the cancellation of some programs if the stoppage is of long duration.
The continuance of the shutdown would have fairly serious repercussions
on employment. Not only would the anticipated pick-up in the production of consumers' durable goods be delayed, but output would have to be
further curtailed, requiring many plants to lay off workers. Soft goods
industries would also be adversely affected because of declining incomes.
Whether the short-run outlook will be more inflationary as a result of
curtailed production cannot be definitely foretold. Curtailed production
of consumers' goods is inflationary. The loss in incomes resulting from cuts
in output is, however, deflationary. The net result depends upon whether
there will be a spurt of anticipatory buying arising from the fear of rising
prices and shortages of goods.




THE INFLATIONARY BIAS OF THE NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK
The amount of inflationary pressures to be confronted in the near-term
future depends upon how hard the demands of businessmen, consumers,
and Government press against the productive capacity of the economy.
With respect to Government demand, its size over the next 12 months will
depend basically upon the pace of the security program. While it is impossible to gauge this pace with precision, estimates as to the lower and
upper likely limits fall within a range of 2 or 3 billion dollars. Similarly,
the upper and lower limits of likely business investment within the next
12 months would not now seem very far apart, although there is more
uncertainty with respect to inventories. Added to these possibilities for
higher expenditures, the rate of consumer expenditures might also rise.
Such a rise might lift total demand considerably. If, for example, the
rate of consumer spending out of disposable income increased by only 1
percent, and if Government expenditures and business investment were
running at the higher ranges which are likely during the first half of 1953,
the combined effect would be an 8- to 10-billion-dollar higher level of
consumer outlays. There is also some uncertainty as to the extent to which
consumers will draw upon credit and upon liquid assets, and as to the
general mood of the buying public.
If the main components of expenditures tend toward the lower side within
the range of what is now foreseeable, the outlook is for a period of high
prosperity in the near future without dangerous inflationary pressures.
It does not seem reasonable to expect total expenditures to fall short of
the lower limit of this range. Nothing now foreseeable in the short-run
future justifies the hypothesis of a recessionary movement for the economy
in general. On the other hand, if the main components of total expenditures tend toward the higher levels indicated, there will be a substantially
growing inflationary strain upon the economy.
The policy conclusions to be drawn from this outlook are the same,
wherever expenditures happen to fall within this range. If the economy,
while operating at very high levels of production and employment and close
to its productive capacity, avoids an inflationary movement, it will not be
injured by the maintenance of the safeguards against inflation. If, on the
other hand, inflationary pressures intensify, the maintenance of safeguards
against inflation will prove of great value while their abandonment would
prove to be a very costly mistake. This conclusion is strongly reinforced
by the possibility that some new wave of concern about the international
situation could release an inflationary movement comparable in character
to that which succeeded the Korean outbreak and the Chinese intervention.
Such a movement would commence from a much higher price level, in a
much more fully utilized economy, with a large volume of available purchasing power.




The experience during and since World War II is that, in a world of
tension, a full-employment economy has an inflationary bias, except when the
business outlook is clouded by unfavorable factors. No such clouds now
appear on the immediate horizon. In view of the possibility of another
inflationary spiral, we find nothing in the current economic situation to
warrant letting down our guard against inflation, although we believe the
greater probability is for a period of stability or a mild increase in
inflationary pressures rather than for a considerable inflationary spiral.




III. Immediate Policy Issues
In the January 1952 Economic Review, the Council sought to offer a comprehensive set of policy recommendations for meeting the problems which
the economy seemed likely to face during the present year. In this Midyear
Review, there is no need to retrace this ground, except to the extent that new
developments have modified some of these problems or created new ones.
Most noteworthy among the factors which have altered the economic
outlook significantly enough to call for a reconsideration of our earlier policy
appraisals are the prospects for larger supplies of many scarce materials
than had been anticipated earlier, the persisting absence or weakness of
inflationary pressures in a number of markets, the congressional actions weakening anti-inflationary control authority, the steel dispute, and the sentiment to increase barriers to imports despite the continued balance of payments difficulties of many foreign countries.
These developments make it desirable to take a fresh look at the impact
of the national security program on the economy, as well as at stabilization
policy, and to examine the relationship between our security program and
economic problems abroad as it affects our international economic policy.
THE FEASIBILITY OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM
The problem of strengthening the military and economic potential of
the free world is not an easy one. Unlike the situation in an all-out war,
the effort is continually beset by uncertainties as to how much effort is
needed, and by continuous changes in international tensions. Since there
is no such thing as absolute military security, the size of the security program must be determined by balancing the sacrifices which different levels
of security expenditures would entail, against the various degrees of strength
which can be purchased with those expenditures. In this situation, economic and strategic considerations are almost inextricably intertwined, much
more so than in an all-out war, when victory must be won whatever the
cost. In order to be prepared for changes in the international situation, and
changes in the pace of our security build-up which might be occasioned
thereby, a constant evaluation of the economic impact of larger security
programs must be made.
Such an evaluation does not consist in attempting to state, for example,
that a 5-percent increase is feasible but a 6-percent change is impossible.
Rather, it consists in determining how an increased allocation of resources




86

to military use would affect civilian supplies and prices, and through them
the standards of living and economic efficiency of the Nation. Given such
data, it then becomes a matter of strategic consideration as to whether the
additional security purchased is sufficient to warrant the costs incurred.
An argument strongly put forward by persons seeking to reduce or slow
down the present security program is that this program is too large for the
country to bear, and, if persisted in, will seriously damage the economy. If
this were true, it would be of the utmost importance for national policy.
We believe the argument to be entirely fallacious; its frequent repetition,
however, calls for an examination of the facts.
In the second quarter of 1952, the 50.5 billion dollars of goods and
services (annual rate) utilized for our security programs represented about
15 percent of gross national product. Current mobilization plans call for
an increase in security expenditures for goods and services to a level between
60 and 65 billion dollars in late 1953. With only moderate increases in the
labor force, working no longer hours than during 1951, and with the expansion of plant capacity which will then have been completed, we could
increase our national output by about 25 billion dollars while security
expenditures are scheduled to increase only 10 to 15 billion, leaving an increase of 10 to 15 billion dollars in goods and services available for civilian
use. When the peak of the presently planned security expenditures is
reached, it will represent less than 18 percent of the gross national product, compared with 41 percent at the peak of World War II. In addition, by the end of 1953, about 90 percent of the 22-billion-dollar investment
which has been programed for defense-supporting industries through rapid
tax amortization will have been completed.
During the second quarter of 1952, our gross national product was at an
annual rate of 343 billion dollars. If we adjust for price changes since
1951 and subtract the goods and services which were utilized for direct
security expenditures, we find that the amount left over for civilian use
for both investment and consumption amounted to $1,830 per capita (in
1951 dollars). By the end of 1953, given present estimates of security
expenditures, this could rise to almost $1,875 per capita if maximum production is maintained. Since part of the current per capita output which
we have counted as available for civilian use is being utilized for defensesupporting investment, the decline in such investment will increase even
further the amount actually available to civilians. Under the present program, therefore, we can carry out the increases now planned, and at the
same time achieve a very substantial per capita gain in the use of resources
for purely civilian purposes.
Such general conclusions, however, are not sufficient to measure the
impact of the increasing security program. We must also review its effects
on each of our major national resources—manpower, raw materials, and
plant and equipment capacity.
At the present time, the level of security expenditures is not imposing




8?

severe strains upon our resources. We can achieve the currently planned
levels by adding to our civilian labor force only slightly more workers than
we would ordinarily expect through normal growth. Average hours of
work for the economy as a whole have shown no increase since 1951, and in
manufacturing have actually declined slightly. In the first half of 1952,
average hours worked in manufacturing were about 40.4, compared with
40.7 in 1951, 40.5 in 1950, and 45.2 in 1944. There is, indeed, some slack
in the economy, as demand for many consumer goods in the past year and a
quarter has been only moderate. In general, labor shortages, except for
certain specialized skills, have been held to a minimum, and some areas of
moderate labor surplus exist. As has been pointed out, we could increase
the real national output about 25 billion dollars between now and the
end of 1953 without adding to hours of work, and with moderate growth
in the labor force. With some slight additional effort, by increasing productivity and improved utilization of the existing labor force, especially in
nonurban areas, we could raise output even more.
Under present security programs, metals available for civilian supplies
should be increasing from now on, as is shown in chart 24. With some exceptions, present metal supplies available for civilian use have not been so
low as to cause a significant imbalance between the demand for and the
supply of metal-using products. This is partly due to the existence of heavy
inventories, partly to the conservation of such metals by manufacturers, and
partly to a lower demand for consumer durable goods. As security programs
are raised moderately, metal allocations to the military may have to be increased. This could be done, while still allowing some increases in metals
available for civilian use. It may be necessary to reduce temporarily the
amount of steel available for civilian production late in 1952 or in 1953, to
make up losses in military output resulting from the steel strike. On the
other hand, metals requirements for military production have been overstated, in some cases, with the result that more metal has been allocated to
such production than was necessary. In situations like this, military programs can be increased without the diversion of additional metal from
civilian use.
The level of the security program must be measured against another
resource besides manpower and materials, namely, the plant and equipment
capacity to turn out military end-items. One of the more critical bottlenecks in the security production program throughout 1951 was machine
tools. However, part of this problem disappeared as machine tool production began to climb, reducing the time required to fill existing orders
from almost 24 months in mid-1951 to slightly less than 14 months at the
present time. While certain machine tools are still critically short, causing
bottlenecks, the number of these is small relative to the total. Indeed,
machine tool manufacturers are beginning to search for civilian business
in order to keep production lines going.
Moreover, many plants producing military end-items have been tooled up




88

beyond the needs of current production, in order to provide a base for expansion in the event of all-out war. In the sixth quarterly report of the
Director of Defense Mobilization, it was pointed out that in order to build
a broad mobilization base, procurement agencies are spreading contracts
out over a number of plants working on only a one-shift basis, rather than
concentrating them in a few plants working two or three shifts. Consequently, much of the increase in military procurement can be made possible
by raising production rates on existing military production lines, and only
limited conversion of plants producing civilian goods is probable.
In other cases also, the level of military output can be raised significantly
without the diversion of a corresponding amount of resources from the
civilian economy. A large amount of experimentation with new designs
and models, development of newer production techniques, and a general
flexibility of military procurement, have characterized the security program
since Korea. These design and production changes, coming in a continuous stream, have meant that the amount of resources needed, especially
skilled labor and machine tools, per unit of end-item production has been
exceedingly high. However, General Bradley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, recently stated:
We can't afford to put off any longer freezing models. If something better comes
along later on, naturally we will adopt it, and gradually replace this equipment with
it. Anything that is on the drawing board now and is not ready to produce * * *
you are not going to have by 1954.

Thus the increase in the production of military items, under presently
planned schedules, can be much more easily accomplished by slowing down
the rate of design and specification changes. In fact, the attainment of
economical mass production of many items of military equipment is dependent upon decisions to moderate the rate at which specifications are changed.
On many items, the Department of Defense has recently adopted a policy of
"package" changes, under which minor changes in design are accumulated
and submitted only at intervals.
Of course, the cost, in terms of economic resources, of increased production of armaments would vary according to the specific items of equipment
whose output was raised. In certain areas which are currently limited by
specific bottlenecks of machine tools, alloying metals, and the like, increases
in production would require diversion of specialized resources from the
civilian economy. In other areas, generally less critical than the above,
increased production could be achieved with only a limited impact upon
the civilian sectors of the economy. Consequently, the cost of raising the
level of the security program, in terms of its effect on the civilian economy,
would be partially dependent upon the particular area in which production
was increased.
The argument that the current security program is imposing an excessive
strain upon the economy is frequently addressed, not to an examination of
the facts set forth above, but rather to an examination of the tax level and




89

of the current and prospective deficit. The tax level and the deficit are
important, but they alone do not determine the ability of the economy to
sustain the security program.
For example, the argument that taxes are too high is generally based
upon the assumption that they are excessively repressing business opportunity for investment and profits, and consumer ability to purchase
goods and services. But neither the business situation nor the current standard of living can be said to have been hurt by the level of
taxation necessitated by the security program, when measured against the
need for that program. In fact, the predominant business concern for the
future is not that the security program does not leave enough resources
available for the satisfaction of other wants, but rather that even with the
security program the time may come when the satisfaction of other wants
will not absorb the available productive resources.
As to the deficit, if the economy can sustain the current and prospective
diversion of resources to the security program, the deficit merely reflects a
decision of national policy to finance part but not all of the cost through
taxation. Whether or not this decision is wise, a deficit under such circumstances does not mean that the economy cannot stand the strain.
In short, the basic test of whether an economy like ours can support a defense program of given size is whether its productive resources are adequate
to service that program, and at the same time to service other fundamental
economic needs. If the Nation's resources are adequate in this sense, means
can be found to finance the program consistent with maintaining the
strength of the economy. A decision either to finance the program entirely by taxation, or partly by taxation and partly by borrowing, is consistent
with the maintenance of the Nation's economic strength, although there
will be differences in the need for other anti-inflationary measures depending on the financing method that is chosen.
In summary, the Council concludes that the current and prospective
security program, including the methods being employed to finance it, are
entirely compatible with the maintenance and in fact the advancement of
the Nation's economic strength. Thus far, it is clear that this has actually
happened. Looking to the future, our productive resources are adequate
to expand the national output, without excessive strain, by more than the
security program will be expanded under present plans. So long as this
condition persists, it cannot be maintained that the security program is
beyond our means.
STABILIZATION POLICIES
Fiscal policy
In the January 1952 Review, as in previous reviews prepared since the
Korean outbreak, the Council urged that to the largest extent possible the
costs of the national security program be paid currently through taxation.




This policy was supported on both fiscal and economic grounds. The
Council recognized that moderate deficits might not be avoidable when
expenditures were at their highest level. But we urged that tax rates be
placed sufficiently high, so that deficits at the peak could be offset by surpluses when expenditures were being reduced toward a longer-run maintenance level.
Federal taxation. Our belief in the desirability of a pay-as-we-go
policy has been strengthened by the developments of the past 6 months,
and by the economic and fiscal outlook for the near future. The economic
outlook is for a continuing very high level of economic activity, which may
be accompanied by renewed inflationary pressures.
The fiscal outlook is for an increasing deficit during the next 2 or 3 years,
unless the revenue system is strengthened. In the fiscal year just ended,
the budget deficit was 4 billion dollars, while on the cash basis receipts were
approximately in balance with expenditures. In the President's January
Budget Message, the deficit for the fiscal year 1953 was estimated at 14
billion dollars, on the basis of proposed expenditure levels and existing tax
rates. More recent calculations, which take into account congressional
action on the President's budget requests as well as the recent trend of
receipts and expenditures, indicate a deficit in the neighborhood of 10
billion dollars for this fiscal year, with substantial deficits also in prospect
for the fiscal years 1954 and 1955 under present tax rates.
The future level of expenditures depends very largely on the size of the
national security program. As chart 26 shows, 70 cents of each dollar spent
in the fiscal year 1952 went for the major national security programs. In
the President's Budget for the fiscal year 1953, 76 percent would go for
national security and supporting programs, approximately 12 percent would
go for interest on the public debt and veterans' programs, and only about
12 percent would go for all other governmental programs put together.
These other programs have been reduced somewhat since 1950, and are not
likely to be reduced by enough more to have much effect upon the deficit.
Such programs, besides being needed, have the support of public opinion.
When increases in prices and growth of population are taken into account,
these programs in the aggregate are substantially smaller than they were in
1940. It is clear that if any large cut is to be made in the Budget, it will
have to be made in the national security program. The size of the national
security program should rest on the need for it, not on some preconceived
idea concerning tax reduction, however attractive such reduction may be.
In January, the President strongly recommended a substantial strengthening of the tax system. No action was taken on this recommendation
at the recent session of the Congress. It should be noted, moreover, that
tax rates will not continue throughout the rearmament period at their present levels, unless positive congressional action is taken, since the legislation imposing new and higher taxes in 1950 and 1951 set termination dates.
209722—52




7

91

CHART 26

FEDE RAL BUDGET EXPENDITURES
In the fiscal year 1952, total budget expenditures rose 21.5
billion dollars, with national security programs accounting for
most o f the increase. Out of each budget dollar spent in 1952,
70 cerits went for the major national security programs.
c)

10
1

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
20
30
4O
i
1
1

50
1
HOW EACH BUDGET
DOLLAR WAS SPENT
X.

• • . 1 MAJOR NATIONAL
] SECURITY PROGRAMS
FISCAL
YEAR
I960

^^ """""V
/•• i , '
X

j VETERANS' PROGRAMS

1 TOTAL,

'$% INTEREST

f H "*'vL.

| BILL?ON \

v^P^$

\^^^25^r
^^^jjjji^

|
|
|
ALL OTHER

\

l6

1

>s

;
FISCAL
YEAR
1951

s

|

/f _ '7\

|^ TOTAL, f

ij ,

r"°

s
"^s

" " , "-' 3 1
FISCAL
YEAR

\

N

]

I TOTAL,

/^r^x
jf

:

I'lVjl

1952

1

1

1

1

SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET.

Thus, in the absence of congressional action, the excess profits tax will
expire June 30, 1953; the 1951 increases in the individual income tax
will expire December 31, 1953; and the 1951 increases in the corporation
income tax and the excise taxes will expire April 1, 1954. Thus the revenues for the fiscal year 1954 and, more particularly, subsequent fiscal years
will be substantially decreased, unless legislation is passed to prevent the
automatic reductions from taking place.
The Federal debt reached a total of 259.2 billion dollars on June 30,
1952, reflecting an increase of 3.9 billion dollars during the fiscal year.
(See appendix table B-29.) Since 1917, the total amount of public debt




that the Treasury has been permitted to have outstanding has been set by
congressional action. Since the size of the debt is determined by expenditures and revenues, which are dependent on congressional action,, the debt
limit has been changed as the situation required or permitted. The highest
point to which the debt limit was raised was 300 billion dollars, which was
effective during the latter part of the war. Since 1946, the public debt
limitation has been 275 billion dollars. The outlook now is that the rising
debt will reach this limit sometime during the fiscal year 1954.
There should be no need at this late date to discuss again the superiority
of taxation over borrowing as a means of distributing the financial cost of the
defense program. When Government spending is financed by taxation,
each person's share of the bill is determined by the types of taxes that are
imposed. Reliance upon Government borrowing to finance spending incurs the risk that part of the bill will be distributed among the population
in the hit-and-miss fashion which characterizes inflation. Particularly in
a full-employment economy, taxation helps to protect the purchasing
power of the dollar, and thus makes it easier for the economy to carry the
real cost of Government programs. Under present conditions, high taxes
accordingly are needed not only for fiscal reasons, but also as an essential measure of inflation control. Taxation should be the last inflation
control measure to be relaxed, since it is a basic measure and the most
effective one for long-continued use.
Paying taxes is always unpleasant. Consequently, it is always easy to
make an appealing argument that taxes should be lowered, if one, ignores
considerations of economic and national policy. But it is these considerations that make it necessary to have a tax system at all, and it is these considerations which should weigh very heavily in determining how much and
what kind of taxes the people should pay at any particular time. It is after
viewing the entire picture that the Council concludes that it would be'
premature to raise hopes of tax reduction in the near future.
Although the present level of taxation is not a damaging one, it clearly
imposes a burden on taxpayers. Those burdens would be somewhat easier
to bear, if the inequities and loopholes which exist in the tax system
were removed. Inequities ought to be removed whenever they are discovered. And it is especially important to remove them when taxes are high,
since high tax rates accentuate unfairness in the distribution of tax burdens,
and increase the harmful economic effects of tax discriminations. Whatever
else is done to the tax system, the program of structural improvements proposed last January and at other times should be adopted.
Fiscal policy at the State and local level. Since World War II, there has
been a continuous uptrend in the spending of State and local governments
for highways, schools, hospitals, water and sanitation facilities, and other
public works. For several years, the net borrowing for these purposes in
the aggregate has been relatively small. State and local governments are
now planning outlays for public works which will lift expenditures sub-




93

stantially above the probable level of receipts. The easing of controls on
some construction materials, combined with the elimination of the Voluntary Credit Restraint Program, will permit these projects to move ahead
at a faster rate than in the past year. Some further growth in State and
local borrowing accordingly can be anticipated.
From the viewpoint of economic stabilization, it would of course be desirable to postpone as many of these projects as possible, until such time as they
would not compete for scarce resources or contribute to inflationary pressures. Even better would be the postponement of less urgent projects until
they would make a contribution to the support of the economy, if other
supporting forces weaken. It is to be hoped that State and local governments will recognize their responsibility for contributing to economic stability, and that wherever feasible such deferment will be the policy followed.
It must be recognized, however, that there are many State and local public
works projects which have a high priority for early construction. The
deterioration of highways, overcrowding of schools, pressure of a growing
and mobile population on community facilities, and the general problems
raised by urban congestion, have in many cases produced a serious condition.
Credit policy
Appropriate credit policies are essential to the success of a stabilization
program. Market demand is generated by the extension of credit and the
use of past savings, as well as by the use of current income. Credit policies
affect market demand primarily through their impact on credit extension,
and they also may affect the volume of saving out of current income and
the forms in which savings are held. Their impact can be general or5
selective, depending upon the types of actions taken.
Credit restraints have many advantages over most other anti-inflationary
measures. From the standpoint of the control authority, credit regulation is
impersonal, since it relates to the volume of credit in general or to credit
for financing the purchase of whole classes of goods. To be sure, the lenders
themselves operate on a person-to-person basis, since they may be obliged to
decide which customers to accommodate and which to turn away. A more
important advantage of credit controls is that they avoid direct interference
with the operation and functioning of the price system. Regulation of particular forms of credit, moreover, affords an opportunity to reinforce on a
selective basis the operation of direct price and production controls. On
the whole, credit controls are simple to apply, and, given adequate legislative authority, are administratively flexible. For these reasons, they
should be among the first controls to be imposed when inflationary pressures are felt, and they may continue to be useful even after many other
control measures can be discontinued.
It is accordingly very desirable that adequate authority to regulate the
amount and terms of private borrowing be continued as long as any inflationary threat remains. Unfortunately, the existing powers are far from
adequate. Although the recent Congress continued authority for price,




94

wage, and production controls, it did not renew the power to impose controls on loans to finance the purchase of consumer goods. Moreover, the
power to restrict credit for the purchase of new houses was narrowly limited
by the provision that practically no such restrictions should apply when
housing starts for a 3-month period were less than a seasonally adjusted
annual rate of 1.2 million, a figure which has rarely been exceeded. It
may be that the country will have the good fortune of not seriously needing to exercise these powers, but in view of the risks that strong inflationary
pressures may be renewed, it is a matter of simple prudence that these
powers should be restored as soon as it is feasible for the Congress to do so.
Price and wage stabilization
Two broad but simple principles should guide the planning of the pricewage stabilization program in the period ahead. The first is that these
controls are an integral part of our preparedness apparatus—an apparatus
geared not only to meeting the needs and strains of the immediate defense
build-up, but also to providing a reserve for meeting the needs and strains
that might suddenly be imposed by other Koreas or by total mobilization.
The inflationary strains imposed by the present build-up continue to be very
real ones, and, as was indicated above in the discussion of the short-run outlook, the chance that they may increase in the near future is at least as
large as the chance that they may not. In addition, direct controls constitute insurance against the worst excesses of the inflationary surges which
future international outbreaks might thrust upon us. The lack of price
and wage control authority, or of the organization required to exercise it
quickly if need be, could undercut the ability of other elements of the
mobilization program—such as the allocations and procurement functions—to meet sudden future strains should they come.
The second general principle, which is generally accepted both in and out
of Government, is that because of their undesirable aspects these controls
should be kept to a minimum, and should be eliminated just as soon as they
cease to be clearly necessary.
In administering the direct control program, the two foregoing principles
should be applied in the manner which best fits the economic outlook, insofar as it can be discerned from time to time. Throughout the next 2
years, defense expenditures as presently planned will be nearing or at peak
levels. The need for being prepared in all respects to meet any new danger
which may be thrust upon us from outside will be at a maximum. For the
next 6 to 12 months, as has been explained in Part II of this Review, the
outlook is for a continuance in general inflationary pressure, probably moderate, but very possibly stronger than it has been in the recent past. For
this period, there is need for policies of wage and price control which may
require substantial modification thereafter, if the slowing down in the rate
of expansion of defense expenditures should change the tone of the economy.
At the end of June, the Congress, in renewing the Defense Production
Act, extended authority for general price and wage controls for 10 months,




95

until the end of April 1953. This legislation, as renewed, contains a number of weakening amendments. Notable on the price side are the barring of any control of fruit and vegetable prices, and amendments which
may bog down the price control effort in excessive litigation and procedural
complexities. On the wage and salary stabilization side, a number of actions
were taken which will weaken the control program. Among these are the
exclusion of agricultural labor, the exclusion of engineers, and the provision
limiting the Wage Stabilization Board's jurisdiction with respect to disputes,
including the distinction drawn between economic and noneconomic issues.
Taken as a whole, the new price, wage, and rent stabilization legislation weakens controls. In addition, the legislation has placed a somewhat
greater relative burden on the machinery of direct controls, by reducing the
authority for selective controls in the field of credit. Skillful administration may enable the new law to provide a workable basis for the direct
control program during the next 10 months, but only if the recent condition of relative stability in the economy continues.
In view of the inflationary pressure inherent in the rising level of expenditures for the defense program, it would be unsafe to attempt major changes
in the present basic structure of wage and price controls at this time. It
should continue to be a general structure, operated with cautious suspension
of ceilings only when it is reasonably clear that they are not likely to be
needed. This policy is necessary in order to protect the relative price stability and economic balance which have been achieved during the past year
and a half, with the help of these controls and the psychological climate
they encourage.
An inflationary spiral could develop, either through a lack of controls,
or conceivably in the guise of escalation permitted by controls. It is because of the latter possibility that it will be essential to retain a general control structure during the near future, and that it be centered on the broad
principle of minimizing cost increases.
Obviously, this requires control not only of prices, but also of wages.
Insistently, since the commencement of the defense program, the Council
has emphasized in practically all of its published reports and reviews these
two points: (1) that control of prices and of wages is not enough, unless
the two types of control are interrelated through a unified over-all policy
and a unified general supervision. This does not mean that price changes
and wage changes should always move together or at the same rate, but
it does mean that there must be a unified approach to what kind of wage
changes are consistent with price stabilization, and what kind of price
changes are consistent with wage stabilization; (2) that, just as detailed
price administration is not practical without an over-all price policy, so
detailed wage stabilization, while it must remain flexible, is not practical
without an over-all wage stabilization policy defined and declared with
sufficient precision to prevent any important case from being decided purely
on an ad hoc basis. There is need to stress these two points now.
The administration of price controls and wage stabilization should be




96

guided by two specific principles. First, it will be necessary to continue to
require the absorption of cost increases, in industries where such increases
can fairly be absorbed. Second, with particular reference to wages as a
factor in costs, it will be necessary to keep continually under review the
accumulation of increases permissible under the several wage regulations,
to prevent them from attaining unstabilizing proportions. With alert
administration, the accumulation can be kept from becoming a reverberating element disturbing cost-price relationships generally.
The need for maintaining an operating general control structure in the
months of pronounced inflationary risks just ahead does not, and should
not, mean that all individual price ceilings must remain operative. In
April, the Office of Price Stabilization began a carefully planned program
of ceiling suspension in the cases of commodities the market prices of which
had dropped substantially below ceilings, and where there was no strong
reason to expect an early renewal of pressure on ceilings. Ceilings were suspended, in the first instance, on 16 commodities in the fats and oils and
hides and leather groups. Since then, there have been a number of further
suspensions. In the recent extension of the Defense Production Act, the
Congress has expressed the purpose that this practice go forward.
It is important, however, to emphasize the difference between this technique of ceiling suspension—which has been accepted by the Congress
and is altogether appropriate for the current period—and outright decontrol, which would not now be an appropriate general practice. In the
case of suspension, while businessmen are relieved of the burden of elaborate record-keeping and reporting, provision is made for closely watching
the prices in question during the suspension period; an adequate organization is retained to reintroduce ceilings quickly, if necessary; the price control
agency has the discretion to reimpose the old ceiling if market trends or
prospects make such action advisable; and the business community stands
notified that the ceiling will be automatically reimposed if the market price
rises within a stated distance of the ceiling level. Under outright decontrol, on the other hand, few of these protections would be retained. If the
agency kept its authority, ceilings could in theory be reimposed. But there
would be no automatic procedure for accomplishing reimposition when the
need for it developed, and the necessary organization and information would
be lacking. Because it would be a difficult and time-consuming process
to reconstitute controls in the event of an inflationary resurgence, to decontrol on a wide scale in the present situation would be dangerous.
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY
There has recently been growing pressure to increase restrictions on the
entry of imports into the United States—through amendments to the Defense Production Act, through use of the "escape clause" to revoke concessions made in reciprocal trade agreements, and in other ways. The ten-




97

dency to seek increased protection when domestic markets soften is a
natural one. The Government, in determining its course, must always endeavor to administer its policies in a manner which minimizes injury to
individuals. But in considering requests for increased restrictions upon
importation, the Government must also consider the general economic effects of such restrictions and their consistency with other public policies.
Effective increases of import restrictions raise prices to domestic users,
and, under normal conditions of trade, also force foreign countries sooner
or later to cut their purchases from us. In the long run, the artificial
curtailment of trade generally reduces efficiency in the use of economic resources, and thereby reduces the total amount of output. These considerations, being well known, need not be elaborated here. In addition to them,
however, is a newer consideration arising out of the fact that some of the
countries whose trade would be affected by increased United States import
restrictions are receiving foreign aid.
This country has extended foreign aid since the end of the war because,
after repeated and thorough public discussion in connection with the loan to
the United Kingdom, the European Recovery Program, the Mutual Defense Assistance Program, the Mutual Security Program, and other programs, it was concluded that the volume of goods which a number of foreign
countries should be enabled, in our joint interests, to import was greater
than the volume they could finance solely through their exports of goods
and services and the flow of our private capital and private gifts. It has
been generally recognized that, if these countries are to become self-supporting, and if underdeveloped countries are to increase their borrowing capacity
so that sound loans and direct investments can be substituted for grants
from the United States, they must increase their exports. When we place
increased restrictions upon their exports to us, and thus upon their dollar
earnings, however, we increase their need for aid, and to that extent defeat
our own policy of helping them to get along without it. Thus some of the
burden of such restrictions falls upon the United States taxpayer, who
finances a larger volume of aid than would otherwise be necessary. Even
if we were to provide no additional aid in response to the increased need,
such measures reduce the ability of the countries affected to repay the
loans we have already extended to them.
Purchases from us by foreign countries, whether or not they receive aid,
are limited by their dollar receipts. To the extent that we restrict imports
without increasing foreign aid, and avoid a reduction of foreign payments
on our public and private investments, our exports are certain to be reduced.
The gain in sales, profits, and employment by the domestic industry which
is given increased protection is then made at the expense of sales, profits,
and employment in industries producing for export, a fact which most
producers for export appear to have been slow to recognize.
It is clear that the policies of helping other countries to become more fully
self-supporting, and of reducing the strain on our economy, both require an




98

expansion of imports. This establishes a strong presumption against increases in our barriers to imports. Indeed, the Council believes that in
the years ahead further reductions in our import barriers will be found to
be in the national interest.
Another major aspect of international economic policy relates to the export of capital from the United States to other countries. Many of the lesswell-developed nations have come to recognize their potentialities for economic development. In the nature of the case,, their development will be
very slow> if it must be based entirely on their own current saving. For these
countries, the importation of capital is essential.
The raising of economic levels throughout the free world is a matter of
vital interest to the United States. Economic development not only raises
living standards and facilitates cultural and political advance within the
developing country; it also increases the supply of needed goods for other
countries. More important, economic development is necessary for the
achievement of the world-wide peace and tranquillity, which are vital if our
own economic future is to be a favorable and secure one.
The economic development of the United States during the nineteenth
century was speeded and advanced by capital investment from abroad.
The shoe is now definitely on the other foot. The economy of the United
States is now relatively far advanced, and has been exporting capital for
a generation. However, in the present state of world insecurity, little
tendency is being shown for private capital from the United States to be
invested overseas, except to secure raw materials, particularly oil and metals.
The policy of the United States has been one of encouraging investment
abroad. We believe this policy should be continued and expanded. To
the greatest extent possible, investment abroad should be through private
channels. In the existing situation, however, it is not likely that private
capital will go abroad in any very large stream without improved private
institutional arrangements or further positive encouragement by the Government. Further efforts are needed in order to achieve a mutually desirable flow of capital from the United States to the less developed countries.
Sound methods for encouraging such investment should be under continuing
study and promotion.




99

IV. The Longer-Range Prospects for Stability
and Growth
Many thoughtful people have been expressing concern that the high-level
prosperity in prospect for the near future may be succeeded by an economic
downturn of substantial or even depressionary proportions. Some have said
that this may commence when national security expenditures have stopped
rising, and begin to decline. Others have said that, even without a decline
but with merely a leveling-off in security expenditures after the peak is
reached, the productive power of the economy will have built up to a point
where market demand will not be sufficient to absorb the full product.
This concern sometimes centers upon the belief that investment will
diminish after most of the expansionary programs undertaken to support
the mobilization base will have been completed. It sometimes centers
upon the belief that consumer spending might decline or fail to expand,
either because consumers received too little income or chose to spend a
smaller fraction of it. These two points of emphasis do not neglect the
fact that investment and consumption interact upon each other. More
generally, the reason often given for concern that prosperity may not continue is that the years since the end of World War II have not yet subjected
the economy to a real test of its ability to resist depression, that this test is
bound to come within a few years, and that the resistant powers of the
economy may not be adequate when the test comes.
The Council believes that the present time is none too early for study and
discussion of this problem. It would be overly optimistic to assume that
impersonal or automatic forces will enduringly perpetuate prosperity, or
that human foresight and preparedness are no longer essential ingredients.
The problem of maintaining stability and growth has not disappeared.
On the other hand, we reject as overly pessimistic the argument that the
major depression which some have feared since the end of World War
II is inevitable. We believe that, if appropriate adjustments in private
and public economic policy are made in time, the conditions in prospect
beyond the near-term period discussed earlier in this Review can be held
consistent with the maintenance of a high level of production and employment. While the problems ahead are not to be minimized, there is
nothing which indicates that they are beyond our capacity as a nation to
deal with successfully. In the final result, we hold to the view which is
implicit in the Employment Act of 1946—that our economic future can be
bright if our economic behavior is intelligent, and that the degree of intelligence required for this purpose is not beyond the reach of available
knowledge, common sense, and good will. Toward the achievement of this




100

end, it is appropriate to commence an examination of the problem now,
although many factors are much too uncertain for definitive analysis at
this time. The following discussion is accordingly preliminary and tentative. The Council is making the problem the subject of continuing and
intensive study.
Certainly, the objective of maintaining maximum employment and production without substantial interruption in the years ahead is of great importance. The idea that a general recession in production and employment
is an acceptable method of correcting maladjustments in the economy
must be firmly rejected, for reasons which the Council has analyzed and
presented in previous publications. Quite aside from the personal hardships and social tensions which result from such a development, it is more
likely to enlarge rather than to reduce the problems confronting the economy. An economic machine that is running down hill creates serious
maladjustments and distortions. Moreover, it is harder to prevent the
economic machine from gaining momentum if it starts to run down hill
than it is to erect safeguards against decline; and it is even harder to push
the machine up again, once it is well down the hill.
While the course of economic development never involves exact repetition,
there are nonetheless elements in our economic history which have a bearing
upon the future, looked at with discrimination. For that purpose, we select
the period between the end of World War II and the Korean outbreak,
rather than any period prior to World War II. This is because, despite
admitted differences, the economy a few years hence will in many respects be
more similar to the postwar economy than to the prewar economy. This
will be true in terms of income structure, the habits of business and consumers, institutional practices both private and public, and the kind of world
we live in. Consequently, we believe that a careful examination of the
period from 1944 to 1950 can help to set in better perspective the problems
of the years ahead.
SIGNIFICANCE OF EXPERIENCE FROM WORLD WAR II TO KOREA
In examining the relevance to our future problems of the period from
World War II to Korea, we believe it useful to divide that period into two
parts: (1) the period from 1944 to 1946, when the economy made its first
adjustment to an enormous curtailment of war spending, and (2) the period
from 1946 to the middle of 1950, when the economy for the most part maintained high levels of production and employment, and expanded to absorb
a growing labor force and an advancing productivity, during a time when
defense spending, while high by prewar standards, was very much lower than
it will be in the foreseeable years ahead.
The period from 1944 to 1946
Measured in 1951 prices to facilitate comparison, war expenditures
dropped from 139 billion dollars in 1944 to 24 billion in 1946. (See chart




101

CHART 27

CHANGE IN COMPONENTS OF
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT, 1944 - 46
Between 1944 and 1946 the tremendous drop in national
security expenditures was o f f s e t sufficiently by increases in
the other principal components of demand to maintain high
peacetime levels of production and employment.
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

GOVERNMENT
200

200

(1951 PRICES)

NATIONAL SECURITY
EXPENDITURES

150

150

100

100

ALL OTHER GOVERNMENT
EXPENDITURES

50

1944

1946

1944

50

(946

BILLIONS OP DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

NONGOVERNMENT
200 -. PERSONAL CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURES

200

(1951 PRICES)

150

150

100

100
GROSS PRIVATE
DOMESTIC
INVESTMENT
NET FOREIGN
INVESTMENT

50

1944

1946

1944

1946

50

1944

SOURCES. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.




102

1946

27.) But the civilian sectors of the economy, in "making up" for the decline in war demand, did not have to generate additional activity to the
extent of the whole 115-billion dollar drop. Hours of work were reduced,
many persons left the labor force, and many who left the armed forces did
not seek to enter civilian employment. (See chart 28.) Unemployment
rose considerably from the abnormally low levels of wartime, without becoming high for a peacetime economy. And a sharp change in the composition of total national production more than washed out the effect of any
general increase in productivity (resulting from improved technology) upon
the amount of rise in nondefense spending needed for high employment. In
consequence, although the gross national product measured in 1951 prices
had been 316 billion dollars in 1944, a product of only 273 billion was consistent with high-level employment in 1946. And, although war expenditures declined by 115 billion dollars, an increase in other types of demand of
only 71 billion sufficed to maintain the economy at a high level of employment. As shown in table 21, this increase was achieved through expansion
in all major types of nonsecurity activities.
Looking to the future, it is impossible to be sure now in what year security
outlays may commence to decline or by how much. But it is entirely clear
that any decline within the next few years will not be comparable to that
which took place between 1944 and 1946. It is probably safe, for the
purposes of this discussion, to assume a decline which would be in the neighborhood of 5 billion dollars a year during the first 2 years after it comCHART 28

CHANGES IN THE LABOR FORCE
1944 TO 1946
Many of the 8 million persons leaving the armed forces during the
1944-46 period did not enter the civilian labor force and many
who were in it withdrew. As a result, the civilian labor force
expanded by only 3 million persons, despite new entries.
MILLIONS OF PERSONS

-10

-5

0

+5

TOTAL LABOR FORCE

ARMED FORCES

CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE
UNEMPLOYMENT

SOURCE: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




103

EMPLOYMENT

TABLE 21.—Changes in gross national product in constant prices
[Billions of dollars, 1951 prices, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
Change

1944

Component

1946

1950,
first
half

1944 to
1946

1946 to
1950,
first
half

316

Federal
State and local

295

-44

+23

24
248

18
277

-115
+71

-6
+29

156
13
-8

185
42
3

205
50
-4

+29
+29
+11

+20
+8
-7

15

18

26

+3

+8

2
13

Personal consumption expenditures
__
_
Gross private domestic investment
Net foreign investment
._
_ Government expenditures for goods and services for other
than national security programs

273

139
177

Gross national product: total
National security expenditures
Other expenditures

3
15

5
21

+1
+2

+2
+6

NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix table B-2.

menced, or 10 billion for 2 years. This figure is very small, when compared
with the 71 billion dollar figure which reflected the net increase in other
types of demand required between 1944 and 1946.
It would be fallacious to discuss the problem ahead solely in terms of
the foregoing comparison of the relative size of the past and prospective
needed increases in nondefense spending. If the only difference between
the 1944-46 period and the coming transition period were in terms of these
magnitudes, it would be reasonable to assume that an economy which found
ways to adjust successfully to so great a decline in war spending will find
ways to adjust a much smaller decline in defense spending. But there
are other major differences between the two periods. There were temporary factors which accelerated private demand immediately after World
War II, which will not be present in anywhere near the same degree in
the years ahead. Among the most important of these temporary factors
were the huge accumulation of liquid funds which resulted from a very
great wartime expansion of incomes accompanied by heavy deficit financing
and the repression of civilian buying; the accumulation of "backlogs" in
consumers' durable goods, industrial plant and equipment, housing, commercial construction, and inventories; and the rapid "spring-back" of
repressed wartime buying to a more normal relationship to incomes. In
1944, consumer spending was 76 percent of disposable income; it jumped
back to 92 percent in 1946. The rate of private investment was far below
normal in 1944, and had been for some years before that. By 1946, investment outlays had jumped very sharply toward a relationship to total
production more nearly typical of peacetime conditions.
The experience between 1944 and 1946 has significance for the future in
another way. Both enterprise and government had made systematic and
extensive efforts, toward the end of World War II, to prepare for its immediate aftermath. The success of these efforts, which averted many diffi-




104

CHART 29

PERSONAL INCOME AFTER TAXES PART OF EACH INCOME DOLLAR SPENT OR SAVED,
1929-1952
The increose in the consumer spending rate from 76 percent of
disposable income in 1944 to 92 percent in 1946 was one of the
more important factors in the attainment of the high postwar
levels of activity.

.75

.75

.50

.50
SPENT

.25

.25

i f

*

1930

i.

.).. t .. f

i.....t

.1 ..].. ( ...j

35

40

I f

I i. I {

45

t.....1 i
50

NEGATIVE SAVING IN 1932, 1933, AND 1934.

i/
1952, FIRST HALF; BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES.

SOURCES: DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.

culties that would have been certain if the problem had been neglected,
illustrated the Nation's ability to look ahead and to prepare in time. That
ability still exists, even though the problems ahead vary from those of
the past.
The period from 1946 to mid-1950
While the record of economic transition between 1944 and 1946 is of
some significance for the future, it is in the Council's view far less significant than economic developments between 1946 and the Korean development in mid-1950. For while no one in 1944 could forcast the exact timing of the "depression," many thought one would follow World War II;
the development which was truly startling to these forecasters was not that
the catastrophe did not come by 1946, but rather that it had not appeared
even by 1950. In seeking explanation for this, some factors appear which
may reflect permanent changes in the economy brought about during the
years after the great depression and accelerated during World War II.
It is true, of course, that the extraordinary or temporary stimulants to
demand had by no means ceased to apply in the years after 1946. At the
end of 1946, the levels of money supply, liquidity, and personal savings




105

were unusually high relative to business activity. (See chart 29.) The
suppressed inflation of the wartime and early postwar years came into the
open with the precipitate abandonment of price controls. The price inflation had a stimulating effect on business investment. Moreover, many
kinds of demand could not be filled promptly and some made themselves
felt more slowly than others. But even though the more or less temporary
factors growing in one way or another out of the war helped to explain the
buoyancy and expansion of the postwar economy, it would be wrong to
conclude that the production and employment of the postwar years after
1946 rested almost altogether on these elements.
Without minimizing the importance of these factors, it is clear that
the largest part of the demand in the high-level prosperity of the postwar
years, especially after 1946, was a continuing demand, not a temporary one
closely linked to the war. The standards of living in matters such as food,
clothing, travel, and recreational activities, as well as in many other items,
were raised to new high levels which clearly could not be attributed to
shortages or "backlogs" accumulated during World War II. The introduction of new products, which some of the high demand reflected, was of a
character which recurrently has given new impetus throughout our economic
history. And even in the fields of consumers' durable goods and housing,
where the backlog persisted the longest, the current level of income would
in itself clearly have supported a far higher level of expenditure than existed
in periods of lower income.
Viewing this whole record, explanation beyond the traditional reference
to postwar backlogs must be sought to account for the progress registered
by the economy not only through 1946, but more importantly in the 4 years
after that. The factors of a more enduring quality than those immediately
following a great world war would seem to include the following:
In the first place, very high incomes were flowing to all important sectors
of the economy, thus creating high demand. While this condition is not
automatically self-perpetuating, it creates a favorable momentum in an
economy where retarding factors are not operating in an opposite direction.
In the second place, the economic community rejected the doctrine of
a stagnant economy, and regarded our great productive capacity and our
ability to enlarge it further as an asset rather than as a handicap. Dynamic
investment was made, not merely with a view to supplying existing demand,
but with confidence that enough demand would be present to buy the future
increased product flowing from the investment. The fears of businessmen
carried over from the depression era diminished, and appreciation grew
regarding the potentialities of new and expanding markets.
In the third place, the economic community had come to concentrate
more study and action upon those private economic policies which contributed to a fairly balanced growth of investment and consumption. While




106

some distortions appeared in price-wage relationships, the processes of price
and wage adjustment worked well enough to provide both the funds and the
incentives for high-level capital formation and high-level consumer buying.
Without weakening the business structure,, productivity gains were translated into purchasing power widely distributed among the people.
Incomes were more widely distributed than in either the twenties or the
years immediately preceding the war. While the precise effects of this
change still are open to debate, it probably bolstered consumption. According to studies of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the share
of disposable income going to the top 5 percent of income receivers declined
from 33.5 percent in 1929 to 20 percent or less in the postwar period. Estimates published by the Council in previous Reviews confirm the fact that
the increase in purchasing power, which has been spread generally
throughout the population, has been relatively greatest at low and medium
levels of income. This trend has been evident, for one thing, from the increasing share of total income taken by those regions of the country—notably,
the Southeast and Southwest—where per capita incomes have been the
lowest. It is indicated also by the relative gains in those forms of income—
notably wage and salary payments—where unevenness in income distribution
is probably least pronounced.
In the fourth place, the strength of postwar private demand was implemented by an abundance of credit available at low rates of interest. This
factor should be distinguished from the enlargement of liquid savings and
the money supply held by the public, which resulted from the war and
might be expected to have only a relatively temporary expansionary effect.
In the fifth place, a striking change in population trends became evident
during the war. The rate of population growth in the United States has
risen very sharply since the thirties. Most of this increase came during and
immediately after the war, but so far it has not abated. (See chart 30.)
In 1953, the U. S. population will be 20 million higher than in 1945. The
annual rate of growth has risen from 0.7 percent at the start of the thirties
to about 1.8 percent. The great increase in the number of young married
couples since the end of the war suggests that this acceleration of population
growth is not merely a postwar spurt. Concentrated as it has been in the
younger age group, where parents have more mouths to feed, and in the
older group, where the consumption rate tends to be relatively high, this
population growth has provided a significant support to consumption.
The population has also been shifting geographically. The pronounced
movement away from the centers of our cities to suburban areas and toward the West and Southwest has added to the demand for automobiles,
commercial transportation, commercial construction, and housing. This,
together with other population developments, has also added to the expanded needs for public facilities and services.
Moreover, marriages created new families at an extremely high rate in

209722—52




CHART 30

POPULATION GROWTH
During the forties, contrary to forecasts, total U. S«.
population began to increase faster, and so far the new rate of
growth has persisted. There has been a relative increase in
the number of those under 15 and over 64 years of age.
MILLIONS OP PERSONS

MILLIONS OF PERSONS

160

160

TOTAL POPULATION '

120

120

80

80

~

40

40

I

I i I

40

1930

20

45

PERCENT OF TOTAL POPULATION
40
60

50

80

100

1930

1940

1945

1950
1952
UNDER 5
YEARS

5-14
YEARS

15-64 YEARS

NOTE: POPULATION DATA FOR JULY I OF EACH YEAR,
SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.




108

65 YEARS
AND OVER

the postwar period, and many additional households were created by "undoubling" from crowded wartime quarters. These trends supplied a substantial bolster to the demand for housing and for the consumer durable
goods that go into new homes. However, unlike the growth in population,
the marriage rate has already commenced to decline.
In the sixth place, during the period 1946-50 there was a moderate
but sustained growth of nonsecurity government expenditures, partly in
response to the greater needs for public services associated with the population developments just noted. From 1946 to 1949, Federal, State, and
local government expenditures on nonsecurity goods and services increased
from 18 billion dollars to 27 billion (1951 prices). Most of this increase
occurred at the State and local levels.
Most of these factors which underlay the high levels of total demand
from 1946 to 1950 should continue to assert themselves in the longer-run
period ahead. It may be that they provide a sufficiently strong tendency
toward the maintenance of high-level employment and production to make
it less easy than in the past for the initiating causes of a substantial recession or depression to get under way. But the economy seems by no
means invulnerable to such developments. It is fortunate, therefore, that
there also are factors within the economy which may tend to restrain and
circumvent initial downward movements before they gain cumulative force.
Stabilizers built into our institutions
The quick reversal of the decline of business activity in 1949 focused
attention on another kind of demand support which, in addition to the
elements which have already been identified, contributed to the high
level of production and employment in the postwar period. This kind of
demand support had been built into the structure of our economy since
the great depression. Such "built-in stabilizers" do not primarily prevent
fluctuations in activity or provide positive remedies for them, but they
operate to reduce their magnitude. They function either by decreasing
tax collections, increasing Government payments, or both.
The social security system is one of these "built-in stabilizers." The employment taxes collected under it drop when economic activity declines,
while benefits paid to insured persons increase, particularly unemployment
insurance benefits. From 1948 to 1949, when private wages and salaries fell
by 2.7 billion dollars, unemployment insurance benefits rose about 1 billion
dollars. Old-age insurance payments also tend to increase when more
people voluntarily retire as jobs become scarcer.
The responsiveness of tax collections to changes in income also contributes to the stabilization of demand. Thus, while the annual rate of
personal income declined by 8.1 billion dollars from the second half of
1948 to the second half of 1949, Federal personal income tax payments
declined by 1.9 billion dollars. The automatic reduction in Federal income taxes was the major reason why this 8.1-billion-dollar decline in total
personal income was accompanied by a decline of only 6.4 billion in dis-




109

posable personal income. During the same period, there was a decline of
2.4 billion dollars in the rate of corporate profits tax accruals, which cushioned the impact on corporations of the fall in sales.
The price support system for agricultural products is another new factor which helps to cushion the effects of price declines on farmers and
the economy as a whole. In the moderate recession which began late in
1948 or early in 1949, farm prices and farm incomes declined. But the
average level of farm prices fell only 24 percent during the 24 months
from January 1948 to December 1949, compared with a break of over 50
percent in average farm prices within a 12-month period in the crash
following World War I. Without the existence of the price support program, the declines would have been greater, and declining farm purchasing power would have been a major weakening influence in the economy,
as it had been in the earlier periods of 1920-21 and 1929-32. With nearrecord output of farm products in 1948 and 1949, Government investment
in price support operations rose from about 300 million dollars in mid1948 to a total of almost 4.3 billion dollars in early 1950.
It is important to note that no emergency Government programs were
adopted to deal with the 1949 recession. The "automatic stabilizers"
accounted for about half of the 6-billion-dollar increase in Federal cash
expenditures between 1948 and 1949. The remainder was for purposes
other than stabilization, such as foreign aid. Cash receipts fell off, partly
as a result of income declineSj but also as a result of a substantial reduction
of income taxes in mid-1948. This resulted in the surplus of 8 billion
dollars in 1948 being replaced by a small cash deficit of 1.2 billion in 1949.
Reinforcing these public stabilizers are some changes which have appeared
in private business action. In 1949, it was not the institution of emergency
Government programs, but rather the decisions of business, which maintained a high level of investment based upon the long-range potential of the
economy. And although protective legislation helped, it was primarily the
strength of labor organization combined with important changes in business
thinking which prevented substantial wage reductions, instead of adding to
the cumulative forces of depression by a general policy of wage cutting—a
policy which in an earlier era had erroneously been looked upon as an instrument of revival through reducing business costs.
The 1944—50 record summarized
Chart 31, showing the movement of gross national product and its principal components from the peak World War II year of 1944 to the first
half of 1950, just before the impact of the Korean outbreak, summarizes the
effects of the factors which have been identified in the foregoing pages.
In it and in appendix table B-3 are reflected the outcome of the forces
\vhich governed total spending and production during the period: the
enormous drop in defense spending in 1945 and 1946; the great volume of
money and liquid private savings which resulted from the financing of the
war; the surge of liberated private demand for consumer goods and fixed




no

CHART 31

TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS & SERVICES
GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1951 PRICES
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

BILLIONS OF DOLLARS

300

300

200

200

100

100

1944

1945

1946

1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952

NONGOVERNMENT COMPONENTS
200

200
' PERSONAL CONSUMPTION
EXPENDITURES

100

100
GROSS PRIVATE
DOMESTIC INVESTMENT

1

1944
NOTE:

1945

1946

1947

NET FOREIGN
INVESTMENT

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952

DATA FOR 1 9 5 0 - 5 2 ARE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES, PLOTTED SEMI - ANNUALLY.

S O U R C E : COUNCIL OF E C O N O M I C ADVISERS.




1U

capital goods which, with the assistance of increased inventory spending and
net foreign investment, filled the gap of needed demand in those early transitional years; the steady and growing strength of consumption and basic
investment demand which characterized the period thereafter; the growth
of nonsecurity government expenditures; the fluctuations of inventory
spending and net foreign investment which agitated total demand but never
bullied it into a major down-spiral, even when the downward movement
of both joined forces in 1949; the institutional stabilizers which played a
significant role in that year; and finally the resurgence of consumption
and investment in early 1950, bringing renewed evidence of the healthy
and expanding state of the civilian economy before the present security program took shape.
This record strongly illustrates the ability of a dynamic economy to counteract declines in one sector by advances in another. It warns against the
assumption that a substantial decline in one sector—even if it occurs—will
necessarily arrest the progress of the whole economy. From 1947 to 1948,
for example, net foreign investment declined by close to 9 billion dollars, and
in 1949 private investment declined by more than 9 billion dollars, but in
each instance other developments of a neutralizing character quickly asserted
themselves.
In a complex, flexible, dynamic economy like ours, substantial upward
and downward movements in specific sectors inevitably will occur from time
to time. One problem of such an economy is to prevent the movements of
the different sectors from coinciding; another is to prevent changes in one
sector from causing similar changes in other sectors, thus resulting in a
cumulative downward movement. This makes the whole task of stabilization and growth more manageable than if the whole economy moved
together in an inevitable cyclical process of boom and depression.
THE PROBLEM AHEAD
The economy of today may be said to have "grown up" to its defense
burden. Productive power has been enlarged to an extent enabling us, without excessive strain, to carry the defense burden while maintaining a high
and advancing level of business investment and consumer supplies. Between
now and the time when defense outlays cease to climb, the near-term outlook is that (1) our productive power will be sufficient to support the
increasing defense program without inflation, if moderate safeguards are
maintained, and if there is not great change in the international situations;
and (2) private and public demand combined will be sufficient to support a
high level of employment and business activity.
The longer-range outlook which here concerns us looks to the time when
defense outlays are stabilized—under current plans, sometime during
1953—and later begin to decline. When they stabilize, the issue of maintaining maximum employment and production will depend upon whether
the private demand of business and consumers and the nondefense expendi-




112

tures of Federal, State, and local governments maintain in the aggregate
a rate of expansion consistent with improvements in productivity and a
growing labor force, without benefit of the stimuli provided by expanding
defense outlays. When defense outlays commence to decline, the problem
of maintaining maximum employment and production will be somewhat
accentuated, but not essentially changed. The decline in defense outlays
during the period under consideration will, in any event, be a relatively
small factor compared with others operating in so vast and varied an
economy.
As will appear in the discussion below, the kinds of temporary factors
which stimulated demand after World War II are not likely to be present in
substantial degree in the longer-range period ahead. The more enduring
factors present in the 1946-50 period, which became of increasing importance with the passage of time after the war, will determine the result. If
the more enduring factors of strength should not be sufficiently strong in
the years ahead, the impact of even a moderate reduction in defense outlays, or in investment or consumption, could be cumulatively aggravated
by a deflationary psychology among businessmen or consumers. In that
event, a combination of retarding forces, feeding upon one another, could
have serious results. On the other hand, if the more enduring factors
of strength are powerful, and if the economy continues to exhibit a high
degree of resiliency and adaptability such as it has shown for more than
a decade, declines in one sector or another of the economy should not be
large or precipitous enough to trouble the economy seriously even for a
short period, since any declines would be quickly offset by increases in other
sectors.
There is no reason to adopt a priori the dismal thesis that an economy
which found ways between 1946 and 1950 to market the product of highlevel employment will lose its ability to do so a few years hence. The problems in some respects will be different, but not so different as to make irrelevant that heartening experience. We may now proceed to an examination,
fraught though it be with many uncertainties, of the principal factors on
which the longer-range economic outlook will depend.
Basic demand prospects
The maintenance of high employment and production in the period under
consideration will depend primarily upon the presence of a rise in consumer
and business demand adequate (a) to substitute for any decline which
may occur in security spending in excess of any rise in nonsecurity public
spending, and (b) to utilize the increasing productive potential of the economy. In normal times this increasing productive potential, reflecting both
growing population and growing productivity, might approximate 4 percent
annually. However, in the first years after security spending stops rising,
the needed increase in total demand may be somewhat lower than this.
This is because working hours, the proportion of the population in the
civilian labor force, and the role of high productivity defense industries, all




'

113

may be significantly above normal at the maximum level of the defense
build-up. Most certainly, the necessary increase of consumer and business demand will be much smaller in both absolute and relative terms than
that which occurred during the period 1944-46, and on an annual basis
probably will be closely comparable to the increases which occurred during
some years between 1946 and 1950. The problem thus appears clearly to
be one of manageable proportions. The next step in the analysis is to
examine the prospects for private demand.
Fiscal factors affecting private demand. The outlook for Federal finances,
during at least the first part of the period under consideration, is for substantial Federal deficits unless there is a further increase in taxes. The
resulting rise in privately-held Government securities, and such increase in
the money supply as may result from financing part of the deficit through
bank borrowing, will increase the liquidity of the economy and be a buoyant
influence. This assumes that the inflationary impact of the deficit has been
restrained or offset in the immediate future period of rapidly rising defense
outlays. The deficits and increases in liquidity will be small in comparison
with World War II experience.
There seems no reason to doubt that credit will be available in adequate
supply and at reasonable rates of interest for financing business investment
and durable goods consumption.
Outlook for consumer spending. The outlook for consumer spending, the
largest single component of total demand, appears fairly reassuring. There
are of course some uncertainties in this outlook. First of all, consumer
spending depends fundamentally upon the volume of consumer incomes,
which in turn are heavily dependent upon the levels of private investment
and of public expenditures. The Council's analysis of the outlook for
private investment (itself strongly influenced by the outlook for consumer
spending, as we indicate below) and public outlays indicates developments
within a range which should produce a further enlargement in consumer
incomes prior to the period under consideration, so that consumers would
enter the period with high levels of disposable income.
The second factor which determines the level of consumer spending is
the percentages of disposable income spent and saved. The rate of saving
has continued high since its sharp climb in the second quarter of 1951, when
spending declined from the high rate which followed the Korean outbreak.
Since the third quarter of 1951, it has declined from 9 percent of disposable
income to 7 percent in the most recent quarter. Much of the saving has
taken the form of increased holdings of liquid assets, and this if continued
will restore a higher degree of liquidity in the private sector of the economy.
This is significant, since if the rise in disposable personal income should be
interrupted temporarily in the period under discussion, there is a good
chance that, as in 1949, the rate of saving would fall as individuals, drawing
upon reserves of liquid assets, attempted to maintain their standards of
living. This certainly could be expected, unless the fear of depression caused




114

a husbanding of savings as a means of promoting personal security. Thus,
a dip in saving might serve as a shock absorber to help carry the economy
through a temporary deviation from the long-term rise in consumer incomes.
Over the longer run, there has been no observable tendency for the rate
of saving to rise as a secular trend. There is no basis yet for concluding
that a rate of saving as high as the recent rate is likely to become a permanent
feature of the economy., or that the rate of saving will tend to increase as the
standard of living rises further.
In the period ahead, fluctuations in the saving rate probably will be
mainly associated with changes in the proportion of income spent for consumer durable goods. Some observers believe that, because of the increased use of consumer credit to finance durable goods buying in recent
years, and because the present volume of outstanding consumer debt is
very large, the demands for automobiles and other consumers' durable
goods may fail to keep up with incomes in the period ahead. In addition,
the decline now beginning in the rate of family formation will exert a
dampening effect. However, replacement demand for durable goods should
be an important factor holding up consumer expenditures, especially in the
case of automobiles, because of the high proportion of cars on the road that
are already over age, and because of the striking recent growth in the
number of two-car families. Further, the demand for new products is
likely to form an important supplement to replacement demand in the
next few years. Home freezers, driers, air conditioners, and other new
products were relatively immune to the drop in durable goods purchases
which took place last year. Moreover, there are some indications that demand for consumer nondurable goods in the last year or two has averaged
somewhat low relative to incomes, and might therefore be expected to rise.
The outlook for investment in productive facilities. The expected high
level of consumer demand would normally be expected to induce a large
amount of investment in plant and equipment. The amount will depend in
part, however, on the relationship between consumer demand and existing
plant capacity.
The buying spurts after Korea undoubtedly stimulated the efforts of
businessmen to make investment in industries which had little or no
relationship to the defense program. As a result of materials shortages,
delays in filling orders for machine tools, and restrictions on unnecessary
construction, there has been some restraint of such investment activity. But
the amount of curtailment has been relatively small, and no doubt will
be even smaller during the remainder of the defense build-up. Even at
the present time, when the stimulus of a growing defense program in income and consumer spending is strong, there is unused capacity in a number of consumer goods industries. In addition, the defense program is
entailing an extraordinarily large volume of outlays for plant and equipment to broaden the industrial mobilization base. While a substantial
proportion of these new plants perhaps never will be useful for the produc-




tion of civilian goods, the part that will be useful and available for that
purpose is likely to be large. Moreover, as the scheduled build-up programs are completed, the special investment for the defense program will
be greatly diminished, and in some industries will come to an end.
These considerations regarding plant capacity, taken alone, would point
to a downward adjustment in the rate of total investment in plant and
equipment later on. However, the expansion of some industries shows
every sign of increasing. Despite the rapid expansion of electric power
capacity which has been taking place, analyses of power needs and investment plans indicate that outlays for that purpose will probably rise to even
higher levels for several years to come. Similarly, present plans call for
further increases in investment in the development of oil and gas facilities.
The chemical industry also has been growing with great speed, and most
evidence points to a maintained or possibly higher rate of investment for
several years ahead. The motor truck and bus transportation industry
also gives promise of requiring higher investment outlays in the future.
The history of industrial development indicates that other new industries
are even now in their early stages, and will be expanding to support investment. Most forecasts of the volume of investment tend to be too low,
because the intangible character of these dynamic elements of investment
seems too uncertain and insecure a foundation for raising expectations.
Nevertheless, to disregard them is almost certain to result in underestimating future investment.
On balance, it is clearly too early to determine the precise course of plant
and equipment investment during the period under consideration. Much
will depend on the dynamic factor. There seems to be a good chance
that the level of investment will be high enough at that time to support
employment and production at high levels, if consumer demand also is at
high levels. As the period between 1946 and 1950 indicates, moderate
variations in investment need not have serious consequences, if compensating adjustments within the economy go forward, and if businessmen avoid
succumbing to a fear psychology and reducing investment excessively. In
an important degree, the outlook for investment depends upon how well
businessmen respond to their long-range prospects. The over-all economic
outlook justifies and should evoke a favorable response.
Other private investment. Another important sector of the investment
picture is residential construction. The recent level of home building has
been high in comparison with levels of past decades. The "backlog" of
demand, the temporary acceleration in the rate of family formation, the
high level of incomes, and government insurance and loan programs, all
have contributed to the high level of home building. In terms of the
long-range needs of the Nation and its capacity for high and advancing
standards of living, the levels of home building have not been abnormally
high. If people are willing and able to spend for housing at rates consistent with an advancing standard of living, the present rate of con-




116

struction would seem to be needed and sustainable for some years to come,
perhaps indefinitely. But this is a statement of the problem, not its solution; it gives no assurance of the continuation for years ahead of the present
rate of home building. The relationship of housing costs to the income
structure is one factor which may intervene to prevent the needed quantity
of housing from being constructed. The structure of housing costs presents
a chronic problem, reflecting the fact that the mass market for housing has
not been probed comparably to the mass market for food, clothing, or even
automobiles. An effective attack on housing costs could open up a large
volume of middle-income demand. Low-rent housing will be important.
Inventory accumulation and decumulation often have marked effects on
levels of business activity. There is no prospect that the production and
distribution pipelines for civilian goods will be drained dry at the beginning
of the period under consideration; indeed, it is to be expected that they
will be well filled, since goods are not short in supply. There is a tendency
for inventories to fluctuate between a minimum at which normal selling
operations can be carried on, and much higher levels reached as a result
of speculative activity. In view of the rapid changes from inventory
accumulation to decumulation and vice versa which may take place, it seems
fruitless to try to forecast the precise situation in particular future years.
Nonsecurity expenditures of government. The nondefense facilities and
services provided by Federal, State, and local governments constitute one
sector of potential demand where the country has already accumulated a
large backlog of needs. The sum of our urgent needs for more and better
schools, hospitals, roads, public recreational facilities, and local water supplies, and for land and water conservation and development works, exceeds
those at the end of World War II. During most of the period before Korea,
all levels of government moved slowly in many of these areas, because of the
discouragement of a tight market and of prices which seemed unduly high
and were expected to fall. Under the new restrictions since Korea, new
unfilled needs have been accumulating every month.
The kinds of projects listed above are undertaken in response to basic
needs of varying degrees of urgency. Some projects can be postponed
until a time when private construction is at a relatively low level. At such
a time, the government constructing the project is likely to benefit from
lower costs, while the economy in general benefits from the offset to the
decline in private construction. Other projects may be so urgently needed
that postponement could not be justified even to secure these advantages.
The larger and more elaborate projects, such as multiple-purpose dams and
super-highways, which may require several years to construct, cannot ordinarily be "turned on and off" to promote economic stability, although they
serve to give the economy a continuing undertone of stability. In the present instance, moreover, since such projects for the most part have been
postponed by the defense effort, many of them, if gotten under way soon,
would result in substantial outlays shortly after that effort has reached its
maximum level.




117

Available private policies
The basic long-range prospects for consumption, investment, and nonsecurity government spending, rooted in factors of growth and long-term
structural change, are reasonably reassuring. However, the central question is whether these potentially high and in some instances expanding
needs for consumption, investment, and public services will express themselves quickly enough during the period under consideration, thereby reinforcing and strengthening each other, or whether the economy will be
nudged into a temporary but sharp and cumulative down-spiral. There
are no imperatives for such a down-spiral.
The long-run expansibility of markets, in the Council's opinion, is no less
than it was between 1946 and 1950. At that time, the unhesitating confidence in the continuing expansibility of American markets which many
businessmen demonstrated in their investment decisions was one of the factors maintaining prosperity. It may well be so again. There is evidence
that many businesses increasingly are planning their capital expenditures
programs with a view to longer periods than was their habit before the war,
and are giving more weight to factors of long-run market growth. The
more pervasive such business policy is, the more quickly resources released
by defense production will be transferred in part to civilian capital formation, and the surer will it be that such confidence in the economy will not
be misplaced.
Viewed in this longer perspective, investment opportunity is obviously
linked with consumer markets. These markets do not depend only upon
the wishes of consumers; they depend also upon business policies. Price
adjustments, wage increases, product improvements, and merchandising
efforts can all be combined to open up markets as productive power increases. American enterprise, with few lapses, has enjoyed more than a
decade of sellers' markets. Many firms may have become excessively rigid
and cautious in the art of market development. It will be in their own
interest to sharpen their tools of market research and market analysis, to
the degree needed to service a more venturesome merchandising policy.
In summary, the business system during the transitional period can capitalize upon the fact that the enduring factors of strength which were present
between 1946 and 1950 will not have disappeared, and with appropriate
economic policies should never disappear. Business should be particularly
mindful of the striking recent population trends outlined above—developments which probably have not yet been fully reflected in private investment
planning.
Available public policies
Given an intelligent and confident approach by businessmen, investors,
and consumers to the problems of the period under consideration, the
prospect is bright that adjustment policies within the enterprise system can
largely, perhaps fully, meet those problems. Public policies, however, can
be helpful, and they may be needed since the prospect, although bright,




118

is by no means certain. The Council adheres to its previously expressed
view that public policy can best exert its stabilizing influence by serving
mainly the long-range needs of the economy. At the same time, we are
mindful that the timing of public actions can be made to help offset transitory fluctuations in the private sector. Many built-in stabilizers, for
example, are long-range established programs which automatically time
public action to help slow down and reduce declines in total demand. There
are also some positive instruments for stimulating or generating new demand, which are summarized in the following paragraphs.
Tax adjustments. Probably the most effective single method by which
the Government could stimulate consumer spending and business investment, if needed during an adjustment period, would be well-designed tax
reductions. For example, reductions in corporate income taxes can improve cost-profit ratios, while the lowering of personal income and excise
taxes would energize markets. As has been emphasized in the discussion
of current fiscal policy, it is premature to be talking about reducing taxes
now. This is an appropriate time, however, to begin analyzing, as part
of further study of the longer-range outlook, various alternative patterns
of future tax adjustments and reductions with a view to determining what
pattern would give the best balanced stimulus to consumption and private
investment.
Housing and urban redevelopment. Housing and urban redevelopment
programs are urgently needed, both as a means of providing families with
suitable housing and to prevent the decay of our great cities. A realistic
housing and urban redevelopment program, taking into consideration the
changed character of needs in the period ahead, also could contribute
much toward stability.
The Federal Government in recent years has added to its traditional
management of general credit policy a newer but pervasive influence on
the private housing market as an insurer of housing credit. Experience
with the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Administration
mortgage insurance programs in 1949 and 1950 indicates that liberalization of the terms of housing credit can provide a marked impetus to private residential construction. There may be some remaining opportunity
for similar steps, particularly with respect to lower downpayments and
lower monthly housing costs, to be taken in the future.
Another action that could be taken is acceleration of both the slum
clearance and low-rent housing programs. The latter has been drastically curtailed in the defense mobilization period. The construction of
135,000 low-rent housing units a year (presently impossible because of
appropriations action by the Congress) as contemplated by the Housing
Act of 1949 would involve local construction expenditures of over 1 billion
dollars annually for several years. Much additional impetus to investment in private residential, commercial, and industrial construction and
in public works could be given through the program of slum clearance and




urban redevelopment. Some of the necessary planning and preparation
for programs of slum clearance and low-rent housing has already been
accomplished at both Federal and local levels. Because of the long lead
time required before such efforts can manifest themselves in substantial
new expenditures and jobs, practical preparation of projects as early as
possible is to be desired. Middle-income housing needs more attention.
Public welfare and development programs. At all levels of government,
advance preparations for public welfare and development programs, and
efforts to develop standards for the assignment of priorities, should now be
going forward, primarily because of the urgent needs for these programs in
their own right, and secondarily because of their potential demand-supporting usefulness. Some of this work already is done—a large backlog of
vitally needed highway construction, for example, has been planned in preliminary phases—-but much more is called for. Attention probably should
be given first to those types of programs which, because they can be got
under way quickly, can provide a quick stimulus to employment. But, as
already noted, under present circumstances there also is an opportunity to
get some greatly needed longer-range projects into operation in time to have
an anti-deflationary effect if planning is pressed forward now.
The factor of confidence
The analysis thus far leads the Council to the conclusion that, with the
underlying strength of private demand in the economy, with a reasonable
awareness of that strength among businessmen, with built-in stabilizers
which serve to moderate any downturn, with the public programs which are
needed irrespective of current business conditions, and with a battery of
stimulants available for intelligent use, if needed, the problem of maintaining a high level of production and employment during the period under
consideration should be entirely manageable. Complete stability of the
economy is, of course, impossible to attain. Fluctuations in various sectors
are inevitable, if for no other reason than that people act today on forecasts
of the future which often prove to be erroneous, necessitating later adjustments. But complete stability is not necessary for over-all general stability.
The Council at various points in the above discussion has said a good
deal about the importance of confidence in future growth. It is not easy
to overestimate its importance as a necessary condition for prosperity. If
the people expect prosperity, they act in ways which promote prosperity;
individually, they plan and spend consistently with rising production and
rising markets. If they expect depression, they act in ways which promote
depression; they tighten their belts, and the effects may cumulate in a
downward spiral of production and consumption. Men make conditions.
To be sure, while confidence is a necessary factor, it is not sufficient.
Confidence without a reasonable basis may result in destroying the very
prosperity it produces. For example, a man might build a resort hotel .in
a desert. Building this hotel would help produce prosperity; but if the
expected customers then failed to come, the resulting financial losses and




120

unrealized expectations would help to destroy confidence and tear down
prosperity. Unbounded confidence may thus result in mistakes that are
destructive of prosperity. The Council does not believe that the only
requisite for continued prosperity is for all of us to assure ourselves and
each other that "every day and in every way, things are getting better and
better." There must be a solid foundation for confidence.
Nonetheless, the Council believes that, assuming peace is maintained,
the factors necessary for the development of sound confidence in the future
of the economy exist today. As we see it, four of these factors are of
central importance.
The first is that the economy has before it great possibilities of growth and
expansion. The major requirements for a healthy economy are bound up
in its ability to produce and in its ability to purchase and consume. Both
of these abilities rest upon a wide array of factors—including natural
resources, plant and equipment, training and skills, a sound financial system, broad distribution of income, incentives to production and efficiency,
and the freedom and flexibility of our institutions both private and public.
The United States possesses both the ability to produce and to consume in
a degree which should make it unnecessary for any lengthy time for our
level of employment to fall far below the number of those able and willing
to work, or for our level of actual production to fall far below what our
plant and technology are capable of producing without strain.
The second factor which supports sound confidence lies in the characteristic of our economic system that, for the most part, when downward
fluctuations occur in any sector, the forces of the private economy will react
to correct them if the total economic environment is favorable. The economy is not like a precariously balanced glass vase which is doomed to fall
and be destroyed at the least mishap; in its month-to-month movements,
it usually acts like a well-constructed ship which rights itself after rolling
from the impact of the waves.
The third factor supporting confidence is the fact—and the Council
believes it is now firmly a fact—that if downward forces should at any time
become too pronounced for the private economy assisted by the built-in
stabilizers to compensate for them automatically, the Government has the
ability and the will to take those measures which may be necessary to end
and reverse the downward movement. The Employment Act of 1946 was
an acceptance by the Government of this responsibility. We believe that
this responsibility will continue to be accepted.
The fourth factor supporting confidence is that, since the near-term outlook is for high prosperity, we now have time in which to apply private and
public policies geared to the longer-range maintenance of prosperity, which
are easier to formulate and easier to apply than policies which stand ready
only with plans to reverse the course of a depression after it is well under
way. Instead of merely preparing to fight a depression, we primarily should
work constantly to preserve and advance prosperity. This does not over-




look the threat; it meets the threat on the selected ground most favorable to
a successful outcome. It chooses the only ground upon which, in view of
world-wide conditions, we can afford to stand.
The Council believes that it is safe for business and consumers to rest on
these foundations of confidence, and, more importantly, to act accordingly.
There is another aspect of confidence, however, which must be developed
if we are to maintain a prosperous nation. It is not sufficient that businessmen, workers, farmers, and public officials each have confidence in the
future. It is equally important that they have confidence in one another
and learn better how to work together. It is in this aspect alone, as the
Council views the situation, that the Nation has thus far lagged farthest
behind its best potential. It is here that all should join in the effort to widen
the areas of economic understanding and agreement, toward the fulfillment
of basic objectives shared by every American.




122

Appendix A
The Nation's Economic Accounts
CONTENTS
Page

The Nation's economic accounts
Statistical tables relating to the Nation's economic accounts:
A-l. The Nation's economic accounts, calendar years 1951-52.
A-2. Consumer account, calendar years 1951-52
A-3. Business account, calendar years 1951-52.
A-4. International account, calendar years 1951-52
A-5. Government account (Federal, State, and local), calendar
years 1951-52
A-6. Reconciliation of Federal Government expenditures on
income and product account with consolidated cash
statement and administrative budget, calendar years
1951-52
A-7. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts on income
and product account with consolidated cash statement
and administrative budget, calendar years 1951-52. ...
A-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient
and transaction, calendar years 1951-52

209722—52




9

123

125
128
129
130
130
131

132
133
134




The Nation's Economic Accounts
The Nation's economic accounts presented in tables A-l to A-5 are designed to show the major economic developments of the last year and a half,
and to throw light on the process of change and adjustment within the
economy. However, the accounts are more nearly like snapshots taken at
intervals than like a moving picture which shows the process of change. The
causal elements must be inferred from a succession of static pictures.
It is in the nature of the accounting concepts used that, for the economy
as a whole, total income received and total output (or expenditure) are
always equal: the sum of the components of income, such as rents, wages,
profits, and interest, must equal the value of the output of goods and services. Thus, in the Nation's economic accounts, receipts and expenditures
add to the same total, which is the gross national output or expenditure.
It follows that if the receipts of any one sector of the economy exceed the
expenditures of that sector, this will be balanced by an excess of expenditure over receipts in another sector. This balance is shown in the third
column of table A-l.
So much for the static relations. If we think of the process of change it
becomes evident that, while income and expenditure for the economy as a
whole are equal for any period, the expenditure of one period may differ
from the income of the preceding period. This results from the fact that
collectively all the economic units may wish to buy more than current
output (i. e., they may be trying to spend more than their current income),
thereby stimulating increases in prices, production, or both, or they may be
trying to reduce spending below the level of income and output, which
tends to bring prices down, to reduce production, and to cause unintended
inventory accumulation. Only by rare coincidence will the aggregates of
countless individual, business, and government decisions to spend or save
match up so that the desire to save by some is exactly counterbalanced by
plans to spend more than income by others. When this does happen, the
economy remains stabilized at a given level of output and prices. When it
does not happen, forces will be set in motion which operate to change
either the physical volume of activity, or the price level, or both. It follows
that if there is to be steady expansion of the economy at stable prices, total
spending in each succeeding period must rise somewhat above the income
of the preceding period.
The economic forces and developments that were discussed in Part I
of this Review are reflected in the national account figures presented in




125

the tables of this appendix. Accordingly, no statement of these forces
and developments is included here.
The estimates included in the Nation's economic accounts are all taken
from the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce. The 1951 National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current
Business has complete statistics from 1929 to 1950, as well as much explanatory material. Revised estimates for 1949-51 can be found in the
Survey of Current Business, July 1952. Many of these estimates are reproduced in tables in Appendix B of this report. Some notes on the four
accounts contained in the accompanying tables follow:
Consumer account
The consumer account, table A-2, summarizes the more detailed statistics on personal income and consumption contained in appendix tables
B-4, B-7, and B-9. It should be noted that, whereas personal income
includes the income of unincorporated businesses and farms, only expenditures for consumption purposes are included in this account. Investments
of both corporate and noncorporate businesses are included in the business
account. Residential construction, whether for owner-occupancy or for
rental purposes, is also included with business investment, while the actual
or imputed rent of dwellings is included in consumer expenditure. Gifts
to residents of foreign countries are also part of consumer expenditure.
Business account
In the business account, table A-3, receipts of business include the undistributed profits of corporations after adjustment for inventory valuation,
plus the capital consumption allowances of both corporate and noncorporate
enterprises and institutions, and depreciation on residences. Depreciation
allowances must be added to receipts, since investment is on a gross
basis; that is, before deduction for depreciation. As mentioned above,
business investment includes additions to plant and equipment and inventories of both corporate and noncorporate enterprises, as well as residential
construction for owner-occupancy. Additional information relating to
business is contained in appendix tables B-5, B-18, B-19, B-32, and B-37.
International account
Net foreign investment, table A-4, represents the excess of United States
current receipts over current payments arising from transactions in goods
and services (including investment income) and unilateral transfers such as
private remittances or Government grants. Expenditures for these unilateral transfers are included in consumer expenditures and Government
expenditures for goods and services, and exports which arise from them are
included in the current receipts component of net foreign investment. Consequently, the payments involved in the transfers themselves must be included in the current payment component of net foreign investment in
order to avoid double counting. (See also appendix tables B-38 through
B-44.)




126

Government account
In table A-5, government receipts and expenditures are shown on an
income and product account basis rather than on a cash or administrative
budget basis, so as to be consistent with the receipts and expenditure accounts of the other sectors and with the gross national product total. Government transfer payments, such as social security and veterans' benefits,
and interest charges represent income to the recipients, but are not included
in the gross national product. Therefore, these payments are subtracted
from both receipts and expenditures.
The income and product accounts of the government are on a consolidated basis, just as the cash accounts are, but they depart from the latter
because of the timing of the items included in each and because of conceptual differences. (See appendix table B-31 for government cash receipts
from and payments to the public.) The income and product accounts of
the government are designed to be in accord with the accrual records
maintained by private business. Thus, business taxes, especially those
on corporate profits, are recorded on an accrual rather than a collections basis, and government expenditures for goods are corrected for
the lag between deliveries and payments therefor. All capital transactions,
such as receipts from the sale of government property and changes in loans
and investments of government credit agencies, are excluded from the income and product accounts, although such transactions are included in both
the cash and administrative budgets. A reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures, as reported in the Nation's economic accounts, with receipts and expenditures in the consolidated cash and conventional administrative budgets, is presented in tables A-6 and A-7. For a
description of the differences between the consolidated cash budget and
the conventional administrative budget, see Special Analysis A, the Budget
of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1953,
p. 1142.




127

TABLE A—1.— The Nation's economic accounts, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
1951, first half

Economic group

Consumers:
Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Personal net saving (+)
Business:
Gross retained earnings
Gross private domestic investment
Excess of investment ( — )

Excess
Excess
of reof receipts
ceipts
Ex- (+)or ReEx- Of) or ReExRe- pendiceipts tures ex- ceipts pendi- ex- ceipts penditures penditures
penditures
tures
(-)
<-)
220.6

Equals: Net receipts ..

229.3
207.5

4-1.4

14

-1.8

-1.4

85.3

17.2

16.7

17.2

71.1

68.6

74.0

91 2

73.1

85.9

94.0

17.2

16.7

17.2

55 8

Equals: Purchases of goods and
services

69 2

76.7

Excess of receipts (+) or expenditures ( — )
Gross national product ._

-12.8

88 3

Total government expenditures
Less: Transfers, interest, and
subsidies (net)
__ _

Statistical discrepancy

49.0

—18 2

18

—1 4

+16.9

36.2

54.6

—33 2

214 1

+20.9

36 4
62.5

Excess
of receipts
(+)or
expenditures
(-)

231.0

208.4

+13.1

29 3

International:
Net foreign investment
Excess of receipts (+) or investment (— )
Government (Federal, State, and
local):
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals
Less: Transfers, interest, and
subsidies (net)
__

1952, Arst half 1

1951, second half

+15. 3
324. 4

— 4

.0

334.0

324.4

1

-2.7

— 6

+3 2

3.2

—.4

334.0

—.2

.0

341.2

-.2

341.2

.0

Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce (except as
noted).




128

TABLE A-2.—Consumer account, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]

1951
Receipts or expenditures

Second
half

170.7
15.6
26.2
8.9
20.4
12.4

167.4
14.8
26.1
8.5
20.0
12.3

174.0
16.4
26.3
9.2
20.7
12.4

178.2
15.0
27.4
9.4
21.0
12.5

254.1

249.0

259.0

263. 5

26.1
3.0

25. 5
2.9

26.7
3.1

29.3
3.3

Total
Personal income:
Salaries, wages, and other labor income
Farm proprietors' income
Business and professional income 2
Rental income
_
Dividends and personal interest income
Transfer payments - _

_.

_ __

Total
Less: Personal tax and nontax payments:
Federal
State and local
Total

-

29.1

Equals: Disposable personal income

.._

Less: Personal consumption expenditures 3

28.4

29.7

32.5

225.0

220.6

229.3

231. 0

208.0

207.5

208.4

214.1

+17.0

Equals: Personal net savinp

+13.1

+20.9

+16. 9

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Includes adjustment for inventory valuation.
For detail, see appendix table B-4.
NOTE.-—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table A-l.

2
3




1952,
first
half*

First
half

129

TABLE A-3,—Business account, calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
1951

Receipts or investment
First
half

Total
Receipts:
Corporate profits before tax _ __
Less: Corporate tax liability 3
Dividend payments

1952,
first
half i

41.2
23.8

42.9
24.2
9 0

_
...

Total gross private domestic investment *
-

39.0
22.0
9 2

11.4

7.8

8.2

24.6
-1.3

23.8
-5.8

25.4

27.1

(5)

—.1

3.1
.1

— 1

29.3

36.4

36.2

23.3
11.0
12.3
24.9
10 3

24.1
11.8
12.2
25.0
13.3

22.4
10.1
12.3
24.8

23.6
11.0
12.6
25.8
— .4

58.5

Expenditures:
New construction
. _. . _
Residential (nonfarm)...
Other private construction
Producers' durable equipment
..
Change in inventories

8.8

32.9

_

46 7
26.4

9.6

,.

Equals: Corporate undistributed profits
Plus: Capital consumption allowances 8
Corporate inventory valuation adjustment *
Excess of wage accruals over disbursements
Equals: Gross retained earnings-

Excess of investment (—)...

Second
half

62.5

54.6

49.0

—18.2

— 12.8

-25.6

-33.2

7.4

9.2

1.0

* Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes.
»Includes capital consumption allowances on noncorporate capital, including residences.
* The adjustment measures the excess of the value of the change in the volume of nonfarm business inventories valued at average prices during the period over the change in the book value.
' Less than 50 million dollars.
* For additional detail, see appendix table B-5.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table A-l.
TABLE A—4.—International account, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, annual rates]
1951

Item
Total

Exports of goods and services
Less* Imports of goods and services
Equals" Surplus of exports of 'goods and services

- -

1952,

First
half

half i

Second
half

...

E quals * Net foreign investment

- -

1
8

19.3
15.7

21.1
14.5

21.4
15. 7

51

Less: Net unilateral transfers: *
Government 8
Private
..

20.2
15 1

3.6

6 6

5.7

4 5

4.6
.4

4.4
.4

3.9
.4

18

1.4

.4

9

-1.4

Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Net unilateral transfers are included with Government or private expenditures for goods and services.
For example, remittances (gifts) made by American citizens to relatives or charitable groups abroad are included with consumer expenditures. Government aid in the form of grants is included in Government
purchases of goods and services. Thus, net unilateral transfers must be deducted from tho export surplus
to avoid double counting.
* For further detail, see appendix table B-39. These figures do not agree with unilateral transfers "included in appendix table A-8, which is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis and is gross.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See table A-l.




130

TABLE A—5.—Government account (Federal, State, and local), calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars, seasonally adjusted annual rates]
1951

Receipts or expenditures
Total
Federal Government:
Receipts:
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals 2
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments
Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises. _.
Equals: Net receipts

_

_. . . _ _

Expenditures:
Total expenditures
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments
Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises - _ _
Equals: Purchases of goods and services.

67.8

64.4

69.6

13.2
2.4
1.3

13.1

13.3

13.3

49.2

50.7

47.7

53.0

57.8

51 6

63 9

70 4

13 2
2.4
1.3

13 1

13 3
24

13 3

.9

2.0
1.4

2.3
1.7

2.3
1.7

2.4
.9

2.0
1.4

40.9

34.6

47.2

53.6

+8.3

+16.1

+.5

-.6

20.7
2.4
.8
3.2

20.6

20 9

21.5

20.7

20.4

20 9

21.0

24.1
32
.8

23. 8
32

24.4
32

25.7
34

21.7

21.4

22 0

23.1

—1.0

—1.0

—1 1

—2.1

86.8

88.3

86.3

91.2

16 4
.5

16 3

16 5

16 6

71.1

63 6

74.0

79.5

73.1

85 9

94.0

16.4
.5

16.3

16.5

16.6

G2. 6

55.8

69.2

76.7

+7.3

+15.3

-.6

-2.7

....

.._ _
- _

Total government:
Receipts: 3
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals 2
.
__
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments
Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises
Equals: Net receipts

66.1

._

Expenditures:
Total expenditures
Less' Transfers and net interest payments
Plus' Current surplus of Government enterprises
Excess of receipts (-J-) or expenditures (— ) .

1952,
first
half»

69.9

_...

State and local governments:
Receipts:
Tax and nontax receipts or accruals 2 _
Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments
Current surplus of Government enterprises
Less: Transfers and net interest payments
__

Equals: Purchases of goods and services

Second
half

..

Excess of receipts (+) or expenditures (— )

Equals: Net receipts

First
half

- -.

Expenditures: »
Total expenditures .
Less:
Transfers and net interest payments
_.
Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises
Equals: Purchases of goods and services _.
Excess of receipts (+) or expenditures (—)

2.3
.8
3.2

.8

.9

.9

2.4
.8
3,2

.8

.2

.2

2.0
.8
3.4

.8

.6

.6

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Includes personal tax and nontax receipts, indirect business tax and nontax accruals, corporate profits
tax accruals (including excess profits tax accruals), and contributions for social insurance.
3 Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State
and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to
eliminate this duplication.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: See appendix table A-l.




131

TABLE A—6.—Reconciliation of Federal Government expenditures on income and product account
with consolidated cash statement and administrative budget, calendar years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars, annual rates]
1951

Item

1952,
first
half i

Total

First
half

Second
half

40.9

8.6
4.6
1.3
2.4

34.6
8.5
4.5
1.7
2.3

47.2
8.7
4.6
.9
2.4

53.6
8.7
4.6
14
2.0

Total
Less:
Transfer to trust accounts
Federal employee contributions to retirement funds
_
Accrued interest on savings bonds and Treasury bills
Seasonal and other adjustments to Commodity Credit Corporation
expenditures
_
__.
Increase in accounts payable to business
Plus:
Major loans and net investments (excluding Commodity Credit
Corporation)
Federal Government salesDistrict of Columbia expenditures
.-_.
Miscellaneous capital transactions
Statistical errors and omissions. ,

57.8

51.6

63.9

70 4

1.0
.4
.7

.3
.4
.6

1.7
.4
.8

6
.4
.7

.0
.6

.9
.4

Q

.8

.6

1.8
.4
.1
.6
.0

1.6
.3
.1
.6
—. 2

2.0
.5
.1
.7
.3

22
.4
.1
.7
—.3

Equals: Consolidated cash expenditures

58 0

51.4

64.7

71 2

4 3
.1

3.3

5.3
.3

4.0
.5

1.8
10
.4

2.3
.3
.4

1.4
1.7
.4

2.1
.6
.4

56.8

51.1

62.6

69 7

Federal expenditures on income and product account:
Purchases of goods and services (net).
Transfer payments
Net interest paid by the Federal Government
Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises
Grants-in-aid to State and local governments.. _ _

Less:
Cash trust account expenditures
Clearing account for outstanding checks .__
Plus:
Noncash interest payments
_
Transfer to trust accounts
Federal employee contributions to retirement funds .
Equals: Administrative budget expenditures (net)

.

o

i Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Bureau of the Budget, Treasury Department, and Department of Commerce (except as noted).




13*

TABLE A—7.—Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts on income and product account with
consolidated cash statement and administrative budget, calendar years 1951—52
[Billions of dollars, annual rates]
1951

Item

1952,
first
halfi

Total

First
half

Second
half

23 4
9.5
7.1

26.1

25.5
25 5
96
7.1

26.7
21 2
94
7.1

29.3
23 o
10 0
7.4

66.1

67 8

64 4

69 6

Federal receipts on income and product account:
Personal tax arsd nontax liabilities _ .
Corporate profits tax accruals
Indirect business tax and nontax liabilities
Contributions for social insurance
-

-

_

Total

Less:
Excess of corporate profits tax accruals over cash collections (net of
refunds)
Excess of individual income tax withholdings by employers over
deposits with Treasury
Transfer to trust accounts..
Federal employee contributions to retirement funds
Plus:
Sales of Government property
Proceeds of Government-owned securities .
..
Other capital receipts
_
District of Columbia revenues
Statistical errors and omissions
_
Equals* Consolidated cash receipts

Equals* Administrative budget receipts

6.7

7.1

—5.9

.6
.6
.4

—2 9
.3
.4

41
.9
4

—6 6
.6
4

.4
.4
.9
.1
.0

.3
.5
.8
.1
.1

5
.3
.9
.1
—.l

4
.3
.8
.1
—.3

59.3

65.1

53.6

82 4

6.1

6.0

6.1

6.0

.2

.3

.1

.2

53 5

.

Less* Cash trust account receipts
. Plus: Payments to Treasury by Federal agencies and other noncash
budget receipts

7.0

59 4

47 6

76 6

i Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Bureau of the Budget, Treasury Department, and Department of Commerce ("except as noted).




133

TABLE A-8.—Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction, calenda
years 1951-52
[Billions of dollars]
1951

Cash payments

First
half

Total
Direct cash payments for goods and services, excluding payments for
military services: 2
Payments to individuals for services rendered:
Civilian wages and salaries (excluding Post Office):
Federal 3
Grants- and loans-in-aid for performance of specified services,
net*
_
_
Total

-

1.6

3.0

1.5

1.5

.9

.4

.4

.5

3.8

.-

Payments to business for goods and services:
Public works:
Federal
.
Grants-in-aid and loans for public works
Other goods and services *
Payments to foreign countries and international institutions
for goods and services

1.9

1.9

2.1

2.1
.8
.9

.9
.3
.4

1.1
.5
.6

1.3
.3
.4

. .1

(6)

(6)

(6)

3.8

Stockpiling of strategic and critical materials
Operation and maintenance of equipment, research and development reserve forces and other
Total
Loans and transfer payments to individuals:
Social insurance and public assistance:
Federal employees' retirement benefit payments
Old-age and disability benefit payments
_
Unemployment insurance benefit payments
Grants-in-aid for pubtic assistance
Readjustment benefits, pensions, and other payments to veterans 8.
Loans to home owners net
Interest 8
.
_
_
_
Other10
Total

-

Loans, investments, subsidies, and other transfers to business and agriculture:
Farmers:
Price support, net (including supply program)
International Wheat Agreement
Other loans and direct subsidies to farmers
Business:
Home mortgage purchases from financial institutions
-_.
Loans, net
Direct subsidy payments
Subsidy arising from t h e postal deficit
_____
. _
_.
Interest 9

1.6

2.2

2.0

9.7
7.5
12
.7

4.4
2.8
3
.4

5.3
4.7
9
.3

5.7
6.5

10.7

4.3

G. 3

7.1

29.8

Total..
Direct cash payments for goods and services—payments for military
services: 7
Military personnel
- IVIalor procurement and production

12.2

17.5

20.9

.3
2,2
.9
1.2
5.2
.1

.1
1.1
.5
.6
2.6

.1
1.1
.4
.6

.2
1.2
.6
.6

2.3
(6)

5.4

5.6

5.2

i
^
.1
.4

.1
.3

—.2
.1
.5

.6

11.0

o

(6)

A

(6)

.5

(6
U

.5

2.7
.1
.5

(6)

1.1
-.1

.2
.8

11

.2

.3

(6)

(6)

(6)

(6)

.6
-.2

.2

(6)
(8)

.4
1.4

Total

15

.3
1.6

48

Total
Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions:
Unilateral transfers:
Military aid __
Economic aid. _
Loans.. Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund (net
cash withdrawals) . .

23

25

2.4

1.6
2.9
3

.7
1.6
2

1.0
1.3
.1

1.4
1.2
.1

7
3.1

(6)

4.7

Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports

.4

(6)

(C)

Footnotes on following page.

134

(6)

2.4

(6)
25 7 !

!

2.7

+.1

2 4

+.1

58.0

Total Federal cash payments to the public




Second
half

1952,
first
half*

+.3

32.3

35.6

1
Estimates based on incomplete data.
2 Differs from the national income concept of "Government purchases of goods and services" by exclud
ing, in addition to military services, farm price-support expenditures, and unilateral aid to foreign countries.
Grants to States and localities for public works, here included as a Federal expenditure, would be included
in the national income accounts as a State and local expenditure. There are other less significant differences
between the two concepts.
3
Excludes payroll deductions for Federal employees' retirement.
* Includes all grants-in-aid and loans to public bodies for purposes other than public works and public
assistance. Includes, in addition, one-third of Federal expenditures for veterans' tuition, books, and
supplies.
s This figure is obtained as a residual by deducting all other expenditures from total cash payments to
the public. This residual is subject to a high margin of error, since many of the detailed expenditure figures
are estimated from records maintained on different bases. Conceptually, it includes purchases of supplies
and equipment, payments for transportation, communication, and various contractual services.
• Less than 50 million dollars.
7 Excludes retired pay and redemption of Armed Forces Leave bonds which are included below as payments to veterans. Also excludes payroll deductions for civilian employees' retirement.
s Includes cashing of terminal leave bonds, retired pay of military personnel, and National Service and
Government Life Insurance refunds and benefits in addition to veterans' pensions and readjustment benefits. Includes only one-third of payments for veterans' tuition, books, and supplies.
»Includes a small amount of interest on tax refunds in addition to interest on the public debt. Interest
paid to business includes about 100 million dollars of interest paid each year by the Federal Government to
State and local governments. (Interest in appendix table A-2— Consumer account—is net and is on an
accrual rather than a cash basis; it includes interest paid by State and local governments and by Government corporations.)
10
Represents transactions in deposit funds (including partially-owned Government corporations) and
in trust funds not specified elsewhere.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Bureau of the Budget.




135




Appendix B
Statistical Tables Relating to Employment,
Production, and Purchasing Power
CONTENTS
National income or expenditure:
B-l. Gross national product or expenditure, 1929-52
B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in 1951 prices, 1929-52
B-3. Gross national product or expenditure in 1939 prices, 1929-51
B-4. Personal consumption expenditures, 1929—52
B~5. Gross private domestic investment, 1929-52
B-6. National income by distributive shares, 1929-52
B-7. Personal income, 1929-52
B-8. Relation of national income and personal income, 1929-52
B-9. Disposition of personal income, 1929-52
B-10. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and 1951
prices, 1929-52
Employment and wages:
B—11. Labor force, employment, and unemployment, 1929—52
B-l 2. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments,
1929-52
B-l 3. Average weekly hours in selected industries, 1929-52
B-l4. Average hourly earnings in selected industries, 1929-52
B-l 5. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929—52 . . . . . . . .
Production and business activity:
B—16. Indexes of industrial and agricultural production, 1929—52
B-17. New construction activity, 1929-52
B—18. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 1929—52
B—19. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade, 1939-52
B-20. Sales, stocks, orders, and receipts at 296 department stores, 1939-52..
Prices:
B-21. Wholesale price index, 1929-52
B-22. Consumers' price index, 1929-52
B-23. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers, and parity
ratio, 1929-52
B-24. Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and
foreign countries, selected dates since June 1950




137

Pago
139
140
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
162
163
164

Credit, m©ney supply, and Federal finance:
B-25. Consumer credit outstanding, 1929-52
B-26. Loans and investments of all commercial banks, 1929-52
B-27. Deposits and currency, 1929-52
B-28. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations, 1939-52
B-29. U. S. Government debt—volume and kind of obligations, 1929-52. . .
B-30. Bond yields and interest rates, 1929-52
B-31. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public, calendar
years, 1943-52
Corporate profits and finance:
B-32. Profits before and after tax, all private corporations, 1929-52
B-33. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations, 1939-52
B-34. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity, private
manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1947-49 average
and 1950-51
B-35. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales, private manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1947-49 average and 1950-51..
B-36. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity and to
sales, all private manufacturing corporations, by asset size class,
1947-49 average and 1950-51
B-37. Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1946-52
International transactions:
B-38. International transactions of the United States, 1949-52
B-39. United States exports and imports of goods and services, by area,
1949-52
B—40. U. S. Government grants, other unilateral transfers, and loans to foreign countries, 1949-52
B—41. United States merchandise exports, including reexports, by area,
1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-52
B—42. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports, by economic class, 1936-38 quarterly average
and 1947-52
B-43. United States general merchandise imports, by area, 1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-52
B—44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption, by economic class, 1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-52
Summary:
B—45. Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 1951




138

Page
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185

TABLE B—1.—Gross national product or expenditure, 1929—52
[Billions of dollars]
Government purchases of
goods and services

Gross private domestic
investment 2
Gross
national
product

Period

Personal
consumption
expenditures i

Construction

Net
foreign
oB investment

«i

•81

3 sl 1
£ « 0

o3
3&
T3 0»
0

Hi

Federal *

"§8
pQ'E

ll If

^x-S

1
fr

JS
,a

1-9

!s
za

8—. >»

3 5
§ g

•2 I
"cS
£

•d
fe

5

0
5

()
(5)
(6)
s
(5)
(5)
()
(5s)
()

§
1

CQ

103.8

78.8 15.8

7.8

2.8

5.0

6.4

1.6

0.8

8.5

1.3

(fi)

90.9
75.9
58.3
55.8
64.9

70.8 10.2
61.2 5.4
.9
49.2
46.3 1.3
51.9 2.8

5.6
3.6
1.7
1.1
1.4

1.4
1.2
.5
.3
.4

4.2
2.4
1.2
.8
1.0

4.9 -.3
3.2 -1.4
1.8 -2.6
1.8 -1.6
2.5 -1.1

.7
.2
.2
.2
.4

9.2
9.2
8.1
8.0
9.8

1.4
1.5
1.5
2.0
3.0

(8)

72.2
82.5
90.2
84.7
91.3

56.2 6.1
62.5 8.3
67.1 11.4
64.5 6.3
67.5 9.9

1.9
2.8
3.7
3.3
4.9

.7
1.1
1.4
1.6
2.7

1.2
1.7
2.3
1.8
2.2

.9
3.4
4.5 1.0
5.4 2.3
4.0 -1.0
4.6
.4

-.1
— .1
.1
1.1
.9

9.9
11.7
11.6
12.8
13.1

2.9
4.8
4.6
5.3
5.2

«
(s)
0)
(*)
1.2 3.9

8

7.0
6.9
7.0
7.5
7.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

101.4
126.4
161.6
194.3
213.7

72.1 13.9
82.3 18.3
91.2 10.9
102.2 5.7
111.6 7.7

5.6
6.8
4.0
2.5
2.8

3.0
3.4
1.8

11
2.2

6.1 2.3
7.7 3.9
4.9 2.1
4.1 -.9
5.7 -.8

1.5
1.1
— 2
-2.2
-2.1

13.9
24.7
59.7
88.6
96.5

6.2
16.9
52.0
81.2
89.0

2.2
13.8
49.4
79.7
87.5

4.0
3.2
2.7
1.5
1.6

7.8
7.8
7.7
7.4
7.5

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

215.2
211.1
233 3
259.0
258.2

123.1
146.9
165.6
177.9
180.6

10.7
28.7
30.2
42.7
33.5

3.9
10.3
13.9
17.7
17.2

1.1 2.8 7.5 -.7

-1.4
4.6
8.9
1.9
.5

82.8
30.9
28.6
36.6
43.6

74.8
20.9
15.8
21.1
25.4

73. 8
18.5
12.0
15.5
18.9

1.0
2.5
3.8
5.8
6.6

8.0
10.0
12.8
15.6
18.2

284.2
329.2

194.3 50.3 22.9 12.6 10.3 22.0 5.5
208.0 58.5 23.3 11.0 12.3 24.9 10.3

1929
1930
1931 ..
1932
1933
1934 .

. ..

_

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

..

.
._.

-.

1950
1951

.

l

:l

4.0
6.3
8.6
8.3

1.5
2.0

6.3
7.6
9.1
9.0

12.3 6.1
17.1 -.8
19.9 5.0
18.7 -2.5

3)
8
s

)

7.2
7.8
7.7
6.6
5.9
6.8

-2.3 41.9 22.2 18.3 3.9 19.7
.2 62.6 40.9 36.7 4.2 21.7

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half
Second half

324.4
334.0

207.5 62.5 24.1 11.8 12.2 25.0 13.3
208.4 54.6 22.4 10.1 12.3 24.8 7.4

1952: First half •

341.2

214.1 49.0 23.6 11.0 12.6 25.8 -.4

1951: First quarter
Second quarter...
Third quarter....
Fourth quarter..

319.6
329. 3
330.9
337.1

210.5
204.5
206.4
210.5

1952: First quarter
339.4
Second quarter •_ 343.0

59.8
65.2
56.2
52.9

24.7 12.8 11.9 24.8 10.3
23.5 10.9 12.6 25.3 16.3
22.4 9.9 12.5 24.9 8.9
22.4 10.3 12.1 24.7 5.8

213. 2 50.0 23.7 11.0 12.7 25.7
.6
215.0 48.0 23.5 10.9 12.6 26.0 -1.6

1
2

-1.4 55.8 34.6 30.9 3.6 21.4
1.8 69.2 47.2 42.4 4.8 22.0
1.4 76.7 53.6 48.2 5.3 23.1

-2.7
-.2
1.1
2.6

51.9
59.8
67.3
71.2

30.8
38.3
45.5
48.9

27.3
34.5
41.1
43.8

3.5
3.7
4.5
5.1

21.1
21.6
21.7
22.3

1.9 74.4 51.2 46.0 6.2 23.2
1.0 79.0 56.0 50.5 5.5 23.0

See appendix table B-4 for major components.
See appendix table B-5 for more detail and explanation of components.
3 Net of Government sales, which have be^n deducted from the national security expenditures.
4
For 1947-52 "national security" expenditures include the following: military services, international
security, and foreign relations, development and control of atomic energy, promotion of merchant marine,
promotion of defense production and economic stabilization, and civil defense. (See The Budget of the
United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1953, for items included in each of these
classifications.) Prior to 1947, the expenditure? are based on items formerly clarified as "war" by the
Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department. For all years, the expenditures exclude Government
sales and have been adjusted to the concept of purchases of goods and services.
• Not available.
< Estimates based on imcomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised serias of national income and product
of the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).

209722—52-




-10

139

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product or expenditure in 1951 prices, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars, 1951 prices]
Personal consumption
expenditures

Gross private domestic investment

Total
New construction
gross
Pro- Change
national
Nonin
ducers' busiproduct Total Dur- dur- Serv- Total
Eesiable able ices
durable ness
dengoods goods
Total tial Other equip- invenment
(nontories
farm)

Period

1929

168.1 119.1

16.4

62.9

39.8

32.6

18.5

(4)

(4)

11.1

3.0

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

152.2 111.9
140.7 108.1
119.1 98.3
117.9 97.3
131.4 103.2

13.1
10.9
8.0
7.8
9.1

59.9
59.5
54.4
54.1
58.3

38.9
37.7
35.9
35.4
35.8

22.2
13.6
2.9
3.7
7.3

13.8
9.7
5.4
3.6
4.1

4

()
(<)
(*)
(4)
(<)

(4)
4

()
(*)
4
( 4)
()

8.8
6.1
3.6
3.7
4.8

-.4
-2.2
-6.1
-3,6
-1.6

1935.
1936
1937 ...
1938
1939

143. 2
163.6
171.2
164.4
179.8

109.7
121.0
125.2
123.1
130.3

11.1
13.6
14.3
11.8
13.6

61.9
68.8
71.3
72.2
76.4

36.7
38.6
39.6
39.1
40.3

13.9
19.5
23.7
13.6
21.6

5.5
7.9
9.5
8.3
12.3

(4)
(4)
(«)
(«)
6.8

4
(4)
(4)
(4)
()
5.5

6.6
8.8
10.0
7.3
8.5

1.8
2.8
4.2
-2.0
.8

197.4
229.3
260.4
293.4
316.3

137.9
148.6:
146. 5
150.4
156.4

15.7
18.2
11.6
10.1
9.4

80.3
86.8
89.4
92.3
96.4

41.9
43.6
45.5
48.0
50.6

29.3
36.3
19.8
11.2
13.4

13.7
15.4
8.4
4.7
5.0

7.3
7.9
3.6
1.7
1.4

6.4
7.5
4.8
3.0
3.6

11.0
13.2
8.2
6.7
9.4

4.6
7.7
3.2

-i!o

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949_

307.2
272.6
272. 3
281.0
281.6

166.8
185.2
189.9
193.3
198. 4

10.8
21.1
25.1
25.6
26.2

103. 6
108.5
107.2
107.7
109.7

52.4
55.6
57.6
60.0
62.5

16.8
42.2
40.2
47.4
38.1

6.6
15.2
17.3
20.0
19.7

1.8
6.0
7.8
9.6
9.4

4.8
9.2
9.5
10.4
10.3

12.2
18.1
21.7
23.2
21.0

-2.0
8.9
1.2
4.2
-2.6

1950
1951. .

303.3 208.7
329.2 208.0

31.5 111.7
27.1 113.5

65.5
67.3

54.4
58.5

24.6
23.3

13.5
11.0

11.1
12.3

24.1
24.9

5.7
10.3

12.3
12.3

25.2
24.6

13.4
7.4

1940 _
1941
1942
1943
1944

_.

..

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half
Second half

_._

325.6 208.6
333.0 207.4

1952: First half «_

336.0 211.2

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter ,

321.3
329.9
331. 7
334. 3

1952: First quarter...
Second quarter *

_

212.2
204.9
206.6
208.3

334.6 210.4
337.3 211.9

29.0 112.6
25.2 114.6

67.0
67.6

62.8
54.4

24.2
22.4

11.9
10.0

25.0 117.9

68.2

47.7

23.1

10.8

12.4

25.4

-.8

113.8
111.3
113.7
115.5

66.8
67.2
67.4
67.8

60.2
65.3
56.2
52.6

24.9
23.5
22.4
22.3

12.9
10.9
9.9
10.2

12.0
12.6
12.5
12.1

25.0
25.4
24.9
24.4

10.3
16.4
8.9
5.9

24.8 117.8
25.2 118.0

67.8
68.7

49.0
46.4

23.3
22.9

10.8
10.7

12.5
12.2

25.3
25.5

.4
-2.0

31.6
26.4
25.5
25.0

See footnotes at end of table.




I4O

TABLE B-2.—Gross national product or expenditure in 1951 prices, 1929-52J—Continued
[Billions of dollars, 19511prices]
Government purchases of goods and services

Period

Net
foreign
investment

Federal »
Total
Total

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

Other

State
and
local

-0.7

_

_.._

.._ .

1950
1951

17.1

2.8

(*)

(«)

14.3

-.9
-1.3
-1.3
-1.7
-.9

_

1935 _
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940.
1941
1942
1943
1944

National
security *

19.0
20.3
19.2
18.6
21.8

3.2
3.4
3.6
4.9
6.7

(«)
(4)
(<)
(4)
(4)

(4)
(«)
(«)
(*)
(4)

15.8
16.9
15.6
13.7
15.1

-2.4
-2.6
-2.2
.1
-.4

22.0
25.7
24.5
27.6
28.3

6.5
10.5
9.6
11.5
11.3

(4)
(*)
(4)
(4)
2.6

(*)
(«)
(4)
(*)
8.7

15.5
15.2
14.9
16.1
17.0

.3
-1.3
-3.2
-7.6
-8.0

29.9
45.7
97.3
139.4
154.5

13.3
29.9
82.9
126.3
141.7

4.7
24.4
78.8
124.0
139.3

8.6
5.5
4.1
2.3
2.4

16.6
15.8
14.4
13.1
12.8

-7.8
2.8
7.3
-1.3
-2.9

131.4
42.4
34.9
41.6
48.0

118.4
27.7
18.5
23.8
28.0

116.8
24.5
14.1
17.5
20.8

1.6
3.2
4.4
6.3
7.2

13.0
14.7
16.4
17.8
20.0

-4.3
.2

44.5
62.6

23.6
40.9

19.4
36.7

4.2
4.2

20.9
21.7

3.6
4.8

21.3
22.0

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half
Second half....

34.6
47.1

31.0
42.4

75.8

53.2

47.8

5.3

22.6

51.9
59.9
67.4
70.9

30.9
38.3
45.5
48.7

27.4
34.5
41.1
43.6

3.5
3.8
4.4
5.1

21.0
21.6
21.9
22.2

73.5
78. Ij

50.8
55.5

45.7
50.0

5.1
5.5

22.7
22.6

-1.6
fc 2.0

55. 9
69.2

1952: First half « . ..

1.3

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

-3.0
-.2
1.5
2.5

1952: First quarter .
Second quarter « _ _ .

1.7
.9

1
These estimates represent a rough conversion of the Department of Commerce series in 1939 prices. (See
appendix table B-.3) This was done by major components, using the implicit price indexes for the year
1951 as a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components, this
would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II, and for the series
on change in business inventories.
* Net of Government sales, which have been deducted from the national security expenditures.
3
See appendix table B-l, footnote 4.
* Not available.
« Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Council of Economic Advisers.




141

TABLE B-3.—Gross national product or expenditure in 1939 prices, 1929-511
[Billions of dollars, 1939 prices]
Personal consumption
expenditures
Period

Government
purchases of goods
and services

Gross private domestic
investment

Total
gross
naPro- Change
tional
New ducin
prodDur- Non- Servcon- ers'
uct Total able dur- ices Total struc- dur- business
able
goods goods
able
tion equip- invenment tories

Net
Gross
forprieign
vate
inprodvestState
ment Total Fed- and uct 2
eral local

1929

85.9

62.2

8.0

29.1

25.1

14.9

7.4

6.1

1.5

0.8

7.9

1.3

6.6

81.5

1930
1931
1932
1933 . .
1934

78.1
72.3
61.9
61.5
67.9

58.6
56.6
51.8
51.1
54.0

6.4
5.3
3.9
3.8
4.4

27.7
27.5
25.2
24.9
27.0

24.5
23.9
22.7
22.4
22.6

10.1
5.9
1.1
1.6
3.5

5.4
3.8
2.1
1.5
1.7

4.8
3.3
1.9
2.0
2.7

-.2
-1.1
-3.0
-1.8
-.8

.6
.3
.2
.1
.3

8.7
9.4
8.9
8.7
10.1

1.5
1.6
1.7
2.3
3.1

7.3
7.8
7.2
6.4
7.0

73.5
67.7
57.4
56.5
62.0

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939.

73.9
83.9
87.9
84.0
91.3 i

57.2
62.8
65.0
63.9
67.5

5.4 28.6
6.8 31.8
7.0 32.9
5.7 33.4
6.7 35.3

23.2
24.4
25.1
24.8
25.5

6.7
9.3
11.4
6.3
9.9

2.2
3.1
3.8
3.3
4.9

3.6
4.8
5.5
3.9
4.6

.9
1.4
2.1
-1.0
.4

-.1
-.2
.1
1.0
.9

10.1
11.9
11.4
12.7
13.1

3.0
4.9
4.4
5.3
5.2

7.1
7.1
6.9
7.4
7.9

67.6
76.4
80.9
76.4
83.7

71.3
76.6
75.8
78.0
81.1

7.7
8.9
5.7
5.0
4.6

37.1
40.1
41.3
42.6
44.5

26.5
27.6
28.8
30.4
32.0

13.7
17.1
9.3
5.4
6.6

5.4
6.1
3.3
1.9
2.0

6.0
7.2
4.4
3.6
5.1

2.3
3.8
1.6

1.2
.7
-.4
-2.1
-'.5 -2.2

13.8
21.1
45.0
64.3
71.3

6.1
13.8
38.3
58.2
65.4

7.7
7.3
6.7
6.1
6.0

92.1
106.2
116.5
125. 3
133.0

1945- __- 153.4 86.3
138.4 95.7
1946
1947
138.6 98.3
1948
143.5 100.3
1949
144.0 103.2

5.3
10.4
12.3
12.6
12.9

47.9
50.2
49.5
49.7
50.7

33.2
35.2
36.4
38.0
39.6

8.3
20.3
19.3
22.7
18.0

2.6
6.0
6.9
8.0
7.9

6.7
9.9
11.8
12.6
11.4

-1.0 -1.8
4.4 2.7
.6 4.8
2.1 1.4
-1.3
.6

60.6
19.6
16.1
19.2
22.2

54.6
12.8
8.5
10.9
12.9

6.0
6.8
7.6
8.2
9.3

129.7
125.6
128.8
133.7
133. 7

1950
1951

15.4
13.3

51.6
52.4

41.5
42.6

25.8
28.0

9.8
9.2

13.1
13.6

20.6
28.9

10.9
18.9

9.7
10.1

144.3
154. 0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

100.0
115.5
129.7
145.7
156.9

... 154.8 108.5
167.3 108.4

2.8
5.1

.0
2.0

1
See Survey of Current Business, January 1951, and the National Income Supplement to the Survey of
Current Business, 1951, for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in 1939 prices.
* Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce.




142

TABLE B-4.—Personal consumption expenditures, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Durable goods
Period

1929

__

_ .
-

1050
1951

6.1

37.7

19.7

9.2

8.9

31.7

11.4

20.2

2.2
1.6
.9
1.0
1.4

5.1
4.0
2.8
2.5
2.9

34.1
29.0
22.7
22.3
26.7

18.1
14.8
11.4
11.5
14.3

7.9
6.8
5.0
4.6
5.6

8.1
7.4
6.4
6.2
6.9

29.5
26.6
22.8
20.6
20.9

11.0
10.2
9.0
7.8
7.5

18.5
1Q.4
13.8
12.7
13.4

5.2
6.4
7.0
5.8
6.7

1.9
2.3
2.4
1.6
2.1

3.3
4.1
4.6
4.1
4.6

29.4
32.9
35.2
34.0
35.3

16.3
18.5
20.0
19.0
19.3

5.9
6.5
6.7
6.6
7.0

7.2
7.9
8.6
8.4
8.9

21.7
23.3
24.9
24.7
25.5

7.6
7.9
8.4
8.7
8.9

14.1
15.4
16.5
16.0
16.5

7.9
9.8
7.1
6.8
7.1

2.7
3.3
.7
.8
.9

5.1
6.4
6.4
6.0
6.2

37.6
44.0
52.9
61.0
67.1

20.7
24.4
30.5
35.3
38.9

7.4
8.8
11.0
13.7
15.3

9.5
10.8
11.4
11.9
12.9

26.6
28.5
31.2
34.4
37.4

9.2
9.9
10.6
11.1
11.7

17.4
18.7
20.6
23.3
25.7

123.1
146.9
165.6
177.9
180.fi

8.5
16.6
21.4
22.9
23.8

1.1
4.2
6.6
7.5
9.4

7.4
12.4
14.8
15.4
14.5

74.9
85.8
95.1
100.9
99.2

43.0
50.3
56.6
59.7
58.9

17.1
18.6
19.1
20.1
19.0

14.8
16.9
19.4
21.1
21.4

39.7
44.5
49.1
54.1
57.5

12.2
13.0
14.6
16.5
18.1

27.5
31.4
34.5
37.7
39.4

194.3
208.0

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

3.2

7.3
5.6
3.7
3.5
4.3

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

_ _

9.4

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9
58.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

-

1932
1933
1934

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

Services

78.8

.._

1930
1931

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

Nondurable goods

Total
exAutomopenditures Total biles Other Total Food* Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other
ing a
ing 2
and
parts

29.2
27.1

12.3
10.7

16.9
16.4

102.8
113.5

61.4
69.2

18.9
20.3

22.5
24.1

62.4
67.3

19.9
21.8

42.5
45.6

66.4
68.3

21.2
22.2

45.1
46.1

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half
Second half

207.5
208.4

_.

1952: First half*
1951: First Quarter
Second quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth quarter.
1952: First quarter
Second quarter *

28.8
25.4

11.8
9.7

17.1
15.7

112.3
114.7

68. 4
70.0

20.2
20.4

23.8
24.4

214.1

25.4

10.0

15.4

118.2

72.0

20.6

25.6

70.5

23.1

47.4

210.5
_ 204.5
206.4
210.5

31.3
26.3
25.5
25.3

12.6
11.0
9.9
9.5

18.8
15.4
15.6
15.8

113.3
111.3
113.2
116.2

68.5
68.2
69.5
70.4

20.7
19.7
20.0
20.7

24.1
23.4
23.7
25.1

65.9
66.9
67.6
69.0

21.0
21.5
22.0
22.5

44.9
45.3
45.6
46.5

213.2
215.0

25.2
25.5

9.6
10.4

15.6
15.1

118.0
118. 5

71.8
72.2

20.6
20.6

25.6
25.7

70.0
71.0

22.9
23.3

47.1
47.7

_ __

1
Includes
2
Includes
8

alcoholic beverages.
shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel.
Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings.
« Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised series of national income and product
of the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




143

TABLE B-5.—Gross private domestic investment, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Nonfann producers' Farm equipment and
construction
Total plant and equipment
Resigross
dential
priconvate
strucdomesConCon- tion
4 EquipEquip- structic
(nonnvest- Total i ment 2 tion i 3 Total ment struc- farm)^
tion
ment

Period

Net change in
business inventories
Other
priNonvate
farm
conafter
struc- Total revalu- Farm
tion 8
ation
adjustment

15.8

9.8

5.6

4.2

1.1

0.8

0.3

2.8

0.5

1.6

10.2
5.4
.9
1.3
2.8

7.6
4.6
2.5
2.3
3.1

4.3
2.8
1.6
1.6
2.2

3.4
1.8
1.0
.7
.9

.9
.5
.3
.3
.4

.7
.4
.3
.3
.3

.2
.1

.5

-.3

.1

1.4
1.2
.5
.3
.4

-1.4
-2.6
-1.6
-1.1

—1.7
-2.6
-1.3
.2

— 3
-L3

6.1
8.3
11.4
6.3
9.9

3.8
5.2
6.6
4.7
5.7

2.9
3.9
4.7
3.4
4.0

1.0
1.3
1.9
1.4
1.7

.6
.8
1.0
.8
.8

.5
.6
.8
,6
.6

.1
.2
.2
.2
.2

.7
1.1
1.4
1.5
2.7

.1
.9
.1
1.0
.2
2.3
.2 — 1 0
.4
.2

.4
2.1
1.8
—11
.3

.5
-1.1
.5
I
.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

13.9
18.3
10.9
5.7
7.7

7.4
9.3
5.8
4.6
6.3

5.3
6.6
4.1
3.5
4.7

2.1
2.7
1.7
1.1
1.6

1.0
1.3
1.0
.9
1.2

.8
1.0
.7
.6
.9

.2
.3
.3
.3
.3

3.0
3.4
1.8
1.0
.8

.2
.3
.1

2.3
3.9
2.1
-.9

2.0
3.4
.8
-.5
— 3

.2
.5
13
-.4

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

10.7
28.7
30.2
42.7
33.5

8.7
15.5
20.3
23.4
21.7

6.3
10.7
14.6
16.7
15.3

2.4
4.8
5.7
6.7
6.4

1.4
2.4
3.8
4.6
4.7

1.1
1.6
2.5
3.2
3.4

.3
.9
1.3
1.4
1.3

1.1
4.0
6.3
8.6
8.3

'.7 -.8
5.0
1.0
1.3 -2.5

-.7
6.1

-.6
6.3
1.4
3.7
-1.6

i
—'.2
-2.2
1.3
-.9

1950
1951

50.3
.'58. 5

25.4
29.6

18.4
20. 8,

7.0
8.8

5.4
5.9

3.6
4.1

1.8
1.8

12.6
11.0

1.5
1.7

5.5
10.3

4.6
9.4

.9
.9

i929
1930
1931
1932
1Q33
1934
1935
1936
1937
19°»8
1939

- - -

.4
.2
.1
.1

.1
o

o

1.8

-0,3
— 2
3

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951:
First half
Second half

62.5
54.6

29.3
30.0

20.6
21.1

8.6
8.8

6.2
5.5

4.4
3.7

1.8
1.8

11.8
10.1

1.8
1.6

13.3
7.4

12.1
6.7

1.2
.6

1952:
First half «

49.0

31.0

21.8

9.2

5.8

4.1

1.7

11.0

1.7

A

-1.3

.8

1951:
First quarter
Second quarter. .
Third quarter-.
Fourth quarter.

59.8
65.2
56.2
52.9

29.1
29.5
30.0
29.9

20.7
20.6
21.0
21.2

8.4
8.9
9.0
8.7

5.9
6.6
5.7
5.3

4.1
4.8
3.9
3.5

1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

12.8
10.9
9.9
10.3

1.7
1.9
1.7
1.6

10.3
16.3
8.9
5.8

9.0
15.2
8.2
5.2

1.3
1.1
.7
.6

1952:
First quarter
Second quarter8.

50.0
48.0

30.9
31.1

21.6
21.9

9.3
9.2

5.8
5.8

4.1
4.1

1.7
1.7

11.0
10.9

.6
1.7
1.7 -1.5

—.1
-2.5

.7

i

1
Items for 1945 and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years, nor with figures shown in
appendix table B-17. Items for all years are not comparable with those shown in appendix table B-18,
principally because the latter exclude certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current
expense.
2
Total producers' durable equipment less "farm machinery and equipment" and farmers' purchases of
"tractors" and "business motor vehicles." These figures assume that farmers purchase 85 and 15 percent,
respectively, of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes.
3
Industrial buildings, public utilities, gas- and oil-well drilling, warehouses, office and loft buildings, stores,
restaurants, and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to 1946 only.
* Farm construction (residential and nonresidential) plus "farm machinery and equipment" and farmers'
purchases of "tractors" and "business motor vehicles." (See footnote 2.)
* Includes construction of hotels, tourist cabins, motor courts, and dormitories since 1946 only.
6
Includes religious, educational, social and recreational, hospital and institutional, miscellaneous nonresidential, and all other private.
7
Less than 50 million dollars.
8
Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised series of national income and product of
the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




144

TABLE B-6.—National income by distributive shares, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Business and proCorporate profits
fessional income
and inventory
and inventory
valuation
valuation
adjustment
In- Rentadjustment
Total Comcome al innapenof
Net
tional sation
InIn- farm come
Ininin- 1 of emof
come ven- pro- percome ployCor- ven- terest
tory prie- sons
of
tory
ees 2
porate valuunin- valuTotal corpo- ation tors
Total profits ation
before adrated adtax a
enter- justjustprises ment
ment

Period

1929

1935
1936
1937
193g
1939

_.

_
.

1945
194(3
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

_

-

_

__
_

8.3

8.1

0.1

5.7

5.8

46.5
39.5
30.8
29.3
34.1

7.0
5.3
3.2
2.9
4.3

6.3
4.7
2.9
3.4
4.3

.8
.6
.3
-.5
-.1

3.9
2.9
1.7
2.3
2.3

4.8
6.6
3.6
1.6
2.5 -2.0
2.0 -2.0
2.1
1.1

56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5

37.1
42.7
47.7
44.7
47.8

5.0
6.1
6.6
6.3
6.8

5.0
6.2
6.7
6.1
6.9

-.1

'^
-.2

4.9
3.9
5.6
4.4
4.5

2.3
2.7
3.1
3.3
3.5

3.0
4.9
6.2
4.3
5.8

51.8
64.3
84.9
109.2
121.2

7.7
9.6
12.6
15.0
17.2

7.8
10.2
12.9
15.1
17.2

-.1
-.6
-.4
-.2
-.1

4.9
6.9
10.5
11.8
11.8

3.6
4.3
5.4
6.1
6.5

182.7
180.3
198.7
223.5
216.3

123.0
117.1
128.0
140.2
139.9

18.7
20.6
19.8
22.1
21.6

18.8 -.1
22.4 -1.8
21.3 -1.5
22.5 -.4
.6
21.0

12.5
14.8
15.6
17.7
12.8

239.2
277.6

.

50.8

75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6

81.3
103.8
137.1
169.7
183.8

-_

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

10.3

87.4

-

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

153.4
178.9

23.7
26.2

24.9 -1.2
A
26.6

13.3
15.6

0.5

6.5
6.2
5.9
5.4
5.0
4.8

9.2
14.6
19.9
24.3
24.0

3.3 3.3
-.8
2.4
-3.0
1.0
.2 -2.1
1.7 -.6
9
3.2
5.7 -!7
4
6.2
3.3
1.0
6.5 -.7
i
9.3
17.2 -2^6
21.1 -1.2
25.1 -.8
24.3 -.3

4.1
4.1
3.9
3.4
3.1

6.3
6.6
7.1
7.5
7.7

19.2
18.3
24.7
31.7
29.2

19.7 -.6
23.5 -5.2
30.5 -5.8
33.8 -2.1
27.1
2.1

3.0
2.9
3.5
4.3
5.0

8.2
8.9

34.8
41.6

39.6 -4.8
42.9 -1.3

5.8
6.4

9.8

()

4.5
4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951- First half
Second half

272.2
282.9

1952- First half •
1951* First quarter
Second quarter _ _ _ _ _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter.
1952: First quarter 5
Second quarter

175.6
182.2

26.1
26.3

27.6 -1.5
25.6
.8

14.8
16.4

8.5
9.2

41.0
42.2

46.7 -5.8
3.1
39.0

6.4
6.6

287.4

186.5

27.4

27.4

.1

15.0

9.4

42.2

41.2

1.0

6.8

269.6
274.8
280.2
285.6

172.9
178.2
181.0
183.4

26.2
26.0
26.0
26.6

15.1
14.4
15.8
17.0

8.5
8.5
9.1
9.4

40.7
41.2
41.9
42.5

186.5
186.5

27.3
27.6

15.4
14.6

9.4 •41. 9
9.4 42.5

50.1 -9.4
43.3 -2.1
3.2
38.6
39.5
3.0
i
»42.0
40.5
2.'o

6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6

«287.2
_
_ _ _ 287.5

29.0 -2.8
26.2 -.2
25.2
.8
25.9
.7
o
27.5
'.4
27.2

6.7
6.9

1 National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals and businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes
depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital
goods, and indirect business taxes.
2 Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income (see appendix table B-7), and employer and
employee contributions for social insurance (see appendix table B-8).
See appendix table B-32 for corporate tax liability (Federal and State income and excess profits taxes)
and corporate profits after tax.
* Less than 50 million dollars.
s Estimates based on incomplete data; corporate profits and total national income for first quarter and all
items for second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised series of national income and product of
the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




TABLE B-7.—Personal income, 1929-52
[Billions>f^dollars]
Total
personal
income

Salaries,
wages,
and other
labor
income *

1929

85.1

50.5

19.7

13.3

1.5

76.8

8.3

1930
1931
1932.
1933
1934

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

46.3
39.2
30.5
29.0
33.8

15.7
11.8
7.4
7.2
8.7

12.6
11.1
9.1
8.2
8.6

1.5
2.7
2.2
2.1
2.2

70.0
60.1
46.2
43.0
49.5

6.2
4.7
3.1
3.6
3.7

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

36.8
42.1
45.9
42.8
45.7

12.1
12.6
15.4
14.0
14.7

8.6
10.1
10.3
8.7
9.2

2.4
3.5
2.4
2.8
3.0

53.4
62.8
66.5
62.1
66.3

6.5
5.6
7.5
6.2
6.3

1940
1941
1942. .
1943
1944

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9

49.5
61.5
81.4
104.5
116.2

16.3
20.8
28.4
32.8
35.5

9.4
9.9
9.7
10.0
10.6

3.1
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.6

71.5
86.1
109.4
135.2
150.5

6.8
9.2
13.3
15.1
15.4

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.9

116.9
111.1
122.3
134.9
134.2

37.5
42.0
42.4
47.3
42.1

11.4
13.2
14.5
16.0
17.1

6.2
11.4
11.8
11.3
12.4

155. 7
158.8
170. 8
187.1
188.7

16.2
18.9
20.2
22.4
17.2

1950
1951

226.3
254.1

146.5
170.7

45. 2
50.6

19.5
20.4

15.1
12.4

208.5
233. 6

17.8
20.5

12.3
12.4

229.7
237.5

19.4
21.5

Period

1935
1936
1937. .
1938
1939

._

.

_
_

Proprie- Dividends
tors'
and
Transfer
and
personal payments
rental 2
interest3
income
income

Nonagricultural
personal
income 4

Agricultural
income

Seasonally adjusted annual rates

1951: First half
Second half
1952: First half »

_

1951: First quarter
Second quarter...
Third quarter
Fourth quarter. ..
1952: First quarter
Second quarter *--

249.0
259.0

167.4
174.0

49.4
52.0

20.0
20.7

263.5

178.2

51.8

21.0

12.5

243.4

20.0

240.2
251.9
256. 1
262.0

164.5
170.2
172. 2
175.7

49.7
49.0
50.8
53.1

19.7
20.3
20.6
20.8

12.2
12.4
12.5
12.4

226.6
232.8
235. 3
239.8

19.6
19.1
20.8
22.2

263.0
264.0

178.1
178.3

52.1
51.6

20.5
21.5

12.5
12.5

242.6
244.3

20.4
19.7

1 Differs from "compensation of employees" in appendix table B-6, in that it excludes employer and
employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor incomecompensation for injuries, employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds, pay of military
reservists not on full-time active duty (pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries),
directors' fees, jury and witness fees, compensation of prison inmates, Government payments to enemy
prisoners of war, marriage fees to justices of the peace, and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims.
2 See appendix table B 6 for major components.
* See appendix table B-32 for dividend payments.
< Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises,
farm wages, agricultural net rents, agricultural net interest, and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations.
• Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised series of national income and product of
the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




146

TABLE B-8.—Relation of national income and personal income., 1929—52
[Billions of dollars]
Less:

Plus:

CorpoExcess
rate
of
profits ContriNational and in- butions wage
• acincome
vento
tory
social cruals
over
valu- insurdisation
ance burseadjustments
ment

Period

Government
transfer
payments

Net
interest
paid
by
government

Dividends

Busi- Equals:
Perness
sonal
trans- income
fer
payments

1929

87.4

10.3

0.2

0.9

1.0

5.8

0.6

85.1

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

75.0
58.9
41.7
39.6
48.6

6.6
1.6
-2.0
-2.0
1.1

.3
.3
3
.3

1.0
2.0
1.4
1.5
1.6

1.0
1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2

5.5
4.1
2.6
2 i
£6

.5
.6
.7
.7
.6

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

56.8
64.7
73.6
67.4
72.5

3.0
4.9
6.2
4.3
5.8

.3
.6
1.8
2.0
21

1.8
2.9
1.9
2.4
2.5

1.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.2

2.9
4.6
4.7
3.2
3.8

.6
.6
.6
.4
.5

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

81.3
103.8
137.1
169.7
183.8

9.2
14.6
19.9
24.3
24.0

2.3
2.8
3.5
4.5
5.2

2.7
2.6
2.7
2.5
3.1

1.3
1.3
1.5
2.1
2.8

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

.4
.5
.5
.5
.5

78.3
95.3
122.7
150. 3
165.9

182.7
180.3
198.7
223.5
216.3

19.2
18.3
24.7
31 7
29.2

6.1
6.0
5.7
52
5.7

5.6
10.9
11.1
10.5
11.6

3.7
4.4
4.4
4.5
4.6

4.7
5.8
6.6
7.2
7.5

.5
.6
.7
.7
.8

171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.9

239. 2
277. 6

34.8
41.6

6.9
8.2

14.3
11.5

4.7
4.9

9.0
9.0

.8
.9

226.3
254.1

4.8
5.0

8.8
9.2

0.9
.9

249.0
259. 0

11.6

5.0

9.2

.9

263.5

11.3
11.6
11.6
11.5

4.8
4.9
4.9
5.0

8.6
9.0
9.2
9.3

.9
.9
.9
.9

246.2
251.9
256.1
262.0

11.7
11.6

5.0
5.0

8.9
9.6

.9
.9

263.0
264. 0

_

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943 _ _ _ _ _
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

_ _
.-

-.

0

0.2
— .2

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half.
Second half

272.2
282. 9

41.0
42.2

8.2
8.2

1952: First half »

287.4

42,2

8.4

1951: First quarter.
Second quarter
Third quarter. _._.
Fourth quarter

269. 6
274.8
280.2
285.6

40.7
41.2
41.9
42.5

8.1
8.2
8.1
8.3

1952: First quarter
Second quarter *__

2287.2
287.5

41. 9
42.5

8.9
8.5

2

-0.1

.1
-.1
.]
-.2

.8
—.6

.1

-.3

11.4
11.6

1
Less than 50 million dollars.
2 Estimates basedfon incomplete data; corporate profits and total national income for first quarter and
all items for second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised series of national income and product of
the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




147

TABLE B-9.—Disposition oj personal income, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Less:
Less:
Equals: Personal
Equals:
Personal Personal DisposconPersonal
tax and
able
income
net
nontax personal sumption
saving
payments income expenditures

Period

1929

._..

Net
saving as
percent
of disposable
personal
income

85.1

2.6

82.5

78.8

3.7

4.5

76.2
64.8
49.3
46.6
53.2

2.5
1.9
1.5
1.5
1.6

73. 7::
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6

70.8
61.2
49.2
46.3
51.9

2.9
1.8
-1.4
-1.2
2

3.9
2.9
-2.9
-2.7
-.4

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

59.9
68.4
74.0
68.3
72.6

1.9
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.4

58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2

56.2
62.5
67.1
64.5
67.5

1.8
3.6
3.9
1.0
2.7

3.1
5.4
5.5
1.5
3.8

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

78.3
95.3
122.7
150.3
165.9

2.6
3.3
6.0
17.8
18.9

75.7
92.0
116.7
132.4
147.0

72.1
82.3
91.2
102.2
111.6

3.7
9.8
25.6
30.2
35.4

4.9
10.7
21.9
22.8
24.1

171.9
177.7
191.0
209.5
205.9

20.9
18.8
21.5
21.1
18.6

151.1
158.9
169.5
188.4
187.2

123.1
146.9
165.6
177. 9
180.6

28.0
12.0
3.9
10. 5
6.7

18.5
7.6
2.3
5.6
3.6

226.3
254.1

20.8
29.1

205. 5
225.0

194.3
208.0

11.2
17.0

5.5
7.6

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

...

____
_

_

1945... .
1946
1947
1948
1949 _

.

1950....
1951

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half
.
Second half.. ....

249.0
259.0

28.4
29.7

220.6
229.3

207.5
208.4

13.1
20.9

1952: First half i ...

263.5

32. 5

231.0

214.1

16.9

7.3

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter.

246.2
251.9
256.1
262.0

28.2
28.7
29.0
30.4

218.0
223.2
227.1
231.5

210.5
204.5
206.4
210.5

7.5
18.7
20.7
21.1

3.4
8.4
9.1
9.1

1952: First quarter. _.
Second quarter J

263. 0
264.0

32.5
32.5

230.5
231. 5

213.2
215.0

17.3
16.5

7.5
7.1

5.9
9.1

i Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1919 are based on the revised series of nationa income and product of
the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




148

TABLE B-10.—Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and 1951 prices, 1929-52
Total disposable personal
income (billions of dollars)

Per capita disposable personaljncomej(dollars)

Period
Current
prices

1951
prices *

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

. -

1950
1951

121, 770

73.7
63.0
47.8
45.2
51.6

116.4
111.3
95.4
95.0
102.6

599
508
383
360
408

946
898
764
756
811

123, 077
124, 040
124, 840
125, 579
126, 374

113.3
127.9
132.6
125.0
135.5

456
516
552
505
536

891
998
1,030
964
1,035

127, 250
128, 053
128. 825
129, 825
130, 880

144.7
166.1
187.3
194.7
205.9

573
690
866
968
1,062

1,096
1,245
1,390
1,424
1,487

132. 114
133, 377
134, 831
136, 719
138, 390

204.7
200.4
194.4
204.8
205.7

,080
,124
,176
,285
,255

1,463
13417
1,349
1,397
1,379

139, 934
141, 398
144, 129
146, 621
149, 149

205.5
225.0

_ _

1,024

151.1
158.9
169.5
188.4
187.2

_

678

75.7
92.0
116.7
132.4
147.0

_

124.6

58.0
66.1
71.1
65.5
70.2

_ ._.

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

Current
prices

82.5

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

1951
prices 1

Population
(thousands) 2

220.7
225. 0

1, 355
1,458

1, 455
1,458

151, 689
154, 353

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951- First half
Second half

220.6
229.3

1952: First half 3

1952: First quarter 3
Second quarter

___

1,435
1,478

1,442
1,471

153, 699
155, 107

227.8

1,477

1,456

156, 405

218.0
223.2
227.1
231.5

-

1951' First quarter
Second quarter _ _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

221.7
228.2

231.0

-

219. 8
223.6
227.3
229.0

1,421
1,449
1,463
1,489

1, 432
1,452
1,469
1,473

153, 396
154, Oil
154,724
155,466

230. 5
231. 5

227.5
228.1

1,477
1,477

1,458
1,455

156, 098
156, 700

* Dollar estimates in current prices divided by an over-all implicit price index for personal consumption
expenditures. This price index was based on Department of Commerce data shifted from a 1939 base.
2
Provisional intercensal estimates of the population of continental United States including armed forces
overseas, taking into account the final 1950 census total population count. Annual data are as of July 1;
quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period.
3 Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the revised series of national income arid product of
the Department of Commerce. For detail, see the Survey of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers.




TABLE JB-11.—Labor force, employment, and unemployment, 7929-52

Total
labor
force
Armed
(includ- forces '
ing
armed
forces) *

Period

Civilian labor force
Total
civilian
labor
force

Employment 2
Total

Agri- Ncnagricultural cultural

Unemployment

Unemployment
as percent of
total
civilian
labor
force

Thousands of persons, 14 years of age and over
Monthly average:
1929

49, 440

260

49, ISO

47, 630

10, 450

37, 180

1,550

3.2

1930
1931
1932
1933 -.
1934

50, 080
50, G80
51, 250
51, 840
52, 490

260
2GO
250
250
260

49, 820
50, 420
51,000
51, 590
52,230

45, 480
42, 400
S8, 940
38, 760
40, 890

10, 340
10, 290
10, 170
10, 090
9,900

35, 140
32, 110
28, 770
28, 670
30, 990

4, 340
8,020
12, 060
12,830
11,340

8.7
15.9
23.6
24.9
21.7

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

53, 140
53, 740
54, 320
54, 950
55, 600

270
300
320
340
370

52, 870
53, 440
54, 000
54, 610
55, 230

42, 260
44. 410
46, 300
44, 220
45, 750

10, 110
10. 000
9,820
9,690
9,610

32, 150
34, 410
36,480
34, 530
36, 140

10, 610
9,030
7,700
10, 390
9,480

20.1
16.9
14.3
19.0
17.2

1940
1941
1942...
1943
1944

56, 030
57, 380
60, 230
64, 410
65, 890

390
1,470
3,820
8,870
11, 260

55, 640
55, 910
56. 410
55, 540
54,630

47, 520
50, 350
53, 750
54, 470
53, 960

9,540
9,100
9,250
9,080
8, 950

37, 980
41, 250
44, 500
45, 390
45, 010

8,120
5,560
2,660
1,070
670

14.6
9.9
4.7
1.9
1.2

1945
1946
1947 .
1948
1949

65, 140
60, 820
61, 608
62, 748
63, 571

11, 280
3,300
1,440
1,306
1,466

53, SCO
57, 520
60, 168
61, 442
62, 105

52, 820
55, 250
58, 027
59, 378
58, 710

8.580
8, 320
8,266
7,973
8,026

44, 240
46, 930
49, 761
51, 405
50, 684

1,040
2,270
2,142
2,064
3,395

1.9
3.9
3.6
3.4
5.5

1950
1951

64, 599
65, 832

1. 500
2,948

63. 099
62, 884

59, 957
61, 005

7,507
7,054

52, 450
53, 951

3, 142
1,879

5.0
3.0

64, 948
66, 717

2,694
3,204

62, 2f,4
63, 513

60, 189
Cl, 820

6, 714
7,365

53, 446
54, 455

2,065
1, 693

3.3
2.7

(3)

62, 341

60, 512

6,634

53, 878

1, 829

2.9

2,245
2. 555
2, 631
2, 788
2,925
3,017
3,095
3, 163
3.210
3,210
3,258
3, ?85

61, 514
61, 313
62, 325
61, 789
62, 803
63, 783
64,382
64, 208
63, 18G
63, 452
63,164
62, 688

59, 010
58, 905
00. 179
60, 044
61, 193
61,803
62. 526
62, 630
61, 580
61,836
61, 336
61, 014

6,018
5,930
6,393
6, 645
7, 440
8, 035
7,908
7,688
7. 52r,
7, 668
7,022
6,378

52, 993
52, 976
53, 785
53, 400
53, 753
53, 768
54. 618
54, 942
54, 054
54, 168
54, 314
54, 636

2, 503
2, 407
2,147
1,744
1,609
1, 980
1,850
1, 578
1,606
1, 616
1,828
1,674

4.1
3.9
3.4
2.8
2.6
3.1
2.9
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.9
2.7

(3)
(3)

61, 780
61,838
61, 518
61, 744
62, 778
64,390

59. 726
59, 752
59, 714
60,132
61, 176
62, 572

6.186
6,064
6.012
6.412
6,960
8,170

53, 540
53, 688
53, 702
53, 720
54, 218
54, 402

2.054
2,086
1.804
1,612
1,602
1,818

3.3
3.4
2.9
2.6
2.6
2.8

.

.

1951: First half..
Second half

(3)

1952: First b-ilf
1951* J^rnifirv
February
March _
Anril
MavJune
July
Aujrust
September ._
October
November
December . _
1952: January
February
March
April . .
Mav
June

-

__ .

63, 759
63, 8f>8
64, 956
64, 577
65, 728
66, SOO
67, 477
67. 371
66. 396
66, 662
66, 422
65, 973
(3)
3
(3)
(3)
(3)
()
(3)

§
i8)

1
Data for 1940-51 exclude about 150,000 members of the armed forces who were outside the continental
United States in 1940 and who were therefore not enumerated in the 1940 census. This figure is deducted
by3 the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with 1940 data.
Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation;
illness, bad weather, temporary lay-off, and industrial disputes.
3 Not available.
NOTE.—Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the
month.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Department of Labor (1929-39) and Department of Commerce (1940-52).




150

TABLE B-l 2.—Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments, 1929-52l
[Thousand's of employees}

Total
wage
and
salary
workers

Period

Monthly average:
1929

Manufacturing

Total

NonDur- duraable
ble
goods goods

(3)

(3)

3

Mining

TransCon- portatract tion
Ficonand Trade2 nance
struc- public
utilition
ties

Government,
Serv- (Fedice 2 eral,
State,
and
local)

1,078

1, 497

3,907

6, 401

1, 431

3,127

3, 066

1930
1931 . . .
1932
1933
1934 ---

29, 143
26, 383
23, 377
23. 466
25, 699

9,401
8,021
6,797
7,258
8,346

()
(')
3
(3)
(3)
()

(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)
C)

1,000
864
722
735
S74

1,372
1,214
970
809
862

3. 675
3, 2-13
2, 804
2, 659
2,736

6,064
5,531
4,907
4,999
5,552

1,398
1,333
1,270
1,225
1,247

3,084
2, 913
2,682
2,614
2,784

3,149
3,264
3,225
3, 167
3,298

1935
1936
1937
1938 .
1939

26, 792
28, 802
30, 718
28, 902
30, 287

8,907
9,653
10, 606
9, 253
10,078

0)
(3)
(3)
(3)
4,683

3
(3)
()

5, 394

888
937
1,006
882
845

912
1,145
1,112
1,055
1, 150

2,771
2, 956
3,114
2,840
2, 912

5, 692
6, 076
6, 543
6, 453
6,612

1,262
1,313
1,355
1,3-17
1,382

2,883
3,060
3,233
3,196
3, 321

3, 477
3.662
3,749
3,876
3, 987

1940
1941 _ .
1942...
1943
1944

32, 031
38, 154
39, 697
42, 042
41, 480

10, 780 5, 337
12, 974 6,945
15, 051 8,804
17, 381 11,077
17, 111 .10, 858

5, 443
6,028
6,247
6,304
6, 253

916
947
983
917
8S3

1, 294
1,790
2,170
1,567
1,094

3, 013
3, 248
3, 433
3, 619
3, 793

6, 940
7,415
7, 333
7, 189
7,260

1,419
1,462
1,440
1,401
1,374

3,477
3,705
3,857
3, 919
3, 934

4,192
4,622
5,431
6, 049
6,026

1945
1946 .
1947
1948
1949 .

40, 069
41,412
43. 371
44, 201
43,006

15, 302
14, 461
15, 247
15, 286
14, 146

9, 079
7,739
8,373
8,315
7,465

6,222
6, 722
6, 874
6,970
6,681

826
852
943
981
932

1, 132
1,661
1,982
2,165
2,155

3,872
4, 023
4. 122
4 151
3,979

7, 522
8, 602
9, 1'Jo
9,491
9, 433

1, 394
1. 5S6
1,641
1,716
1,783

4, 055
4, 621
4, 786
4,799
4, 782

5, 967
5, 607
5, 454
5,613
5, 811

1950
1951

44, 124
46, 401

14, 884
15, 931

8,008
8,926

6,876
7,005

904
920

2,318
2.569

4,010
4,144

9, 524
9,804

1,812
1, 883

4, 761
4,759

5,910
6,390

45, 880
46, 921

15, 925
15, 938

8,927
8,925

6,997
7,013

923
916

2, 432
2,707

4,116
4,173

9, 650
9,958

1, 859
1,906

4, 729
4, 788

6, 246
6,535

4,123

31,041

1951: First half
Second half

10, 534

8

1952: First half <__.„ 46, 119

15, 733

8,954

6,779

895

2,418

9,730

1,943

4,734

6,544

1951: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August .
September
October _ _
November
December

15, 784
15, 978
16, 022
15, 955
15, 853
15, 956
15, 813
16, 008
16, 039
15, 965
15, 890
15, 913

8,742
8,877
8, 969
9, 003
8,975
8,998
8,839
8,878
8,913
8,942
8,976
9,000

7,042
7,101
7,053
6,952
6, 878
6,958
6,974
7,130
7,126
7,023
6,914
6,913

932
930
924
911
915
927
906
922
917
917
917
916

2,281 4,072 9, 592
2,228 4,082 9,554
2,326 4,112 9,713
2,471 4, 132 9,627
2,598 4,137 9,683
2,686 4,161 9,732
2, 754 4, 176 9,667
2,809 4,190 9, 641
2,768 4,178 9,781
2,761 4,166 9, 893
2,633 4,165 10, 109
2,518 4,161 10, 660

1,831
1,839
1,854
1,865
1,874
1,893
1,908
1,914
1,893
1,898
1,907
1,912

4,668
4, 657
4, 682
4,745
4,789
4, 835
4,852
4,839
4, 831
4,770
4, 734
4,702

6,088
6,122
6.217
6,292
6, 377
6, 377
6,358
6,401
6,544
6,532
6,497
6,881

15,776
15,859
15, 869
15, 784
15, 671
15,440 '

8, 946
9,010
9,035
9,045
9,006
8,682

6, 830
6, 849
6, 834
6,739
6,665
6,758

909
902
904
897
894
882

2,316 4, 103
2,308 4,111
2,296 4,118
2,410 4,098
2,517 ! 4, 138
2,661 1 4,170

1, 909
1,919
1,937
1, 953
1,959
1,978

4,671
4, 667
4,681
4, 748
4,795
4,839

6. 509
6, 490
6,528
6,551
6, 602
6, 585

195?: January
February
March
April *
May*
June *

45, 246
45, 390
45, 850
45, 998
46, 226
46, 567
46, 432
46, 724
46, 956
46, 902
46, 852
47, 663
45, 913
„_ 45, 899
46, 001
46, 258
46, 320
46, 322

9, 720
0, 643
9,668
9,817
9, 744
9,787

3
Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked
during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes
proprietors, self-employed persons, domestic servants, and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable
with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of
Commerce (appendix table B-ll) which include proprietors, self-employed persons, and domestic servants,
which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes, bad weather, or
temporary lay-offs, and which are based on an enumeration of population, whereas the estimates in this
table are based on reports from employing establishments.
2 Data for the trade and service divisions, beginning with 1939, are not strictly comparable with data shown
for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service
division.
3 Not available.
* Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.-—Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies
and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through 1947, and have been carried forward from
1947 bench mark levels, thereby providing consistent series.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Labor.




TABLE B-13.—Average weekly hours in selected industries, 1929-52
Manufacturing

Retail
trade
Bitumi- Build- Class I
(except Hotels
ing
Tele- Whole- eating
nous
conrail- phone
sale
(yearNoncoal
and
trade drink- round)
Total Durable durable mining struc- roads
tion
goods goods
ing
places)

Period

Monthly average:
1929

44.2

0)

(0

38.4

C)

0)

0)
(0
32.6
34.8
33.9

0)
(0
41.9
40.0
35.1

33.5
28.3
27.2
29.5
27.0

0)
(')
0)
0)
(0
28.9

44.8

42.1
40.5
38.3
38.1
34.6

43.1
41.1
38.9
38.8
40.4

(0
(0
(')

0)

36.6
39.2
38.6
35.6
37.7

37.3
41.0
40.0
35.0
38.0

36.1
37.7
37.4
36.1
37.4

26.4
28.8
27.9
23.5
27.1

30.1
32.8
33.4
32.1
32.6

41.1
42.5
43.2
42.5
43.4

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

3S.1
40.6
42.9
44.9
45.2

39.3
42.1
45.1
46.6
46.6

3/.0
38.9
40.3
42.5
43.1

28.1
31.1
32.9
36.6
43.4

33.1
34.8
36.4
38.4
39.6

44.0
45.6
46.9
48.7
49.1

39.5
40.1
40.5
41.9
42.3

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

43.4
40.4
40.4
40.1
39.2

44.1
40.2
40.6
40.5
39.5

42.3
40.5
40.1
39.6
38.8

42.3
41.6
40.7
38.0
32.6

39.0
38.1
37.6
337.3
36.7

48.5
45.9
46.3
46.1
43.5

(2)
39. 4
37.4
39.2
38.5

1950
1951

40.5
40.7

41.2
41.7

39.7
39.5

35.0
35.2

3P>. 3
37.3

40.8
41.0

40.9
40.6

41.8
41.5

39.8
39.3

34.6
35.8

36.6
37.8

1952: First half -._-

40.4

41.4

39.2

33.9

1951' January
February
March
April
May . __ _
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

41.0
40.9
41.1
41.0
40.7
40.7
40.2
40.3
40.6
40.5
40.5
41.2

41.5
41.6
41.9
42.0
41.8
41.8
40.9
41.3
41.6
41.7
41.5
42.2

40.2
40.0
40.0
39.7
39.3
39.4
39.3
39.1
39.4
38.9
39.2
39.9

37.6
34.1
33.6
33.9
33.3
34.8
32.7
34.9
36.5
36.3
36.2
38.4

1952: January
February
March
April4*
May _ _
June 4

40.8
40.7
40.7
39.8
40.2
40. 4

41.8
41.7
41.7
40.8
41.1
41.1

39.5
39.5
39.3
38.4
38.9
39.4

38. 5
35.9
35.4
29.7
30.2
0)

19301931
1932
1933
1934
1935.
1936
1937 ._
1938
1939

.._

1951: First half
Second half...
4

0)
(0
(0
(0

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
(')

0)
0)
0)
0)
(')
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)
0)
0)
ro
0)

41.0
40.9
40.7

0)
0)
40.3
40.3
40.4

0)
0)
45.2
44.3
44.2

38.9
39.1

40.7
'40.7

40.5
40.1

43.9
43.2

41.3
40.6

39.0
39.2

40.6
40.8

40.0
40.2

43.3
43.1

37.6

(')

38.0

40.4

39.8

42.6

36.7
35.3
35.8
36.8
37.5
37.7
38.1
38.2
38.2
38. 5
36.4
37.7

42.1
41.1
41.9
40.6
41.0
41.1
40.1
42.1
39.1
42.0
40.8
39.5

38.9
39.2
38.9
88.7
39.0
39.4
39.8
39.2
39.4
39.1
39.2
38.8

40.8
40.0
40.6
40.6
40.6
40.7
40.7
40.7
40.9
40.8
40.8
41.1

40.3
40.1
39.7
39.9
39.8
40.4
40.8
40.8
40.0
39.8
39.4
40.1

43.4
43.2
43.3
43.3
43.4
43.4
43.4
43.3
42.9
42.9
43.1
43.2

37.5
37.9
36.9
37.7
38.2
0)

41.6
42.7
40.2
0)
(0
1

38.7
38.5
38.5
35.1
39.0
0)

40.7
40.4
40.4
40.1
40.3
(0

39.8
39.8
39.8
39.8
39.7
0)

42.8
42.8
42.5
42.6
42.3
0)

C)

8
8
38.8

38.9
39.1

8

0)
(0
(')
0)
0)
(0
0)
0)
0)
(0
0)
0)
C1)
0)

8
8
0)

1
Not available.
2 Average for year not available because new series was started in April 1945. Beginning with June 1949
data relate to norisupervisory employees only.
3
Not strictly comparable with previous data.
4
Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly-rated employees in railroads, construction workers in building construction, and for nonsupervisory employees hi other industries.
Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly
data are used.
The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable
with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on employment.
Source: Department of Labor.




'52

TABLE B-14.—Average hourly earnings in selected industries, 1929-52
Eetail
trade
(except Hotels
Bitumi- Build- Class I
Tele- Whole- eating (yearnous ing con- railsale
and
coal
struc- roads phone trade
Dura- Nondrink- round) i
ble durable mining tion
ing
goods goods
places)

Manufacturing
Period
Total

Monthly average:
1929
- - $0.566

(2)

(2)

$0.636

(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

.684
(2)
.647
(2)
.520
.501
.673^ $0.795

8

.644
.651
.600
.595
.602

2
(2)
(2)
( 2)
(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
2

00
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

8
()

$0. 681

(2)

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

.552
.515
.446
.442
.532

(2)
(2)
$0. 497
.472
.556

(2)
(2)
$0. 420
.427
.515

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

.550
.556
.624
.627
.633

.577
.586
.674
.686
.698

.530
.529
.577
.584
.582

.745
.794
.856
.878
.886

.815
.824
.903
.908
.932

.651
.659
.676
.712
.714

(2)
(2)
$0. 774
.816
.822

(2)
(2)
(2)
2
(2)
()

8
()

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

.661
.729
.853
.961
1.019

.724
.808
.947
1. 059
1.117

.602
.640
.723
.803
.861

.883
.993
1.059
1.139
1.186

.958
1.010
1.148
1.252
1.319

.717
.751
.824
.897
.938

.827
.820
.843
.870
.911

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2>
(2)
(2)
(2)

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

1. 023
1.086
1.237
1.350
1.401

1. Ill
1.156
1.292
1.410
1.469

.904
1.015
1. 171
1.278
1.325

1.240
1.379
1.401
1.478
1. 636
1.681
1.898 < 1. 848
1.941
1.935

.942
1.116
1.170
1.309
1.419

(3)
1.124
1.197
1.248
1.345

(2)
(2)
$1. 268
1.359
1.414

(2)
(2)

$1. 009
1.088
1.137

2
(2)
()
$0.650
.709
.743

1950
1951

1.465
1.594

1.537
1.678

1.378
1.481

2.010
2.212

2,031
2.201

1.549
1.702

1.398
1.491

1.483
1.585

1.176
1.253

.771
.819

1951: First half—
Second half...-

1.575
1.614

1. 655
1.702

1.466
1.495

2.193
2.235

2.166
2.232

1.658
1.746

1.458
1.522

1.569
1.601

1.244
1.262

.807
.832

1952: First half «....

1.652

1.739

1.529

2.253

2.279

(2)

1.549

1.647

1.288

.857

1951: January
February
March
._
April
May
_
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

1. 555
1.561
1.571
1.578
1.586
1.599
1.598
1.596
1.613
1.615
1.626
1.636

1.630
1.639
1.654
1.659
1.665
1.681
1.682
1.684
1.707
1. 705
1.712
1.723

1.456
1.458
1.460
1.465
1,474
1.484
1.488
1.481
1.489
1.491
1.507
1.515

2.038
2.219
2.222
2. 231
2.218
2. 232
2.254
2.213
2.236
2.221
2.240
2.247

2.135
2.157
2.163
2.167
2.182
2.194
2.195
2. 207
2.236
2. 239
2.260
2.253

1. 559"
1.622!
1.657,
1.687
1.698
1.723
1.741
1.723
1.760
1.732
1.750
1.771

1.450
1.469
1.453
1.450
1.451
1. 475
1.490
1. 501
1.522
1. 533
1.552
1.532

1.555
1.567
1.567
1.575
1.571
1. 581
.586
.585
.605
.604
.606
.620

1.237
.236
.233
.249
.252
.256
.262
.259
.270
.267
.267
.245

.804
.811
.801
.806
.807
.812
.817
.815
.834
.837
.840
.852

1952: January
February
March _ _
Aprils
5
May 5 -June

1.640
1.644
1.656
1.654
1. 657
1.658

1.726
1.731
1.746
.741
1.745
.746

1.520
1.522
1.530
1.530
1. 531
1.540

2. 244
2. 236
2.239
2.233
2.213
(2)

2.276
2.285
2.292
2.277
2.267
(2)

1.781
1.796
1.779
(2)
(2)
(2)

1.542
1.554
1.540
1.545
1.566
(2)

1.632
1.637
1.649
1. 659
1.660
(2)

.287
.281
.279
.285
.309
(2)

.852
.855
.856
.860
.862
(2)

.

()

()

2

(2)
2

()

2

2
(2)
()

(2)
(2)

§

(2)

i Money payments only; additional value of room, board, uniforms, and tips not included,
a Not available.
3
Not available. Series beginning April 1945 includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June 1949, data relate to nonsupervisory employees.
4
Not strictly comparable with previous data.
« Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly rated employees in railroads, construction workers in building construction, and for all nonsupervisory employees hi other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where
monthly data are used.
The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable
with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Source. Department of Labor.




153

TABLE B—15.—Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries, 1929—52
Manufacturing
Period
Total

Monthly average:
1929

Retail
trade
Bitumi- Build- Class I
(except Hotels
nous ing con- railTele- Whole- eating (yearsale
Dura- Noncoal
struc- roads phone trade
and
l
drink- round)
ble durable mining tion
goods goods
ing
places)

$25. 03

$27. 22

$22. 93

$25. 72

(2)

$28. 49

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934 _

23.25
20.87
17.05
16. 73
18.40

24.77
21.28
16.21
16.43
18.87

21.84
20.50
17.57
16.89
18.05

22.21
17.69
13.91
14.47
18.10

(2)
(2)
2
(2 )

()
$22. 97

27. 76
26.76
23. 34
23.09
24.32

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

20.13
21.78
24.05
22.30
23.86

21.52
24.04
26.91
24.01
26.50

19.11
19.94
21.53
21.05
21.78

19. 58
22.71
23.84
20.80
23.88

24.51
27. 01
30.14
29.19
30.39

26.76
28.01
29.20
30.26
30.99

$29. 81
31.53
31.94

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

25.20
29.58
36.65
43.14
46. 08

28.44
34.04
42.73
49.30
52.07

22.27
24.92
29.13
34. 12
37.12

24.71
30. 86
35.02
41.62
51.27

31.70
35.14
41.80
48.13
52.18

31.55
34.25
38. 65
43.68
46.06

32.44
32.74
33.97
36.30
38.39

1945
1946
1947 ..
1948
1949

44.39
43.82
49.97
54. 14
54.92

49.05
46. 49
52. 46
57. 11
58. 03

38. 29
41. 14
46.96
50. 61
51.41

52. 25
53.73
58.03 66.24
66.59 63.30
72.12 * 68. 85
70.95
63.28

45. 69
51. 22
54.17
60. 34
61. 73

(3)
44.04
44.77
48.92
51.78

$51.99
55.58
57. 55

1950
1951

59. 33
64.88

63.32
69.97

54.71
58.50

70.35
77. 86

73.73
82.10

63.20
69.78

54.38
58.30

1951: First half
Second half. __

64.42
65.45

69.11
70.70

58.30
58.76

75.69
80.09

79.37
84.46

68.44
70.88

56. 89
59. 72

1952: First half «_.__

66. 77

71.94

59.88

75.81

85. 79

(2)

58. 82

1951: January _
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

63.76
63.84
64.57
64.70
64.55
65. 08
64.24
64.32
65.49
65.41
65.85
67.40

67.65
68. 18
69.30
69.68
69.60
70.27
68.79
69.55
71.01
71.10
71.05
72.71

58.53
58.32
58.40
58. 16
57.93
58.47
58.48
57.91
58.67
58.00
59. 07
60.45

76.63
75. 67 '
74. 66
75. 63
73. 86
77. 67
73.71
77. 23
81.61
80.62
81.09
86.28

78.35
76.14
77.44
79.75
81.83
82, 71
83. 63
84.31
85.42
86.20
82.26
84.94

65. 63
66. 66
69.43
68. 49
69.62
70.82
69.81
72.54
68.82
72.74
71.40
69.95

56. 41
57.58
56. 52
56.12
56. 59
58. 12
59. 30
58.84
59. 97
59.94
60.84
59.44

66. 91
66.91
67.40
65.83
66. 61
66.98

72.15
72.18
72.81
71.03
71.72
71.76

60. 04
60. 12
60. 13
58. 75
59.56
60.68

8«. 39
80. 27
79. 26
66.32
66.83
(2)

85.35
86. GO
84. 57
85.84
86.60
(2)

74.09
70, 69
71. 62
(2)
(2)
(2)

59. 68
59. 83
59. 29
54.23
61.07
(2)

66.42
66. 13
66.62
66. 53
66.90
(2)

_

1952: January
February
March
April"........
May *.
June '

(2)

8
()
2
2
(2 )

()
(2)
(2)

(2)

(2)

(2)

8
()
8
8
()

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)'
2
()

(2)
2
(2)
(2)
()
(3)

2
(2 )
(2)
(2)
()
(2)

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

(2)
(2)

00
(2)
(2)
2
(2)
()

2

2
2
(2)

()
(2)
2
(2 )
(2)
( )
(2)

(2)
(2)

2
(2)

(2)
()
(22)
()
$40. 66

(2)
2

()

43.85
45. 93

$29. 36
31.41
32.84

00.36
64. 51

47.63
50.25

33.85
35.38

63.79
65.37

49.80
50.66

34. 98
35.91

66. 52

51.24

36.51

63. 44
63.62
63.62
63.95
63.78
64. 35
64. 55
64.51
65.64
65.44
65.52
66.58

49.85
49.56
48.95
49.84
49.83
50.74
51.49
51.37
50.80
50.43
49.92
49.92

34.89
35.04
34.68
34.90
35.02
35.24
35.46
35.29
35.78
35.91
36.20
36.81

51.22
50. 98
50.90
51.14
51.97
(2)

36. 47
36. f>9
36.38
36. 64
36. 46
(2)

1 Money payments only; additional value of room, board, uniforms, and tips not included.
2
Not available.
3 Not available. Series beginning April 1945 includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June 1949, data relate to nonsupervisory employees.
4
Not strictly comparable with previous data.
8
Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Data arc for production workers in manufacturing and mining, hourly rated employees in railroads, construction workers in building construction, and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where
monthly data are used.
The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable
with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours.
Source: Department of Labor.




TABLE B—16.—Indexes of industrial and agricultural production, 1929—52
[1935-39=100]
Industrial production
Period 1

Manufactures
Total

Minerals
Total

Nondurable

110

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939 .
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944 .

--

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

-- _

_

93

107

97

90
74
57
68
74

98
67
41
54
65

84
79
70
79
81

93
80
67
76
80

87
103
113
89
109

87
104
113
87
109

83
108
122
78
109

90
100
106
95
109

86
99
112
97
106

95
104
101
93
79
H
96
85
108
105
106

126
168
212
258
252

139
201
279
360
353

115
142
158
176
171

117
125
129
132
140

110
114
128
125
130

203
170
187
192
176

214
177
194
198
183

274
192
220
225
202

166
165
172
177
168

137
134
149
155
135

129
134
129
141
140

200
220

__

132

125
162
199
239
235

1930
1931 .
1932
1933 _
1934

110

91
75
58
69
75

1929

1950
1951

Durable

Agricultural production 2

209
229

237
273

187
194

148
164

136
139

Adjusted for seasonal variation
1951: First half
Second half

222
217

232
226

274
273

199
189

162
166

8

1952: First half 3

216

226

275

186

162

<«)

1951: January
February
March
April
May. . _
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

221
221
222
223
222
221
212
217
218
218
219
218

231
232
234
234
233
231
222
226
228
226
228
228

268
271
277
279
276
274
265
267
271
274
277
282

201
201
199
198
198
197
187
193
192
188
188
185

164
158
158
164
165
165
156
165
167
174
170
163

8
()

221
222
221
216
214
202

231
232
231
225
223
212

282
284
284
277
276
246

189
190
188
183
180
184

167
167
164
166
161
145

. _-

_ _

1952: January. ._
February
March
April 3
May
June 3 - -

__

4

(*)

8
I
(4)
(<)
(4)
(4)
(*)
(4)
(4)
(4)

1 For industrial production, average of monthly indexes is used for year or half year.
2
Index of volume of farm production for human use. New census data may result in some downward
revision for the years 1945-49.
3
Estimates based on incomplete data.
4
Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production, only an annual index has been
computed.
Sources: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Agriculture.

209722—52




155

TABLE B-17.—New construction activity, 1929-52
[Value put in place, millions of dollars]
Public construction

Private construction

Total
private 1

Residential
building
(nonfarm)

Nonresidential
building
(nonfarm)

Other
private 8

10, 793

8,307

3,625

2,694

1,988

2,486

8,741
6,427
3,538
2,879
3,720

5,883
3,768
1,676
1,231
1,509

2,075
1,565
630
470
625

2,003
1,099
502
406
456

1,805
1,104
544
355
428

2,858
2,659
1,862
1,648
2,211

4,232
6,497
6,999
6,980
8,198

1,999
2,981
3,903
3,560
4,389

1,010
1,565
1,875
1,990
2,680

472
713
1,085
764
786

517
703
943
806
923

2,233
3,516
3,096
3,420
3,809

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

8,682
11,957
14, 075
8,301
5,259

5,054
6,206
3,415
1,979
2,186

2,985
3,510
1,715
885
815

1,025
1,482
635
233
351

1,044
1,214
1,065
861
1,020

1945
1946
1947.
1948
1949

5,633
12,000
16, 689
21, 678
22, 789

3,235
9,638
13, 256
16,863
16, 384

1,100
4,015
6,310
8,580
8,267

1,020
3,341
3,142
3,621
3,228

1950
1951

28, 749
31, 025

21, 610
21,684

12, 600
10, 973

3,777
5,152

Period

1929
1930
1931
1932 .
1933
1934

.
_

1935
1936
1937 .
1938
1939-.

Total
new
construction

Nonresidential
building

Highway

Other
public*

19

659

1,266

542

29
40
34
36
47

660
612
415
230
363

1,516
1, 355
958
847
1,000

653
652
455
535
801

37
29
37
62
125

32S
701
550
672
970

845
1. 362
1.226
1,421
1, 381

1,023
1,424
1,283
1,265
1,333

3,628
5,751
10,660
6,322
3,073

385
1,620
5,016
2,550
837

615
1,646
3,685
2.010
1,361

1,302
1,066
734
446
362

1,326
1,419
1,225
1,316
513

1,115
2,282
3,804
4,652
4,889

2,398
2,362
3,433
4,825
6,405

690
188
204
158
137

937
354
599
1,301
2,068

398
895
1,451
1,774
2,131

373
925
1,179
1,592
2,069

5,233
5,559

7,139
9,341

177
1,019

2,402
3,471

2.381
2.400

2,179
2,451

Total
public

Military
and
naval

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
5,224
5,080

5,504
5,614

8,922
9,760

704
1,334

3,342
3,600

2,438
2,362

2,438
2,464

10, 944

5,052

5,774

11, 190

1,824

3,970

2,778

2,618

12,408
13, 044
12, 900
11,904
10,644
10,200
10, 008
9,744
9,852
10,260
10,368
10, 344

4,716
5,004
5,220
5,424
5,544
5,436
5,424
5,364
5,196
4.908
4,800
4,788

5,448
6,472
5,496
5, 520
5, 532
5,556
5,556
5,580
5,616
5,616
5,640
5,676

8,196
8,004
9,108
9,396
9,408
9,420
9, 036
9,372
9,612
9,948
10, 116
10, 476

396
492
648
792
888
1,008
984
1,128
1,284
1,464
1,548
1,596

3,120
3,096
3,312
3,456
3,528
3,540
3,372
3,444
3,492
3,576
3,804
3,912

2.304
2, 172
2. 736
2. 004
2.436
2.376
2,352
2,484
2,448
2,424
2.160
2,304

2,376
2,244
2.412
2,544
2,556
2.496
2,328
2,316
2. 388
2.484
2,604
2,664

10, 044
10, 812
12, 132
11. 448
10, 800
10,428

5,052
5,184
5,172
5,112
5,004
4,788

5,772
5,760
5,736
5,748
5,760
5,868

10,440
11,160
11, 208
11, 424
11,316
11, 592

1,680
1,680
1,812
1,800
1,932
2,040

3,852
3,828
3,840
4,008
4,092
4,200

2,208
3,000
2.940
2, 952
2,700
2,868

2,700
2,652
2,616
2,664
2,592
2,484

1951 f First half
31, 500
Second half— 30, 550

22, 578
20,790

11,850
10,096

1952: First half

32,960

21, 770

1951: January.
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

30, 768
31, 524
32, 724
32, 244
31, 128
30. 612
30,024
30, 060
30, 276
30, 732
30, 924
31, 284

22, 572
23,520
23,616
22, 848
21, 720
21, 192
20.988
20, 688
20, 664
20,784
20,808
20,808

1952: January
February
March
AprilMay
June

31,308
32, 916
34, 248
33, 732
32, 880
32, 676

20,868
21, 756
23,040
22, 308
21, 564
21, 084

1
Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling, and therefore does not
agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product.
a
Includes public utility, farm, and other private construction not separately shown.
3
Includes residential, sewer and water, miscellaneous public service enterprises, conservation and development, and all other public construction not separately shown.
Sources: Department of Commerce and Department of Labor.




156

TABLE B-18.—Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, 192£h52
[Millions of dollars]
Manufacturing and mining Transportation
Total i

Period

Total

Manufacturing

1929

9,165

3,596

(3)

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

7,610
4,712
2,608
2,137
3,080

2,541
1,435
930
992
1, 460

3

3,738
5,077
6,730
4,520
5,213

1,790
2,450
3,330
1,830
2,323

3
(3)
(3)
(3)
()

6,490
8,190
6,110
4,530
5,210

3,140
4,080
3,170
2,610
2,890

2,580
3,400
2, 7BO
2,250
2,390

7,405
12, 922
17, 426
20, 032
18, 021

4,426
7,347
9,396
9,936
7,887

17, 832
23, 290

8,175
11, 926

_

1935
1935
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

___

-

. . .

_

...

1950
1951

.

Mining Railroad
(3)
(3)
(3)
(3)

Other

840

(4)

865
350
164
101
218

4

Electric
and gas
utilities

Commercial
and
miscellaneous *
4,729

()
(«)
(4)
4
( 4)
()

(«)
(4)
(*)
(4)
4
(4)
()

380

166
305
525
238
280

(«)
(4)
(4)
(4)
280

f4)
(4)
4
(4)
()
480

1,782
2,321
2,875
2, 452
1,850

560
680
410
360
500

440
560
540
4RO
580

390
340
260
190
280

550
710
680
540
490

1,980
2,400
1,470
730
970

3,983
6,790
8,703
9,134
7,149

443
557
693
802
738

552
573
903
1,319
1,350

321
659
798
700
525

630
1, 045
1,897
2, 083
3,140

1,477
3,298
4,429
5.394
5,119

7,491
11, 130

684
798

1,136
1,541

437
511

3.167
3,577

4,917
5. 735

()

8
8
1,943

8
8
8

4,204
2.917
1,514
1,044
1,402

Annual rates, not adjusted for seasonal variation
1951: First half
Second half

21, 552
25, 032

10, 684
13, 172

9,912
12,352

772
820

1,430
1,652

522
500

3,292
3,862

5,624
5,846

1952: First half ».

23,816

12, 796

11, 986

810

1,564

590

3,390

5,476

19, 452
23, 652
23, 376
_ _ 26, 688

9,348
12. 020
12, 160
14, 184

8,616
11, 208
11, 364
13, 340

732
812
796
844

1,212
1,648
1,508
1,796

500
544
480
520

3 012
3,572
3,732
3,992

5,380
5,868
5, 496
6,196

22, 208
25, 424
24, 672

11, 720
13, 872
13, 216

10. 968
13, 004
12, 348

752
868
868

1,504
1,624
1,560

536
644
480

3, 044
3,736
4,144

5,404
5. ,548
5,272

1951: First quarter __
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1952: First quarter
Socond quarter 5
Third quarter s

1
Excludes agriculture and outlays charged to current account.
2 Commercial and miscellaneous include tiade, service, finance, and communication for all years shown.
Prior to 1939, miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad, and electric and gas utilities
which are not available separately for these years.
3 Not available separately for years prior to 1939.
* Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to 1939.
5 Estimates for second and third quarters of 1952 are based on anticipated capital expenditures reported
in May.

NOTE.—These figures do not agree with those shown in column 2 of appendix table B-5 and included in
the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce, principally because the latter cover
certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for 1929-44 (except manufacturing for 1939) are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission
and other data.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources:

Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce (except as noted).




TABLE B-19.—Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade, 1939-52
[Adjusted for seasonal variation]

Total manufacturing and trade

Manufacturing

Millions
Ratio
of
of
dollars
inventories InInto
ven- Sales 2 sales 3 ven- Sales 2
tories i
tories '
Millions
of
dollars

Period

Wholesale trade

Millions
Ratio
of
of
dollars
inventories Into
vensales 3 tories 1 Sales 2

Retail trade

Millions
Ratio
of
of
dollars
inventories Into
vensales 3 tories * Sales 2

Ratio
of
inventories
to
sales 3

1939

20,051 10, 803

1.77 11,465

5,112

2.12

3,052

2,187

1.35

5,534

3,504

1.53

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

22, 176
28,780
31, 091
31, 343
31, 059

12, 134
15,811
18, 624
21, 920
23,785

1.73
1.60
1.66
1.40
1.33

12, 819 5,859
16, 960 8,172
19, 287 10, 430
20, 098 12, 820
19, 507 13, 782

2.07
1.80
1.78
.52
.45

3,238
4,044
3,781
3,684
3,912

2,410
3,033
3,426
3,830
4,152

1.30
1.21
1.19
.97
.94

6,119
7,776
8,023
7,561
7,640

3,865
4,606
4,768
5,270
5,851

1.49
1.49
1.76
1.42
1.32

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

30, 893
42, 942
50, 605
55, 64/
50, 921

23, 852
27, 151
33, 157
36, 438
34,467

1.30
1.35
1.44
1.47
1. 55

18, 380
24, 498
28, 920
31,734
28, 690

12, 873
12, 617
15,918
17, 630
16, 339

.48
.68
.73
.73
1.85

4,555
6,592
7,625
8,085
7,729

4,476
5,993
7,272
7,931
7,235

.91
.92
1.02
.99
1.07

7,948 6,503
11, 852 8,541
14, 060 9,967
15, 828 10, 877
14, 502 10, 893

1.21
1.15
1.28
1.40
1.41

- -

60, 434 39, 109
_.. 70, 107 43, 455

1.37 33, 253 19, 064
1.56 42, 014 22, 036

1.56 9,388
1.76 10, 000

8, 065
8,897

1.02 17, 793 11, 974
1.12 18, 093 12, 549

1.32
1.54

1951: First half.... 69, 442 44, 362
Second half. 70, 107 42, 544

1.49 39, 009 22, 579
1.65 42, 014 21, 492

1.61 10, 151
1.91 10, 000

9,036
8,701

1.10 20, 282 12, 747
1.16 18, 093 12, 351

1.55
1.53

1952: First half 4.. 69, 996 44, 272

1.58 42, 458 22, 845

1.85

9,478

8,622

1.13 18,060 12, 805

1.41

.97
1.05
1.11
1.16
1.16
1.17
1.23
1.14
1.20
1.10
1.12
1.17

18, 455
19, 044
19, 743
20, 346
20, 643
20, 282
20, 045
19, 429
18,761
18, 545
18, 280
18, 093

13, 593
13, 321
12, 633
12, 285
12, 411
12, 240
12, 058
12, 429
12, 258
12, 551
12, 492
12, 318

1.36
1.43
1.56
1.66
1.66
1.66
1.66
1.56
1.53
1.48
1.46
1.47

1.12
1.09
1.17
1.10
1.13

18, 061
17, 980
17,887
18, 010
18,060

12, 650
12, 862
12,399
12, 711
13, 103

1.43
1.40
1.44
1.42
1.38

1950
1951

1951: January
February. ..
March
April
May
June
July
August
September..
October
November.December...

62, 050
63, 416
65, 240
67, 361
68, 981
69, 442
70, 268
70. 124
69, 965
70, 068
69, 991
70, 107

45,914
44, 804
44, 222
43, 448
44, 728
43, 052
41,691
42, 930
41, 215
44, 175
43, 648
41, 609

1.35
1.42
1.48
1.55
1.54
1.61
1.69
1.63
1.70
1.59
1.60
1.68

34, 120
34, 657
35, 557
36, 908
38, 068
39, 009
39, 908
40, 621
41,132
41, 424
41, 676
42, 014

22, 560
22, 261
22, 605
22, 479
23, 434
22,133
21, 249
21, 677
20, 591
22, 463
22, 214
20, 761

1952: January
February
March *
April*.
May 4

70, 219
69, 899
69, 972
70,185
69, 996

43, 989
45, 144
42, 627
44, 807
44, 532

1.60
1.55
1.64
1.57
1.57

42, 206
42, 192
42, 332
42, 513
42, 458

22, 484
23,334
21,914
23,324
23,007

1

1.51
.56
.57
.64
.62
.76
.88
.87
.00
.84
.88
.02

9,475
9,715
9,940
10, 107
10, 270
10, 151
10,315
10, 074
10, 072
10, 099
10, 035
10, 000

9,761
9,222
8,984
8,684
8,883
8,679
8, 384
8,824
8, 366
9,161
8,942
8,630

.88
.81
.93
.82
.85

9,952
9,726
9,753
9,662
9,478

8,855
8,948
8,314
8,772
8,422

Book value, end of period.
» Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month.
«For annual and semiannual periods, ratio of average end-of-month inventories to average monthly
sales; for monthly data, ratio of end-of-month inventories to sales for month.
< Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of "change in business
inventories" included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather
than all business, and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation.
Source: Department of Commerce.




158

TABLE B-20.—Sales, stocks, orders, and receipts at 296 department stores, 1939-52
Derived data
(millions of dollars) *

Reported data
(millions of dollars) »
Period
Sales
(total for
month)

129

344

136
156
179
204
227

353
419
599
509
535

255
318
337
352
333

Monthly average:
1939

Stocks
(end of
month)

Outstanding
orders
(end of
month)

New
Receipts
orders
(total
(total for
for
month) month)

(2)

Ratio

Stocks
to sales

Outstanding
orders
to sales

Outstanding
orders
to stocks

(2)

(2)

130

(2)

2.67

108
194
263
530
560

137
165
182
203
226

(2)
170
192
223
236

2.60
2.69
3.35
2.50
2.36

0.79
1.24
1.47
2.60
2.47

0.31
.46
.44
1.04
1.05

563
715
826
912
862

729
909
552
465
350

256
344
338
356
331

269
327
336
335
331

2.21
2.25
2.45
2.59
2.59

2.86
2.86
1.64
1.32
1.05

1.29
1.27
.67
.51
.41

347
358

942
1,113

466
425

361
355

370
345

2.71
3.11

1.34
1.19

.49
.38

324
391

1,139
1,087

467
384

350
361

346
345

3.52
2.78

1.44
.98

.41
.35

1952: First half 3

313

987

324

328

320

3.15

1.04

.33

1951: January
February
March
April
May .
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

o37
284
348
312
339
326
257
309
343
388
442
608

988
1,087
1,216
1,239
1,192
1,112
1, 069
1,106
1,117
1,152
1,147
929

662
654
467
337
293
386
434
395
404
408
373
292

368
383
477
335
292
246
214
346
354
423
437
390

618
375
290
205
248
339
262
307
363
427
402
309

2 93
3'. 83
3.49
3.97
3.52
3.41
4.16
3.58
3.26
2.97
2.60
1. 53

1.96
2.30
1.34
1.08
.86
1.18
1.69
1.28
1.18
1.05
.84
.48

.67
.60
.38
.27
.25
.35
.41
.36
.36
.35
.33
.31

1952: January
February
March
April

291
271
317
340
345

910
956
1, 027
1,036
1,007

379
386
332
274
251

272
317
388
349
316

359
324
334
291
293

3.13
3.53
3.24
3.05
2.92]

1.30
1.42
1.05
.81
.73

.42
.40
.32
.26
.25

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

..
.

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

.. .-.

.-

1951: First half
Second half

May

1
2

Not adjusted for seasonal variation.
Not available.
3 Averages of data through May.
NOTE.—These figures are not estimates for all department stores hi the United States. Figures for sales,
stocks, and outstanding orders are based on actual reports from the 296 stores. Receipts of goods are derived
from the reported figures on sales and stocks. New orders are derived from estimates of receipts and reported
figures on outstanding orders.
Semiannual and annual data on receipts and new orders cannot be derived directly from the monthly
averages of sales, stocks, and outstanding orders.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

209722r—52




159

TABLEp-21.—Wholesale pricejndexyrJQ29-52
[1947-49=100]
All [commodities other than farm products
and foods
All
commodities

,^

Period j

Farm
products

Processed
foods
Total

61.9

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

_

_

58.6

0)

65.5

56.1
47.4
42.1
42.8
48.7

49.3
36.2
26.9
28.7
36.5

0)

60.9
53.6
50.2
50.9
56.0

8
8
1

Textile
prodj ucts
and
apparel

C1)

C1)

0)

?

C1)

0)
0)
0)
C1)
0)

0

?
8
0)

52.0
52.5
56.1
51.1
50.1

44.0
45.2
48.3
38.3
36.5

C)
0)
0)

8

55.7
56.9
61.0
58.4
58.1

51. l,i
56.8
64.2^
67.0
67.6
«*3fc.
68.8
78. 7,^
96.4
104.4
99.2

37.8
46.0
59.2
68.5
68.9

0)
0)
C1)
0)
(»)

59.4
63.7
68.3
69.3
70.4

71.6
83.2
100.0
107.3
92.8

0)
0)
98.2
106.1
95.7

71.3
78.3
95.3
103.4
101.3

0)
0)
100.1
104.4
95.5

1950
1951

103.1
114.8

97.5
113.4

99.8
111.4

105.0
115.9

1951: First half ..._
Second half

115.9
113.7

115.7
111.0

111. 8
111.0

112.1

108.3

115.0
116.5
116.5
116.3
115.9
115.1
114.2
113.7
113.4
113.7
113.6
113.5

112.3
117.2
117.6
117.5
115.7
113.9
111.1
110.4
109.9
111.5
112.0
111.3

113.0
112.5
112.3
111.8
111.6
111.3

110.0
107.8
108.2
108.7
107.9
107.3

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

-_

__

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

._

--

1952- First half «
1951: January
February
March
ApriL— _
May
June
July .
August
September _
October
November
December

_

•_-_

_

1952: January
February _ . _
March
April _
May
June 2

1

C)
0)

(»)

0)
0)
0)
0)

8
8
8
8
0)
0)
0)
C1)
0)
C)
0)
0)

1

C)
0)
0)

8
8
(»)

,(1)
0)

$
')
»)
0

3
0)
0)

0)
0)

8
0)

101.4
103.8
94.8

0)
0)
99.0
102.1
98.9

0)
0)
93.7
107.2
99.2

99.2
110.6

96.3
110.0

120.5
148.0

113.9
123.9

116.9
114.8

114.9
106.3

111.5
108.6

151.5
144.5

126.0
121.8

109.0

113.5

100.7

105.2

140.6

120.4

110.2
112.9
112.0
111.8
112.3
111.3
110.7
111.2
110.9
111.6
111.0
110.7

116.6
117.2
117.3
117.1
116.8
116.2
115.7
114.9
114.8
114.6
114.5
114.6

114.6
115.7
115.9
115.5
114.8
112.9
111.6
108.5
105.9
103.9
103.9
104.0

111.4
112.6
111.8
111.5
111.3
110.2
108.8
108.5
108.7
103.8
108.6
103.4

153.0
152.5
152.3
151.5
151.3
148.3
144.3
144.3
144.7
144.7
144.6
144.3

125.5
126.4
126.6
126.6
126.1
124.6
123.5
122.3
121.6
121.7
121.1
120.3

110.1
109.5
109.2
103.0
108.6
108.7

114.3
114.2
113.8
113.3
113.0
112.6

103.3
102.1
100.6
99.9
99.3
99.0

106.7
105.9
105.4
104.8
104.3
104.3

144.1
143.1
142.0
140.6
140.4
133.6

120.1
120.3
120.5
120.9
120.7
119.9

See footnotes at end of table.




ChemiRubber Lumber
cals
and
and
and
wood
prodallied
prodcuts
products
ucts

160

TABLE B-21.—Wholesale price index, 1929-52—Continued
[1947-49=100]
All commodities other than farm products and foods (continued)
Pulp,
paper,
and
allied
products

Metals
and
metal
products

Machinery
and
motive
products

Furniture
and
other
household
durables

70.2

0)

(9

0)

(0

0)

66.5
57.2
59.5
56.1
62.0

0)
0)
0)
(0
0)
0)
0)
(0
0)
0)
0)
C11)
C)
0)
(0

0)
0)
0)
0)
(0

0
0
0
')
0)

0)
0)
( l1)
C)
0)

0)
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)
C1)
0)
0)
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)
C1)
0)
0)

0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)

Hides,
skins,
and
leather
products

Fuel,
power,
and
lighting
materials

1929

59.3

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

54.4
46.8
39.7
44.0
47.1
48.7
51.9
56.9
50.5
52.0

62.2
64.5
65.7
64.7
61.8

54.8
58.9
64.0
63.9
63.4

60.7
64.5
66.4
68.4
70.3

64.2
74.6
101.0
102.1
96.9

71.1
76.2
90.9
107.1
101.9

0)
0)
98.6
102.9
98.5

(9
0)
91.3
103.9
104.8

1950
1951

104.6
120.3

103.0
106.7

100.9
119.6

1951: First half.. ...
Second half. _

126.6
114.0

106.7
106.8

Period

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

. --

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

_ _

___

8
8
0)
0)
0)

Non- Tobacco
metal- manulic
factures Misceland
minerals—
bottled laneous
strucbeverages
tural

1)
1)

0
0

0)

8
0)
1

C)
(9

0)
(l)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)

8
0)
0)
0)

0)

8
0)
0)
0)
0)
C1)
0)
0)
0)

(')

0)
0)
C1)
0)
0)
!

92.5
100.9
106.6

0)
0)
95.6
101.4
103. 1

0)
93.9
101.7
104.4

98.0
100.4
101.6

110.3
122.8

108.6
119.0

105.3
114.1

106.9
113.6

102. 4
108.1

96.6
104.9

120.1
119.1

123.4
122.3

118.2
119.8

114.9
113.2

113.6
113.5

108.4
107.8

103.7
106.2

(100.8
)

103.1
98.1

1952: First half 2. _.

97.4

106.7

117.5

122.2

121.6

112.0

113.0

.110. 4

109.6

1951: January
February
March.. _
April
May
June
July
August
September _ _ _
October
November...
December

127.3
127.7
126.9
126.5
126.2
124.7
122.3
118.0
118.0
113.6
107.0
105.1

106.4
107.4
107.3
106.5
106.2
106.3
106.5
106. 3
106.7
106.8
106.9
107.4

120.1
120.5
120. 3
119.7
119.8
120.2
120.2
119.5
119.4
118.8
118.4
118.4

124.0
123. 7
123.2
123. 3
123.2
122.7
122.3
122.2
122.1
122.4
122.5
122.5

117.3
117.7
118. 6
118.6
118.6
118.6
118.8
118.9
119.4
120.2
120.5
120.7

114.2
114.6
115. 1
115.4
115.3
115.0
114.4
113.5
113.1
112.8
112.7
112.7

113.6
113.7
113.7
113.7
113.6
113.6
113.6
113.6
113. 6
113.6
113.6
112.8

108.4
108.4
108.4
108.4
108.4
108.4
107.9
107.8
107.8
107.5
107.5
108. 1

102.6
103.9
104.2
105.7
103. 0
102.8
103.7
102.6
105. 1
106.9
108,9
109.8

1952: January
February
March
April
May 3
June

102.2
99.5
98.0
94.1
94.7
95.9

107.4
107.2
107.4
106.3
106.0
106.0

118.2
118.3
117,7
117.4
116.9
116. 7

122.4
122.6
122.6
122. 5
121.8
121.1

120.8
122.0
121.8
121.6
121.6
121.5

112.3
112.4
111.9
112.1
111.7
111.6

112.9
112.9
112.9
112.8
112.9
113.8

108.1
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8
110.8

111.1
111.4
109.2
109.5
108.4
108.1

1

Not available.
2 Preliminary.
NOTE.—Revised index. For description of the revision, see The Monthly Labor Review, February 1952.
Source: Department of Labor.




161

TABLE B-22.—Consumers' price index, 1929-52
For moderate-income families in large cities
[1935-39=100]

All
items

Period

Monthly average:
1929

Food Apparel Rent

Fuel,
elecHousetricity, furnishand reings
frigeration

Miscellaneous

122 5

132.5

115.3

141.4

112.5

111.7

104 6

119.4
108.7
97.6
92.4
95.7

126.0
103.9
86.5
84.1
93.7

112.7
102.6
90.8
87.9
96.1

137.5
130.3
116.9
100.7
94.4

111.4
108.9
103.4
100.0
101.4

108.9
98.0
85.4
84.2
92.8

105.1
104.1
101 7
98.4
97.9

98.1
99.1
102.7
100.8
99.4

100.4
101.3
105.3
97.8
95.2

96.8
97.6
102.8
102.2
100.5

94.2
96.4
100.9
104.1
104.3

100.7
100.2
100.2
99.9
99.0

94.8
96.3
104.3
103.3
101.3

98.1
98.7
101.0
101.5
100.7

100.2
105.2
116 6
123.7
125.7

96.6
105.5
123.9
138.0
136.1

101.7
106.3
124.2
129.7
138.8

104.6
106.4
108 8
108.7
109.1

99.7
102.2
105.4
107.7
109.8

100.5
107.3
122 2
125 6
136.4

101 1
104.0
110 9
115 8
121.3

128.6
139.5
159. 6
171 9
170.2

139.1
159.6
193.8
210 2
201.9

145.9
160.2
185. 8
198 0
190.1

109.5
110.1
113.6
121.2
126.4

110.3
112.4
121.1
133.9
137.5

145.8
159.2
184.4
195 8
189.0

124 1
128 8
139.9
149 9
154 6

171 9
185.6

204.5
227.4

187.7
204.5

131.0
136.2

140.6
144.1

190.2
210.9

156.5
165.4

184.2
187 1

225.7
229 1

202.5
206.5

134.7
137.8

143.8
144.5

210.8
211.0

164.0
166 8

1952* First half 1

188 5

230 0

203 5

140.5

145.1

207 4

170 6

1951* January 15
February 15
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15.- ._
Septarnhp.r 1 5
October 15
November 15
December 15

181 5
183.8
184.5
184 6
185.4
185.2
185 5
185. 5
186 6
187.4
188.6
189.1

221 9
226.0
226.2
225.7
227.4
226.9
227 7
227.0
227.3
229.2
231.4
232.2

198 5
202.0
203.1
203 6
204.0
204.0
203 3
203.6
209 0
208.9
207.6
206.8

133.2
134.0
134.7
135 1
135.4
135.7
136 2
136.8
137 5
138.2
138.9
139.2

143.3
143.9
144.2
144.0
143.6
143.6
144 0
144.2
144 4
144.6
144 8
144.9

207.4
209.7
210.7
211 8
212.6
212.5
212 4
210.8
211 1
210.4
210 8
210.2

162 1
163. 2
164.3
164 6
165.0
164.8
165 0
165.4
166 0
166.6
168 4
169.1

189 1
187.9
188.0
188.7
189.0

232 4
227.5
227.6
230.0
230.8
3
231 6

204 6
204.3
203.5
202.7
202.3

139 7
140.2
140.5
140.8
141.3

145 0
145.3
145.3
145 3
144.6

209 1
208.6
207. 6
206 2
205.4

169 6
170.2
170.7
171 1
171.4

(2)

(2)

1930 .

-

1931
1932
1933
1934

_ -

_

1935 _ 1936
1937
1938
1939

-

-

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950

1951__.

._
_

. .
.

--

1951: First half
Second half

1952' January 15
February 15 _ ._
March 15
April 15 .
May 15
June 15

.

_.

. .

- .

(2)

* Averages of data through May, except for food.
2 Not available,
aEstimated.
Source: Department of Labor.




l62

(2)

(2)

(2)

TABLE B--23.---Indexes ojprices received and prices paidjby farmers, and parity ratio, 7929-52
[1910-14=100]
Prices
received
by farmers

Period

Monthly average:
1929

Parity index
(prices paid,
interest,
taxes, and
wage rates)

Parity
ratio J

148

160

92

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

125
87
65
70
90

151
130
112
109
120

83
67
58
64
75

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

109
114
122
97
95

124
124
131
124
122

92
93

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

100
123
158
2192
2196

124
132
151
170
182

81
93
105
113
108

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

2206
2234
275

285
249

189
207
239
259
250

109
113
115
110
100

1950
1951

256
302

255
281

100
107

296

279
283

110
105

1951: First half
Second half _ _ _
1952: First half—-._

292

1951: January 15
February 15.-.
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15
July 15
August 15
September 15..
October 15
November 15..
December 15..

300
313
311
309
305
301
294
292
291
296
301
305

272
276
280
283
282
282
282
282
282
283
284
284

110
113
111
109
108
107
104
104
103
105
106
107

1952: January 15
February 15___
March 15
April 15
May 15
June 15

300
289
288
290
293
292

287
288
288
289
289

105
100
100
100
101
3 102

101

1
Ratio of prices received by farmers to parity index.
2 Includes wartime subsidy payments paid on beef cattle, sheep, lambs, milk, and butterfat between
October 1943 and June 1946.
3
Estimates based on incomplete data.
Source: Department of Agriculture.




163

TABLE B-24.—Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign
countries, selected dates since June 1950
[June 1950=100]
Cost of living

Wholesale prices
Country

Decem- Latest
ber 1951 data

United States

113

Africa and Near East:
Algeria
. ._
Egypt-,
.
Iran
Iraq
Israel
^
.
Lebanon
Morocco
Tunisia.
_ .
Union of South Africa _

132
114
123
118
131
135
141
129
125

Western European countries:
Austria
_ .
Belgium
Denmark
France.. _ __
Germany (Federal Republic) _
Greece
Ireland
_
Italy
Netherlands
Norway _ _ _
Portugal
Spain __
Sweden.. .
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom

163
131
135
147
128
134'
124|
116
127
132
115
139
143
116
115
129

Latin America:
Argentina,.
Brazil
.
Chile - ._
Costa Rica
Cuba __
Dominican Republic .. ...
El Salvador
Guatemala
Mexico.Nicaragua
Paraguay
Peru
Venezuela-.. _ ..

111 June 1952
0)
115
122
117
175
127
143
0)
127
163
125
131
142
127
133
123
113
125
132
115
136
144
113
115
128

CO
March 1952
April 1952
March 1952
March 1952
April 1952
February 1952
(J)
April 1952
May 1952
March 1952
April 1952
April 1952
March 1952
April 1952
March 195
April 1952
March 1952
May 1952
April 1952
March 1952
March 1952
April 1952
April 1952
May 1952

Deceni- Latest
er 1951 data
111
127
113
109
117
120
114
127
123
111
150
114
2117

134
113
121
3111

113
110
122
101
111
123
108
102
114

__

«L
109
104
133
139
161
126
108

(4)
April 1952
February 1952
February 1952
(4)
April 1952
January 1952
April 1952
April 1952
March 1952
June 1951
February 1952
March 1952

165
111
137
108
112
112
(4)
103
122
2 140
•120
115
100

132
109
126
155
122
108
114

Pacific and Far East:
Australia _
India_.
Indochina
Japan
New Zealand ._
Philippines
Thailand
Other:
Canada
Finland

Date

136
93
129
153
126
104
115

March 1952
May 1952
March 1952
April 1952
February 1952
May 1952
February 1952

C133
106
126
131
•118
108
107

113
155

110
145

March 1952
May 1952

(4)
131
147
94
(4)
111
109
103
132
144

106
^

(

%
149
93

115
121

111




May 1952

112
117
118
149
114
132
127
114

0)
March 1952
April 1952
March 1952
March 1952
April 1952
March 1952
February 1952
April 1952

149
113
117
138
115
124
112
113
111
125
98
110
125
107
104
118

April 1952
April 1952
April 1952
February 1952
May 1952
April 1952
February 1952
March 1952
February 1952
March 1952
April 1952
March 1952
March 1952
April 1952
March 1952
May 1952

C1)

0)
121 March 1952
C1)
0)
106 February 1952

115 March 1952
111 April 1952
(4)
()
106 April 1952
February 1952
127
139 March 1952
213 March 1952.
115 February 1952
99 March 1952
4

136 First quarter 1952
111 April 1952
134 March 1952
134 January 1952.
119 First quarter 1952
106 April 1952
107 December 1951
113
122

CData not available after December 1951.
2
January 1952.
»November 1951.
4
Not available.
• July 1951.
* Fourth quarter 1951.
NOTE.—The components of the indexes are not always the same for each country.
Source: International Monetary Fund.

164

Date

May 1952
April 1952

TABLE B-25.—Consumer credit outstanding, 1929-52
[Millions of dollars]
Instalment credit

End of period

Total
consume
credit
outstanding

Sale credit
Total
instalment
credit

Total

Automobile
sale
credit

Other
sale
credit

Loans '

Other
Charge
accounts consumer
credit 2

3,158

2,515

1,318

1,197

643

1,749

1,345

5,570
4,636
3,493
3,439
3,846

2,688
2,204
1,518
1,588
1,860

2,032
1,595
999
1,122
1,317

928
637
322
459
576

1,104
958
677
663
741

656
609
519
466
543

1,611
1,381
1,114
1,081
1,203

1,271
1,051
861
770
783

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

4,773
5,933
6,513
6,128
7,031

2,622
3,518
3,960
3,595
4,424

1,805
2,436
2,752
2,313
2,792

940
1,289
1,384
970
1,267

865
1,147
1,368
1,343
1,525

817
1,082
1,208
1,282
1,632

1,292
1,419
1,459
1,487
1,544

859
996
1,094
1,046
1,063

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

8,163
8,826
5,692
4,600
4,976

5,417
5,887
3, 048
2,001
2,061

3,450
3,744
1,617
882
891

1,729
1,942
482
175
200

1,721
1,802
1,135
707
691

1,967
2,143
1,431
1, 119
1,170

1,650
1,764
1, 513
1,498
1,758

1,096
1,175
1,131
1,101
1,157

5,6271
8, 677*
11, 8621
14,366'
16, 809J

2, 364
4,000;
6,434
8,600
10, 890

942
1,648
3,086
4,528
6,240

227
544
1,151
1,961
3.144

715
1,104
1,935
2,567
3,096

1,422
2,352
3,348
4,072
4,650

1,981
3,054
3,612
3,854
3,909

1,282
1,623
1, 816
1,912
2,010

1950
1951

20, 097
20, 644

13, 459
13, 510

7,904
7,546

4,126
4,039

3,778
3,507

5,555
5,964

4,239
4,587

2,399
2,547

1951: January
February
March
April
May
June
July
.
August
September
OctoberNovember
December..

19, 937
19, 533
19, 379
19, 126
19, 207
19, 256
19, 132
19, 262
19, 362
19, 585
19, 989
20,644

13, 252
13, 073
12, 976
12,904
12, 920
12, 955
12,903
13, 045
13, 167
13, 196
13, 271
13, 510

7,694
7,521
7,368
7,270
7,248
7,234
7,173
7,247
7,327
7,355
7,400
7,546

4,056
3,990
3,946
3,934
3,980
4,041
4,061
4,138
4,175
4,134
4,100
4,039

3,638
3,531
3,422
3,336
3,268
3,193
3,112
3,109
3,152
3,221
3,300
3,507

5,558
5,552
5,608
5,634
5,672
5,721
5,730
5,798
5,840
5,841
5,871
6,964

4,248
4,010
3,938
3,744
3,793
3,804
3,743
3,724
3,696
3,868
4,190
4,587

2,437
2,450
2,465
2,478
2,494
2,497
2,486
2,493
2,499
2,521
2,528
2,547

1952: January
February
March
April ._
May
June 3 _,

20, 126
19, 717
19, 560
19, 784
20, 258
20,700

13, 314
13, 185
13, 156
13, 320
13, 767
14,100

7,322
7,158
7,047
7,109
7,393
7,600

3,962
3,927
3,891
3,954
4,147
4,300

3,360
3,231
3,156
3,155
3,246
3,300

5,992
6,027
6,109
6,211
6,374
6,500

4,253
3,967
3,855
3,913
3,925
4,000

2,559
2,565
2,549
2,551
2,566
2,600

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

6,252

.

..

..-

1
8

Includes repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration.
Includes loans by pawnbrokers, service credit, and unclassified single-payment loans under $3,000 made
by commercial banks.
3
Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Keserve System (except as noted).




165

TABLE B—26.—Loans and investments of all commercial banks, 1929-52 x
[Billions of dollars]

End of period

Total
loans
and
investments

2

Loans

Investments

Commercial
and industrial loans 4

Total 3

Total

If. S. Government
obligations

Other
securities

1929—June 5 _

49.4

35.7

(6)

13.7

4.9

8.7

1930—Junes
5
1931—June s
1932—June
1933— June s« . _ _
1934— June

48.9
44.9
36.1
30.4
32.7

34.5
29.2
21.8
16.3
15.7

(6)

14.4
15.7
14.3
14.0
17.0

5.0
6.0
6.2
7.5
10.3

9.4
9.7
8.1
6.5
6.7

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

36.1
39.6
38.4
38.7
40.7

15.2
16.4
17.2
16.4
17.2

5.7
6.4

20.9
23.1
21.2
22.3
23.4

13.8
15.3
14.2
15.1
16.3

7.1
7.9
7.0
7.2
7. 1

43.9
50.7
67.4
85.1
105. 5

18.8
21.7
19.2
19.1
21.6

7.3
9.3
7.9
7.9
8.0

25.1
29.0
48.2
66.0
83.9

17.8
21.8
41.4
59.8
77.6

7.4
7.2
6.8
6.1
6.3

124.0
114.0
116.3
114.3
120.2

26.1
31.1
38.1
42.5
43.0

9.6
14.2
18.2
18.9
17.1

97.9
82.9
78.2
71.8
77.2

90.6
74.8
69.2
62.6
67.0

7.3
8.1
9.0
9.2
10.2

1950
1951 ..

126.7
132.6

52.2
57.7

21.9
25.9

74.4
74.9

62.0
61.5

12.4
13.3

1951: January _.
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December .

125.1
125.0
125.7
125.4
125.1
126.0
126.1
127.0
128.6
130.5
131.9
132.6

52.7
53.5
54.4
54.4
54.5
54.8
54.6
55.2
56.0
56.8
57.3
57.7

22.3
23.1
23.7
23.6
23.5
23.7
23.4
23.9
24.5
25.0
25.3
25.9

72.4
71.5
71.3
71.0
70.6
71.2
71.5
71.8
72.6
73.7
74.6
74.9

60.0
59.1
58.8
58.5
58.1
58.5
58.7
59.1
59.7
60.9
61.6
61.5

12.4
12.4
12.6
12.6
12.5
12.7
12.8
12.7
12.9
12.9
13.0
13.3

132.8
132.2
132.5
132.3
133.1
134.8

57.5
57.6
57.8
58.2
58.5
59.4

25.6
25.6
25.8
25.2
24.9
25.2

75.3
74.6
74.7
74.1
74.5
75.4

62.0
61.3
61.1
60.4
60.7
61.5

13.3
13.4
13.6
13.7
13.8
13.9

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

, .
. . .

1945
1946 .
1947
194S
1949
.

..

..

1952: January
February
March
April
May
June 7

_. __

--.

{?)
(
8

C5)

(6)
(6)
(6)

•

* Excludes mutual savings banks.
3
June and December figures are for call dates, Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the
month.
3 Data are shown net. Includes commercial and industrial loans, agricultural loans, loans on securities,
real estate loans, loans to banks, and "other loans," some of which represent consumer credit.
* Beginning with 1948, data are shown gross, i. e., before deduction of valuation reserves, instead of net as
for previous years. Prior to June 1947 and for months other than June and December, data are estimated on
the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks.
5 June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to 1935 for U. S. Government obligations and other securities,
aNot available.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the];Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




166

TABLE B-27.—Deposits and currency, 1929-52
[Millions of dollars]

Total
deposits
and
currency

End of period 1

U. S.
Government
deposits 2

Total excluding U. S. Government deposits
(privately-held money supply) 3

Total

Currency
outside
banks

Demand
deposits
adjusted *

Time
deposits 5

1929

54,742

187

54, 555

3,557

22, 809

28, 189

1930
1931
1932 . . .
1933—
1934

53,572
48, 379
45, 370
42, 551
48, 106

324
518
516
1,019
1,836

53,248
47, 861
44, 854
41, 532
46, 270

3,605
4,470
4,669
4,782
4,655

20, 967
17, 412
15, 728
15, 035
18, 459

28, 676
25, 979
24, 457
21,715
23, 156

52,726
57, 595
56, 781
59, 878
64, 733

1,453
1,235
966
1,812
1,480

51, 273
56, 360
55, 815
58,066
63, 253

4,917
5,516
5,638
5,775
6,401

22, 115
25, 483
23, 959
25,986
29, 793

24, 241
25, 361
26, 218
26, 305
27, 059

71, 129
79,098
100, 500
123, 391
151, 428

1,121
2,762
9,201
11, 003
21, 203

70,008
76, 336
91, 299
112, 388
130, 225

7,325
9,615
13, 946
18, 837
23, 505

34,945
38, 992
48, 922
60, 803
66,930

27, 738
27, 729
28, 431
32, 748
39, 790

176, 378
167, 500
172, 330
172, 693
173,851

25, 585
3,496
2,322
3,574
4,070

150,793
164, 004
170, 008
169, 119
169, 781

26, 490
26,730
26, 476
26, 079
25, 415

75, 851
83, 314
87, 121
85, 520
85, 750

48, 452
53, 960
56, 411
57, 520
58, 616

1950
1951...

180, 574
189,846

3,657
3,862

176, 917
185,984

25, 398
26, 303

92, 272
98, 234

59, 247
61, 447

1951: January
February
March
April
May^
June
July
August
September .
October
November ._
December... ..

178, 800
178, 900
179, 900
179, 800
179, 100
181, 333
180, 800
181,600
183, 800
185, 800
187, 100
189, 846

3,600
4,700
7,400
6,500
5,400
6,649
5,000
4,600
5, 900
4,200
4,400
3,862

175, 200
174, 200
172, 500
173, 300
173, 700
174, 684
175, 800
177, 000
177,900
181, 600
182, 700
185, 984

24, 600
24,600
24, 400
24,600
24,900
25, 776
25, 100
25, 300
25, 400
25, 700
25, 800
26, 303

91, 600
90, 600
89,000
89, 500
89, 500
88,960
90, 700
91, 400
92, 000
95,000
96, 300
98, 234

59, 000
59, 000
59, 100
59, 200
59, 300
59, 948
60, 100
60, 400
60, 500
60, 900
60, 600
61, 447

1952: January
February
March
April
May_ _ _ _ _ _
June 6

188, 200
188, 000
188, 700
188, 700
189, 300
191, 300

3,000
4,600
5,800
4,900
4,900
6,000

185, 200
183, 400
182, 900
183, 800
184, 400
185, 300

25, 600
25,600
25, 700
25, 900
26, 000
26, 100

97, 900
95, 700
94, 800
95, 100
95, 300
95, 800

61, 700
62, 000
62, 500
62, 800
63, 000
63, 300

. . . .

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939...
1940- _ .
1941
1942
1943 .
1944

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949. .

_

.
_

. . .

1
June and December figures are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the
month.
2 Includes U. S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve banks and commercial and savings banks, and,
beginning with 1938, includes U. S. Treasurer's time deposits, open account.
3 Includes deposits and currency held by State and local governments.
4 Includes demand deposits, other than interbank and U. S. Government, less cash items in process of
collection.
s Includes deposits in commercial banks, mutual savings banks, and Postal Savings System, but excludes
interbank deposits.
6 Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (except as noted).




167

TABLE B-28.—Estimated ownership of Federal obligations, 1939-52
[Billions of dollars—par values i]
Gross public debt and guaranteed issues 3

End of period
Total

Held by others

Held by
U. S.
Government
investment
accounts

Total
held by
others

State
and local
governments 3

Commercial
banks *

Nonbank
private
Federal corporaIndiReserve tions and viduals 6
banks
associations 5

1939

47.6

6.5

41.1

0.4

15.9

2.5

12.2

10.1

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

50. Q
64.3
112.5
170.1
232.1

7.6
9.5
12.2
16.9
21.7

43.3
54.7
100.2
153.2
210.5

,5
.7
1.0
2.1
4.3

17.3
21.4
41.1
59.9
77.7

2.2
2.3
6.2
11.5
18.8

12.8
16.8
28.2
42.0
56.8

10.6
13.6
23.7
37.6
52.9

1945
1946
1947 .1948
1949

278.7
259.5
257.0
252.9
257.2

27.0
30.9
34.4
37.3
39.4

251.6
228.6
222.6
215.5
217.8

6.5
6.3
7.3
7.9
8.1

90.8
74.5
68.7
62.5
66.8

24.3
23.3
22.6
23.3
18.9

66.2
60.3
58.6
56.7
58.3

63.9
64.1
65.5
65.1
65.7

1950
1951

256.7
259.5

39.2
42.3

217.5
217.2

8.8
9.5

61.8
61.6

20.8
23.8

61.2
58.8

64.9
63.6

1951' January
February
March _
April
May
_- _ _ _
June
July
August
September
October
_ _
November
December

256.1
256.0
255.0
254.7
255.1
255.3
255.7
256.7
257.4
258. 3
259.6
259.5

39.6
39.7
39.8
39.9
40.3
41.0
41.0
41.5
42.0
42.0
42.2
42.3

216.6
216.2
215.2
214.9
214.8
214.3
214.6
215.2
215.4
216.4
217.4
217.2

8.9
9.0
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.4
9.5
9.4
9.5
9.5
9.5

59.9
58.9
57.8
58.4
57.8
58.4
58.7
58.8
59.5
60.7
61.4
61.6

21.5
21.9
22.9
22.7
22.5
23.0
23.1
23.1
23.7
23.6
23.2
23.8

61.7
62.0
61.6
60.6
61.0
59.5
59.6
60.0
59.3
59.1
59.7
58.8

64.6
64.5
63.9
63.9
64.2
64.0
63.8
63.7
63.4
63.5
63.7
68.6

1952: January
February
March
April
May '
June 7

259.8
260.4
258.1
258. 3
200. 0
259.2

42.7
42.9
43.0
43.2
43.7
44.4

217.1
217.5
215.1
215.1
216.2
214.8

9.7
9.7
9.8
9.9
9.9
10.0

62.1
61.3
60.2
60.5
61.1
61.7

22.7
22.5
22.5
22.4
22.3
22.9

58.9
60.2
58.7
58.7
59.4
56.7

63.7
63.9
63.9
63.7
63.6
63.5

.

_

-

-

1 United States savings bonds, series A-D, E, F, and J, are included at current redemption values.
2 Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury.
3 Includes trust, sinking, and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies, and
Territories and possessions.
* Includes commercial banks, trust companies, and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions; excludes securities held in trust departments.
«Includes insurance companies, mutual savings banks, savings and loan associations, nonprofit institutions, corporate pension trust funds, dealers and brokers, and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December 1946, the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary
Fund in special noninterest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June 30,1947,
includes holdings of Federal land banks.
«Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts.
* Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.

NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Treasury Department (except as noted).




168

TABLE B-29.—U. S. Government debt—volume and kind of obligations, 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Interest-bearing public debt
Gross
public
debt and
guaranteed
issues *

End of period

Marketable public
issues

Nonmarketable public issues

Shortterm
issues 2

United
States
savings
bonds

Treasury
bonds

Treasury
tax and
savings
notes

Investment
bonds 3

Special
issues *

1929

16.3

3.3

11.3

0.6

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

16.0
17.8
20.8
24.0
31.5

2.9
2.8
5.9
7.5
11.1

11.3
13.5
13.4
14.7
15.4

.8
.4
.4
.4
.6

35.1
39.1
41.9
44.4
47.6

14.2
12.5
12.5
9.8
7.7

14.3
19.5
20.5
24.0
26.9

0.2
.5
1.0
1.4
2.2

50.9
64.3
112.5
170.1
232.1

7.5
8.0
27.0
47.1
69.9

28.0
33.4
49.3
67.9
91.6

3.2
6.1
15.0
27.4
40.4

2.5
6.4
8.6
9.8

278. 7
259.5
257. 0
252.9
257. 2

78.2
57.1
47.7
45.9
50.2

120.4
119.3
117.9
111.4
104.8

48.2
49.8
52.1
55.1
56.7

8.2
5.7
5.4
4.6
7.6

1.0
1.0
1.0

20.0
24.6
29.0
31.7
33.9

256.7
259.5

58.3
65.6

94.0
76.9

58.0
57.6

8.6
7.5

1.0
13.0

33.7
35.9

256.1
256. 0
255.0
254.7
255.1
255 3
255.7
256. 7
257. 4
258. 3
259. 6
259.5

57.4
57.4
57.4
57.4
57.4
58.9
60.3
60.8
61.9
63. 5
64.5
65.6

94.0
94.0
94.0
80.5
80.5
78.8
78.8
78,8
78.1
78.1
78.1
76.9

58.0
57.8
57.8
57.7
57.6
57.6
57.5
57.5
57.5
57.5
57.6
57.6

8.7
8.7
8.3
8.1
8.2
7.8
7.9
8.0
7.8
7.7
7.7
7.5

1.0
1.0
1.0
14.5
14.5
14.5
13.5
13.5
13.5
13.0
13.0
13.0

34.0
33.9
33.5
33.6
34.0
34.7
34.7
35.1
35.6
35.6
35.9
359

259.8
260. 4
258.1
258. 3
260.0
259. 2

65. 6
65.6
64.4
64.8
65.6
64.6

76.9
76.9
76.8
76.8
76.8
75.7

57.7
57.7
57.7
57.6
57.6
57.7

7.5
8.0
6.9
7.1
7.5
6.6

13.0
13.0
13.0
12.5
12.5
14.0

36.2
36. 4
36.5
36.7
37,2
37.7

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

_.
_

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

_

_
._

1950
1951

___

1951: January
February
March
April

_
_ _ _

May

June
July
August _ -_
September
October
November
December
1952: January
February
March
April

_ _

__ .

May

June

.7
.6
2.2
3.2
4.2
5.4
7.0
9.0
12.7
16.3

1 Total includes non-interest-bearing debt, fully guaranteed securities (except those held by the Treasury),
Postal Savings bonds, prewar bonds, adjusted service bonds, depositary bonds, and Armed Forces Leave
bonds, not shown separately.
2
Includes bills, certificates of indebtedness, and notes.
3
Includes Series A bonds and beginning in April 1951 Series B convertible bonds.
* Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held 6.6 billion dollars of public
marketable and nomnarketable issues on June 30, 1952.
Source: Treasury Department.




TABLE B-30.—Bond yields and interest rales, 1929-52
[Percent per annum]
U. S. Government
security yields
Period

3-month 9-12
Treasury month
bills i issues 2

Average of Prime
Federal
rates
com- Bankers Reserve
Corporate charged by
accepAaa
Bank
banks on mercial tances,
paper
bonds
discount
Taxable (Moody's) short-term
4-6
rate
loans—se- months 90 days
bonds 3
lected cities

1929

(4)

(•)

(6)

4.73

(7)

5.85

5.03

5.16

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

4

()
1.402
.879
.515
.256

(5)
(5)
(5)
(5)
5

(6)
6
(6)
(6)
(6)

(7)

()

4.55
4.58
5.01
4.49
4.00

3.59
2.64
2.73
1.73
1.02

2.48
1.57
1.28
.63
.25

3.04
2.11
2.82
2.56
1.54

.137
.143
.447
.053
.023

5
(5)
(5)
(5)
()
(5)

8
(6)
( 6)
(6 )
()
(6)

3.60
3.24
3.26
3.19
3.01

2.1

.76
.75
.94
.81
.59

.13
.16
.43
.44
.44

1.50
1.50
1.33
1.00
1.00

.014
.103
.326
.373
.375

(5)
5
(5)
()
.75
.79

(6)
(6)
2.46
2.47
2.48

2.84
2.77
2.83
2.73
2.72

2.1
2.0
2.2
2.6
2.4

.56
.54
.66
.69
.73

.44
.44
.44
.44
.44

1.00
1.00
1.00
8 1.00
8 1.00

.375
.375
.594
1.040
1.102

.81
.82
.88
1.14
1.14

2.37
2.19
2.25
2.44
2.31

2.62
2.53
2.61
2.82
2.66

2.2
2.1
2.1
2.5
2.7

.75
.81
1.03
1. 44
1.48

.44
.61
.87
1.11
1.12

81.00
81.00

1.218
1.552

1.26
1.73

2.32
2.57

2.62
2.86

2.7
3.1

1.45
2.17

1.15
1.60

1.59
1.75

1.466
1.638

1.73
1.72

2.52
2.62

2.80
2.92

3.04
3.16

2.08
2.26

1.57
1.64

1.75
1.75

1935
1936
1937
1938
1939

--

1940 ?_
1941
1942.
1943
1944

.
_

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

_ _ _

-

1951: First half
Second half

()

8
()
7

(7)
(7)
(7)
(7)
(7)

8

1.00
1.34
1.50

1952: First half

1.659

1.69

2.66

2.94

3.48

2.35

1.75

1.75

1951: First quarter
Second quarter . Third quarter
Fourth quarter. .

1.400
1.532
1.628
1.649

1.62
1.84
1.72
1.73

2.42
2.61
2.59
2.68

2.70
2.90
2.89
2.95

3.02
3.07
3.06
3.27

1.96
2.20
2.25
2.26

1.51
1.63
1.63
1.65

1.75
1.75
1.75
1.75

1952: First quarter
Second quarter..

1.640
1.678

1.71
1.67

2.72
2.61

2.96
2.93

3.45
3.51

2.38
2.32

1.75
1.75

1.75
1.75

1 Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax-exempt prior to March 1,1941, and fully taxable there after. Series includes issues with maturities of more than 3 months in period, 1934-37.
2
Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues.
3
15 years and over prior to April 1952; 12 years and over beginning in April 1952.
* Treasury bills were first issued in December 1929 and were issued irregularly in 1930.
' Not available before August 1942.
6
Bonds in this classification were first issued in March 1941.
7
Not available on same basis as for 1939 on.
8
From October 30, 1942, to April 24, 1946, a preferential rate of 0.50 percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in 1 year or less.
NOTE.—Yields and rates computed for New York City, except for average of rates charged on short-term
loans.
Sources: Treasury Department, Moody's Investors Service, and Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.




170

TABLE B--31.—Government cash receipts from and payments to the public, calendar years, 1943—52
[Billions of dollars]

Calendar year

Cash
Cash
payreceipts ments

State and local 1
St

Federa 1

Total

Excess of
Excess of
Excess of
Cash receipts
Cash receipts Cash
receipts
Cash
(+)or receipts pay(+)or receipts pay(+)or
paypaypayments
ments
ments (—)
ments (—)
ments (—)

47.4
57.9

96.1
102.0

-48.7
-44.0

37.9
48.1

89.0
94.8

-51.1
—46.7

9.6
9.8

7.1
7.2

+2.5
+2.6

59.8
53.0
57.5
60.0
57.9

93.9
51.0
51.0
52.3
60.2

—34.1
+2.0
+6.5
+7.7
-2.3

49.4
41.4
44.3
44.9
41.3

86.1
41.4
38.6
36.9
42.6

-36.7
(2)
+5.7
+8.0
-1.2

10.3
11.6
13.2
15.1
16.6

7.8
9.6
12.4
15.4
17.6

+2.6
+1.9
+.8
-.3
-1.0

1950.
1951

60.8
79.2

61.3
78.4

—.5
+.8

42.4
59.3

42.0
58.0

+.4
+1.2

18.2
19.9

19.4
20.3

-1.2
-.4

1951: January-June. _.
July-December _

42.5
36.7

35.6
42.8

+6.9
-6.1

32.5
26.8

25.7
32.3

+6.8
-5.6

10.0
9.9

10.4

1952: January- June 3 _.

52.2

46.3

+5.9

41.2

35.6

+5.7

10.9

10.7

1943 . __
1944
_ .
1945- 1946....
1947
1948
1949

__

..

+.1
+.2

1 Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce, adjusted to a
cash basis.
2
Less than 50 million dollars.
3
Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Sources: Treasury Department (except as noted).




171

TABLE B-32.—Profits before and after tax, all private corporations., 1929-52
[Billions of dollars]
Corporate profits after tax

Corporate
profits
before
tax

Period

Corporate
tax
liability l

Total

Dividend
payments

Undistributed
profits

9.8

1.4

8.4

5.8

2.6

3.3
-.8
-3.0
.2
1.7

.8
.5
.4
.5
.7

2.5
-1.3
-3.4
4.

i!o

5.5
4.1
2.6
2.1
2.6

-3.0
-5.4
-6.0
-2,4
-1.6

3.2
5.7
6.2
3.3
6.5

1.0
1.4
1.5
1.0
1.5

2.3
4.3
4.7
2.3
5,0

2.9
4.6
4.7
3.2
3.8

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

9.3
17.2
21.1
25.1
24.3

2.9
7.8
11.7
14.4
13.5

6.4
9.4
9.4
10.6
10.8

4.0
4.5
4.3
4.5
4.7

2.4
4.9
5.1
6.2
6.1

1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

19.7
23.5
30.5
33.8
27.1

11.2
9.6
11.9
13.0
10.8

8.5
13.9
18.5
20.7
16.3

4.7
5.8
6.6
7.2
7.5

3.8
8.1
12.0
13.5
8.8

39.6
42.9

18.4
24.2

21.2
18.7

9.0
9.0

12.3
9.6

1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934

_

. . .
.

1935
1930
1937
1938
1939

1950
1951

_

..
-

.

(2)

-.6
-.3
Q

l.*2

Seasonally adjusted annual rates
1951: First half - .
Second half

46.7
39.0

26.4
22.0

1952: First half 3. _

41.2

1951: First quarter .
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

50.1
43.3
38.6
39. 5

1952' First quarter 3 3
Second quarter

42.0
40.5

1
2

11.4
7.8

20.2
17.1

8.8
9.2

23.8

17.5

9.2

8.2

28.4
24.5
21.8
22.2

21.7
18.8
16.9
17.3

8.6
9.0
9.2
9.3

13.1
9.8
7.7
8.0

24.2
23.3

17.8
17.2

8.9
9.6

8.9
7.6

Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes.
Minus 8 million dollars.
8 Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
NOTE.—No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table B-6 for
profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment. The figures beginning with 1949 are based on the
revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce, For detail, see the Survey
of Current Business, July 1952.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




172

TABLE B—33.—Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations, 1939—52
[Millions of dollars]
Nondurable goods industries
(94 corporations) 1

Durable goods industries
(106 corporations)!
Period

Profits

Profits
Sales

Sales
Before taxes After taxes

Before taxes After taxes

1939

6,743

733

597

3, 878.

478

402

1940
1941
1942
1943
1944

8,746
12, 802
15, 371
20, 641
22,090

1,227
2,176
2,330
2,391
2,192

830
982
783
755
726

4,295
5,540
6,470
7.671
^331

622
989
1,079
1,302
1,346

446
541
441
509
532

1945
1946
19471948
1949

18, 162
12, 376
19, 484
23, 566
23, 885

1,290
608
2,311
3,105
3,191

574
295
1,354
1,835
1,887

8,438
8,997
11, 385
13, 441
12, 853

1,139
1,430
1,793
2,212
1,847

558
911
1,170
1.477
i;213

1950
1951

29, 341
33, 696

5,192
5,374

2,542
2,000

14, 777
17, 371

2,702
3,184

1,513
1,411

Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation
1951: First half 2
Second half 2

17, 121
16, 575

2,787
2,587

1,007
993

8,637
8,735

1,669
1,514

710
702

1951: First quarter 2
Second quarter 2
Third quarter 2 2
Fourth quarter

8,362
8,759
8,003
8,572

1,382
1,405
1,191
1,396

510
497
428
565

4,349
4,288
4,294
4,441

855
814
773
741

368
342
334
368

1952: First quarter 3

8,443

1,234

445

4,355

709

312

_

* See Federal Reserve Bulletin for similar data for the following industry groups: Primary metals and
products, machinery, automobiles and equipment, foods and kindred products, chemicals and allied
products, and petroleum refining.
2 Certain tax accruals for the first 6 months of 1950 and 1951, required by subsequent increases in Federal
income tax rates and charged by many companies against third quarter profits, have been redistributed to
the first and second quarters. Available information does not permit a similar redistribution of accruals
charged against fourth quarter 1950 profits to cover 1950 liability for excess profits taxes.
3 Estimates based on incomplete data.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published
reports of various industrial corporations.




TABLE B—34.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity', private manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1947—49 average and 1950-51
Ratio of profits (annual rate) to stockholders equity

1951

Industry group

1947-49
average

1950

Total

First Second Third Fourth
quarter quarter quarter quarter

Before Federal taxes

23.2

28.0

27.9

32.8

30.4

25.5

25.8

23.6
19.6
24.8
21.6
26.0

22.4
21.2
22.8
18.0
29.6

18.3
21.5
17.4
12.1
25.1

20.8
20.4
29.6
22.0
34.0

18.4
20.4
23.2
11.2
31.6

18.9
22.5
11.8
11.5
20.6

17.0
23.7
9.1
6.4
16.4

Furniture and fixtures
23.6
Paper and allied products
26.0
Printing and publishing (except newspapers) _ 23.6
Chemicals and allied products
24.0
Petroleum refining
i 20.4

27.2
28.4
20.0
32.4
i 19.2

25.5
35.7
23.1
32.3
22.1

34.4
44.0
21.6
40.8
23.2

28.8
42.8
26.8
32.4
23.0

22.2
32.6
25.4
31.2
22.8

17.4
27.5
22.2
28.0
22.8

(2)
19.6
17.6
22.8
18.4

(2)
30.8
19.2
33.2
25.6

27.5
36.7
13.8
32.1
28.1

26.0
43.2
22.4
36.4
32.0

34.0
41.2
17.6
39.2
32.8

27.5
31.3
16.9
33.2
24.2

24.5
35.8
1.0
23.8
26.8

Primary iron and steel industries
Fabricated metal products. . .
Machinery (except electrical)
_
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)

20.0
24.4
24.0
26.8

28.4
29.2
26.0
41.6

32.7
31.0
31.9
37.5

34.8
37.6
34.8
47.2

35.6
33.6
34.8
34.4

29.7
27.2
28.1
28.6

32.1
26.1
32.7
43.3

10.4

18.8

22.6

19.6

25.2

18.3

29.4

Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including
ordnance)

34.4

53.2

40.0

46.0

44.0

34.0

37.6

22.0

30.8

31.0

33.6

33.6

30.0

31.7

19.2

22.8

24.9

34.8

26.0

17.3

21.8

All private manufacturing corporationsFood
Tobacco manufactures _ .
Textile-mill products
Apparel and finished textiles
Lumber and wood products

.__

Products of petroleum and coal (except petroleum refining)
Rubber products
Leather and leather products _. _
Stone, clay, and glass products
_.
Primary nonferrous metal industries

After Federal taxes
All private manufacturing corporations

14.4

15.6

12.2

14.8

13.6

10.4

11.2

14.0
12.0
14.8
12.4
16.8

12.4
11.6
12.8
10.0
17.6

8.7
9.4
8.0
5.3
13.2

10.0
9.6
14.4
11.6
17.2

9.2
10.X)
10.8
4.4
16.0

8.8
9.2
4.8
4.8
10.6

7.6
9.4
4.1
1.8
9.9

Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
Printing and publishing (except newspapers).
Chemicals and allied products
Petroleum refining

14.0
16.0
14.4
14.8
115.2

15.2
16.4
11.6
18.0
114.0

10.6
14.1
10.5
12.9
14.7

16.0
18.4
10.0
17.2
14.5

11.6
17.6
13.6
14.0
15.1

9.8
12.4
12.4
10.7
14.6

5.1
9.9
7.8
11.3
16.4

Products of petroleum and coal (except petroleum refining)
Rubber products
Leather and leather products.
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary nonferrous metal industries

(2)
11.2
10.4
14.0
11.6

(2)
16.8
10.8
17.6
15.2

11.5
14.5
5.3
13.2
13.3

11.4
18.8
10.8
16.0
16.0

14.0
15.6
7.2
16.8
14.8

10.8
12.2
6.5
12.0
10.4

10.8
13.1
-2.0
10.4
13.9

Primary iron and steel industries
Fabricated metal products. __
Machinery (except electrical)
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)

12.0
14.8
14.4
16.0

14.4
16.0
14.0
20.8

11.8
13.2
12.7
14.1

13.6
17.6
15.2
18.4

13.6
14.4
14.8
14.0

8.5
11.2
10.4
8.6

11.7
10.2
11.3
16.9

6.0

10.0

9. 7

9. 2

11. 6

8.0

11.2

Motor vehicles and. parts
Instruments; photographic and optical j;oods;
watches and clocks
.1
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including
ordnance)

19.6

25.2

14.3

17.2

17.2

10.6

13.1

13.6

16.8

12.2

14.4

14.0

10.4

12.1

11.2

12.4

11.1

16.4

10.0

6.7

10.4

Food
Tobacco manufactures
Textile-mill products
Apparel and finished textiles.
Lumber and wood products..

1
Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined.
* Not available.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




174

TABLE B-35.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales, private manufacturing corporations, by industry group, 1947-49 average and 1950—51
Profits in cents per dollar of sales
1951

Industry group

1947-49
average

1950

First Second Third Fourth
Total quarter quarter quarter quarter
Before Federal taxes

All private manufacturing corporations_

10.5

12.8

12.2

13.5

12.8

11.5

11.0

6.1
7.8
11.6
5.6
14.4

6.1
9.0
10.5
5.0
15.9

4.9
8.8
8.3
3.3
13.9

5.4
9.1
11.9
5.4
17.7

4.9
8.3
10.2
3.2
16.1

4.9
8.9
6.0
3.0
11.5

4.3
9.0
4.4
1.7
9.8

8.4
14.0

9.0
15.4

8.7
17.7

10.5
19.8

9.4
19.6

8.9
16.8

5.9
14.2

8.6
13.8
114.7

7.9
18.8
114.9

9.0
18.1
16.9

8.3
20.9
16.7

9.9
17.5
17.3

9.6
18.0
17.2

8.1
15.9
16.4

?.7
5.7
13.7
13.4

(2)
10.6
6.5
18.8
17.3

11.2
11.6
4.7
18.2
17.5

11.3
13.0
6.9
19.7
18.2

13.0
12.2
5.9
20.1
19.3

10.6
10.0
5.7
18.6
16.2

9.9
11.1
.3
14.2
16.3

Primary iron and steel industries .. ..
Fabricated metal products ..
Machinery (except electrical)
Electrical machinery
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles)

11.5
10.8
6.5
9.9

15.5
12.4
13.3
14.3

15.9
12.6
14,1
13.2

16.5
14.5
15.0
15.1

16.6
13.1
14.5
12.2

14.9
11.6
13.1
11.1

15.5
10.9
13.6
14.1

5.5

8.9

7.8

7.9

8.2

6.7

8.0

Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks _
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including
ordnance)
.

12.2

17.5

13.5

14.0

13.8

12.4

13.5

Food
Tobacco manufactures
Textile-mill products
Apparel andfinishedtextiles
Lumber and wood products

.

Furniture and fixtures
Paper and allied products
Pa.per and allied products
Printing and publishing (except newspapers) _
Chemicals and allied products
_
Petroleum refining
Products of petroleum and coal (except petroleum refining)
Rubber products _
_
Leather and leather products
Stone, clay, and glass products
Primary nonferrous metal industries. .

(

12.2

15.9

15.0

16.0

15.6

14.8

13.7

8.9

10.4

10.9

13.8

11.3

8.6

9.3

After Federal taxes
All private manufacturing corporations .

6.5

7.1

5.4

6.1

5.8

4.7

4.8

Food
3.6
Tobacco manufactures
4.8
Textile-mill products
6.9
Apparel and finished textiles
3.3
Lumber and wood products
_ ._.
9.2
Furniture and fixtures
4.9
Paper and allied products
8.6
Printing and publishing (except newspapers).
5.2
Chemicals arid allied products
8.6
Petroleum refining
Ul.l
Products of petroleum and coal (except petroleum refining). _ .
_._
(»)
Rubber products
4.3
Leather and leather products
3.3
Stone, clay, and glass products
8.4
Primary nonferrous metal industries
8.3

3.4
4.9
5.8
2.8
9.4

2.3
3.9
3.8
1.4
7.3

2.6
4.3
5.7
2.8
9.1

2.5
4.1
4.7
1.3
8.2

2.3
3.6
2.4
1.3
5.9

1.9
3.6
2.0
.5
5.9

5.1
8.8
4.5
10.3
110.7

3.6
7.0
4.1
7.2
11.2

4.9
8.3
3.9
8.8
10.5

3.8
7.9
5.0
7.4
11.4

3.9
6.4
4.7
6.2
11.0

1.7
5.1
2.8
6.4
11.8

(«)
5.8
3.7
10.1
10.2

4.7
4.6
1.8
7.5
8.3

5.0
5.7
3.3
8.5
9.0

5.3
4.7
2.4
8.5
8.7

4.2
3.9
2.2
6.8
7.0

4.4
4.0
-.7
6.2
8.5

4.3
4.8
4.8
3.3

5.7
4.3
4.7
5.5

Primary iron and steel industries
Fabricated metal products
Machinery (except electrical)
Electrical machinery
_. .
Transportation equipment (except motor
vehicles).. _

6.9
6.6
3.9
6.0

7.9
6.8
7.3
7.2

5.7
5.3
5.6
5.0

6.4
6.7
6.6
5.9

6.4
5.6
6.2
5.0

3.2

4.7

3.3

3.7

3.7

2.9

3.1

Motor vehicles and parts
Instruments; photographic and optical goods;
watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing (including
ordnance)--

7.0

8.3

4.8

5.2

5.4

3.8

4.7

7.5

8.6

5.9

6.9

6.4

5.2

5.2

5.2

5.6

4.9

6.6

4.9

3.3

4.5

1 Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined.
2 Not available.
Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.
209722—52




13

I 75

TABLE B-36.—Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' equity and to sales, all
private manufacturing corporations, by asset size class, 1947-49 average and 1950-51
1951

1947-49
average

Asset size class (thousands of dollars)

1950

Total

First Second Third Fourth
quarter quarter quarter quarter

Ratio of profits before Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders' equity
.

.

-.

23.2

28.0

27.9

32.8

30.4

25.6

25.8

.

All asset sizes
tinder 250
250 to 999
1,000 to 4,999
5 000 to 99 999
100,000 and over

16.8
22.4
23.6
24.0
22.4

17.2
23.6
25.2
27.6
29.6

17.2
23.5
25.6
28.2
28.8

23.6
28.8
33.2
34.4
32.0

22.4
28.0
30.4
32.0
30.0

17.4
21.3
22.6
25.4
26.8

5.4
14.8
18.6
25.7
28.9

Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales
All asset sizes.

.- -

10.5

12.8

12 2

13.5

12.8

11.5

11.0

-

_

Under 250
250 to 999
.
I,000to4,999
5,000 to 99,999
100,000 and over

4.5
7.2
8.8
10.8
12.2

4.3
7.9
9.6
12.5
15.5

4.0
7.3
8.9
12.0
14.6

5.4
8.8
10.9
13.8
15.4

5.2
8.5
10.1
12.9
14.8

4.2
7.0
8.2
11.0
14.0

1.3
4.7
6.3
10.6
14.3

.
- -

Ratio of profits after Federal taxes (annual rate) to stockholders' equity
14.4

15.6

12.2

14.8

13.6

10.4

11.2

9.6
12.8
14.0
14.8
14.4

All asset "sizes
Under 250
250 to 999
1,000 to 4,999
5,000 to 99,999
100,000 and over

10.4
13.2
14.0
15.2
16.4

8.9
10.4
10.8
11.8
13.0

14.4
14.8
15.6
15.2
14.4

13.6
13.2
13.2
14.0
14.0

9.1
9.7
8.8
10.0
11.0

-1.4
3.6
6.3
10.4
13.8

Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales
All asset sizes
Under 250
250 to 999 .
1,000 to 4,999
5,000 to 99,999
100,000 and over

-

6.5

7.1

5.4

6.1

5.8

4.7

4.8

2.6
4.2
5.2
6.6
7.8

2.6
4.4
5.2
6.9
8.6

2.1
3.2
3.7
5.0
6.6

3.3
4.5.
5.2
6.0
7.0

3.2
4.0
4.4
5.6
6.8

2.2
3.2
3.2
4.3
5.8

-0.3
1.1
2.1
4.3
6.9

^Sources: Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.




175

TABLE B-37.—Sources and uses of corporate funds, 1946-52l
[Billions of dollars]
1951

Source or use of funds

1947

1948

1949

1950

1952,
first
First Second half 2 3
Total half 2 half 2

16.2
7.1
3.0

18.0
4.2
2.9

16.1
-3.6
2.1

16.6
8.0
4.0

21.6
10.2
.2

9.5
8.3
.2

12.1
1.9
(5)

10.5
.5
.5

1.2
— .1

1.0
(*)

3.4

o

4.7
.3

2.3
.4

.1
.3

2.2
.1

-3.0
.5

19.0

27.4

26.1

17.8

33.6

34.7

18.4

16.3

9.0

7.6
4.3

11.6
5.2

12.8
6.2

8.0
7.2

11.6
7.8

9.0
8.8

5.6
4.2

3.4
4.6

4.0
5.0

11.9

16.8

19.0

15.2

19.4

17.8

9.8

8.0

9.0

-1.6
2.1

2.3
1.0

.8
.3

-2.3
.3

7.4
1.5

5.6
.8

1.9
.4

3.7
.4

-4.5
.5

4.3
2.3

3.2
4.4

1.7
5.9

-1.2
4.9

3.3
3.7

5.0
6.4

2.7
3.3

2.3
3.1

.0
4.0

1946

Uses:
12.4
Plant and equipment outlays
Inventories (change in book value) 4 _ 11.2
_
Change in customer net receivables .8
Cash and U. S. Government securities
-4.7
Other current assets
..
—.7
Total uses
Sources:
Internal:
Retained profits and depletion
allowances
Depreciation allowances
Total internal sources
External:
Change in Federal income tax
liability
Other current liabilities.
Change in bank loans and mortgage loans
__ „ .
Net new issues
Total external sources
Total sources
Discrepancy (uses less sources)

7.1

10.9

8.7

1.7

15.9

17.8

8.3

9.5

.0

19.0

27.7

27.7

16.9

35.3

35.6

18.1

17.5

9.0

,0

—.3

—1.6

.9

-1.7

-.9

.3

-1.2

.0

1
Excludes banks and insurance companies.
2
Not adjusted for seasonal variation.
3

Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
* Receivables are net of payables which therefore are not shown separately.
5 Less than 50 million dollars.
Source: Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial
data (except as noted).




177

TABLE B-38.—International transactions of the United States, 1949-52
[Millions of dollars]
19 52

1951

Type of transaction

1949

Exports of goods and services:
12, 052
Recorded goods
Other goods 2
- -_
285
Total goods
Services
Income on investments

12, 337
2,232

1950

Second
First Second Third Fourth First
Total quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter l

10, 275
383

15, 020
466

3 335
69

4,019
84

3,691
158

3,976
154

3,996
159

4,100
80

10,658
2,024

15, 486
2,741

3,404
567

4,103
715

3,849
739

4,130
720

4,155
721

4,180
735

1,405

1,743

1,992

396

467

459

670

418

485

Total exports

15, 974

14, 425

20, 219

4,367

5, 285

5,047

5,520

5,294

5,400

Imports of goods and services:
Recorded goods
Other goods 2

6 622
444

8 852
463

10, 964
704

3 035
179

2,981
151

2,496
181

2,453
192

2, 776
189

2,700
200

7,066
2 184

9,315
2 376

11,668
3 047

3,214
601

3,132
705

2,677
904

2,645
837

2,965
850

2,900
945

Total goods - - - Services
Income on investments . - - - - - -

353

437

398

99

98

90

111

94

95

Total imports

9,603

12,128

15, 113

3,914

3,935

3, 671

3,593

3,909

3,940

Surplus of exports of goods
and services:
Recorded goods
Other goods 2 ._.

5 430
—159

1 423
-80

4 056
—238

300
-110

1,038
—67

1,195
-23

1,523
-38

1,220
-30

1,400
-120

5 271
48

1 343
—352

3 818
—306

190
—34

971
10

1,172
-165

1,485
-117

1,190
-129

1,280
-210

1 052

1 306

1 594

297

369

369

559

324

390

6 371

2,297

5 106

453

1,350

1,376

1,927

1,385

1,460

57 —3 629

—442

—892

—149

294

305

372

-300

Total goods
Services _ _
Income on investments
Total surplus of
exports- - Means of financing surplus of exports of goods
and services:
Liquidation of gold
and dollar assets by
foreign
countries
and by international
institutions
U. S. Government
sources (net): 3
Grants and other
unilateral transfers
Long- and shortterm loans
U. S. private sources
(net):
Remittances
Long- and shortterm capital
Total means of
financing
Errors and omissions

5,321

4,120

4,501

1,031

1,252

1,128

1,090

822

1,170

647

164

163

61

80

34

-12

133

150

522

481

412

109

99

90

114

95

90

237

312

3

514

233

350

1,460

609

1,317

1,066

7,156

2,453

5,700

546

1,594

1, 549

2,011

1,655

-785

-156

-594

-93

-244

-173

-84

-270

1 Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2
Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the
United States customs area, and other adjustments.
3
For detail, see appendix table B-40.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




178

TABLE B—39.—United States exports and imports of goods and services, by area, 1949-52
[Billions of dollars, annual rates]
1951

Area

Exports of goods and 3services: 2
OEEG countries
OEEC dependencies 3 _ ~
Europe, except OEEC
countries
Canada .
_ _ __
Latin-5
American republics. .
Other
Total exports
Imports of goods and services: 2
OEEC countries 3 3
OEEC dependencies
Europe, except OEEC
countries
Canada
Latin- American republics- .
Other s
Total imports _

1950

5.39
.90

4.43
.58

6.52
.68

5.46
.52

7.04
.67

6.46
.76

7.13
.76

6.90
.76

.21
2.59
3.66
3.21

.18
2.73
3.92
2.59

.33
3.48
5.15
4.06

.30
3.19
4.57
3.44

.39
3.91
5.07
4.06

.31
3.37
5.34
3.96

.34
3.44
5.63
4.78

.32
3.34
5.33
4.52

15.97

14.42

20.22

17.47

21.14

20.19

22.08

21.18

2.22
.71

2.69
.89

3.52
1.20

3.38
1.30

3.63
1.20

3.61
1.16

3.45
1.14

3.54
1.60

(*)
<<)

.18
2.01
2.94
1.54

.23
2.44
3.56
2.32

.24
2.79
4.12
3.25

.26
2.47
4.93
3.31

.26
2.78
4.20
3.66

.18
3.00
3.51
3.22

.26
2.90
3.83
2.79

.20
2.62
4.32
3.35

(«)
(*)
(4)
(4)

9.60

12.13

15.11

15.66

15. 74

14.68

14.37

15.64

15.76

1.73
-.31

3.00
-.52

2.08
-.78

3.41
-.53

2.85
-.40

3.68
37

3.36
-.84

(4)
(«)

-.04
.29
.36
.27

.09
.69
1.03
.81

.04
.72
-.36
.13

.13
1.13
.87
.40

.13
.37
1.83
.74

.07
.54
1.80
1.99

.11
.72
1.01
1.17

2.30

5.11

1.83

5.40

5.52

7.71

5.54

(*)
(4)
(4)
(4)
5.84

Surplus of exports of goods and
services: 2
OEEC countries 3 3
3.17
OEEC dependencies
.19
Europe, except OEEC
countries
.03
Canada
.58
Latin- American republics. . .72
Other 5
1.67
Total surplus of exports..

1952

1949

6.37

First Second Third Fourth First Second
Total quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter!

8
8
()
4

(*)

21.60

ADDENDUM

Exports of goods6 and services
to sterling area
Imports of goods and services
from sterling area ..

2.52

1.95

3.17

2.32

2.88

3.20

4.27

3.71

(*)

1.73

2.27

2.92

2.96

3.44

2.92

2.34

2.87

(*)

Surplus of exports to
sterling area 6

.79

-.56

.28

1.94

.84

(4)

-.32

.25

-.64

1
Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
2 Includes income on investments.
3
"OEEC countries" are those which are members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. They are the countries which participated in the European Recovery Program prior to its termination.
4
Not available.
s Includes international institutions.
* In 1950-52, includes "special category" exports sold for cash, but excludes all transactions under the
Mutual Defense Assistance Program.
NOTE.—Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




179

TABLE B-40.—U. S. Government grants, other unilateral transfers, and loans to foreign countries,
7949-52
[Millions of dollars]
1952

1951

Type of aid

1949

1950

Unilateral payments:
Military aid programs:
Mutual Defense
Assistance and
Mutual Security Programs. -.
Greek-Turkish
171
aid
Chinese aid
44
E conomic aid programs:
EGA, Mutual
Defense Assistance, and Mutual Security
Programs
3 822
Europe
3 730
Other areas. ..
92
Army Civilian
Supply Program 3 _.
1 082
Philippine Rehabilitation Act...
203
International Refugee Organization and other
United Nations
relief organizations
-. .
104
Technical assistance
30
Interim aid and
Post-UNRRA..
2
Other transfers
127
Total unilateral
payments _
Less: Unilateral receipts
Equals: Net unilateral payments.
Long-term loans and investments:
European Recovery
Program
Export-Import Bank
loans
Surplus property
credits, including
ship sales
...
Raw-material credits
to occupied areas-..
United Nations building loan._.
Other

First Second
uarter uarter

Total

Third Fourth
uarter uarter

First Second
uarter quarter 1

616

1,481

305

414

428

334

62

8

2

2

3

1

2,833
2,719
114

2,643
2,490
153

652
628

699
679
20

619
580
39

673
605

26

68

339
305
34

m
h)
(2)

500

336

78

138

78

42

22

M

166

12

5

4

2

1

1

(2)

84

39

14

3

4

18

19

M

29

48

5

11

8

24

21

(?)

100

109

23

24

29

33

33

5 585

4,295

4,678

1,084

1,297

1,171

1,126

845

(2)

264

175

177

53

45

43

36

23

(2)

5,321

4, 120

4,501

1,031

1,252

1,128

1,090

822

428

163

209

39

25

70

75

80

(?)

163

193

222

83

81

30

28

121

(2)

5

2

410

(2)
W
(Z\

2

(2)

1,170

30

2

26

28

20
12

22
6

13
6

3
2

4
2

4
1

2
1

2
1

(2)
(2)

Total long-term
loans and investments
Less: Repayments.. .

679
205

414
287

450
310

127
59

112
47

105
88

106
116

204
64

(2)

Equals: Net longterm loans and investments

474

127

140

68

65

17

— 10

140

173

37

23

-7

15

17

—2

—7

Total net unilateral
payments, loans
and investments . _ 5,968

4,284

4,664

1,092

1,332

1,162

1,078

955

Short-term loans (net)

(2)

150

1,320

1
2 Estimates based on incomplete data; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers.
Not available.
3 Includes disbursements in Germany administered by EGA from funds appropriated under the Army
Civilian Supply Program.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




180

TABLE B-41.—United States merchandise exports, including reexports, by area, 1936-38 quarterly
average and 1947—52

Period

Total exports including
reexports

Canada

Other
Western
Hemisphere

OEEO
countries i

Other
Europe

Asia a

Australia
and
Africa
Oceania

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
_
_..
1948
1949_ .
19503
1951 3
- -

742
3,835
3, 1&3
3,013
2,569
3,755

H5
528
486
490
499
647

1950: First quarter 3...
Second quarter 3.
Third quarter 3. .
Fourth quarter 3_

2,365
2,510
2,451
2,949

389
519
505
583

1951: First quarter 3 _._
Second quarter 3 _
Third quarters..
Fourth quarter 3_

3,335
4,019
3,691
3,976
3,996
« 4, 100

1952: First quarter 3.. _
Second quarter. .

1,324
1,046
1,019

698
955

31
118
49
41
34
69

122
562
507
534
360
545

23
80
38
49
33
61

32
205
196
155
86
145

614
647
706
796

724
728
583
756

31
33
37
34

381
367
332
361

32
34
30
38

78
85
78
102

623
756
605
603

866
958
978
969

813
1,027

64
81
62
69

469
549
517
644

44
45
68
88

120
155
173
132

623
(5)

986
(5)

1,045

51

646
(5)

73

175
(*)

136
1,017

841
725
691
943

282

869

1,111

«

(s)

(5)

Percentage of total
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949
19503
___
19513

100
100
100
100
100
100

15.5
13.8
15.4
16.3
19.4
17.2

18.3
26.5
26.6
24.1
26.9
25.1

38.0
34.5
33. 1
33.8
27.2
25.4

4.2
3.1
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.8

16.4
14.7
16.0
17.7
14.0
14.5

3.1
2.1
1.2
1.6
1.3
1.6

4.3
5.3
6.2
5.1
3.3
3.9

1950: First quarter 3 _ _ _
Second quarter 3 _
Third quarter 3. _
Fourth quarter 3_

100
100
100
100

16.4
20.7
20.6
19.8

26.0
25.8
28.8
27.0

30.6
29.0
23.8
25.6

1.3
1.3
1.5
1.2

16.1
14.6
13.5
12.2

1.4
1.4
1.2
1.3

3.3
3.4
3.2
3.5

1951: First quarter 8...
Second quarter 3.
Third quarter 3 _3.
Fourth quarter _

100
100
100
100

18.7
18.8
16.4
15.2

26.0
23.8
26.5
24.4

24.4
25.6
23.5
27.9

1.9
2.0
1.7
1.7

14.1
13.7
14.0
16.2

1.3
1.1
1.8
2.2

3.6
3.9
4.7
3.3

1952: First quarter 8 _ > _

100

15.6

24.7

26.2

1.3

16.2

1.8

4.4

1 "OEEO countries" are those which are members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. They are the countries which participated in the European Recovery Program prior to its termination. Turkey is included with OEEC countries and excluded from Asia. Exports from Germany are included with those of OEEC countries and, in the postwar period, relate almost wholly to exports from the
three western zones.
2 Excludes Turkey, which is included with OEEC countries.
3 Data by area exclude, while total exports include, "special category" exports. For this reason, exports
by area will not add to total exports in these periods. "Special category" exports are those of military or
potential military significance, and are not published in this area classification for security reasons. See
Foreign Trade Statistics Notes, January 1952, Bureau of the Census, for further detail.
* Estimate based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers,
s Not available.
NOTE.—Data in this table cover all merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign
countries, including, in postwar years, both commercial transactions and goods financed by the United
States through the various aid and relief programs and the Mutual Security Program. Shipments to
United States armed forces abroad for their own use are excluded.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote 3.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




181

TABLE B-42.—Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports,
by economic class, 7936-38 quarterly average and 7947-52
[1936-38=100]
Total
domestic
exports

Period

Crude
materials

ManuCrude
factured
foodstuffs i foodstuffs i

Semimanufactures

Finished
manufactures

Quantity indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949
_._
1950
1951

100
275
214
219
193
247

100
123
100
126
128
142

100
397
362
435
287
475

100
478
350
297
237
264

100
203
144
150
127
153

100
332
257
250
225
298

1950* First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

181
194
184
209

125
143
112
128

284
270
264
325

213
250
224
230

121
126
125
135

207
220
220
251

1951 : First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

223
258
243
264

112
126
117
220

456
5R3
434
422

242
263
265
266

131
157
165
160

278
319
304
291

1952: First quarter
Second quarter

2

262
267

157

(3)

(3)

548

(3)

265

(3)

162

(3)

309

Unit value indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947 .
1948—
1949
1950
1951.

100
188
200
186
180
206

100
195
223
212
220
260

100
248
255
225
193
215

100
218
223
177
151
189

100
169
184
174
170
209

100
182
193
184
179
199

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

177
175
180
191

206
212
226
245

196
190
192
196

151
142
162
169

164
166
168
184

179
175
177
187

202
210
206
204

263
275
249
246

203
219
221
219

188
206
194
183

203
212
211
211

195
201
200
200

1951: First quarter.
Second quarter
Third quarter .
Fourth quarter
1952: First quarter .
Second quarter

...

207
2208

(3)

255

(3)

230

(3)

178

(3)

208

(3)

201

1
Export indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs in some periods, particularly those of unit value
during 1950, are influenced by sales of large quantities of food products at prices considerably below market
quotations. Such exports include sales from Government-owned surplus and shipments on which subsidies
were paid by the Department of Agriculture.
2 Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
a Not available.
NOTE.—The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes
in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics, including change in
average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




182

TABLE B-43.—United States general merchandise imports, by areay 1936-38 quarterly average and
1947-52
Total
general
imports

Period

Canada

Other
Western
Hemisphere

OEEC Other
Australia
Asia 2
Africa
and
counOceania
tries i Europe

Millions of dollars
Quarterly average:
1936-38
- - .
1947.
1948
1949
-1950
1951

622
1,439
1,781
1,656
2,213
2,741

88
282
398
388
490
569

143
568
627
611
776
887

152
174
244
211
315
478

30
45
49
35
47
52

183
249
324
296
409
495

10
39
41
31
52
113

17
82
98
84
123
147

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

1,889
1,931
2,388
2,645

404
478
504
575

727
645
913
818

240
243
323
455

45
45
49
50

302
363
417
555

49
52
47
60

122
103
136
132

1951: First quarterSecond quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter..

3, 035
2,981
2,496
2,453

529
585
553
608

1,086
894
737
833

514
515
457
426

63
57
40
46

592
544
482
364

83
184
120
64

169
201
106
113

2, 776
3 2, 700

560
(4)

943

454
(4)

45
(4)

502
(4)

60

213
(4)

1952: First quarter
Second quarter

_

(«)

(4)

Percentage of total
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
_
1949
1950
1951 ..
. _ _.

100
100
100
100
100
100

14.1
19.6
22.3
23.4
22.1
20.8

23.0
39.5
35.2
36.9
35.1
32.4

24.4
12.1
13.7
12.7
14.2
17.4

4.8
3.1
2.8
2.1
2.1
1.9

29.4
17.3
18.2
17.9
18.5
18.1

1.6
2.7
2.3
1.9
2.3
4.1

2.7
5.7
5.5
5.1
5.6
5.4

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

.

100
100
100
100

21.4
24.8
21.1
21.7

38.5
33.4
38. 2
30.9

12.7
12.6
13.5
17.2

2.4
2.3
2.1
1.9

16.0
18.8
17.5
21.0

2.6
2.7
2.0
2.3

6.5
5.3
5.7
5.0

1951: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

_

100
100
100
100

17.4
19.6
22.2
24.8

35.8
30.0
29.5
34.0

16.9
17.2
18. 3
17.4

2.1
1.9
1.6
1.9

19.5
18.3
19.3
14.8

2.7
6.2
4.8
2.6

5.6
6.7
4.3
4.6

100

20.2

34.0

16.4

1.6

18.1

2.2

7.7

1952: First quarter

1 " OEEC countries" are those which are members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. They are the countries which participated in the European Recovery Program prior to its termina
tion. Turkey is included with OEEC countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany are
included with those of OEEC countries and, in the postwar period, relate almost wholly to imports from the
three western zones.
2
Excludes Turkey, which is included with OEEC countries.
s Estimate based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
* Not available.
NOTE.—Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign
countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising
channels, plus entries into bonded customs warehouses.
Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




183

TABLE B-44.—Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption, by economic class, 1936-38 quarterly average and 1947-52
[1936-38=100]
Total
imports for
consumption

Period

Crude
materials

Crude
foodstuffs

Finished
Manufactured food- Semimanu- manufacfactures
tures
stuffs

Quantity indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38

100
108
123
120
146
144

1950: First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter .
Fourth quarter

. _

1951: First quarter
Second quarter. _ ...
Third quarter
Fourth quarter
1 952: First quarter
Second quarter

100
129
139
125
152
142

100
96
109
119
113
118

100
83
91
97
117
122

100
130
149
143
219
200

100
84
103
101
125
135

137
136
154
158

152
140
155
161

121
94
125
111

98
113
143
113

189
213
220
247

107
119
125
147

163
147
131
136

1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

161
144
137
125

149
108
92
125

127
1291
121
111

227
215
182
178

141
141
126
131

151
U48

153
0)

(2)

137

(2)

121
(2)

191

(2)

138

Unit value indexes
Quarterly average:
1936-38
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951

100
213
235
224
243
305

100
180
203
195
214
312

100
311
343
330
454
512

100
208
212
202
203
221

100
191
217
198
193
244

100
245
266
258
252
296

1950' First quarter
Second quarter
Third quarter
Fourth quarter

223
229
248
270

185
194
215
255

410
433
485
491

199
199
203
210

176
179
197
220

245
248
253
262

1951: First quarter
Second quarter _
Third quarter
Fourth quarter __ _ _-

295
313
312
299

302
340
316
288

508
521
516
505

214
224
225
221

234
242
250
249

278
288
313
307

1952* First quarter
Second quarter

.

300
1295

(2)

288

(2)

508

(2)

216

(2)

253

(2)

303

* Estimates based on incomplete data; by Council of Economic Advisers.
*Not available.
NOTE.—The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of
changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in
the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics, including
changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade.
Source: Department of Commerce (except as noted).




184

TABLE :B-45. Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 1951
Percentage
change *

1939=100
Source:
Appendix
table
No.

1951

Economic series
Total

B-l

First
half

361
308
591

Gross national product
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investmentGovernment purchases of goods and
services

355
307
631

Second
half
366
309
552

1952,
first
half 2

1951,
1951,
first
second
half to half to
1952,
1952,
first
first
half 2
half 2

374
317
495

5.2
3.2
-21.6

2.2
2.7
-10.3

478

426

528

585

37.5

10.8

B-3 Gross national product in 1951 prices .
Personal consumption expenditures
Gross private domestic investment
.
Government purchases of goods and
services
_ _ _ _

183
160
271

181
160
291

185
159
252

187
162
221

3.2
1.2
-24. 0

.9
1.8
-12.3

221

198

245

268

35.6

9.5

B-6 National income .
Compensation of employees

383
374

375
367

390
381

396
390

5.6
6.2

1.6
2.4

B-9

Personal income — Disposable personal income
Personal net saving

350
321
630

343
314
485

357
327
774

363
329
626

5.8
4.7
29.0

1.7
.7
-19.1

Per capita disposable]personal income:
Current prices
1951 prices

272
141

268
139

276
142

276
141

2.9
1.0

-.1
-1.0

Labor force, including armed forces
Civilian labor force
Employment
Agricultural
Nonagricultural .
Unemployment
. ._

118
114
133
73
149
20

117
113
132
70
148
22

120
115
135
77
151
18

(3)
113
132
= 69
149
19

'.5
-1.6
.8
-11.4

(3)
-1.8
-2.1
-9.9
-1.1
8.0

Average gross weekly earnings:
Manufacturing
_
Durable goods
Nondurable goods
Building construction

272
264
269
270

270
261
268
261

274
267
270
278

280
271
275
282

3.6
4.1
2.7
8.1

2.0
1.8
1.9
1.6

B-16

Industrial production
Durable •mannfa.ctnrp'.s
N ondur able manufactures
Minerals ,
Agricultural production

202
250
178
155
131

204
251
183
153
(3)

199
250
173
157
(3)

198
252
171
153
(3)

-2.7
.4
-6.5
.0
(3)

-.5
.7
-1.6
-2.4
3
()

B-17

New construct! on _ _
Private
Residential (nonfarm)
N onresidential _
Other private
Public.
. . .

378
494
409
655
602
245

384
514
442
665
596
234

373
474
377
646
608
256

402
496
408
643
626
294

4.6
-3.6
-7.6
-3.3
4.9
25.4

7.9
4.7
8.4
-.6
2.9
14.7

B-18

Business expenditures for plant and equipment
Manufacturing
_
_

447
573

413
510

480
636

457
617

10.5
20.9

-4.9
-3.0

Inventories, end of period
Manufacturing
Wholesale trade
Retail trade
Sales
_
M anuf actur ing . _
Wholesale trade....
Retail trade

350
366
328
327
402
431
407
358

346
340
333
366
411
442
413
364

350
366
328
327
394
420
398
352

349
370
311
326
410
447
394
365

.8
8.8
-6.6
-11.0
-.2
1.2
-4.6
.5

-5.2
-.2
4.1
6.3
-.9
3.7

187
239
203
131
208

185
237
201
129
208

188
241
205
132
208

190
242
202
135
205

2.3
1.9
.5
4.3
16

.7
.4
-1.5
2.0
-1.7

229
311
(*)
199

231
317
(3)
201

227
304
(3)
198

224
297
(3)
195

-3.3
-6.4
-2.5
-2.9

-1.4
-2.4
-1.8
-1.1

B-10
B-ll

B-l 5

B-19

_ _ _ _ _ _

B-21

Consumers' price index: All items
Food
Apparel
- .
_ Rent.
-- _-_
Housefurnishings .

B-22

Wholesale price index: All commodities
Farm products
Processed foods
Other than farm products and foods

_

See footnotes at end of table.




185

(3)

— 2

i!i

TABLE B-45. Changes in selected economic series since 1939 and 1951—Continued
Percentage
change l

1939=100
Source:
Appendix
table
No.

1951

Economic series
Total

First
half

Second
half

1952,
first
half 2

1951,
1951,
first
second
half to half to
1952,
1952,
first
first
half 2
half 2

Prices received by farmers
Parity index (prices paid, interest, taxes,
and wage rates)

318

322

312

307

-4.6

-1.4

230

229

232

236

3.2

1.8

B-25

Consumer credit outstanding - .
Instalment credit

294
305

274
293

294
305

294
319

7.5
8.8

.3
4.4

B-26

Loans and investments of all commercial
banks
Loans
_
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Investments in U. S. Government obligations

326
335

310
319

326
335

331
345

7.0
8.4

1.7
2.9

377

359

377

377

5.1

.0

B-28

Gross public debt and guaranteed issues

545

536

545

545

1.5

-.1

B-32

Corporate profits:
Profits before tax
Profits after t a x
_ _ _ _ _ _ _
Dividend pavments
._
Undistributed profits

660
374
237
800

718
404
232
950

600
342
242
650

634
350
242
683

-11.8
-13.4
4.5
-28.1

5.6
2.3
.0
5.1

B-23

B-41

Merchandise exports, including reexports

<506

M96

<517

4546

B-43

General merchandise imports

4441

4484

4 398

4440

_ _ _ _ _ _

10.1
-9.0

5.6

10.7

1 Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed
from the indexes shown here.
2
Estimates based on incomplete data.
3
Not available.
41936-38 average=100.




186

List of Text Tables and Charts
TABLES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Production of goods and services: gross national product in constant prices. .
Changes in nonagricultural employment
Loans and investments of all commercial banks
Money supply
Changes in price indexes: spot primary market, wholesale, and consumers'. .
Changes in personal income
Earnings and hours in manufacturing and building construction industries. .
Personal consumption expenditures
New housing starts
Accumulation of business inventories
Business inventories and sales
Progress on facilities projects aided by tax amortization
Estimated increases in capacity for manufacturing industries
Business loans of all commercial banks
Federal cash payments to the public by function
Federal cash receipts from the public by source
Federal Government fiscal operations
Government cash receipts from and payments to the public
Unemployment in selected countries of Western Europe
Financing the exports of goods and services supplied to other countries
Changes in gross national product in constant prices
CHARTS
Progress since 1939
Growth since Korea
Growth in the decade 1950-1960
Indicators of defense progress since Korea
Economic indicators, changes from first half 1951 to first half 1952
Capacity expansion in basic industries
Military procurement and construction, obligations, and deliveries since
June 1950
Industrial production
Civilian labor force
Wholesale prices
Consumers' prices
Price trends since Korea
Average hourly earnings, selected industries
Personal income
New housing starts
Consumer credit
Business investment
New plant and equipment outlays, in selected manufacturing industries. . . .
Construction
,




187

Page
34
37
39
40
43
47
49
49
50
55
55
58
58
59
62
62
63
65
69
72
104
3
4
7
11
17
30
33
35
36
41
43
44
46
48
51
52
54
56
57

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Sources and uses of corporate funds
Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public
Industrial production in Western Europe
Exports and imports of goods and services
Metals supply
Personal income, spending, and saving
Federal budget expenditures
Change in components of gross national product, 1944-46
Changes in the labor force, 1944 to 1946
Personal income after taxes, part of each income dollar spent or saved,
1929-52
30. Population growth
31. Total production of goods and services, gross national product in 1951 prices. .




tf

s

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICEl 1912

Page
60
64
68
71
76
81
92
102
103
105
108
Ill













