' f e I I ? * I Economic Report or tne President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. G Price of single copy cents ( n ) LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE January To the Congress of the United States : I am herewith presenting my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this Report I have had the assistance and advice of the Council of Economic Advisers. I have also had the advice of the heads of executive departments and independent agencies I present below largely in the words of the Report itself what I consider to be its highlights Our Objectives A great opportunity lies before the American people. Our approach to a position of military preparedness now makes it possible for the United States to turn more of its attention to a sustained improvement of national living standards Our economic goal is an increasing national income shared equitably among those who contribute to its growth and achieved in dollars of stable buying power Sustained economic growth is necessary to the welfare and indeed to the survival of America and the free world Although American living standards on the average are now higher than ever there are certain groups whose consumption is much less than it should be. We can in our lifetime go far toward eliminating substandard living A steadily rising national income is the best assurance of harmonious social and economic adjustments. There can be no lasting harmony in a nation in which competing groups and interests seek to divide a constant or shrinking national output Role of Government The demands of modern life and the unsettled status of the world require a more important role for Government than it played in earlier and quieter times It is Government 's responsibility in a free society to create an environment in which individual enterprise can work constructively to serve the ends of economic progress ; to encourage thrift ; and to extend and strengthen economic ties with the rest of the world To help build a floor over the pit of personal disaster Government must concern itself with the health security and welfare of the individual citizen m Government must remain alert to the social dangers of monopoly and must continue vigorous enforcement of the anti-trust laws Government must use its vast power to help maintain employment and purchasing power as well as to maintain reasonably stable prices Government must be alert and sensitive to economic developments including its own myriad activities. It must be prepared to take preventive as well as remedial action ; and it must be ready to cope with new situations that may arise. This is not a start-and-stop responsibility but a continuous one Trie arsenal of weapons at the disposal of Government for maintaining economic stability is formidable. It includes credit controls administered by the Federal Reserve System ; the debt management policies of the Treasury ; authority of the President to vary the terms of mortgages carrying Federal insurance ; flexibility in administration of the budget ; agricultural supports ; modification of the tax structure ; and public works. We shall not hesitate to use any or all of these weapons as the situation may require The Current Situation The year just closed was very prosperous with record output widely distributed incomes very little unemployment and prices stable on the average In the second half of the year there was a slight contraction in business leading to unemployment in some localities. This was due mainly to a decline in spending by businesses for additions to inventory. Other categories of spending notably retail sales have been well sustained Our economic growth is likely to be resumed during the year especially if the Congress strengthens the economic environment by translating into action the Administration 's far-reaching program Basis for Confidence The removal of wage and price controls the stopping of price inflation the development of new products available to consumers and the improved economic condition of the nations of the free world constitute an unusual combination of favorable factors for the future While Federal expenditures were being cut in many directions during the past year outlays on research and development grew and came to 2J4 billion dollars out of a total national expenditure on research of billion dollars. Research has already given us many new industries and products including atomic energy radioactive isotopes electronics helicopters jet engines titanium and heat resistant materials plastics synthetic fibers soil conditioners and many others. Outlays on the building of new knowledge must continue since they are our surest promise of expanding economic opportunities Because of billions of dollars of savings in Government spending made in this Administration 's first year major tax cuts went into effect on January More than billion dollars of tax savings are now being left with the American people to increase their purchasing power this year. More will rv be released to taxpayers as rapidly as additional savings in Government expenses are in sight Also favorable to the maintenance of high consumer expenditures growing out of high personal incomes is our wide diffusion of wealth and incomes and the strong urge of Americans to improve their living standards Expenditure plans of American business for plant and equipment constitute a powerful support for economic activity Despite the record volume of home building in recent years there is still a good market for housing in this country. Vacancies in our cities with few exceptions are below the level necessary for a healthy competitive market A continued rise in State and local expenditures may be expected. There is still in most parts of the country a vast backlog of needed schools highways hospitals and sewer water and other facilities. Federal expenditures will remain a significant sustaining factor in the economy Our financial institutions are fully capable of meeting all reasonable credit demands and are in condition to withstand successfully any strains to which they may be exposed Measures to Strengthen the Economy To protect and promote economic stability we should take bold steps by modernizing unemployment insurance ; by broadening the base and benefits of old-age insurance ; by permitting a longer " carry-back " of losses for tax purposes ; by granting broad discretionary authority to the Executive to alter within limits and appropriate to changing circumstances the terms of governmentally insured loans and mortgages ; by establishing a secondary home mortgage market ; and by making improvements in the planning of public works programs To stimulate the expansive power of individual enterprise we should take action by revising the tax laws so as to increase incentives and to remove certain impediments to enterprise especially of small business ; by improving credit facilities for home building modernization and urban rehabilitation ; by strengthening the highway system ; and by facilitating the adjustments of agriculture to current conditions of demand and technology Conclusion Employment in January is somewhat lower than in January There seems to be a connection between this fact and the fact that in January we were still fighting in Korea and are not doing so today. We can make the transition to a period of reduced mobilization without serious interruption in our economic growth. We can have in this country and in the free world a prosperity based on peace There is much that justifies confidence in the future. The Government will do its full part to help realize the promise of that future in its program to encourage an expanding and dynamic economy DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER CONTENTS PART I. Introduction CPIAPTER ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN ECONOMIC PROGRESS The Importance of Progress Conditions of Progress The Tasks Ahead Page PART II. Economic Review of CHAPTER PERFORMANCE OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY Broad Characteristics of Recent Years The Nation 's Output and Its Disposition The Minor Contraction of Recent Months Analysis of the Turn During the Year Credit and Monetary Developments Prices at Wholesale and Retail Wage Movements Corporate Profits Farm Income and Expenditure International Economic Transactions Summary CHAPTER GOVERNMENTAL POLICY IN A YEAR OF ECONOMIC CHANGE Preventing Inflation Controlling the Readjustment Flexibility in Credit and Fiscal Policies Aiding Agriculture Looking Ahead Fostering Individual Enterprise International Economic Policy The Federal Budget CHAPTER APPRAISAL OF THE CURRENT ECONOMIC SITUATION. Plant and Equipment Expenditures Housing Consumer Expenditures Government Expenditures The Condition of Agriculture International Developments Basis for Confidence Need for Economic Preparedness vn PART III. Toward a Stronger Economy CHAPTER PATHWAYS TO STRENGTH CHAPTER REFORMING THE TAX STRUCTURE Greater Equity to Consumers Encouragement of Enterprise and Employment Increasing Economic Stability Paths of Future ' Reform CHAPTER GOVERNMENTAL AIDS TO HOUSING AND FINANCE Flexibility in Loan Insurance Terms Modernization of Existing Houses Neighborhood Rehabilitation Regulations Governing Housing Credit Aids Secondary Mortgage Market Facilities Need for Further Study CHAPTER AGRICULTURE IN AN EXPANDING ECONOMY Major Agricultural Problems Proposed Agricultural Legislation Matters for Further'Study CHAPTER SOCIAL INSURANCE AND THE MINIMUM WAGE Federal-State Unemployment Insurance System Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance System Low Incomes and the Minimum Wage CHAPTER PLANNING OF PUBLIC WORKS Role of Public Works Need for Public Works Advance Planning of Public Works Community Action to Regularize Employment CHAPTER ECONOMIC RELATIONS WITH OTHER COUNTRIES.. Progress Toward a Free ) World Economy Domestic Economic Stability Reduction of International Barriers CHAPTER DEALING WITH ECONOMIC INSTABILITY Need for Constant Vigilance and Flexibility Instrumentalities of Policy Actions in Case of Need The Basis for Progress > -e vm Page ill Ill APPENDIXES APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. EMPLOYMENT ACT OF AS AMENDED AND RELATED LAWS APPENDIX G. REORGANIZATION PLAN No. OF APPENDIX D. GOVERNMENT FINANCES APPENDIX E. STATISTICS OF UNEMPLOYMENT APPENDIX F. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURES APPENDIX G. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION IX Page Part I INTRODUCTION Chapter Role of Government in Economic Progress GREAT OPPORTUNITY lies before the American people. The United States is in a position immediately to undertake a sustained improvement in national living standards. During World War II the needs of the military services and the contributions that this Nation made to the military efforts of its allies naturally took precedence over all other claims on the economy. The years that followed the war were devoted in the main to meeting demands that had been postponed during the conflict and the preceding years of depression. The war in Korea once more assigned first priority to military needs. Today and we believe tomorrow this emphasis is no longer as pressing. Our approach to a position of military preparedness now makes it possible to turn the productive potentialities of the economy increasingly to peaceful purposes. This is a welcome opportunity. To help our people seize it the Federal Government must continue to meet successfully the challenging problems of economic transition from war and inflation to peace and monetary stability Our economic goal is an increasing national income shared equitably among those who contribute to its growth and realized in dollars of stable buying power. To achieve this goal the dynamic forces of our society must be fully released. Accordingly Government programs must be designed to help maintain reasonable stability during periods of readjustment and to encourage long-term growth. The mandate of the Congress as set forth in the Employment Act must always be kept before us : " To promote maximum employment production and purchasing power in a manner calculated to foster and promote competitive enterprise and the general welfare. " This Report sets forth the main lines along which the Federal Government proposes to move toward these ends A THE IMPORTANCE OF PROGRESS A high and sustained rate of economic growth is necessary to the welfare if not to the survival of America and the free world. The United States is now engaged and must be for some time to come in an effort to build security forces adequate to deter and to strike back at aggression These security-building efforts and the parallel efforts to raise the defense potentials and the living standards of friendly peoples in other countries are as much dependent on our industrial production as is the conduct of war itself. Success in them will depend in large part on the amount by which our national output is increased Economic progress offers more than security against aggression. An increasing national income with the purchasing power of the dollar maintained at a steady level will make it easier to move against substandard living. American living standards on the average are higher today than ever before and the diffusion of prosperity is wider. Yet for certain groups consumption is much below the level it should reach. The elimination of substandard living is a goal that can be approximated within the lifetime of many of us if the economy continues to grow rapidly The prospect of a steadily rising standard of living is furthermore the best assurance of harmonious social and economic adjustments. There can be no real and lasting harmony in a nation in which competing groups and interests seek to divide a constant or a shrinking national output. A general improvement in incomes makes it easier to reconcile conflicting claims releasing everyone 's efforts to constructive ends For all these reasons it is essential that measures be taken by the Government to promote economic progress. In order to move effectively however it is necessary to have clearly in mind the conditions on which rapid progress in our own country and age depends CONDITIONS OF PROGRESS There is of course no formula that will guarantee economic progress Progress is to a very considerable degree the product of a people 's culture or " way of life " which includes such intangible and spiritual qualities as their religious ideals belief in personal dignity faith in self-improvement capacity for cooperation and receptiveness to change. Progress can be nurtured by wise public policy just as it can be impeded by careless or shortsighted policy. Above all things public policy should recognize that the atmosphere in which people pursue their productive activities is as important to progress as the physical resources that they employ Individual freedom Our history provides abundant proof that a basic condition of economic progress is an environment in which the individual can within wide limits pursue his interests according to his own lights. American culture is an expression of economic as well as political freedom and of the interdependence of the two. Traditionally our Government has sought to create and maintain a democracy of opportunity in which individuals have the general freedom and the specific opportunities to work to spend to save and to invest and the incentive to pursue these opportunities to the fullest extent This concept of the role of Government has not been made obsolete by the events of the last few decades. Two world wars and a world-wide depression brought a continued broadening of the scope of governmental activities but this fact does not justify the oft-made assumption that the range of Federal activities must continue to grow Adequate incentives It must be recognized however that the demands of modern life and the unsettled state of the world require a much larger role for Government and a much higher level of taxation than suited earlier generations. For this very reason Government must exercise great care to shape its policies so as to strengthen economic incentives rather than to chill or frustrate them as has happened so often in the world 's history. Reasonable assurance must be given that efforts will be fairly rewarded. The wage earner must know that greater exertion and improvements in his skill and capacity will earn him more pay. The saver must be assured of a fair return for contributing capital to the productive process. Equally the risk-taking investor must have an assurance of adequate rewards for successful ventures. In a society which fails to provide these assurances the urge to greater effort is enfeebled capital does not grow rapidly and the economy may stagnate Effective competition Open markets and effective competition are the means of channeling productive efforts toward social purposes in a private enterprise system Markets must be kept free from restraints that discourage the innovator for the benefit of established firms or products. Open markets provide ladders of opportunity up which the newcomer may climb. Competition must be allowed to perform its traditional role of regulator and energizer to direct our economic resources into those lines which most accurately meet the needs or tastes of consumers. This role of competitive markets is as basic to the proper functioning of our economic order as the secret ballot is to our political democracy. Government has a vital responsibility in this area immensely complicated by large aggregations of capital under single management and large organizations of labor But it is clear that size alone does not preclude effective competition Cases abound in which competition among large firms turning out similar products seeking steadily to improve them or to reduce the cost of making them has speeded technical progress and price reduction to the consumer Government must nevertheless remain alert to the dangers of monopoly and it must continue to challenge through the antitrust laws any outcropping of monopoly power. It must practice vigilance constantly to preserve and strengthen competition Savings and capital formation Another condition of economic progress in our society is an ample supply of savings for on this depends the growth of real capital. It is essential that economic policy give encouragement to thrift. There is no place for a fear of thrift in a dynamic economy. Perhaps no greater contribution can be made by Government to the encouragement of thrift and thus to growth of the stock of capital than to provide assurance that a dollar saved today will not go to waste through inflation of prices tomorrow Also required is a supply of money in keeping with the increase in the physical volume of production and trade. Such a growing money supply is necessary to prevent the development of deflationary pressures to maintain equity values and to keep the purchasing power of the dollar reasonably stable But savings will go to waste from the viewpoint of society unless they are readily transformed into productive investment. This means that the economy must have an efficient competitive financial system capable of channeling funds risk capital as well as borrowed funds into those lines in which they appear likely to be most productive Research and development A fundamental condition of economic progress is a growing fund of scientific and technological knowledge. From such knowledge come opportunities for investment and new industries based upon the development of new materials and products more efficient processes and the improvement of old products. Scientific research and development have created an almost endless roster of new industries and products including atomic energy radioactive isotopes electronics helicopters jet engines titanium and heat resistant materials plastics synthetic fibers soil conditioners hybrid seeds and a host of others. During the outlays on scientific research and development by industry institutions of learning nonprofit foundations and Government rose to the total of about billion dollars Progressive public policy requires that these activities be given strong encouragement Maintenance of economic stability Under a competitive enterprise system which gives freedom to individual initiative and encouragement to technological change and innovation the economy can not of course be absolutely stable. Inevitably economic progress is to some degree uneven. Even when the economy as a whole advances some industries go ahead more rapidly than others and some may decline. The practical importance of this fact for public policy is that it indicates a need for fluidity and resilience in the economic system The desirable goal of stability in the general level of prices must not be interpreted to mean that every individual price should remain constant On the contrary it is essential to economic progress that individual prices be flexible so that resources may be shifted from uses in which rewards of labor management and capital are low to uses in which rewards are high Industries benefiting from advances in technology or shifts in demand will offer expanding opportunities for employment while others that have lost favor with the public will provide fewer jobs. The proper role of Government is not to resist adjustment to change but rather to foster conditions under which adjustment can be accomplished with a minimum of hardship or difficulty The most important of the conditions favorable to effective adjustment is a reasonable measure of stability in the over-all level of employment and incomes. Letdowns in industrial activity were not so intolerable a bar to economic progress as long as a large and expanding agriculture offered temporary refuge to the unemployed. But agriculture today forms a smaller part of the total economy and having become more commercialized is also subject to the movement of business in general. As a result of the catastrophic depression of the thirties minor dips in the curve of business such as an earlier generation passed by without notice now cause concern in our shops and homes. Unless the Government is prepared and willing to use its vast powers to help maintain employment and purchasing power even a minor readjustment may be converted into a spiralling contraction. Recognizing the changed character of our age its anxiety about business fluctuations and the political as well as economic difficulties that would come to the American people through a business depression both parties wisely united in the Congress to enact the Employment Act of which pledged the Federal Government to use its power to help keep the economy on an even keel Floor of individual security Still another condition of economic progress in our times is a floor of security for the individual and it is incumbent on Government to help to establish it. A dynamic urbanized economy poses numerous hazards for the individual. No longer is free land on the Western frontier available to those who want to make a fresh start. The spread of private pension and insurance plans and social security programs in recent years has strengthened the forces of economic growth by helping to relieve individuals from the anxieties attaching to sickness accident unemployment and old age A further strengthening of social insurance is highly desirable. Yet it must be kept in mind that the individual has a responsibility to provide as far as he can for his own security ^ and that Government can make its greatest contribution to the welfare of individuals by fostering improvements in their productivity World community of free nations Finally it must be noted that economic progress in our country is tied closely to the progress of the rest of the world. The world is no less interdependent economically than politically. Just as Americans have no chance to enjoy security from aggression while aggression is being committed against other free nations so also they can not make maximum progress if other nations suffer economic stagnation or decline. A program for promoting economic progress in America must therefore provide for an extension and strengthening of economic ties with the rest of the world An accelerated flow of goods and of capital across national boundaries would contribute to economic progress everywhere THE TASKS AHEAD These then are the conditions of economic progress in our country and in our times. To forge ahead as our Nation can the Government must foster competitive enterprise strengthen economic incentives and promote scientific and technological knowledge. It must use its vast powers to help protect the stability of the purchasing power of money to help maintain employment at a high level and to help provide a floor of security for the individual. It must not only join with other nations but should be prepared to lead them in solving the problems of international trade and currencies To deal with these difficult tasks in a systematic manner steps were taken in the last year to re-examine the policies of the Federal Government affecting economic growth and stability. The Council of Economic Advisers was reconstituted. The Government launched special inquiries into the problems of agriculture housing foreign economic policy and the relations between the Federal and State and local governments. Furthermore all agencies and departments of the Executive Branch were instructed in studying the problems coming within their purview to keep the broad objective of stable economic growth prominently in mind. Some of the initial recommendations relating to this objective are set forth in this Report. But before turning to recommendations of policy it is well to review economic developments during the past year to note how the Government has dealt with them and to analyze the current position of our economy and its prospects Part II ECONOMIC REVIEW OF Chapter Performance of the American Economy T HE PAST YEAR was marked throughout most of the free world by new advances in production general price stability salutary readjustment of the international pattern of trade and payments and further removal of the emergency controls instituted during World War II and its aftermath. In the United States and Western Europe effective monetary policies have been established. Domestic price controls and rationing have disappeared almost everywhere. In nearly all countries monetary inflation has been stopped and restrictions on foreign trade relaxed. The gold and dollar reserves of the free world outside the United States have increased sharply. Further liberalization of international trade and unrestricted convertibility of currencies have become subjects of serious and lively discussion Such a conjunction of favorable developments has not existed for some years. But the dislocations wrought by war and inflation have not yet vanished and they are likely to continue to harass the world for some time The upsurge of production and employment which has been sustained with but brief interruptions in the United States for about a dozen years continued in New records were established in industrial activity employment and the disbursement of incomes. Unemployment reached the lowest level of any peace-time year in recent decades. The average level of prices was remarkably steady. The fruits of expanding production and enterprise were shared widely. Perhaps never before in their history have the American people come closer to realizing the ideal of high and expanding employment without price inflation than in But some sections of industry notably farming failed to participate in the widespread prosperity. The index of consumer prices inched a little higher in spite of some decline in food prices. And economic activity taken as a whole receded somewhat toward the close of the year BROAD CHARACTERISTICS OF RECENT YEARS How far and in what general directions the American economy has traveled in recent years is attested by the summary table in Appendix G Between and commodity prices wages and taxes increased sharply. The gross national product expressed in current dollars which includes these inflated price elements and taxes as well as physical outputs quadrupled. But a considerable expansion occurred also in the real output and over-all efficiency of the economy. While population rose percent and total employment percent unemployment dropped percent and the gross national product ( adjusted for changes in the price level ) increased percent. Practically all major branches of industry shared in the advance. Agricultural output rose percent mining production percent construction percent manufacturing output percent and electric power production percent Over much of the period since the course of external events has propelled or twisted the Nation 's economic life. First came a protracted war which severely tested our industrial strength piled up a huge Federal debt wiped out unemployment and swelled private incomes that could not be easily spent. The end of the war brought military demobilization and a rush by consumers and business firms to make good their accumulated shortages. To the astonishment of many still under the spell of the theories of economic maturity that darkened the thirties the expansion of private spending quickly compensated for the sharp decline of governmental expenditure. Then came the extension of Marshall Plan aid to foreign countries and more recently the Korean problem and the superimposition of a huge defense program on an expanding civilian economy. While these events together with the great inflation of credit and prices that followed in their path dominated public attention powerful forces of growth were quietly gathering strength within the economy expressed in the upsurge of population the onrush of technology the innovations of finance the intensified pace of business competition the rapid obsolescence of business plant and equipment the industrialization of the South the rapid development of the West the widening of the middle class the diffusion of home ownership and the development of mass markets for a host of new consumer goods. ( See Table ) The history of recent years has disclosed the remarkable power of the American people to adjust to unsettling influences and to operate under burdensome governmental restraints. The lull in the contraction in and the slight dips in and again in were by and large pauses of an expanding economy seeking as it must from time to time to TABLE Output of New Products Year Room air conditioning units Television sets Waste Freezers Clothes farm food and dryers disposals home W r ) Synthetic Synthetic fibers deterother gents than ( soap ) rayon Millions of pounds Thousands of units I960 * Frozen foods Not available * Estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Department of Agriculture Tariff Commission National Electrical Manufacturers Association Radio-Television Manufacturers Association and Textile Organization bring its tools or inventories into closer adjustment with what it sells and how much it sells. The resourcefulness of individual enterprise and the new horizons that have recently opened up for the consumer will serve our economy well in the more normal environment that it may be hoped will be ours in the years ahead THE NATION 'S OUTPUT AND ITS DISPOSITION The gross national product which expresses the market value of all the goods produced and services rendered increased from billion dollars in to billion in or percent. Since prices rose a little between the two years the expansion of physical output was percent ( see Chart ) The largest advances were made by durable goods manufactures which in the aggregate rose percent ; the output of nondurable manufactures increased percent and of minerals percent. ( See Tables and ) The steel industry completed a record year turning out million tons of ingots and castings which was million more than in and million more than in when a strike severely curtailed output. The automobile industry produced more than million passenger cars and million trucks a total of million units the highest since when million units were produced. The output of major household appliances and instruments was substantially above the level but the volume of the major lines television sets refrigerators washing machines cooking stoves was below the record totals. Furthermore some branches of the capital goods industry notably the output of farm machinery including tractors certain types of industrial machinery machine tools and office machines experienced a decline from their level in The general increase of the Nation 's output in was achieved partly through additions to employment partly through gains in productivity The average length of the work week in manufacturing for example was about the same in as in while the number employed was percent larger ; but output was percent larger. Productivity increased also in TABLE Changes in Physical Output Type of output Percentage change to i Gross national product constant prices. Industrial production : total Agricultural production Electric power New construction constant prices Freight carloadings i Estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Department of A griculture Department of Commerce Federal Power Commission Interstate Commerce Commission and Board of Governors of the Federal Keserve System TABLE Changes in Industrial Production Percentage change = Industryjjroup Year * Industrial production : total July July to to De1953 cember Decem1953 ber * Durable manufactures : total _ Primary metals Metal fabricating : total _ Fabricated metal products Electrical machinery Nonelectrical machinery. Transportation equipment _ _ ^ _ ^ _ T Instruments and ordnance Clay glass and lumber products Furniture and miscellaneous manufactures... Nondurable manufactures : total Textile and apparel Rubber and leather products Paper and printing ._ Chemicals and petroleum products Foods beverages and tobacco Manufactures ^ total ._ Minerals i Monthly data are seasonally adjusted ' Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System agriculture and some other branches of production. Since the outlays for new plant and equipment by American business firms excluding agriculture have totaled over billion dollars. This enormous expenditure for the expansion and modernization of productive facilities provided the basis for the large increase in output of the Nation 's factories mines and construction yards The increased output of generated a larger flow of incomes to individuals corporations and the several levels of government. The sum of personal incomes increased from billion dollars in to billion in with both workers and investors sharing in the increase. On a percentage basis the share of total personal income received by investors ( that is dividends interest and net rentals ) was percent in or virtually the same as in other recent years while the share received by workers for wages or salaries continued to increase and reached close to percent. The income of proprietors declined both in dollars and relatively to other groups very largely a reflection of the decline in farmers ' incomes ( See Table ) Since direct taxes paid by individuals in were billion dollars or billion more than in the disposable personal income rose from billion dollars in to billion in or 5J4 percent. This rate of increase was apparently exceeded by corporate profits whether before or after taxes. Of course the several levels of government derived revenue from excises and other sources as well as from income tax receipts. They in turn transferred a portion of their massive receipts to CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT CURRENT AND CONSTANT DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS INDEX. = CURRENT DOLLARS " ( Left Scole ) IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATORS ( Right Scale ) ; ONSTANT ( ) DOLLARS ( Left Scale ) too I I I I I960 SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS individuals in the form of subsidies pensions interest on debt or other payments not directly related to production. The income and expenditure accounts of the Government in recent years are set out in Appendix D The bulk of the Nation 's huge output in passed into the hands of consumers who spent billion dollars on goods and services exclusive of new residential structures which cost ( apart from farm residences ) another billion dollars. Government took a large slice of the Nation 's output Federal purchases of goods and services amounting to billion dollars and State and local purchases to billion. Business firms acquired new plant and equipment costing close to billion dollars and at the same time added billion dollars ' worth of inventories. These takings amounted in all to billion dollars. The excess over the gross national product of billion dollars represents a net deficit of American claims on foreign countries. Table shows that the relative disposition of the gross national product among consumers business firms and the Government was nearly the same in as in But whereas the increment of the gross national product between and was devoted largely to governmental use the expansion of the defense program which has dominated governmental outlays of late virtually ceased by The increment of the gross national product between and was devoted principally to civilian uses TABLE Percentage Distribution of Personal Income [ Percent ] Labor income and transfer payments Total personal income Total Period i Investment income Proprietors ' Wage Other Trans- income and fer Total labor salary income payments receipts ' Rents Dividends Interest i Estimates based on incomplete'data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE Percentage Distribution of Gross National Product Among Major Components [ Percent ] Year Personal Gross Total consump- private gross tion national expendi- domestic investproduct ture ment Government purchases of goods and services Total i National security Other Net foreign investment _ * Government sales have been subtracted from total Government purchases but not from the components shown in : ,this table. See Appendix Table G-l for amounts of Government sales See Appendix Table G-l footnote for items included Expenditures by the Federal Government for other than national security plus expenditures by State and local governments Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers CHART PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES BY MAJOR CATEGORIES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS7 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS NONDURABLE GOODS \ I * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES S O U R C E S : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES FOR SELECTED GOODS AND SERVICES B I L L I O N S OF DOLLARS * I i I I I BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * i I I i I i I i i i I i i i NONDURABLE GOODS FOOD ( EXCLUDING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ) OTHER NONDURABLES ^ V _ ^ ^ ^ CLOTHING AND SHOES I i i I SERVICES OTHER SERVICES ORATION HOUSEHOLD OPERATION K I L * SEASONALLY I I I i ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The manner in which consumers have utilized their disposable income is shown for a span of years in Table The effects of World War II and of the Korean war on consumer spending and saving stand out clearly So too do recent trends in consumer buying habits and attitudes. ( See Charts and ) Services have taken an increasing share of the consumer 's dollar since largely because housing has gradually moved toward TABLE Percentage Distribution of Disposable Personal Income [ Percent ] Less : Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal Total income Year Durable goods Food ' Clothing and shoes Other Housing Other Nondurable goods Services Equa Personal saving -_- _ i Excludes alcoholic beverages * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Councillor Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) its former place in consumer budgets. Even so expenditure on services was only percent of disposable income in in contrast to percent in Expenditure on food has not shown a definite trend in relation to income since the war but it has been running well above the prewar level percent of disposable income in in contrast to percent in and percent in Expenditure for clothing and shoes on the other hand has taken a diminishing part of income percent in percent in then a continuous decline to percent in Relative spending on other nondurables has likewise diminished although gasoline and oil are outstanding exceptions. The proportion of income spent on durable goods has been very irregular since the war but it has been running considerably higher than in prewar years. The recent shifts in consumer spending are worth noting with some care because they facilitate understanding of the economic changes within the past year to which we now turn THE MINOR CONTRACTION OF RECENT MONTHS At the beginning of the economy advanced rapidly but not without some signs of impending change. The real income of farmers which had started to fall during was continuing to shrink. Stock prices began drifting downward after the turn of the year. The average length of the workweek in manufacturing ( adjusted for seasonal variations ) started to decline in the spring. So too did the orders for durable goods received by manufacturers. Retail trade continued on an impressive scale but failed to expand while consumer debt and business inventories kept rising. Business failures while relatively few increased in number and average size. Interest rates rose at an accelerated rate as they usually do toward the close of a general business expansion. These and other developments were closely watched by the Government and they influenced public policy as the next chapter will describe. True some decline from the hectic pace of extensive overtime operations might well prove salutary in the long run. But it was important that the transition if there was to be one be carried through without shock and that the readjustment be moderate and not cumulate. The once fashionable theory that a sharp liquidation was good for the economy could not be trusted As the year wore on the economy continued to be prosperous but underwent some contraction the extent of which may be judged from movements of broad composites of economic activity. Thus the gross national product reached its highest volume during the second quarter then fell percent by the fourth quarter. Personal incomes proved steadier continuing to rise until the third quarter then dropped percent in the last quarter. On a monthly basis personal incomes reached a peak in July and declined percent by the year 's end. Nonagricultural employment adjusted for seasonal variations as are the preceding series fell by million or percent after reaching a peak in July. Unemployment which reached a low of million or percent of the civilian labor force in October rose to percent in December. ( See Chart and Appendix E. ) Industrial production reached a crest between May and July and then declined percent in the following months. On the average commodity prices changed very little. The index of wholesale prices was at its highest point of the year in September and in December was only percent lower. The index of consumer prices in turn reached its highest value in October and fell a mere percent by December. The precise movements of several of these indicators of the condition of the economy are displayed in Chart Of course broad composites fail to convey the degree to which the decline has been diffused over the economic system. It is clear however from the behavior of the components of these indexes that a large portion of the economy was undergoing readjustment toward the close of the year and some evidence to this effect is presented in Table ANALYSIS OF THE TURN DURING THE YEAR The immediate cause of the contraction which became visible after midyear was an imbalance between production and sales that developed earlier in the year. After the settlement of the steel strike on July the advance of production was swift especially in the durable goods industries Within a month the steel industry was operating at over million tons per week partly to meet the large demand for current use partly to enable fabricators and dealers to rebuild their stocks. The steel-using industries whose operations had been seriously affected by the strike followed suit Business inventories especially those held by makers and sellers of consumer durables were generally low in the sense that businessmen sought to expand them. Even before the steel strike inventories of civilian goods had been much reduced from their embarrassing peaks. Of course the strike led to further depletion of stocks. On a wide front therefore producers now faced a need of meeting the requirements of distributors for restocking as well as for larger sales to customers whose incomes and borrowing propensity were both high and rising. And if conditions appeared favorable on the side of demand they were also satisfactory on the side of supply. Materials were more readily available than a few months earlier and the relaxation of governmental restrictions on their use permitted a rising volume of output particularly of automobiles. Hence production moved forward rapidly. Employment expanded hours of work lengthened hourly earnings rose and weekly earnings rose faster still. With incomes rising consumer expenditures expanded briskly. Indeed from the fall of through the first half of the increments of consumer spending which were being bolstered by growing indebtedness exceeded the increments of disposable personal income. Private investment expenditure and Government spending propped by expanded borrowing added to the rising monetary demand Nevertheless production and sales gradually fell out of balance in the early months of The reason was partly that business requirements for additions to their inventories had been fairly well met by the beginning of the year when it became clear that quicker deliveries could be counted on. The reason was partly that while demand was high business firms had apparently expected it to be higher still. The reason was also that after the turn of the year consumer spending turned more in the direction of services than of commodities. ( See Chart ) The gap that opened up early in between purchases at retail stores and consumer incomes though not between consumer spendings of all types and their incomes is shown by Chart Since personal income rose with production while retail sales moved sluggishly inventories soon piled up in all hands. ( See Charts and ) The annual rate of nonfarm inventory investment rose from billion dollars in the first quarter of to billion in the second quarter with the highest rate of accumulation concentrated in a few major durable goods industries motor vehicles other transportation equipment and primary metals The sluggishness of retail sales in the early months of together with excessively sanguine production schedules brought about a condition that could not long continue. The reshaping of the defense program also affected inventories which here and there became redundant in relation to the reduced military production rates in prospect. By mid-year manufacturers in numerous industries were curtailing operations so as to bring output and inventories into better adjustment with their orders and sales First overtime was reduced or eliminated then some workers were laid off. Meanwhile the rise in hourly earnings was checked and average weekly earnings stopped rising. But the declines in production were generally moderate and there were few signs of distress selling. In all manufacturing employment ( adjusted for seasonal ) decreased by about between June and December with percent of the decrease occurring in the durable goods sector. The decrease in manufacturing employment was nearly as large as the decrease in total nonagricultural employment since other areas of employment construction wholesale and retail trade transportation and so on experienced little change in the aggregate ( See Chart ) Basic wage rates in these fields of employment also continued in general to move upward. This fact combined with fairly stable over-all employment goes far to explain the approximate steadiness of personal income in the second half of The contraction since last June or July has thus far been largely in the nature of an inventory adjustment as Chart and Table indicate. Apart from the reduced expenditure by business firms on additions to their inventories total expenditure has been nearly unchanged since mid-year. Further the major categories of final expenditure have themselves remained remarkably stable. There have been shifts within the total of consumer expenditure but little change in the total itself. Similarly there have been shifts within the total of governmental expenditures with Federal outlays declining since the second quarter and State and local outlays increasing but again approximate stability in the whole. There apparently was a very slight dip in consumer spending as well as in business outlays on fixed capital investment toward the end of the year. However other categories of final expenditure offset these diminutive declines. The sum of final expenditure expressed as an annual rate which was billion dollars in the second quarter and billion in the third came to billion in the fourth. But the figures for the last quarter are still uncertain and such as they are indicate an inventory readjustment in the second half of and little else Thus far the decline of inventory additions has been largely a corrective movement designed to bring production into better balance with sales. It appears from the information at hand that apart from the defense-goods industries the inventory adjustments have been largely responses to current sales rather than protective movements geared to unfavorable forecasts of future sales. It is well to recognize however that an inventory readjustment can affect other types of spending and communicate itself to the stream of business and consumer spending as a whole. The next chapter will consider this possibility at some length CHART LABOR FORCE MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * TOTAL LABOR FORCE ARMED FORCES * UNEMPLOYMENT INONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT : m mill. tiiiil m.l.f mill n u I n j n I n m h i rn I n : m i n ml tunbtitjijM.Ithiu i \ \ ti * PERCENT PERCENT li mull inn i i i i i i i n * UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 284874M54r iiinli in I960 in CHART EMPLOYMENT IN NONAGRICULTURAL ESTABLISHMENTS MILLIONS OF PERSONS MILLIONS OF PERSONS ' ' S S S S S S S/S/S S S S S//S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S S/S WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TRADED I960 SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART INDICATORS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY INDEX = INDEX = INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION X no MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT * ( BLS-FRB ) N r .XT ^ * J ' v ^ * * t ^ v ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ // * " / ,J X ^ ' OO M s ^ " ^ \ s ^ ^ / X I..-C " * " * * s ^ * l ^ v/ yX X W NONAGRICULTURAL > .<P Jr EMPLOYMENT * * * * % * * * >f ( BLS-FRB ) \ J \ J Oft f Is ^ ^ / V i i i i i i ii1 1i it i i i i i i i i ii i i i i i t i i i i WHOLESALE PRICES ^ v ^ ' CONSUMER PRICES i t i i i M I i ii n i i i ' MUM * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES AND RETAIL SALES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( LEFT SCALE ) V ^ ^ [ ^ * ~ ; t ^ ~ V- \ ^ ^ EXPENDITURES ^ V ^ ( LEFT SC/ * * * S ~ ~ r >V r CONSUMPTION >> ^ y J S/lS " * ^ ^ / ' 'PERSONAL J ^ +s \ \ j ' * v.... .-v ' ' A/ ' v y ! ^ TOTAL RETAIL SALES ( RIGHT SCALE ) * / : /a * * * " * * * ^ ^ /- " ? ^ > * J fV_>V ^ r ^ ^ \ * f * " * ^ } j * * % * * / / SALES OF NONDURABLE GOODS STOR ES ' ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ -s ~ s u ^ ^ / / _ % ' v>iv % * * * * % ' i ' \ \ * % 9t 'v ^ X fmillLU.LL ! uLi i I [ JJ /V \ / " ] LJ ' ! I ! ! ! f ) ' I ! ! ' I f i ! I 1I * SEASONALLY AOJUSTfcD A N N U A L RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM,AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS < ? \ ^ SALES OF DURABLE GOODS STOREIS * i949 * i'i M i.7> CHART RETAIL INVENTORIES AND SALES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED INVENTORIES SALES il I I I I I I I Ill I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Ii I I I I I I I II0 RATIO RATIO -J >- nTI I I I I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I | ? A DATA BEGINNING JANUARY NOT COMPARABLE WITH DATA FOR EARLIER PERIODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART WHOLESALE INVENTORIES AND SALES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS RATIO RATIO INVENTORY/SALES RATIO -J.80 .80<h i i iI I960 SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE t it t iIiiii t fn I iI CHART MANUFACTURERS ' INVENTORIES AND SALES BILLtONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED XT INVENTORIES i i i Iii i i i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE i ii i I it < TABLE Gross National Product or Expenditure During [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual'rates ] Expenditure group Gross national product : total. First quarter _ Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services : total Federal _ _ State and local ___ ._ _ Gross private fixed investment : total New construction _ Producers ' durable equipment _ Personal consumption expenditures : total Durable goods __ Nondurable goods Services Third quarter __ Change in business inventories Final expenditures * total Second quarter Fourth quarter J i Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers f NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add ^ to ^ totals because of rounding [ Source : Department of Commerce ( except ~ as ~ noted ) CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT AND INVENTORY CHANGE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * INVENTORY CHANGE CROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT V FINAL EXPENDITURES ol I I I I I I I I I I I I M l i l l I I I I I I * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS It is also important to recognize the broad teaching of history that in the course of a protracted economic expansion in which monetary inflation has played a large role some distorting speculative movements and some misallocations of resources are bound to develop. An economy that has reached a point where it must operate extensively on an overtime basis as ours did in can not easily increase physical output but can very readily diminish it. Such an economy is sensitive even to minor disturbances especially when inflation is kept in check as it was during the first half of Unfavorable cost-price relations in some sectors of the economy doubtless contributed to the imbalance between production and sales that developed in the early months of the year. The cost-price " squeeze " in agriculture of which much has been heard recently continued in as Chart shows. A similar situation developed in the lead and zinc industries as Chart indicates and the list of such cases could be lengthened. It does not seem however that unprofitable business situations had developed on any scale by the middle of Further one of the outstanding features CHART PRICES RECEIVED AND PAID BY FARMERS INDEX I9IO-I4 IOO INDEX 1910-I4 I i t. i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE of the latest phase of the expansion since has been its comparative freedom from speculation. In recent years the behavior of security markets has been rather subdued. And while there was a strong speculative surge in commodities right after the invasion of Korea it had spent itself before CHART COSTS AND PRICES LEAD AND ZINC INDUSTRIES INDEX = INDEX WHOLESALE PRICE OF MATERIALS SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT BOUGHT I960 SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND AMERICAN METAL MARKET CO CREDIT AND MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS The changing pace of general business activity during the past year was closely reflected in developments in the sphere of money and credit. The demand for all kinds of credit which had been strong in the second half of continued to be active in the first half of After the removal of Regulation W in May consumer instalment credit increased by the record amount of billion dollars in the year ended June A huge increase occurred also in long-term corporate debt State and local debt and real-estate mortgage debt. Business loans at banks increased vigorously in the closing months of and declined less than seasonally in the first half of An exceptionally high rate of saving made it possible to carry through this vast expansion of credit despite a policy of monetary restraint by the Federal Reserve System but not without a rise of interest rates which was sharp after mid-April. ( See Chart ) A long-term * percent Treasury bond announced in April first went to a premium then broke par in May. The volume of new private flotations continued at a very high level but some difficulties were encountered at that time in marketing securities and placing mortgages By late spring it became clear that credit markets were characterized by excessive tension. With inflationary pressures abating the Federal Reserve System provided additional reserve funds to the commercial banks As it turned out the demand for credit by mortgage borrowers and issuers of corporate State and local securities remained high in the second half of the year. The Federal Government was also a heavy borrower. The increase in consumer credit tapered off however and the increase in business loans at banks was much less than seasonal. Member banks were therefore able to reduce their discounts at the Federal Reserve Banks as CHART MONEY RATES PERCENT PER ANNUM PERCENT PER ANNUM SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART PRIVATELY HELD MONEY SUPPLY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I8Q CURRENCY DEMAND DEPOSITS f TIME DEPOSITS DEMAND DEPOSITS CURRENCY DEMAND DEPOSITS ADJUSTED CURRENCY OUTSIDE BANKS ft ! F rl h M T r | f M ft In t I f f f f m f n n f t SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS well as to expand total loans and investments and to meet a gold outflow and the usual currency drain. By late fall these developments eased the credit market as a whole. Yields on all classes of securities declined especially the short-term rates The increase in total loans and investments of commercial banks was considerably smaller in than in A rather sharp decrease in holdings of Government securities in the first half of the year was approximately offset by purchases in the second half. The increase in bank loans was also smaller than in For the year as a whole the increase in demand deposits and currency in the hands of the public was considerably less than while the increase in time deposits was about the same as in ( See Charts and ) CHART BANK LOANS AND INVESTMENTS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TOTAL ( ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS ) INVESTMENT IN U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES BANK LOANS ; ! ..t. * * ...<... ! J * t. i. f J..Y.3.J.. t j END OF MONTH SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS PRICES AT WHOLESALE AND RETAIL The differential between the costs of industrial raw materials and prices of finished industrial commodities which narrowed ominously soon after the invasion of Korea continued to widen in In general industrial prices rose somewhat during On the other hand the prices of indus- trial raw materials and farm products ( whose decline started early in ) continued to fall though at an irregular and much reduced pace. The over-all index of wholesale prices covered up these divergent movements and changed very little : it stood at ( = ) in December at in June at in September ( the peak for the year ) and at in December ( See Charts and ) The outstanding development in primary markets during the year was the decline in the prices of the major farm products. Record supplies and sharply curtailed exports more than offset the supporting influence of a strong domestic demand. In mid-December grower prices of farm products averaged percent below prices a year earlier. Beef cattle prices were down nearly a fourth as the huge slaughter induced partly by the drought moved into consumer markets. Potato prices were less than one-half of the December level. Price declines were registered for most of the grains cotton oil seeds and milk and poultry products. In mid-December prices CHART WHOLESALE PRICES RAW AND FINISHED GOODS INDEX I947-49 ! INDEX I4O SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM BASED ON DATA FROM DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART WHOLESALE PRICES FARM AND INDUSTRIAL INDEX = I N D E X a OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL ) I -sw/A FARM PRODUCTS k v I I I I I I I I 1I I I960 I I I III I I II SOURCE : D E P A R T M E N T OF LABOR of farm products averaged percent of parity compared with in December The decline in farm prices might have been expected to lead to a fall in the cost of living. This did not happen. Indeed the consumer price index for averaged a trifle above the level. During the index moved within a very narrow range yet it had a slight upward tilt the net increase from December to December was seven-tenths of one percent. Some increase occurred in most major classes of consumer prices except foods which showed a net decline of percent over the year The lack of close parallelism between wholesale and consumer prices is due to various factors. ( See Chart ) In the first place the consumer price index includes such items as housing and other services that have no place in the wholesale price index. In the second place the consumer index reflects a much higher degree of commodity processing than does the wholesale index. In the third place even the prices of identical commodi- ties are ordinarily more sluggish in retail than in wholesale markets. The decline in farm prices of food products is not fully reflected in the prices of foods at retail partly because the processing of raw foodstuffs has been increasing partly because labor and transportation costs have been rising and partly because retailers often set their prices on the basis of what they have actually paid rather than on current wholesale quotations But it is not the behavior of food or apparel prices that explains the slight upward tilt of the consumer price index during the past year. The upward push of the index can be traced largely to three categories rents medical care and transportation ( see Chart ) Rents are and have been for some time in a stage of decontrol with most States and municipalities not seeing fit to continue the controls. Rents moreover are often based on long-term contracts. Prices of medical service are heavily governed by custom rather than market conditions. The prices of transportation services are usually regulated by public service commissions and respond slowly to changes in costs. In short the things that have been sending the con- CHART CONSUMER PRICES ON A POSTWAR BASE INDEX INDEX ( f30 NO SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR sumer price index up relate to markets that are still in process of adjusting to the price revolution of the past ten to fifteen years. ( See Chart ) While the dynamic portion of the price system is no longer showing any over-all increases the more passive portion the part governed by contract custom and governmental regulation is still in process of catching up The notion that an inflation can be stopped all at once is naive. What can be stopped is the injection of new inflationary fuel not the consequences of inflationary fuel already pumped into the system. The fact however that the index of consumer prices rose very little during is an indication that most of the earlier inflationary fuel has already burnt itself out CHART CONSUMER PRICES ON A PREWAR BASE INDEX 1939s INDEX IOO SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR WAGE MOVEMENTS The removal of controls early in February had apparently as little effect on the year 's wage movements as on its price developments. A fairly substantial number of wage increases and changes in fringe benefits that were awaiting official approval were put into effect shortly after controls CHART AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS IN SELECTED INDUSTRIES DOLLARS PER HOUR I960 NOTE : DATA ARE FOR PRODUCTION WORKERS OR NONSUPERVISORY EMPLOYEES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS IN SELECTED INDUSTRIES DOLLARS PER WEEK DOLLARS PER WEEK BUILDING CONSTRUCTION \ CLASS I RAILROADS / ^ g ^ v ' ~ X ^ / ^ \ / \ ^ ^ / MANUFACTURING RETAIL TRADE i t t t i i I t i ii I960 * REFLECTS W O R K STOPPAGE NOTE : DATA ARE FOR PRODUCTION W O R K E R S OR NONSUPERVISORY EMPLOYEES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR were discontinued. However the monthly rate of increase in average hourly earnings for factory workers ( excluding premium pay for overtime ) during the period from mid-January to the end of the year was somewhat below that during the period of controls and was less than half the monthly rate of increase during the second half of before controls were imposed General wage increases granted in the larger manufacturing settlements during the eleven months after the removal of controls averaged about cents an hour. However substantial groups of workers notably in the textile and lumber industries received either no general wage increase or adjustments ( up or down ) of or cents resulting from the operation of cost of living escalator clauses. On the other hand the apparel industries put into effect the first widespread wage increase since late The average rise in hourly earnings of all factory wage earners was about cents or percent excluding the effect of premium pay for overtime Wage trends among nonmanufacturing industries also varied. In construction where activity was extremely high throughout the entire year wage increases were widespread ; union scales in urban areas rose an average of percent between January and October Rates of pay in coal mining remained unchanged as the parties to the collective bargaining agreements failed to serve notice of a reopening of these contracts in the fall of The average level of gross hourly earnings rose in wholesale and retail trade local transit electric and gas utilities and some other nonmanufacturing industries. ( See Chart ) Hours of work in manufacturing began declining in the spring and were lower at the end of than late in mainly because of reductions in the amount of overtime work. Average weekly earnings at the end of the year were almost the same as at the beginning of the year since an increase in hourly earnings offset a shorter workweek and a drop in overtime payments. In building construction and most of the service industries weekly earnings rose. ( See Chart ) CORPORATE PROFITS From their low point in the third quarter of corporate profits after taxes ( seasonally adjusted ) rose sharply in the fourth quarter then more gradually through the first two quarters of With the easing of activity in many industries after midyear profits turned downward. But available information suggests that the total for the full year was higher than the figure and perhaps not much different from Profits after taxes for the first three quarters of were in terms of seasonally adjusted annual rates a little over billion dollars compared with ^ billion in as a whole. ( See Chart ) Corporate profits before taxes expanded more than after-tax profits. In the first nine months of profits before taxes were approximately percent above the corresponding period of The sharpest advances were recorded in general by the manufacturing industries where profits had suffered most from the inventory readjustment and the work stoppages in steel. In manufacturing as a whole before-tax profits were about onefifth above the first three quarters of The communication and public utility group recorded increases of around one-sixth. Experience in other industries was mixed but in most cases better than in the corresponding part of Profits however are a peculiarly volatile type of income. Full-year comparisons of with are expected to be less favorable than for the first nine months since profits were moving up in late and down in late The figures cited on corporate profits are of course not comparable with those for wages. The former relate to total profits of the corporate world ; the latter relate to average earnings per hour or week. To facilitate comparisons Table shows separately labor income dividends and undistributed corporate profits in the form of aggregates for recent years It does not appear from these figures that corporate profits have risen at the expense of labor income or vice versa CHART CORPORATE PROFITS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS UNDISTRIBUTED PROFITS- ' ' ^ ^ * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J/NO ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I0 TABLE Relation of Labor Income to Dividends and Undistributed Corporate Profits Corporate profits after taxes Labor income l Period Dividends Total Ratio of labor income to : Dividends Undis- and untributed distribcorporate uted corprofits porate profits Dividends Undistributed corporate profits Billions of dollars _ _ _ ( ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter J Fourth quarter ) ( ) i Wage and salary receipts plus other labor income. ( See Appendix Table G-9 footnote ) * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) FARM INCOME AND EXPENDITURE The principal adverse shift in incomes during as in other recent years occurred in farming. A decline in farm prices was offset by an increase of marketings but not sufficiently to maintain cash receipts at the level. Production expenses also declined but not nearly so much as gross income with the result that the realized net income fell percent This unfavorable development was severest in the case of cattle raising. It was experienced however in many types of farming and was widely diffused among the States There is no clear evidence that rural purchases of general merchandise were lower in than in although in common with the rest of the economy some decline in rural purchases was apparent in the second half of the year. Nonetheless the reduced income of farmers following as it did earlier declines led to smaller purchases of farm equipment machinery and building materials. Retail sales of farm equipment and machinery ran about percent less than in Gross investment in farm buildings motor vehicles and other machinery and equipment declined by about million dollars or percent. But even in gross farm investment was larger than the normal wear and tear on the existing farm plant and equipment INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC TRANSACTIONS The outstanding international development of the past year was the achievement of a broadly balanced pattern of trade and payments at high and growing levels of economic activity. This has been accomplished in an environment of general monetary stability and diminishing controls both within and among the nations of the free world. Some countries however still depend in part on United States military expenditures abroad as well as on a variety of restrictions on dollar transactions There was little change between and in the export balance of the United States when military grant-in-aid shipments are included with exports and military expenditures abroad are counted with imports. The CHART U. S. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS ON CURRENT ACCOUNT BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IMPORTS EXCLUDING U.S. MILITARY EXPENDITURES ABROAD- ^ I/ INCLUDES UNILATERAL TRANSFERS OTHER THAN U.S. GOVERNMENT GRANTS SJ JANUARY-SEPTEMBER DATA AT ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ^ past year witnessed however an important shift in the balance on current transactions between the United States and foreign countries the broad features of which are displayed in Chart Excluding transfers of militaryaid goods which require no dollar financing by the recipient countries the United States had an estimated deficit of million dollars on current account in This contrasts with a surplus of billion in billion in and about billion in and Thus the free world has continued to make progress toward economic and financial strength. In the postwar period taken as a whole foreign economies have been able to adjust to a sharp reduction of United States economic aid ( including loans ) and still maintain a high level of imports from the United States. Their gold and dollar holdings have increased by about billion dollars in the last five years and are now percent higher than in Official monetary reserves outside the sterling area are probably better distributed today than ever before from the standpoint of their relation to the volume of imports and the different needs of foreign countries for liquid balances to meet fluctuations in export earnings Numerous factors have contributed to the great improvement in the dollar position of foreign economics. The outstanding fact is the great increase in their productive power which has enabled them to increase exports to the United States while meeting their own enlarged domestic requirements. Some part of course of the current dollar earnings of foreign countries arises from our Government 's expenditures abroad for military goods and services. These amounted to an estimated billion dollars in which is equal to about percent of our total payments for foreign goods and services and about equal to the increase in foreign holdings of gold and dollar balances during the year Changes since in the current account balances of major trading areas with the United States are shown in Chart The most notable improvement was recorded in the transactions of Western Europe which closed with an estimated surplus of billion dollars in in contrast to a deficit of over billion in The industrial production of Western Europe is now running about percent above and the volume of exports has risen by some percent while imports including raw materials processed for export are only slightly above their prewar level The recovery of the sterling area from the post-Korean deficits began in mid-1952 and continued in with the accumulation of a surplus of about half a billion dollars in its current transactions with the United States The growth of economic activity throughout the free world sustained the volume of exports of the independent sterling area countries and facilitated the adaptation of their economies to the collapse of the raw materials price boom in The same was generally true of raw material exporting countries CHART CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCES WITH THE U. S.1 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OP DOLLARS WESTERN EUROPE AND DEPENDENCIES STERLING AREA ) ^ jy EX PORTS EXCLUDE MILITARY TRANSFERS. IMPORTS INCLUDE NET UNILATERAL TRANSFERS OTHER THAN U.S. GOVERNMENT GRANTS ^ JANUARY-SEPTEMBER DATA AT ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE The current account deficit of the Western Hemisphere in is traceable entirely to Canada whose deficit was offset by United States private investments and by net exports to other countries. The countries of Latin America taken as a whole were close to a balance in their current account ; but it should be noted that this resulted partly from the tighter import controls imposed by some of them. Difficult readjustments are still in prospect in Far Eastern countries whose normal trade patterns were distorted by the Korean war and other political disturbances SUMMARY This chapter has attempted to present and interpret the salient economic developments of the year from the viewpoint of the American economy with only the minimum of detail needed to grasp the meaning of what has occurred. To help others to arrive at their own interpretations extensive statistical tables are presented in Appendix G In the interest of balanced judgment it will be useful to keep in mind the following facts and considerations about the past year : ( ) The year was very prosperous with output at a record level incomes widely distributed unemployment low and prices stable on the average. ( ) In the first half of the year the economy used much of both its manpower and equipment on an overtime basis. ( ) If the buoyant demand for business credit in the early months of the year had not been restrained prices would have risen more than they did since production was at a practical maximum for the time being. ( ) Our economy is a system of interdependent parts When it operates at overtime it is sensitive to even minor disturbances such as always keep occurring in the sphere of both private and public action ( ) In a free economy a perfect balance between production and sales is an ideal that at best can only be approximated. ( ) Although retail sales remained high they failed to match production in the first half of the year. Meanwhile expenditures on services ( quite apart from housing ) increased considerably and personal holdings of liquid assets were much enlarged. ( ) The letdown of economic activity in the second half of the year was slight. ( ) Apart from businessmen 's purchases of additions to inventories expenditure in the last quarter of was substantially at the same rate as in the second quarter. ( ) The year closed with our economy at a very high level of activity when judged by any reasonable historical standard. ( ) On the international front monetary inflation was generally stopped and foreign reserves of gold and dollars were greatly augmented Chapter Governmental Policy in a Year of Economic Change T HROUGHOUT the Federal Government was guided by the broad objectives outlined in Chapter the stimulation of output and employment the protection of the purchasing power of the dollar against further shrinkage the wide distribution of the fruits of expanding activitv and the extension of international trade and investment PREVENTING INFLATION Economic activity increased rapidly during the early months of the year. Production and employment kept rising while unemployment declined to ever-lower levels and reached percent of the civilian labor force in October the lowest recorded rate of unemployment since World War II. Although prices remained fairly stable on the average the prices of many individual commodities reflected ominously the increasing pressure of demand. Under the circumstances wages could be expected to move upward and to some extent they did. The possibility of an upward spiral of prices and wages was enhanced by certain steps taken by the Government to broaden the scope of private enterprise especially the removal of price and wage controls. There was talk in these early months of a " confidence boom " as the American people saw themselves free to embark on new productive enterprises Economic life in a dynamic society is in constant flux. As the economy undergoes changes first one problem then another comes to the surface and requires attention. During the first months of the year when the economy seemed to be entering a new phase of inflation the immediate concern of the Government was the protection of the value of the people 's money. Both credit policy and fiscal policy were aimed at this objective The Federal Reserve System allowed the buoyant demand for credit to adjust itself to the restricted market supply. In January the discount rate was raised from % percent to percent thus bringing it into line with other rates and discouraging member bank borrowing at the Reserve Banks. In response to their tight reserve position commercial banks early in reduced their holdings of Government securities. The Treasury harmonized its policy with that of the Federal Reserve System by seeking to obtain from investors other than banks the funds that it needed to finance the Government. Interest rates of all sorts rose steadily and the rise up to a point was salutary. It served to check the effective demand for pri- vate loans made lenders more discriminating in extending new credits and thus not only restrained the growth of credit but also prevented the quality of the outstanding debts from deteriorating as is their wont when business booms. At the same time a Presidential Tax Message to the Congress on May recommended that the excess-profits tax which was scheduled to expire on June be extended for another six months. Although this tax was injurious to enterprise and hurtful to new firms trying to grow it seemed imprudent to cut any tax at a time when the Government was operating at a deficit and when there was still a latent danger of inflation The restrictive monetary and debt management policies pursued in the early months of the year had however a more potent effect than was generally expected. It was not that the policies were of themselves highly restrictive. At its peak the open-market commercial paper rate was only percent and the yield on high-grade corporate bonds only percent. But the business and financial community having become accustomed over many years to credit policies that facilitated the monetization of the Federal debt no longer clearly remembered the discipline of monetary management aimed at preventing inflationary booms with which an earlier generation had had experience. A new 30-year Treasury issue at % percent a lifting of the maximum interest rate chargeable on FHAinsured and VA-guaranteed mortgages to 4/2 percent a generally rising yield on Government bonds and other securities all these developments combined with neutrality on the part of the Federal Reserve authorities were new and startling to many bankers mortgage lenders and businessmen who while gravely fearing inflation and wishing to see it curbed apparently underestimated the practical adjustments that its containment would require The demand for credit that developed in May and June was not therefore confined to the funds needed for current operations. Part of it was anticipatory generated by fears or expectations that interest rates would rise higher perhaps considerably higher while new credit might become difficult to obtain. In a modern money market the forces that shape expectations of borrowers are bound to influence lenders as well. At the very time when the demand for credit was rising insistently some lenders became reluctant to commit funds for future use at existing interest rates and their hesitation added perceptibly to the strain on the money and capital markets CONTROLLING THE READJUSTMENT The Federal Reserve authorities responded to the incipient and possibly dangerous scramble for liquidity with a degree of promptness and vigor for which there is no close parallel in our central bank history. Between early May and early July the Federal Reserve System increased its holdings of United States Government securities by billion dollars. By purchasing securities the System augmented the reserves of member banks reduced their need for borrowing and improved their ability to extend credit to consumers farmers and business firms. A further and Systemwide step was taken on June when the Federal Reserve authorities announced a reduction of reserve requirements from to percent on demand deposits in central reserve city banks from to percent in reserve city banks and from to percent in country banks. This action promptly released reserves to every member bank of the System ended the current tightness of the credit market and gave assurance to the business community that the needs for private credit and Treasury financing during coming months could be readily met by the banks The easing of tension in the money markets was speeded by the realization that the Treasury would coordinate its management of the public debt with the easier credit policy of the Federal Reserve System. Between August and December the System again added substantially to its holdings of Government securities partly to meet seasonal requirements for currency and credit and partly to strengthen further the lending power of the member banks. In the meantime the Treasury while adhering to its policy of lengthening the maturities of the outstanding Federal debt brought out issues that competed to a minimum with the demands for long-term credit by business firms and State and local governments. Interest rates began declining in June and in the following months mortgage credit as well as credit for other needs became more plentiful FLEXIBILITY IN CREDIT AND FISCAL POLICIES The maintenance of a high and expanding level of output and employment is a definite objective of our society. So also is the maintenance of a reasonably stable level of consumer prices. The pursuit of these twin objectives involves the Government in difficult yet inescapable responsibilities. The road of reasonably full employment without price inflation is narrow. There is always the danger that our economy by moving a little too far to one side of the road will enter the zone of inflation or by moving too far to the other side will slip into the zone of contraction. What we plainly need and want to do is to stay firmly on the road which means that we must moderate economic movements before they acquire large momentum. Our ability to do so is limited however partly because the economy is subject to the shifting moods and modes of human behavior partly also because the makers of policy can not predict with scientific closeness the strength of the responses which their actions may generate. Under the circumstances governmental policies must either be flexible adjusting to new and unforeseen developments or run the peril of courting disaster But flexible policies adapted with promptness and vigor require courage and candor on the part of Government officials. The success with which flexible monetary and debt management policies were used in first to prevent inflation and later to avert credit stringency should inspire confi- dence among all citizens in the capacity and readiness of Government to respond promptly to changes in economic circumstances Fiscal policy is a less flexible instrument than either monetary or debt management policy for keeping the economy on the narrow path that separates inflation from recession. But Federal operations are now so large a factor in our economy that their variations whether on the revenue or expenditure side are bound to have a significant impact on our economy The deliberate use of fiscal policy in the interest of maintaining a sound economy bears great promise for the future and the actions taken in reflected this concern. Early in the year when inflation was still a real danger it seemed reasonable to expect that in another six or twelve months the boom might recede and that at such a time some reduction in taxes would become appropriate. In the meantime the only proper course was to maintain taxes while seeking to curtail expenditures. The Tax Message submitted to the Congress on May therefore called for full maintenance of all taxes during but suggested that taxes might be reduced in January As the year wore on tax policy was continually reviewed by the Treasury not only from the viewpoint of moving toward a budgetary balance but also in the light of the economic situation at large and the part that fiscal policy could play in contributing to economic growth and stability. By late September it was clear that the existing danger of inflation had passed and that the prospective reduction of Federal expenditure would justify some tax reduction. The Secretary of the Treasury therefore announced in the plainest possible language that the Administration besides relinquishing the excess-profits tax would not seek to postpone the reduction of the personal income tax averaging approximately percent scheduled for January This unequivocal promise of tax relief to both families and business firms bolstered confidence at a time when trade and employment were slipping slightly. In coming months these well-timed tax reductions are likely to give substantial support to consumer and investment markets Another significant step taken in was to broaden the scope of credit policy as a stabilizing tool by extending its role to the housing industry When the Congress originally gave authority to the Federal Housing Administration to insure mortgages the law specified maximum terms of insurable loans rather than mandatory terms. As it turned out the broad powers conferred by the Congress were with few exceptions used over the years to reduce interest rates on mortgages to reduce the down payments required of purchasers and to lengthen the maturities of the mortgages. The consequence has been that the housing market augmented the total demand for credit when general economic conditions justified it and also when they did not. Last year when the Congress considered further liberalization of FHA mortgage credit the Administration recommended that the liberalization be made permissive that is that it be allowed only at the direction of the President. The Housing Amendments of as passed by the CHART NEW HOUSING STARTS THOUSANDS OF UNITS * THOUSANDS OF UNITS PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL ( NONFARM ) SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR Congress created a new and highly useful stand-by authority. Instead of stimulating an increased flow of credit at a time when it was not needed as in recent months ( see Chart ) when the annual rate of housing starts ( seasonally adjusted ) has been running above one million units they permit stimulation at a time when it will aid the economy. How great may be the stimulating power of the newly gained authority should economic conditions justify its use may be judged from the fact that on an owneroccupied dwelling costing say $ the required down payment under an FHA-insured mortgage may be reduced from $ to $ while the period for amortizing the mortgage may be simultaneously extended from to years AIDING AGRICULTURE A very difficult problem facing the country during the past year was the readjustment of agriculture. The net income of farmers which began declining in continued to fall during The restoration of agriculture in foreign countries sharply curtailed American exports while our statutory price support levels served to augment accumulating surpluses of many farm products. Widespread drought added to the agricultural troubles of the year especially of cattle farmers. Confronted with these difficulties the Government took steps to aid the farm economy. The commitments of the Commodity Credit Corporation increased by approximately billion dollars during the year. Relief was extended promptly to the farms in drought-stricken areas. Extensive governmental purchases of beef were undertaken with a view to checking a collapse of cattle prices and at the same time benefiting the school-lunch program. A large gift of wheat was made to Pakistan and a program of famine relief to friendly nations was instituted While these and other acts of Government have aided the farmers it is well to recognize that they do not provide a permanent solution of the problems facing American agriculture. To adjust to their new technology and the altered world economic situation farmers will need the continued assistance of Government. But even more important than what the Government does specifically to help the farmer are the policies that it pursues to help maintain an expanding domestic market. And what is true of agriculture is equally true of other industries. As long as employment and production in the entire economy are at high levels the adjustment required of individual industries by shifts in demand or technology can normally be carried through with greatly reduced hardship. Therefore an essential part of the solution of the problems of agriculture as well as of other industries undergoing structural readjustment lies in moderating the fluctuations and promoting the growth of general business LOOKING AHEAD The Federal Government has a special responsibility to use its powers to curb both inflationary or depressive tendencies of the economy. To discharge this responsibility it must be in a state of readiness to cope with new situations that can never be fully foreseen. For this reason the Council of Economic Advisers was instructed early in the year to design plans for dealing with a business depression although none was in sight The Council 's continuing studies have covered a wide range of private and governmental measures for preventing and curbing recession. One of them devoted to the expansibility of public works pointed to the need for developing a continuous inventory of sound projects classified among other ways according to their cost or divisibility so that some speed and flexibility might be gained in a public works program. The study concluded that although ample engineering plans are now in existence for expanding public works if that should become desirable in the near future it would be prudent to take steps to insure a continuous flow of carefully drawn and sifted plans Accordingly the Bureau of the Budget despite strenuous efforts to enforce governmental economy and bring expenditures into line with revenues on July informed the heads of all executive departments and establishments as follows on the budget policy for the fiscal year : " Increased emphasis will be given to the development of plans for authorized high priority projects to a stage where these projects could qualify for construction at a time when new construction starts would be consistent with a less restrictive budgetary policy. " FOSTERING INDIVIDUAL ENTERPRISE In this review of governmental policy during the past year emphasis has been placed on the steps taken to keep the economy from veering either toward inflation or toward contraction. Economic stability as the first chapter of this Report has brought out is not only essential for the wellbeing of the American people and of the entire free world but is one of the basic requisites of continued progress toward the greater national security and higher living standards to which our citizens aspire. The American people will not be long content with employment opportunities that are merely stable or with a stationary standard of living. Nor do they wish or expect their Government to give them jobs and thereby gain control over their individual lives. But if there is to be expanding private employment there must be employers. Their prospect of reward may not need to be so large as an earlier generation believed but it must be sufficient to impel men to assume the risks of enterprise and innovation These precepts guided the Government during the past year. One of the first steps taken was to remove the direct controls of prices which interfered with the normal function of markets to adjust supply to demand and the direct controls of wages which then needlessly restricted collective bargaining between employees and employers. The Government has also taken careful and significant steps to redraw the line separating public from private activities so that Government could divest itself of functions that private enterprise can perform more efficiently. Thus provision was made to dispose of the Government 's rubber plants to liquidate the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to sell the unprofitable Federal barge lines to remove Federal roadblocks to the development of electric power by local enterprise private or public and to encourage under proper governmental safeguards private experimentation with industrial uses of atomic energy At the same time. the Federal Government has sought to broaden the scope of home ownership and of the social security system so that more people might gain a greater measure of security in a dynamic environment. To these important problems reference is made later in this Report INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY The aim of the Federal Government during the past year was to maintain stability in the field of commercial policy pending a broad survey of all aspects of our international economic relations. At the President 's request the Congress extended for one year the Reciprocal Trade Agreements program without major amendment and set up a Commission on Foreign Economic Policy to recommend appropriate means for the improvement of international trade " consistent with a sound domestic economy our foreign economic policy and the trade aspects of our national security and total foreign policy. " In line with the President 's recommendation the Congress also enacted the Customs Simplification Act designed to simplify and to remove the inequities of customs regulations. The United States participated in international efforts to stabilize the markets for wheat and sugar Extensive military and economic assistance to foreign countries was continued but with the improvement in the economic strength of Western Europe the economic aid program was curtailed. Emphasis was also continued on fostering improvements in the industrial productivity of friendly countries in the interest of stimulating their economic development and raising the living standards of their people THE FEDERAL BUDGET The key to governmental planning for economic growth is of course the Federal budget. Generally speaking it sums up every activity undertaken by the Government for the people and every payment by the people to the Government. The average rate of taxation by all levels of government on individual and corporate incomes is now about as high as at the peak of the war effort against the Axis ( see Chart ) and the total tax revenue is even higher since the national income has grown. If economic incentives are to prove adequate some reduction of taxes provided it does not occur at the cost of weakening the Nation 's security is necessary The Government has therefore set about energetically to bring down the rate of expenditure and thus pave the way for tax reductions so that people may have more of their own income to spend instead of having the Government spend it for them Initial efforts have met with success. New obligational authority for the fiscal year which was estimated at billion dollars in the Budget Message of January has been reduced to an estimated billion dollars. Budget expenditures were originally set at billion dollars for the fiscal year or billion more than in the preceding fiscal year. As it now appears expenditures will be billion dollars or billion less than in fiscal This curtailment of expenditures combined with higher receipts has brought the Federal budget within sight of a balance. The budget deficit which reached the disconcerting magnitude of billion dollars in the fiscal year is now estimated at billion dollars for the fiscal year The improvement in the cash budget for fiscal is even more impressive involving a shift from a cash deficit of billion dollars to an estimated cash deficit of about million. The effort to reduce the scale of governmental expenditure and with it receipts from taxation will be continued in the months and years ahead ( see Appendix D ) though the precise rate of both the one and the other may need to be varied according to general economic conditions and the state of our international relations. In a rapidly changing world such as we live in there is no simple fiscal formula that will be suitable under all conditions It must also be recognized that while it is desirable to bring down the scale of Government our society has become so complicated that quite apart from the large and continuing needs for defense the Government now properly assumes obligations unknown to earlier generations. The im- CHART TAXES AND THEIR RELATION TO INCOME BILLIONS OP DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PERSONAL TAXES * ^ CORPORATE TAXES I I I I I I I I I PERCENT I PERCENT I CORPORATE TAXES AS PERCENT OF PROFITS PERSONAL TAXES AS PERCENT OF PERSONAL INCOME * U FOR CORPORATE PROFITS AND CORPORATE TAXES AVERAGE FOR FIRST QUARTERS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS " provement in the health security and industrial efficiency of the population is a large and growing concern of Government. So also is the maintenance of sound banking competition and the general conditions of stable economic prosperity. So too is the promotion of scientific knowledge which is the most important of all factors in the marvelous rise of our industrial productivity. Thus during the past year while Federal expenditures were being cut in many directions the outlays on research and development including those connected with national security activities were allowed to grow. They came to about billion dollars out of a total national expenditure on research of billion ( see Appendix F ) The building of new knowledge must continue for it is our surest promise of expanding economic opportunities in a growing America Chapter Appraisal of the Current Economic Situation A > WE TURN from to the current year we must first of all recognize the limitations of attempts at prevision. Despite the great improvement of statistical knowledge it is impossible to deduce the future from statistics of the present or to infer it from records of the past. Only those who adhere to a mechanistic view of history and of human behavior or who are enamored of forecasting formulae can entertain such illusions The best we can hope for is to minimize errors of miscalculation through making full use of available data and to give due recognition to those elements of uncertainty that attach to both the present and the future The settling of economic activity during recent months has not caught American industry by surprise. Long before last summer alert businessmen were aware that the stimulus of rising business activity from defense expenditures was likely to lessen. They recognized that a readjustment of this character in which a decrease in Federal Government expenditure would be accompanied by a reduction of taxes would provide a more durable basis for business enterprise. The generally prosperous level of economic activity during facilitated the corrective process that has been under way in many lines. Instead of culminating in a single climax of activity and then going into a general and abrupt decline the economy has displayed a considerable diversity of movement so that continued strength in some quarters has allowed time for adjustment in others The slight decreases of production since mid-summer reflect primarily a decline in the rate of inventory accumulation. Final purchases of output by business consumers and Government have kept up very well. Thus far at least the readjustment process has been largely a matter of reducing excessive inventories especially of consumer durable goods. While competition has become keener business firms have shown little disposition to liquidate their excess stocks in ways that might aggravate the situation By granting more favorable terms by adjusting prices here and there and by applying more effort to selling businesses should be able to ease their inventory situations and achieve a better balance between production and sales during the next few months providing final expenditures continue at their recent high and stable level. Such a corrective process seems clearly to have gone some distance. Over the last two months of inventories declined generally while retail sales were generally sustained. Should this development continue the moderate contraction now under way would come to a halt soon Within the over-all movement of the wholesale price index the pattern of recent changes has been significantly different for farm products industrial raw materials and industrial finished goods. The prices of industrial raw materials dropped sharply from a peak in the spring of and continued to decline thereafter. The prices of other industrial commodities declined very moderately from early through late and then rose very moderately through As a result of these diverse movements there existed a sounder price relationship between raw materials and finished goods at the end of than in the immediate post-Korean period. Some downward adjustments in manufacturers ' prices for finished goods may occur during the next few months reflecting the earlier price decline of raw materials During the recent series of prosperous years and in contrast to earlier periods purchasers of corporate securities have capitalized earnings on a basis that neither caused a prolonged advance in prices nor absorbed large amounts of credit. Stock prices pursued a slow downward movement during the first three quarters of followed by an upturn beginning in September. This change of direction would appear to register favorable expectations of investors. Although changes in security prices are not always reliable guides to subsequent business developments security market movements sometimes reflect changes before they are recorded in other statistics Economic readjustments require time for completion. Those we have considered so far have been facilitated by the high level of aggregate spending throughout the past year. In considering the future the basic question concerns the level of final expenditure. To the prospects of the major classes of expenditure those by business consumers and Government attention is now directed PLANT AND EQUIPMENT EXPENDITURES Recent surveys indicate that business firms have little disposition to change their planned capital outlays because of the mild decline in output since last summer. A survey conducted two months ago by the Department of Commerce and the Securities and Exchange Commission disclosed that businesses expected to maintain the average rate of capital spending during the first quarter of Plans of electric utilities and commercial enterprises pointed to an increase over and with the exception of railroads other major industry groups expected their spending early in to be close to rates. The McGraw-Hill survey of investment plans for indicated that businesses intended to spend for plant and equipment about percent less than the unprecedented billion dollars spent in Statistics on contracts for-commercial and industrial construction likewise indicate a high level of investment expenditure in the early months of In evaluating the outlook for fixed investment it is also well to examine " norms " provided by past experience. Historical data indicate a steady growth in the physical stock of capital from to about a virtual flattening out of the curve during the depression of the thirties and a pronounced growth since the end of World War II. The stock of capital expressed as a ratio to output shows no definite trend in the two decades prior to the Great Depression ; it rises considerably with the underutilization of resources during the thirties and drops sharply during the war years. ( See Chart ) An upward adjustment in the capital-output ratio took place as a result of heavy postwar investment but the ratio is still low by historical standards. It is important to note however that the low current ratio is traceable solely to plant. The equipment ratio rose steadily between the end of the war and ; since then it has remained at about the level that prevailed in the period. Thus on the basis of these uncertain historical yardsticks it does not seem that productive facilities in the aggregate are excessive at the present time relative to current rates of output Profit expectations are of course a key determinant of the rate of investment. Throughout the postwar period investment has been higher than would be expected from the relationship that existed in earlier years between profits and investment. This persistent postwar excess represents in part a catching-up process and it also reflects the unusual stimulus of Federal provisions for accelerated depreciation. In part it may also represent a change in the relationship between profits and investment as a result of lower interest rates the more liquid position of businesses and the increased pace of technological change and obsolescence. But whether or not there has been a shift in the long-term relationship between profits and investment it is clear that the termination of the excess profits tax on January will give some support to investment The generally strong financial position of business firms will likewise help to support a high level of investment expenditure. In nonfinancial corporations the ratio of cash and Government security holdings to all current liabilities was substantially higher in mid-195 than before the war partly because of the increase in accrued tax liabilities. In the ratio was percent compared with percent in and in While the ratio of total assets to total debt in was not appreciably higher than in prewar years this ratio understates the financial strength of business since a considerable volume of business assets is still being carried on the books of corporations at prewar prices Research and development activities of industry nonprofit institutions and Government are steadily enlarging the opportunities for new investment As already stated these expenditures reached billion dollars in Over one-third of this amount originated in industry ; and a still larger proportion about percent represented work done in industrial establishments either on their own account or for the Government. While much of the research outlay of recent years has been oriented to defense needs the results of the new knowledge are largely adaptable to civilian uses. Defense CHART RATIO OF STOCK OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT TO OUTPUT1 TOTAL PLANT AND EQUIPMENT EQUIPMENT r i I I i i I i i I I I I I I I I i i I i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i ^ * RATIO CALCULATED ON BASIS OF STOCK AND PRIVATE GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE MACHINERY AND ALLIED PRODUCTS INSTITUTE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS research expenditure is creating opportunities for private investment on numerous fronts for example scientific instruments electronic computers electronic and other process controls communication equipment radioisotopes atomic energy heat- and corrosion-resistant metals and alloys highspeed cutting tools and heavy forge presses. Furthermore defense research programs have trained thousands of scientists and engineers whose skills are facilitating the adaptation of new techniques to civilian uses ( see Appendix F ) The emergence of a long-range outlook among business firms promises well for the future the magnitude of industrial expenditures for research and development being merely one evidence of this outlook. Another is the long-range planning of investments partly to assure growth partly to meet the competition of other enterprising firms. The urge or need to cut costs is reflected in an active demand for automatic controls and materialshandling inspection and office equipment. It also is accelerating outlays for the modernization of existing plant and equipment. Despite heavy postwar installations a substantial volume of productive facilities is approaching " normal " retirement age or has become obsolete as a result of recent technological advances HOUSING Housing construction which has played so important a role in the rapid rate of increase of investment expenditures since World War II may be expected to continue at a level close to that of Despite the record volume of home building in recent years we are still confronted by a good housing market. Vacancies in our cities are with few exceptions below the level regarded as necessary for a healthy competitive housing market During the next few years the rate of formation of new families and households is likely to diminish as a result of the lower birth rate of the depressed thirties. Other factors on the side of demand are likely however to press for a high volume of residential construction. These include the continued movement of the city population toward the suburbs the high birth rate of recent years and the improvement of incomes during the past decade. The recent easing of funds in the mortgage market will strengthen the forces of supply as well as of demand. Further in contrast to earlier times many of today 's builders have considerable overhead expenses to reckon with and they will not be averse to making price concessions if this will help to keep their organizations intact. The rental housing market especially in the medium-price ranges has been neglected of late and could offer investment opportunities. Finally if the volume of housing showed persistent signs of declining the terms of FHA-insured mortgages could at once be liberalized under existing law Taking a longer view it is well to recognize that the housing industry has become less vulnerable to recessionary influences and is less likely in turn to contribute to economic instability as the result of a number of in- stitutional changes during the past twenty years. The introduction of the long-term amortized mortgage and the establishment of a system of mortgage insurance and guaranties also the establishment of the Federal Home Loan Bank System and of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation have greatly strengthened the home mortgage market. While facilitating the maintenance of high levels of residential building they have also provided more protection against possible economic setbacks CONSUMER EXPENDITURES The influences determining consumer spending are many and to a disconcerting degree unpredictable. Such factors as personal income liquid assets size and age of stocks of durable goods new consumer credit and the repayment burden of outstanding debt must be included in any list of elements governing consumer expenditures in During the next four to six months the disposable income of individuals that is personal income after taxes may well approximate the rate of the last quarter of The cut in personal income taxes of about percent effective January may amount to about billion dollars for Allowing for an increase of million dollars in employee and selfemployed contributions for old-age and survivors insurance there will still be a substantial net reduction in taxes which will tend to act as a support to disposable personal incomes. Further support could come from a moderate rise in Government transfer payments such as unemployment compensation and the pensions to elderly workers retiring from the labor force in a more competitive market The proportion of income spent for consumer goods is of considerable significance in the evaluation of the economic outlook. In terms of current levels of disposable income a change of percent in the spending rate means an increase or decrease of about billion dollars in consumer expenditures. The saving rate in the past three years has been exceptionally high averaging about percent compared with percent in and an average of percent in ( see Chart ) This suggests that businessmen who push new or improved products who produce established goods at lower costs or who practice more aggressive salesmanship will find that their markets are expansible The latest survey of consumer attitudes made in October by the University of Michigan Survey Research Center indicates that the number of consumers finding market conditions favorable for the purchase of major durable goods is slightly larger than at the time of any other survey since the outbreak of the Korean war. A cause of the more favorable view is the belief that prices have been leveling off and will remain more or less stable for some time. Although consumer attitudes may have changed somewhat because of the recent slight drop in production and employment the results are significant in showing that American consumers are alert to conditions favorable to the improvement of their living standards CHART PERSONAL SAVING PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME " I I I I I I I I I I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Favorable also for the maintenance of consumer demand is the large and widely distributed volume of liquid assets. Personal holdings of currency bank deposits shares in savings and loan associations. United States Government securities and equities in trust funds exceeded billion dollars at the end of The effectiveness of liquid assets in maintaining consumer demand in a period of readjustment will depend of course in part on the amounts held by consumers whose incomes are curtailed and in part on the response of other holders to prices and other incentives to purchase Many consumers have virtually no resources as a cushion to a decline of income ; but it is a significant and encouraging fact that the holdings of liquid assets have shown a tendency toward wider distribution in recent years One determinant of the level of consumption expenditures is the size and burden of consumer debt. The heavy borrowing of recent years to finance the purchase of homes and all sorts of durables has raised the ratio of debt service charges to consumer incomes. Last year the payment of interest and required repayment of principal on mortgages and consumer debt amounted to about percent of disposable income. In addition to debt service most consumers were paying premiums for private insurance or pension plans amounting to another percent of disposable income in Other contractual obligations such as contract rents and the operating costs of home ownership claimed still another tenth of income. All told debt service insurance premiums and contractual costs of home operation took about three-tenths of consumer incomes last year. This represented a considerable increase over recent years but was at about the pre-World War II level It is well to note that the bulk of postwar borrowing for the purchase of homes and durable goods has been undertaken by younger family units those with greater family pressures to buy lower reserves for financing expenditures but more favorable income experience and better future prospects. In a period of mild contraction of national income the employment and incomes of this group are likely to hold up better than the average An important influence on the volume of purchases of durable goods is the level and age distribution of consumer stocks. Information available for automobiles reveals that despite the large demand for new cars in recent years about percent of the passenger cars in use in mid-1953 were years old or older in contrast to percent in Experts in the industry generally agree that the volume of sales may well be smaller in than in However if scrappage should amount to about million units a basis would exist for a level of sales in not much below that of last year ; for one may expect a moderate further growth in the total number of motor vehicles in use reflecting such factors as an increase in the number of households and the popularity of suburban life which often creates a demand for more than one car even in families with modest means The slackening in the rate of expansion of outstanding consumer instalment debt in recent months has been the result of a moderate decline in the rate of credit extended and a gradual rise in the rate of repayments- developments that have been dominated by changes in automobile credit ( see Chart ) A downturn in outstanding consumer debt during the next few months does not seem unlikely. But in recent years consumers have demonstrated a remarkable indifference to what business analysts have to say. In our high-income economy many millions of consumers may on the one hand spend more than their income by drawing down savings or going into debt or on the other hand spend appreciably less than their income and still live well. This volatility of consumer markets is however a short-run phenomenon. The urge to improve living standards exercises a strong and fairly continuous pressure in our society CHART CONSUMER INSTALMENT CREDIT BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SOURCE : BOARD OF G O V E R N O R S OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES Federal expenditures for goods and services reached a rate of slightly over billion dollars in A moderate decline in Federal expenditures may be expected in Most of the anticipated reduction will take place in national security expenditures which reached an annual rate of billion dollars in but in addition a slight drop may occur in outlays for nondefense programs. By mid-1954 these changes may bring the annual rate of total Federal expenditures for goods and services about billion dollar below the rate at the end of Yet Federal expenditures will continue to be a strong sustaining factor The small prospective decline in Federal expenditures will probably be counteracted in large part by a rise in State and local purchases which in reached a level of slightly over billion dollars. ( See Chart ) In recent years the annual increase in these expenditures has been close to billion dollars and there is still an immense backlog of demand for schools highways hospitals and sewer water and other facilities ( see Chapter ) Public pressure for the expansion and improvement of local facilities is CHART GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES FOR GOODS AND SERVICES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS T t ' i ' i i -i-r I i i A H i i " SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES -I/EXCLUDES GOVERNMENT SALES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I mounting and it seems entirely reasonable to expect that State and local expenditures will continue to increase The financial situation of State and local governments is favorable to a continued rise in their expenditures. State and local receipts have increased by roughly billion dollars a year in the postwar period with the total rising from billion dollars in to almost billion in Preliminary estimates indicate that receipts and expenditures were in balance during Further evidence of the financial strength of State and local governments is the size of their cash and U. S. security holdings which reached billion dollars in mid-1953. Some part of this amount is committed but the uncommitted portion is undoubtedly large relative to current expenditures Despite the strong financial position of State and local governments the principal source of funds for additional capital outlays will have to be from borrowing. The increase in State and local debt in the postwar period has been substantial. However the cost of carrying this debt has not changed appreciably relative to total State and local expenditures Interest charges have increased moderately since but the requirements on account of interest and debt retirement are not likely to be an important impediment to bond financing in the near future. ( See Appendix D. ) THE CONDITION OF AGRICULTURE Agriculture which is beset with more problems than any other major part of our economy will continue to be confronted in with problems growing out of excessive supplies of some of the major farm products notably wheat cotton and corn. ( See Chart ) By July the wheat carry-over may be about million bushels more than three times its mid-1952 level and well in excess of a year 's domestic use. By August the cotton carry-over may reach million bales also more than three times its level two years earlier and the equivalent of a year 's domestic mill consumption. By October stocks of corn are expected to reach about million bushels nearly twice their level. Stocks of food fats and oils already at a record high are expected to be moderately larger by October The price-depressing effects of these stocks will however be substantially offset during by Government price-support operations acreage restrictions and other measures In recent months agricultural prices have shown signs of stabilizing This has been true not only of the major crops moving under Government price-support programs but of the unsupported prices of livestock products as well. While export demand for farm products has fallen substantially during the last year it appears unlikely to weaken further during Domestic demand for farm products continues to be a source of underlying strength with consumer incomes and food expenditures remaining near record level CHART CAIRRY-OVER OF MAJOR FARM CO MMODITIES CORN WHEAT MILLIONS OF BUSHELS MILLIONS OF BUSHELS < ) | j | COTTON FOOD FATS AND OILS MILLIONS OF BALES c> BILLIONS OF POUNDS j | | NOTE : C ROP-YEARS BEGINNING : CORN OCTOBER ; WHEAT JULY ; C,OTTON AUGUST ; FOOD FATS AND OILS OCTOBER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE If the domestic demand for foods and fibers continues at about its present high level average prices received by farmers should hold near to their current levels during and cash receipts from farm marketings be close to the estimated billion dollars received during Production costs may also show a further slight decline. Hence the prospects are that farm operators ' realized net income will be close to its estimated level of billion dollars Even when measured in constant dollars agriculture 's financial assets today are percent higher than in and only percent less than in Farm debts are now estimated to stand at only percent of total assets and percent of total financial assets. Combining these facts with those on income it seems that despite recent readjustments American agriculture as a whole remains financially able to sustain a fairly good rate of purchasing INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS Large military expenditures abroad particularly in the form of trooppay and offshore procurement played a substantial part in other countries ' dollar earnings in The over-all level of these expenditures is not expected to decline in in view of already existing contracts and commitments Although the moderate letdown in United States economic activity in the second half of was accompanied by a slight decline in imports during the closing months of the year the recent and substantial increases in the gold and dollar reserves and in the economic activity of other countries have somewhat improved the prospect that any moderate change in our imports from them will not have a significant influence on our exports to them BASIS FOR CONFIDENCE It has been noted earlier that developments in the American economy during the second half of were due largely to inventory adjustments A review in this chapter of the major fields of expenditure and of the condition of agriculture suggests that outlays in most areas are likely to be well maintained in the visible future. This justifies some confidence in the view that the adjustments now in process will not initiate a cumulative downward movement of the economy There are additional grounds for confidence. One of them is that our financial institutions are fully capable of meeting all deserving credit demands and are in a condition successfully to withstand any strains to which they may be exposed as a result of business readjustments. Credit demands are not expected to tax the available supply of funds over the coming months. Business loans generally decline seasonally in the early months of the year. Nor do developments in the consumer credit field or in the mortgage market suggest unusual levels of demand for funds. Commercial banks are in a highly liquid position with two-fifths of their large holdings of Government securities maturing within one year with their indebtedness to the Federal Reserve System much reduced and with increased power on the part of the System to lend to individual banks or otherwise augment their reserves if this should be necessary. Similarly other financial institutions insurance companies savings banks and savings and loan associations are in a sound condition and equipped to meet all reasonable demands in those areas of the market for investment funds in which they function Many factors contribute to the strength and resilience of our financial institutions. Broadly speaking the reserves held by commercial banks against potential losses on loans and investments are substantial bank capital has increased and funds are readily available to member banks from the Federal Reserve System in case of need. Large segments of the mortgage portfolios of banks and other lending institutions are insured or guaranteed by Federal agencies. The ready availability of funds to all but a small minority of depositors in commercial banks and savings banks and of the funds of most shareholders of savings and loan associations is amply protected by Federal insurance. From the viewpoint of its capacity to meet the needs of the economy for credit and its ability to withstand the strains that may be engendered by economic adjustments our financial system was never stronger The prosperity of the past dozen years has not been characterized by extensive speculative developments in the commodity security or financial markets. There has been no manifestation of a dangerous speculative rise in urban and farm land values despite a record volume of residential building. This has not been a period of reckless financial adventure either at home or abroad such as characterized the twenties In evaluating the economic future it is also well to recall the structural changes in our economy that serve to bolster consumer income as a key support of prosperity. The social security programs supplemented by private pension systems mitigate the effect of any decline in earnings. The unemployment compensation system especially operates as a stabilizer since benefit payments rise while payroll tax receipts decline in a time of increasing unemployment. The Federal tax structure which is based mainly upon individual and corporate income taxes for sources of revenue also operates in ways to cushion the effects of recessionary influences. As incomes move downward tax collections likewise decline relatively more than incomes and thus help to sustain both consumer expenditures and business investment. In addition to rising social security payments and declining income taxes which serve to cushion economic decline agricultural price supports help to protect farm incomes NEED FOR ECONOMIC PREPAREDNESS Impressive as are the factors which justify confidence that the current settling of business activity will stay within relatively narrow limits it should be recognized that periods of readjustment always carry risks with them Continued imbalance could result in cumulative effects as one sector of the economy reacts upon another. Such reactions are partly psychological in character but they are nonetheless real. A relatively slight fall in the level of activity if interpreted as a harbinger of further declines could lead consumers whose incomes have remained unchanged to start curtailing their purchases because they either fear a loss of income or hope for bargain prices later. If businessmen regard the first dropping off in orders as an occasion for curtailing their programs of capital investment they could spread and intensify the difficulties they fear These possible attitudes are illustrations of what are sometimes referred to as psychological repercussions. Whether they take one form or another they could become impediments to smooth adjustment. To avoid the adverse consequences that existing uncertainties might generate the Government should and can make clear its ability to face them and to take the steps necessary to deal with them Part III TOWARD A STRONGER ECONOMY Chapter S Pathways to Strength T HE OPENING CHAPTER of this Report stressed the need for an expanding economy and set forth in general terms the role of Government in establishing the requisites of progress. There followed a review of economic developments during including the directions taken by public policy and an appraisal of the current economic situation. The conclusion was reached that our economy is basically strong that the current economic readjustment seems likely to be brief and self-correcting but that the situation must not be viewed with complacency Our economy today is marvelously prosperous by any historical standard Employment is high prices are steady and wages and profits are generally satisfactory. Consumer expenditure is being maintained. Investment in housing business plant and equipment is continuing in the aggregate at its recent very high level. So too is governmental spending with the outlays of State and local governments offsetting in large part the recent downward tendency of Federal spending. And while total output and employment have declined somewhat since mid-195 creating unemployment in some localities the economy as a whole has been shifting from operations at forced draft to normal levels of peacetime operations But it would be imprudent to stop with this still picture of an economy that is in motion. This Government recognizes that it makes a vital difference whether an unemployment rate of three percent is reached by rising up to that figure or declining to it and whether the rate of increase or decline is high or low. True the contraction of economic activity in the past six months has been small and largely confined to reduced spending by businessmen for additions to their inventories ; but there can be no assurance that the decline will not be extended to other categories of spending. If we could be certain that the contraction in industrial activity now in process will remain an inventory adjustment the Government might stand aside content that the measures already taken ( see Chapter ) will suffice. But there can be no certainty in these matters. Prudence as well as zeal for economic improvement require that public policy contribute both to the immediate strength of the economy and to its long-term growth There are two classes of actions that we should take within the current year to build a stronger economy First we should take bold steps to protect and promote economic stability by modernizing unemployment insurance ; by broadening the base and benefits of old-age and survivors insurance ; by permitting a longer " carry-back " of losses for tax purposes ; by granting broad discretionary authority to the Executive to alter within limits and appropriate to changing circumstances the terms of governmentally insured loans and mortgages ; by establishing a secondary home mortgage market ; and by making improvements in the planning of public works programs At the same time we should take action to stimulate the expansive power of individual enterprise by revising the tax laws so as to increase incentives and to remove certain impediments to enterprise especially of small business ; by improving credit facilities for home building modernization and urban renewal ; by strengthening the highway system ; and by facilitating the adjustments of farming to current conditions of demand and technology These measures for strengthening our economy constitute taken together a program of immediately advisable action. It is not a legislative program of emergency measures for the current situation clearly does not require one. Instead it is a program for stimulating economic growth and minimizing any chance there may be of serious economic difficulty in the future. The program will contribute materially to the requisites for continued economic progress set out at the beginning of this Report The following pages provide a more detailed account of the economic program of this Administration Chapter Reforming the Tax Structure T HE PRESENT FEDERAL TAX SYSTEM is the result of a long succession of Congressional enactments in response to the great increase in the activities of Government during the past generation. During this time many new Federal taxes were imposed and steep increases were repeatedly made in the rates of such established taxes as those on personal and corporate incomes. Federal taxes were increased in the thirties to defray part of the costs of a broad intervention by Government in economic affairs largely directed at relieving distress caused by unemployment and lower prices and incomes. Taxes rose still further during the forties as a result of huge Federal expenditures for military purposes during World War II and after the war for financing national security and reconstruction abroad. The controlling consideration in increasing taxes was the urgent need for revenue and inadequate consideration was given to the long-run effects of tax increases on incentives There is evidence that the present structure of the Federal tax system irrespective of the revenue level contains many features that are unnecessarily restricting economic progress. Some features lead taxpayers to resort to devices for evading tax payments. Some lessen productive effort or lead to less efficient management of resources. Others may dampen consumer expenditures and business investment These adverse effects of the current Federal tax system on the growth of the economy have not become fully apparent because of inflationary conditions that have prevailed during most of the past decade. A tax system that may have been tolerable under inflationary conditions if left unchanged can not be expected to be consistent with the requirements for maximum economic growth and stability after inflation has been stopped It is therefore timely to readjust the Federal tax system to serve the interests of a dynamic and growing but non-inflationary economy. The structure of the Federal tax system can and should be altered so as to apportion the burden more equitably among taxpayers to unleash new incentives to economic growth and to make the system operate more effectively as an economic stabilizer. The opportunity to improve the tax structure should be seized promptly even though general reductions in tax rates must be deferred. Among the paramount objectives of Federal tax reform are those of providing greater equity to consumers providing more powerful incentives for work investment employment and efficient management and making the tax structure more stabilizing in its operation. These objectives will not be achieved quickly ; yet the broad directions of reform are clear enough. With long-run goals in view it is possible to move toward them step by step As it becomes possible to reduce the expenditures of the Federal Government without impairing the performance of necessary functions or shirking responsibility for maintaining a stable and prosperous economy taxes should be brought down. Such reductions will usefully widen the area of private economic activity A beginning was made in the application of these principles on January of this year when the excess profits tax was permitted to expire and when a reduction in individual income taxes averaging about percent for most taxpayers brought such taxes back to pre-1951 levels. These actions have improved the outlook for investment as previously noted. They have also released consumer income for expenditure and thus again provided a timely stimulus to the economy. The force of this stimulus was somewhat reduced though by no means offset by the concurrent rise of percent in the combined employer and employee rates of tax on payrolls for old-age and survivors insurance The continued large requirements of the Federal Government for revenues to meet expenditure for national security and other purposes combined with the current condition of the American economy which is marked by a reassuring measure of price stability and a high level of operations make it unwise to enact a further broad reduction in taxes at this time. But some structural changes in the Federal income taxes can not be postponed. Among the changes that have been recommended in the Budget Message several have a significant bearing on the growth and stability of the economy GREATER EQUITY TO CONSUMERS Irrespective of the level of personal taxation inequities that are present in the structure of the personal income tax should be removed promptly particularly for widows and widowers who employ assistance for child care in the home ; for families with dependent children who earn more than $ a year ; for widows and widowers with dependents who should be accorded the same privileges of " split income " that are accorded to married couples ; for persons struck by the misfortune of heavy medical expenses ; for employers who contribute to medical insurance and pension plans ; and for annuitants who should be able to recover within their life span free of income tax the savings they have invested. These faults can be remedied at comparatively small loss of revenue with resultant gains to the welfare morale and feeling of justice of individual taxpayers ENCOURAGEMENT OF ENTERPRISE AND EMPLOYMENT The present structure of business income taxation is faulty in several respects. It leaves too little incentive for the assumption of risk by investors and offers too meager a reward to enterprisers who assume high risks. It penalizes investment in the equity shares of enterprises particularly small businesses in comparison with investment in bonds and other contracts of debt. It overburdens the person or the business whose income fluctuates from year to year in comparison with the person or business whose income is comparatively stable An important step in removing impediments to enterprise particularly to the expansion of small businesses was taken on January when the excess profits tax expired. This impost was perverse in its effects. It blunted the incentive and denied the financial means of expansion to enterprises with favorable markets low costs or especially efficient managements A number of additional tax measures should now be taken in order to strengthen the forces of growth in employment and production. These measures which involve some immediate sacrifices of revenue. contain the seeds of important future revenue gains to be reaped from the economic growth they will stimulate The period during which individuals and business corporations may " carry back " net business losses should be increased from one to two years This reform would encourage investment by enabling a businessman to know in advance that if his enterprise should suffer net losses he could use these losses as offsets against the profits he made during not only the preceding year but also the year before that. Thus he could obtain a refund of taxes which were in effect overpaid during the preceding two profitable years. Such a lengthening of the carry-back period would reduce the risk assumed on new ventures of existing firms especially those of smaller businesses for which new departures are likely to require the commitment of a considerable part of their capital. Essentially it extends the equitable policy of averaging out results in good years and bad in order to ascertain tax liabilities. Taken in conjunction with the reform measures that follow it could greatly help to sustain investment and create jobs Elimination of the double taxation of dividends should be begun by permitting the stockholder to credit part of the taxes paid by the corporation against his personal income tax liability. At present income resulting from investment in the shares of American business corporations is doubly taxed first in the hands of the corporation that earned it and again in the hands of the stockholder who receives cash dividends from the corporation on his shares. Under current high tax rates the Federal Government appropriates by far the largest share of the total income from investment in common stocks. The unfair discrimination against investment in stocks creates difficulty for smaller businesses in raising money and tends to divert venture capital into relatively riskless investments. For these reasons our ultimate goal should be a substantial equality of treatment of interest on debt and dividends on stocks. A beginning toward this objective should be made immediately by allowing a stockholder to credit against his own income tax some part of the tax already paid by the corporation on dividends received by him Depreciation allowances should be liberalized. The climate for investment and economic growth would also be improved by granting investors more freedom in their choice of methods of writing off investments in buildings machinery and equipment. An investor usually has a clearer and more certain view of the profits from an investment a few years ahead than of returns in the distant future. If he is permitted to charge off a substantial part of the cost of an investment against foreseeable net income and thus recover a good part of his capital quickly he will be more disposed to invest. Many investments will not be made at all unless there is a favorable chance of a short pay-out period. A business should be able to write off the major part of the cost of a capital asset during the first half of its useful life if it desires to do so. Recent experience with accelerated amortization of defense plant facilities suggests that rapid depreciation allowances provide strong inducements to investment. The step proposed here should not entail any ultimate loss of revenue to the Treasury partly because deductions for an asset would merely be shifted from later to earlier years and more significantly because of induced gains in the volume of investment and in industrial productivity Treatment of research and development expenses should be clarified. At present companies are often not permitted to treat unusual research or development outlays as currently deductible business expenses a specially burdensome rule to small businesses because large firms with established research laboratories can usually make immediate deductions. In the interest of fostering rapid technological progress taxpayers should be permitted to deduct research and development expenses currently Accumulation of earnings needed for expansion should not be penalized The present penalty tax on the accumulation of corporate earnings operates to discourage the growth of small companies which are especially dependent on retained earnings for expansion. This handicap should be removed without opening the door to avoidance of individual taxes by stockholders by placing the burden of proof on the Government that a retention of earnings is unreasonable Business income from foreign investments should be encouraged. American capital and management skill can foster the economic development of other countries as well as provide export markets for our goods. Our tax laws should at least contain no penalties against investment abroad and they might well offer some encouragement to it. This can be accomplished by taxing the business income after January of foreign subsidiaries or of segregated branches of American corporations which operate and elect to be taxed as subsidiaries at a rate somewhat lower than the current relatively high corporate rate. In addition the types of foreign taxes that may be credited against the United States income tax should be made more inclusive the over-all limitation on foreign tax credits should be removed and regulated investment companies concentrating on foreign investments should be permitted to pass on to their stockholders the credit for foreign taxes now available for direct individual investments INCREASING ECONOMIC STABILITY The Federal revenue system now possesses large " built-in " potentialities for moderating economic fluctuations as a result of its heavy reliance on the taxation of incomes the keen sensitivity of incomes to business conditions and the pay-as-you-go methods of personal income tax payment. It is desirable that Federal revenues should rise and decline promptly with changes in economic conditions. Additional steps should be taken to move toward a current basis of payment of corporate income taxes The potential contribution of the tax system to economic stability could be enhanced by speeding up refunds of overpayments of taxes in all cases where administrative procedures make this feasible. Under current pay-asyou-go procedures an individual taxpayer is permitted to credit an overpayment against his income tax of the following year or to file a claim for a refund. Most overpayments are due to withholdings of taxes on salaries and wages which prove to be excessive because of unanticipated changes in the taxpayer 's employment or family status or to unexpected declines in his business or investment income which make previous payments on account of the declaration of estimated taxes too high. An individual must wait for a refund of his overpayment until after his return for the taxable year is filed usually a period of many months. Speeding the refund of overpayments could improve the economic impact of the individual income tax during a business downturn just as the prompt increase of estimated tax payments by taxpayers during a period of rising incomes and economic activity now serves to restrain the expansion Increasing the carry-back period of business losses from one to two years as recommended previously would also make it more desirable to speed up refunds of overpaid business taxes in the interests of economic stability At present a business may stop making payments of estimated taxes due on net income of the preceding year if a carry-back of its current year 's losses is believed to cancel the liability. But if current losses are large enough to entitle the business to a refund it is required to wait for the refund until some time within days after the filing of its return perhaps six months after the end of the tax year. Clearly a two-year carry-back period would increase the amounts of overpayments and of refunds. Yet the cash position of a business suffering losses and entitled to tax refunds needs to be bolstered promptly. Hence intra-year refunds of such overpayments would aid in stabilizing business operations There are difficult administrative problems to be solved before the Federal Government can accelerate tax refunds with assurance that the public interest will be protected. These problems are now being studied PATHS OF FUTURE REFORM The specific measures that have been recommended by no means exhaust the opportunities for making our Federal tax system serve better the cause of stable economic growth. They are merely first steps along a path of reform that should be followed during coming years. The whole structure of Federal taxation needs thoughtful re-examination from the point of view of its long-run impacts on employment and over-all economic stability Among the important subjects for future study are the following : the role and effects of Federal excise taxation ; the level and rate structure of our personal and corporate income taxes ; and the taxation of capital gains Those aspects of Federal taxation and finance which relate to the division of responsibilities among the Federal State and local governments are now under study by the Commission on Intergovernmental Relations In any revision of the capital gains tax it would be desirable to assign a high priority to an increase in the amount of net capital losses on new investment by individuals that may be offset against ordinary income. At present an investor whose ventures turn out to be unprofitable in a certain year is allowed to deduct a maximum of $ of his net capital loss from ordinary income during that year and during each of the five succeeding years in figuring his income tax. By increasing the amount of the allowable offset to say $ per annum the climate for risk assumption could be improved and the equity of the tax increased. This proposal would also foster investment in relatively small enterprises. An investor would be encouraged to try new fields of operation if he knew in advance that his misfortune as well as his fortune would be shared by the Federal Government. Limitation of the increased offset of capital loss to new investments would keep the revenue loss to the Treasury at a minimum Chapter Governmental Aids to Housing and Finance N EFFICIENT competitive financial system capable of channeling funds into the most productive uses is a primary condition of economic progress. The growth of production employment and markets in a money economy depends at every turn on adequate supplies of credit and equity capital. These funds must be available on sound and reasonable terms and in forms adapted to the economic processes being financed. In a free society it is the responsibility of Government to provide an environment in which private financial institutions can perform these functions constructively The creation of this environment is a many-sided problem. General monetary and credit policies are of paramount importance because they reach every part of the financial market and affect the lending and investing policies of financial institutions of all types. In addition it is incumbent on Government to find ways of filling such gaps as may appear in the financial structure so that the financial requirements of business agriculture and homeowners may at all times be properly met Much progress has been made along these lines. Nevertheless opportunities remain open to Federal and State governments through legislative and administrative action to augment the contribution that financial institutions can make to stable economic growth. These opportunities are especially great in the field of housing credit. Financial aids to housing should serve more effectively in the task of modernizing and rehabilitating existing homes and neighborhoods. They should be generally revised in the light of current needs. And they should be made more flexible and responsive to changing business conditions During recent years the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Administration have helped to make new homes particularly small single-family residences available to millions of American families. The personal and social benefits of home ownership have been widely extended This has been accomplished by encouraging private lending agencies under the protection of Federal insurance or guaranty to make available home loans requiring small down payments and carrying long maturities and comparatively low interest rates. Experience with this program points to ways of extending its benefits and at the same time preventing undesirable collateral effects A FLEXIBILITY IN LOAN INSURANCE TERMS Insured and guaranteed mortgage loans represent a large segment of the home mortgage market around percent of all private dwellings constructed in involved FHA or VA financing. Since they exert a powerful influence on the level of construction activity it is vitally important to make the terms and conditions of insured or guaranteed mortgage credit responsive to changing economic conditions. In a number of respects present legislation leaves the administrator free to establish terms at or below specified maximums but in practice the administrators have with few exceptions interpreted their responsibilities to require operation at the statutory limits. This has led at times to large extensions of mortgage credit when both the economy and the construction industry were already fully employed with the result that building costs and the prices of homes were driven up and home buyers injured. Under conditions of slack employment however it would usually be beneficial to have available and to employ the stimulus to home building and modernization that is provided by the offer of more liberal credit terms The way to avoid the inflationary influence of excessively liberal mortgage credit terms at certain times and to help offset unfavorable developments by an easing of terms at other times is to make provision for permissive adjustments in the conditions on which credits may be insured or guaranteed. To some extent these influences on the construction industry may be exercised through general monetary and credit measures. But the specific device of varying the terms and conditions of mortgage financing will ordinarily be more effective since it goes directly to those aspects of the loan contract the down-payment requirement and the repayment period to which borrowers are most sensitive The principle of permissive adjustment has already received Congressional approval in the Housing Amendments of Under these amendments the President was given discretionary power within defined statutory limits and with regard for economic conditions to fix the maximum terms to maturity and maximum loan-value ratios on FHA-insured loans for the purchase of new single-family homes. It would be desirable to broaden the area of permissive action by authorizing the President to regulate within appropriate statutory limits the maximum loan-value ratios terms to maturity and interest rates that may be carried by FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed loans of all types MODERNIZATION OF EXISTING HOUSES The major emphasis of Federal programs in the housing and home financing fields has since their start been on the encouragement of new construction. Present FHA programs provide more liberal financing terms to the purchaser of a newly constructed house especially if it is located in a new neighborhood than to the buyer of an existing house located in an older neighborhood. The result has been to encourage the development of new neighborhoods while doing much less to aid older areas which have in many cases fallen into serious disrepair and obsolescence It is necessary to take strong steps to correct the growing blight on the Nation 's stock of housing. Without relaxing efforts to increase the housing supply through an appropriate volume of new construction a significant improvement in housing conditions can be effected through a broad program of repair and modernization of existing structures and in cooperation with local governments through a program of planned rehabilitation of older neighborhoods. Furthermore the construction and related activity which this would involve would help to maintain prosperity in the building and equipment manufacturing industries and serve as a sustaining force in the entire economy Repair and modernization loans The rehabilitation of our housing supply would be facilitated by certain changes in the terms and conditions on which loans for the repair and modernization of existing structures are available under Title I of the National Housing Act. Specifically the maximum insurable loan for the repair or modernization of single-family structures should be raised from $ to $ and the maximum allowable maturity extended from to years. Upward adjustments should also be made in the maximum size and maturity of loans for the repair or modernization of multi-family dwellings and commercial structures. The inclusion of FHA 's Title I program within the scope of the permissive authority recommended above would make it possible to adjust the terms and conditions of loan insurance within the higher statutory limits if necessary as a restraint on overexpansion of credit FHA terms on mortgage loans secured by existing structures Another forward step would be to remove the discrimination against existing housing in present insurance programs. It is desirable to make the terms on which the Federal Housing Administration will insure loans on existing houses more nearly comparable with those available on new houses. Not only would this expand activity directed to the rehabilitation of existing structures but it would give greater flexibility to our economic system by facilitating transfers of houses including those effected on the so-called " trade-in " basis. Transfers and exchanges of houses deserve emphasis at this time because many families that acquired homes in recent years are finding them inadequate in view of changed family size and improved economic circumstances NEIGHBORHOOD REHABILITATION The adjustments in FHA legislation outlined above would contribute significantly to the improvement of the Nation 's stock of housing and as would help to check the decline of older neighborhoods to the extent that this can be done by individual home owners acting more or less independently. The problem of arresting blight is vastly more difficult however in the large centers of population where many structures are of the multi-unit type requiring large expenditures for rehabilitation and where deterioration is often most serious. A successful fight against blight can be waged in these cities only if it is planned and carried forward on a basis sufficiently broad to improve the character of a whole neighborhood. This calls for determined action at the local level in the planning and administration of broad and soundly conceived programs of neighborhood rehabilitation. In some cases urban blight can be corrected only by the total clearance of an area and its subsequent redevelopment ; more frequently however the need is for selective demolition and rehabilitation thus conserving and renewing what is still useful in older neighborhoods There are certain ways in which the Federal Government can assist such programs and steps should be taken at once to make this aid available. The changes in FHA legislation suggested above would be a step in this direction. It would also be desirable to give explicit authority to the Federal Housing Administration to insure mortgages on existing as well as new properties within neighborhoods designated for renewal. In addition the Federal Government should provide financial assistance to communities that are prepared to attack the problem of urban blight through planned neighborhood rehabilitation. Federal aid could be promptly given for this purpose without additional authorizations of funds by making certain of the privileges allowed under Title I of the Housing Act of available to cities which indicate a capacity to carry out neighborhood rehabilitation programs and a willingness to assume part of the cost It would be desirable to supplement the foregoing program of urban renewal by making mortgage loan insurance available on especially liberal terms for low-income families displaced as a result of slum clearance or urban renewal activities. The present program of public housing should also be continued ^ at least until it has been established whether the proposed strengthened aids to private financing will make it possible to meet the housing needs of low-income families through private effort REGULATIONS GOVERNING HOUSING CREDIT AIDS Certain features of existing housing credit law and regulations have been made obsolete by the inflation of recent years. An important adjustment would be to raise the amount of the maximum loan that may be insured by the Federal Housing Administration. At present this is $ for owner-occupied one- and two-family houses. This amount originally set in has remained unchanged despite the great rise in construction costs and in prices of housing that has occurred in the meantime. The maximum might be raised to $ with appropriate differentials for three- and four-family dwellings As suggested above increases in the amount that may be loaned on the basis of Title I financing whether for the repair and modernization of a single-family residence or for a multi-unit or commercial structure are also desirable. Finally the administrative regulations of loan insurance and guarantee agencies which set standards on new construction and define the kinds of modernization programs eligible for Federal credit assistance should be kept abreast of technological advances in the building and equipping of homes SECONDARY MORTGAGE MARKET FACILITIES An institution for discounting mortgage investments in good standing would perform an important function in the American financial system and such an institution should be established. It would help make mortgage funds available in areas where there may be transient shortages of capital. It should also be authorized to purchase insured and guaranteed mortgages of specified types when the President directs that such action is in the public interest. These functions which are so necessary to a smoothly operating market and to sound economic growth must not be confused with the unsound policy of pumping Federal credit into an inflationary mortgage market. Such a policy serves the interests of neither borrowers nor lenders let alone of the economy at large. The proposed agency should be financed with private funds to the greatest extent practicable ; but the Federal Treasury should be authorized to provide it with financial support in order that it may have access to adequate resources NEED FOR FURTHER STUDY Further steps could be taken to facilitate the repair and modernization of existing structures by making supplementary advances on outstanding mortgage loans more readily and economically available. To this end means to overcome the technical difficulties of insuring supplementary loans are being studied In some quarters concern has been expressed over the possibility that adverse economic developments might lead to extensive defaults on outstanding home mortgage contracts because of the unusually liberal terms on which many of them were written and the allegedly low equities of homeowners in their properties. Studies of the home mortgage situation suggest however that defaults on outstanding contracts would not be widespread in a moderate recession. Large numbers of homeowners have accumulated substantial equities in their properties and are unlikely to allow them to go into default. Furthermore present FHA and VA laws and regulations permit the exercise of sufficient forbearance to prevent widespread difficulties. These matters however need further attention in our continuing studies of economic preparedness ? Several financial problems outside the housing field are being examined with a view to action. The Federal securities laws were enacted nearly twenty years ago and have remained largely unchanged over that period Some modifications in these laws are needed which while fully protecting the interests of investors will make the capital market more accessible to businesses of moderate size. It would also be desirable to simplify the rules and thus reduce the costs of registration of new issues and their subsequent distribution Another problem under study is the feasibility of extending Federal insurance to the funds placed by small savers in the shares of credit unions Shareholders in these cooperative institutions do not have at present the type of protection that is afforded to depositors in commercial and savings banks and to shareholders in savings and loan associations Finally the rapid growth in recent years of the Federal Government 's activities in the field of direct lending to businesses to farmers to municipalities and to homeowners and its related activities in insuring or guaranteeing loans by private lending institutions presents an important problem in connection with efforts to moderate economic fluctuations. These manifold programs can and should be administered with increasing attention to their impact on the over-all economy and the contribution that they can make to a stable economic prosperity. To the extent that they work at cross purposes or in a manner that tends to reinforce inflationary or deflationary tendencies they make more difficult the tasks of general economic policy. The coordination of Federal activities in these fields has been inadequate. Careful study must be given to appropriate means for bringing it about Chapter Agriculture in an Expanding Economy T RENDS IN REAL FARM INCOME have been distinctly unfavorable since despite a generally prosperous national economy During operators ' real net farm income per farm fell almost onethird and their real net farm income per farm-family worker fell one-fifth However marked an all-time peak in realized net farm income and agriculture has been in a relatively good financial position to make postwar readjustments. Its financial liquidity remains high notwithstanding the decline in farm incomes. The real value of total agricultural assets and of farm proprietors ' equities per farm or per farm-family worker is substantially above levels Rapidly mounting farm surpluses make it clear that agriculture continues to face many of the serious economic problems which have plagued it except in periods of war during recent decades. These problems are extremely complex and lasting solutions have thus far been elusive. Agriculture provides the classic example of a basic and important industry whose adjustment to an expanding economy must be facilitated if it is to contribute fully to and share equitably in stable economic growth MAJOR AGRICULTURAL PROBLEMS Adjustments of production to meet consumer demand Generally speaking American agriculture has not been producing without significant surpluses or deficits the foods and fibers which domestic consumers and foreign buyers want at current prices. Over the years consumer needs and tastes costs of production and world trade patterns have changed radically. The difficulties of marketing several major crops even under prosperous conditions indicate how incompletely American agricultural production has adapted to these basic changes Wheat and cotton offer striking examples of the present imbalance between production and consumption which high and rigid price supports based as they currently are on price-cost relationships tend to create. Between and the cost in manhours of producing a bushel of wheat declined more than two-thirds the cost of producing a bale of cotton nearly one-half. Present price supports fail to reflect adequately the important cost-reducing advances in agricultural technology which these manhour data imply. In our wheat production was million bushels compared with an annual average of million in Yet annual domestic food consumption of wheat was virtually the same ( about million bushels ) in as forty years earlier. During the war and immediate postwar period our huge wheat output was a great asset for ourselves and our allies. But with the restoration of more normal world conditions exports and domestic feed and seed uses promise to absorb at present support levels only about two-thirds of the wheat production in excess of domestic food needs. As a result ^ about million bushels from the crop must be added to already excessive carry-overs. The same is true for cotton. Production in was million bales greater than the average but during the current year domestic consumption plus exports is expected to be million bales less than four decades ago with million bales being added to carry-overs. Meanwhile substantial increases in per-capita consumption of fibers instead of benefiting cotton have been captured almost wholly by synthetic fibers Both wheat and cotton have been " priced out " of important domestic and foreign markets by high and rigid price supports. These supports have encouraged domestic production of wheat and cotton beyond foreseeable needs and have contributed to an expansion of competitive foreign production greater than would otherwise have occurred. They have resulted in huge surpluses in government hands and have led to the imposition of drastic controls on individual producers. Such undesirable consequences are inevitable if present rigid price-support policies are continued indefinitely without regard to current levels of supply prospective demand and the costs of public storage For such crops a transition to new price-support levels is necessary. However since it will take time for producers to adjust to changing conditions this transition should be gradual. Government assistance can facilitate shifts to the production of products for which the long-run demand is most favorable. In this connection it may be noted that crops and livestock products accounting for about percent of gross cash farm income currently receive no direct price support and gain little from the support program. Yet this nonsupported group includes most of the commodities whose production must generally be maintained or expanded if future consumer needs are to be adequately met Reduction of price and income fluctuations Another major problem of American agriculture though one that is not confined to this industry arises from the great instability of its prices and incomes. There are several reasons for this instability First farm prices are much more sensitive to changes in general business conditions than are the prices of things farmers buy. As a result agriculture 's " terms of trade " with the rest of the economy fluctuate widely being favorable as a rule in periods of business prosperity but taking a quick turn for the worse when business recession appears. Agriculture therefore has an especially strong interest in the over-all stability of the economy and needs effective protection of its price structure in the event of general recession. The difficulties of carrying out such a program are increased how- ever if high and rigid price-support policies are pursued during generally prosperous times. For then storage stocks are likely to accumulate on a scale so large as to accentuate the threat to the stability of farm prices in a period of economic contraction Second agricultural prices and incomes are peculiarly subject to the vagaries of nature. Plant and animal diseases drought and floods cause short-term fluctuations in crop yields and may cause costly changes in the size of livestock herds. By protecting the adequacy of physical supplies of wheat the feed grains and cotton against weather hazards war and other emergency conditions a farm storage program can serve the public interest well. But if public storage becomes a method of accumulating indefinitely the surpluses induced by unduly high price supports it loses most of its effectiveness in offsetting the ordinary year-to-year variations which result from natural causes Third market prices can and often do mislead farmers in their production decisions. Especially in livestock production high prices tend to induce an excessive expansion of output which results later in unduly low prices that in turn bring about overcontraction and a repetition of the cycle. A sound storage program can help to reduce this type of instability ; so can price supports announced as they are in advance of farmers ' production decisions if not fixed at a level that encourages continuing excessive production High and rigid supports on feed grains are of doubtful wisdom. The feed grains are cash crops to only a minor extent. If their prices are supported at high levels livestock producers who grow their own grains gain little while those who do not will suffer in periods of falling livestock prices Rural poverty A third major problem of American agriculture is that many farm families have failed to share adequately in the fruits of the Nation 's phenomenal economic progress. Despite years of national farm programs numerous farm families still have incomes that are not sufficient to provide a satisfactory level of living. This persistence of pockets of rural poverty in an era of plenty gives cause for public concern Of course a substantial number of farm families have already achieved satisfactory levels of income. In about million ( percent ) of the Nation 's farm-operator families had in addition to housing and home-grown foods net cash incomes from all sources of $ or more. More than a fourth of these higher-income families were on part-time and residential farms deriving the greater part of their income from off-farm sources ; and most of the remaining families either combined the operation of small commercial farms with off-farm employment or operated larger commercial farms on a full-time basis. Given remunerative local nonfarm employment opportunities even families living on small farms can achieve a satisfactory level of living Of the farm families that are almost wholly dependent upon income from agriculture as a rule only those on medium-sized to large commercial farms can be said to live well. In million of the latter ( percent of all farms ) accounted for percent of the Nation 's gross cash farm marketings. Since the operators of these farms sell the bulk of the Nation 's farm products they stand to gain most from price supports unless forced to bear the brunt of acreage restrictions. Their principal economic problem is the instability rather than the low level of farm prices and incomes On the other hand in about million ( percent ) of the Nation 's farm families were netting from all sources less than $ of cash income not including however housing and home-grown foods. For the most part these families lacked significant amounts of income from off-farm sources. At the same time they produced too little for sale to benefit appreciably from farm price supports however high. The solution to their income problem lies largely in the expansion of local nonfarm employment or in movement to better opportunities elsewhere. If some of these families are to achieve satisfactory levels of income from farming their relatively small farms must ultimately be replaced by more efficient larger-scale family farms. This will require both a continuing shift of underemployed farm people into more productive work and a substantial influx of capital into agriculture While readjustments of this type have actually been under way for some time the difficulties which they present have been complicated by recent advances in agricultural technology. These have developed serious imbalances in American agriculture 's total productive capacity relative to immediate domestic and export needs. Over the long run the pockets of poverty which persist in American agriculture will be most effectively reduced by the growing opportunities for nonfarm employment that accompany the expansion of the economy. A growing economy will also provide the capital and technical knowledge necessary to bring most of our farms closer to the level of efficiency already achieved by the best farms PROPOSED AGRICULTURAL LEGISLATION In formulating public policies to achieve a more stable prosperous and efficient agriculture we must start where we now find ourselves and proceed a step at a time. Compromises among partially conflicting objectives such as stability efficiency economic freedom and governmental economy are unavoidable here. The present situation is serious and we can no longer delay making those revisions in agricultural policy that will move us toward desirable goals. Accordingly it was recommended in the Special Message on Agriculture on January that with minor changes the Agricultural Act of as amended by the Act of be made fully operative for all commodities The Acts of and had two distinct advantages over previous agricultural legislation. First for all " basic " commodities except tobacco they substituted adjustable price-support levels that is from to percent of parity the percentage varying inversely with current levels of supply for rigid percent supports ernized " parity-price formula Second they introduced a " mod- Adjustable price supports By the Act of Congress recognized the necessity of relating pricesupport levels inversely to current levels of supply in order to avoid chronic overproduction excessive stockpiling and drastic acreage controls. Thus Congress provided that if supplies are above normal price supports shall be lowered by specified amounts to induce greater consumption and smaller output ; if supplies are below normal price supports shall be raised by specified amounts to encourage expansion of output. Although this principle is wholly sound the Congress has up to the present time postponed the shift from high and rigid to adjustable price supports on wheat corn cotton peanuts and rice Largely as a result of this action the Commodity Credit Corporation 's commitments on January already reached million bushels of wheat million bushels of corn and million bales of cotton together representing a cost value of billion dollars and they are still rising. Under these circumstances the acreage restrictions imposed on crops are an inadequate corrective. Price-support levels designed to encourage larger sales also appear to be necessary if further piling-up of government stocks and regimentation of individual farmers are to be avoided. Hence it has been recommended that the price-support legislation of take effect for the " basic " crops as presently scheduled on January " Modernized " parity By the Act of Congress also recognized the desirability of bringing and keeping the base period for parity-price computations up to date In previous legislation the " parity price " of a given farm product had been defined as its average price in ( or some other past period ) increased by the same proportion as a general index of prices paid by farmers had increased. This old parity had tended to overvalue such crops as cotton corn wheat and peanuts and to undervalue livestock and livestock products. In " modernizing " the parity-price formula Congress specified that the average price of a given farm product in the most recent ten years be used to determine its price relationship to other farm commodities while retaining the over-all relationship of farm to nonfarm prices Through this " modernized " parity which is now in effect for all but four commodities provision was made for a relative price structure that is more consistent with current consumer preferences export demand and production costs Congress should avoid further postponement ( beyond the present effective date of January ) of the application of the " modernized " formula to those " basic " commodities corn cotton wheat and peanuts whose old parity price is higher than the new. The Act of provided that in such cases the transition from the old to a lower new parity should be limited to percent a year. This provision for a transition should be re-enacted with reference to the " basic " crops Disposal of surplus stocks The proposed changes will advance us toward the goal of a sound agricultural policy. While they would continue the principle of assuring farmers a high degree of price certainty and price stability they would also encourage needed and effective adjustments of production to current demand and carry-over discourage the building up of burdensome surpluses and reduce the frequency and extent of acreage restrictions on individual farmers. Unfortunately stocks have already reached huge proportions To cover present price-support commitments on and crops it has been recommended that the borrowing authority of the Commodity Credit Corporation be increased from billion to billion dollars. In order to introduce the new program gradually and give it a reasonable chance of success the influence of surplus stocks on current markets and prices must also be reduced For this reason it has been recommended that Congress authorize the setting aside of up to billion dollars ' worth of CCC stocks with the objective of insulating them from regular domestic and foreign markets This measure however can succeed only if further major additions to carry-overs cease after To the extent that foreign disposal is undertaken it should be carried out so as to augment rather than displace the normal volumes of world trade in our surplus commodities. The magnitude of our surplus problem could lead to practices harmful to the economies of other friendly nations a result that must be scrupulously avoided in the interest of the entire free world economy For most farm products other than the " basic " commodities the provisions of the Act of are reasonably satisfactory and with other amendments already proposed in the Special Message on Agriculture should be continued along present lines. Problems surrounding the current surplus of dairy products and oil crops can be largely solved by exercise of the discretionary authority already held by the Secretary of Agriculture MATTERS FOR FURTHER STUDY Even if the foregoing recommendations are fully accepted important matters remain for further study and future action First present agricultural legislation could lead in a period of economic adversity to a repetition of the mistakes of the thirties when acreage restrictions and storage were used to maintain food and fiber prices to consumers whose wants were essentially unchanged but whose purchasing power had fallen Second the purposes and functions of storage in the farm program need re-examination. The present price support program tends to maintain or raise the prices of storable products without reference to the basic objectives of storage policy Third present legislation continues to place reliance upon acreage allotments as a means of contracting production. While such allotments may be necessary during a period of readjustment they are not likely to be successful for long because they encourage rapid increases in the per-acre yields of price-supported crops and larger output of unsupported crops on the diverted acres. Furthermore over a period of years acreage allotments tend to freeze inefficient patterns of production among farmers and regions and to transform the benefits of the farm program into higher costs as land ownership changes Fourth the present statutory classification of farm commodities into " basic " and " nonbasic " " mandatory " and " nonmandatory " requires reconsideration. The " basic " commodities ( wheat cotton corn tobacco rice and peanuts ) have consistently received preferential treatment through mandatory price supports at high and rigid levels. On the other hand most crops and livestock products favored by recent consumption trends have derived few benefits from the price-support program. They have been classified as " nonbasic " with price supports ( usually nonmandatory ) at variable levels Finally neither the present nor the proposed agricultural legislation will appreciably raise the very low incomes of some to million American farm families. In many ways this is the most important yet most neglected problem of agriculture. The causes of rural poverty are many and complex and they require careful and sympathetic consideration. Special attention should be given to means of expanding nonfarm employment opportunities ; of making present public employment-information services more effective ; of improving rural education health and housing ; of adapting present farm-management research and extension programs to the needs of low-income farmers ; of providing adequate intermediate-term credit for farm diversification and enlargement ; and to the feasibility of devising " incentive " payments to speed the necessary shifts in the use of agricultural resources while preventing hardship during the difficult transition period The children of today 's rural poverty will help till our soil populate our cities and man our factories of tomorrow. Clearly we must attend diligently to their economic needs Chapter Social Insurance and the Minimum Wage B ECAUSE THE FLOOR OF SECURITY to the individual has been built primarily upon welfare considerations its contribution to the economic progress of the United States has not been adequately appreciated Yet the worker is likely to be fully productive only if he feels reasonably safe against want from unemployment old-age or misfortune. To help provide such personal security the Federal Government has developed or sponsored systems of unemployment insurance old-age and survivors insurance and public assistance as well as programs to conserve health educate the young rehabilitate the disabled and provide security and opportunity to the war veteran. In an effort to improve the lot of the low-income worker it has also established minimum wages under the Fair Labor Standards Act Some of these programs need improvement in scope and depth and others in clarity and financial strength. The specific recommendations that follow are intended to make them more effective both as conditions of progress and as bulwarks against instability FEDERAL-STATE UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE SYSTEM Unemployment insurance is a valuable first line of defense against economic recession. Benefit payments go to a worker as a matter of right and at the time he loses his income instead of as matter of need and after he has exhausted his savings or liquidated his house and car. In a year of recession the amount of benefit payments was billion dollarsmore than twice the level. Benefits are payable after a brief waiting period from State unemployment reserves of billion dollars. When set at appropriate levels they can sustain to some degree the earner 's way of life as well as his demand for commodities. Thus unemployment insurance payments can help to curb economic decline during an interval of time that allows other stabilizing measures to become effective Coverage But even as a first defense the system needs reinforcement. One deficiency is its inadequate coverage. From the beginning only certain classes of earners now averaging annually about million have enjoyed protection. A worker laid off by a Government agency gets no insurance benefits despite the fact that in many types of Federal jobs he is as vulnerable to lay-off or dismissal as the factory worker. It is recommended that Congress include in the insurance system the million Federal civilian employees under conditions set by the States in which they last worked and that it provide for Federal reimbursement to the States of the amount of the cost estimated to be about million dollars for the fiscal year ending in In addition it is hoped that the States will include under the system the million persons who work for them or for their municipalities and other political subdivisions A person lacks protection also if he works on a farm or in an establishment that processes farm products as an incident to farming. It is not suggested at this time to include farm workers ; but it is recommended that persons engaged in certain operations in the processing packing storing or delivering of agricultural commodities which can not reasonably be classed as agricultural pursuits be brought under the insurance system The number to be so added is around A much larger group of earners numbering million are unprotected in States if they are employed by small businesses meaning in most of these States firms with fewer than eight persons on the payroll. It is proposed that Congress amend the present law to cover employees of businesses with fewer than eight employees on the ground that such workers need protection no less than those of larger and often more stable enterprises Officials in States that already insure the employees of small firms report that the administrative burden of both the agency and the employer is manageable Experience-rating period The Federal Unemployment Tax Act does not permit a State to give an experience rating and therefore a tax reduction to the employer however stable his employment until he has had at least three years of covered experience. A newly covered employer is obliged to pay the full percent of his taxable payroll and is thus put at a competitive disadvantage with the average employer who has over the years been able to reduce his contribution to percent and in over a dozen States to percent or less. This extra cost could be troublesome if the expansion of coverage coincided with a business contraction. For these reasons it is recommended that Congress allow the shortening from three years to one of the period required to qualify for a rate reduction Amount of benefits A second inadequacy is the size of benefits. Originally upon the recommendation of the President 's Committee on Economic Security in the States set benefits generally at percent of weekly wages. However they also fixed dollar maximums which have since significantly curtailed the benefits. The effective ratio of average weekly unemployment benefits to average weekly wages of covered workers was percent in Since then with dollar maximums failing to keep pace with rising wage levels the effective ratio has fallen to percent. At present these maximums are typically between $ and $ weekly. It is suggested that the States raise these dollar maximums so that the payments to the great majority of the beneficiaries may equal at least half their regular earnings Duration of benefits A third deficiency is the duration of benefits. Only two dozen States provide for weeks and only four of these pay benefits for that length of time to all persons who meet minimum requirements for any benefits During the recession almost million persons exhausted their rights most of them in less than 4l/ months. Yet a conspicuous feature of unemployment is that as it increases in amount it also increases in duration for the individual. For example in April when unemployment was large three-fifths of those seeking employment had been out of work six months or longer compared with an average duration in of less than two months. It is urged therefore that all of the States raise the potential duration of unemployment benefits to weeks and that they make the benefits available to all persons who have had a specified amount of covered employment or earnings. A six-month period would not prevent exhaustion of benefits in a severe slump ; but in a minor downturn it should be adequate for a great majority of the claimants Federal loans to reserve funds A fourth point deserves attention. The present law requires that unemployment benefits in each State be paid out of its own earmarked reserve in the Federal Treasury. The reserves of most States are sufficient to finance payments for a number of years at the unemployment experience of But the reserves of a few States are less adequate and might be jeopardized by widespread unemployment. It is recommended therefore that the Congress provide machinery for granting non-interest-bearing loans to a State whose reserves are near exhaustion The Federal Unemployment Tax Act levies a tax on all covered employers of which the share that is retained by the Federal Government is percent of taxable payrolls. Annual appropriations are made to cover the costs of the State and the Federal Governments in administering the Act. Since these appropriations are less than the receipts of the tax it is possible to use the difference to establish a fund from which loans to needy State funds can be made. In the interest of allowing a State a reasonable interval in which to readjust its economy and attract new industries it is recommended that repayment of any loan made from the fund be postponed until after it has been outstanding for four years. Repayment should nevertheless start earlier if at any time the State 's fund rises above a safe minimum or its contribution rate is not sustained at a level reflecting its financial responsibility Improved benefits and administration Adoption by Congress and the States of the above recommendations would extend protection to more than million additional workers case the financial burden on newly covered employers raise benefits lengthen durations and save the States ' reserves from exhaustion without deterring new industries from entering a State undergoing economic readjustment They would constitute the most important improvement for defending the worker against recession that has been made in our Federal-State Unemployment Insurance System since it was instituted more than a decade and a half ago It is highly important that the recommended improvement of benefits be accompanied by strict administration of the law so as to prevent abuses and to assure that benefits are paid only to workers who are entitled to them Nothing is more likely to cast doubt on the unemployment compensation system despite its great social utility than lax administration FEDERAL OLD-AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE SYSTEM The present system of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance covers about four in five of the civilian labor force and pays average monthly benefits of $ to a retired worker and of $ to a retired worker and his wife compared with maximum benefits of $ and $ respectively. At the end of it was paying benefits to almost million widows and children as well as over million aged close to million persons altogether Benefits are financed from payroll taxes one-half being paid by the employer except for the self-employed. These combined tax rates rose to percent on January For the future the law provides for additional financing by periodic rate increases Although desirable changes were made in and the System has urgent need of further improvement. Millions of workers are still excluded and benefits have not kept pace with wage levels or living standards Moreover in the interests of economic growth as well as of individual welfare the retirement test should be so adjusted as to remove barriers to part-time productive employment. On the other hand if an aged person is obliged to give up work both human and economic considerations argue for benefits in reasonable relation to his previous earnings Coverage Coverage should be extended to bring into the System some million additional workers million of them on a voluntary group basis. The new groups would include principally professional persons in independent practice self-employed farmers hired farm workers and domestic workers not now covered members of State and local retirement systems and ministers of religion. Further broadening of the coverage is being considered by the Congressional Committee on Retirement Policy for Federal Personnel which will soon report a plan for including Federal employees in OASI without impairing the independence of present Federal retirement plans. After the Committee has made its report appropriate recommendations will be made to the Congress Amount of benefits Old-Age and Survivors Insurance benefits should be increased ; first by eliminating from the earnings base the four lowest years of earnings ; second by raising the benefit to percent of the first $ of the average monthly wage plus percent of the balance ; third by increasing the minimum benefit from $ to $ ; fourth by raising from $ to $ the annual maximum above which wages are not counted in computing benefits or taxes. As regards the retirement test the earnings permissible without loss of benefits should be put on a yearly basis for all beneficiaries and liberalized in amount Benefit rights of the disabled ; rehabilitation For those with substantial OASI work records who suffer total and extended disability benefit rights should be preserved without diminution or loss until they reach age Furthermore all disabled workers should be referred to the State Vocational Rehabilitation agencies. An expanded and improved program of vocational rehabilitation to help bring more persons back to productive employment was proposed to Congress on January Financial and other aspects The substantial steps toward improvement of the OASI system can be safely taken without any immediate increase in the payroll tax rates. The net additional cost of the Administration 's recommendations would be on a long-term basis about one-half of one percent of the annual payrolls subject to OASI taxes It may be observed in passing that during the transition in to the recommended broader coverage and more liberal benefits of unemployment compensation and old-age and survivors insurance the increased expenditures for benefits under OASI will far more than offset the net addition to tax payments under the unemployment compensation system Low INCOMES AND THE MINIMUM WAGE The prosperity enjoyed by the overwhelming majority of Americans should not blind us to the minority of families with annual incomes below $ or even $ Low annual incomes are not caused solely by low wages nor are high incomes assured by high hourly wage rates. Some people have no earnings at all or extremely low earnings because of partial unemployment sickness or other factors. Some do not earn enough even when fully employed to support their families at a decent living standard As one means of dealing with the problem of low incomes Congress and some State legislatures have sought to place a floor under wages by requiring employers not to pay less than a certain hourly rate. Minimum wage laws in the United States now apply to only million employees The Federal Fair Labor Standards Act covers about million two- thirds of them factory workers at a minimum of cents per hour with few exceptions other than for learners and handicapped. This 75-cent minimum became effective just before the invasion of Korea when the cost of living was appreciably lower than at present. Twenty States cover another million workers the majority of them women or minors in retail trade. The State minimums usually established under wage orders by specially appointed boards range for the most part between and cents There are several considerations concerning minimum wages that deserve comment. These relate to legal coverage to appropriate level to impact upon self-employed persons of low income to fundamental measures for reducing poverty and to the method of achieving adjustments in minimum wages Coverage Neither the Federal nor the State laws now include the lowest-paid workers. Yet a floor that does not support the poorest worker may compound his miseries in two ways : it may force him to pay higher prices as a customer of the covered industries whose costs have risen ; and it may push down his own wages by obliging him to compete for jobs with persons whom the covered industries have let go because they are unable to pay the higher minimum. An effective minimum-wage program should cover millions of low-paid workers now exempted Size of the minimum A minimum does not protect the inadequately rewarded worker if it is too low. On the other hand it may not benefit him if it is so high as to push up the whole scaffolding of wages and of costs of doing business thus leading either to inflation of prices and the worker 's own living costs or to elimination of the less efficient employers and workers. Yet the ability of the employer to absorb a high minimum wage is limited. Indeed the low-pay industries of today are often those earning modest profits having limited opportunities to increase productivity and containing firms easily squeezed out of business by rising costs The self-employed worker It is important to recognize that the economic condition of the wage earner can not be set off sharply from that of the person who provides his own employment. The Census has revealed that one in four of the families with incomes under $ in had the major source of their earnings in self-employment. A minimum that would benefit the wage earner materially may put a heavy burden on the small farmer or small business operator not only of higher prices for what he like the uncovered wage earner buys but also of the higher wages he must pay if he hires assistance. Protection to the wage earner must be considered with full regard to the complexities of our society Basic means of reducing poverty A minimum wage fixed by law helps to protect wage earners against unjustifiably low compensation. But a minimum wage program is an expedient of limited value for dealing with low incomes. The best help for the lowest earner is to enhance his usefulness as a worker and to improve his knowledge and mobility. Some individuals manage to attain economic success with little formal learning ; but on the average there is a close relation between earnings and education. Fortunately education is being steadily and rapidly extended. Already the average American worker under years of age is a graduate of high school It is also important to keep in mind that although some low-wage firms are lucrative the firms that skimp on rewards to their workers are not infrequently those in which profits are also small owing in part to inefficient management. Improvements in efficiency of worker and employer will take time ; but it can not be doubted that they rather than a minimum wage provide the major escape from poverty Conclusions While minimum wage laws do not get at the fundamental causes of poverty they can make a useful contribution to its reduction. Recognizing that an increase of the minimum now provided by Federal law and an expansion of its coverage are desirable the exact nature and timing of these changes must be worked out with a view to the best interests of the economy We must not proceed as has happened at times in the past to ignore some workers and pretend to aid others while in fact raising their cost of living and reducing their chances of employment. We should undertake adjustments of the minimum wage at a time when economic activity can take them in stride thereby minimizing the risk of unemployment of the less productive workers whose welfare the minimum wage seeks to aid. The Secretary of Labor is continuing his intensive canvass of this highly complex problem and is consulting with appropriate groups. At the proper time recommendations will be made to the Congress Chapter Planning of Public Works T HE FIRST CHAPTER of this Report noted the opportunity to devote our productive potentialities increasingly to peaceful purposes This should mean a swelling stream of private income and expenditure to support better living conditions. It should mean also the use of some governmental revenues, as they may be released from military and foreign aid programs or generated by economic growth to help build the Nation 's physical stock of public capital. In our country the major part of public works programs has been and should continue to be the responsibility of the States and their municipal subdivisions ROLE OF PUBLIC WORKS A strong economy requires that the national estate of soil and water resources be conserved. It is no less important that schools and welfare institutions highways and airports rivers and harbors parks and recreational areas and other needed public facilities be enlarged and improved concomitantly with the increase of population private wealth and incomes Indeed failure to augment our public assets may check the growth of private wealth as the failure of the present street highway and parking systems to meet the needs of million motor vehicles is now threatening to do A growing economy brings with it new needs for buildings and engineering projects that clearly lie outside the realm of private enterprise. Many of these needs for example for schools should be met as they emerge However a considerable number of public projects are by their very nature more or less postponable Our public works programs should be so designed and executed as to contribute to economic stability by being accelerated in slack times and restrained in boom times. Within limits expenditures for public works can be timed to serve the interests of stability but only if a reservoir of engineering studies and blueprints for specific projects has been prepared well in advance of need. A considerable amount of advance preparation of drawings and specifications has been completed by the Federal State and local governments and more is under way. If it should become necessary outlays for Federal public works could be stepped up by one-half or more within a year. State and local outlays which are now the highest on record might be expanded to a similar extent if financial arrangements were adequate I<>3 It goes without saying that an effective public works program must meet genuine public needs and thus earn the endorsement of the community Its execution must be compatible with private construction activities with which competition for resources should be kept to a practical minimum Furthermore just as public activity should supplement and encourage private so also should Federal projects supplement those of States and municipalities. Yet a public works program must be capable of administration without centralizing the operations of Government ; State and local governments should carry their full share of responsibilities NEED FOR PUBLIC WORKS In recent years public works have accounted for about one-third of total new construction with State and local outlays being about double the Federal. In construction for State and local government account amounted to billion dollars and for Federal account to billion out of a total expenditure for new construction of billion dollars. The backlog of desirable Federal State and local public works is counted in tens of billions of dollars. Although the rate of public construction has been rising significantly in recent years it is much smaller than what is needed to keep abreast of the growth of the economy and to eliminate within say the next decade the accumulated need for extensions or improvements of highways schools hospitals sewer and water facilities parks forests and other elements of the public estate State and local construction The largest current requirement for predominantly State and local facilities is streets and roads. It has been estimated that an annual expenditure of billion dollars would be required for ten years to eliminate the existing backlog for Federally aided systems and another to billion dollars for other roads and streets. In the meantime many roads now adequate would need to be improved as traffic increased or rebuilt because of normal wear adding over billion dollars of construction annually while maintenance costs would average another billion. Thus the total annual expenditure required to provide an adequate road system within a decade is apparently over billion dollars which compares with a current outlay of about billion The next largest State and local backlog is for schools. It has been estimated that approximately million pupils now have inadequate school facilities and that the required construction of public and private elementary and secondary schools to erase this need would come to over billion dollars Elementary and secondary school enrollments over the next four years will grow about million a year which together with normal replacement of obsolete schools would add an annual construction requirement of about billion dollars. A total annual expenditure of about billion dollars would therefore be necessary to meet current needs and to eliminate the backlog of such school facilities within five years. Clearly the needs of education can not long be deferred The backlog for college and university construction is reported to be in the neighborhood of billion dollars. About ^ million students are now enrolled in institutions of higher education and by the number may approximate million. If the construction backlog were worked off over a period of years and the additional facilities required for current growth in enrollment were put in place the expenditure would average about % billion dollars per year. By adding this figure to that for primary and secondary school structures we get an estimate of % billion dollars per year for school construction which compares with a current rate of about billion dollars Hospitals are another large potential of State and local construction The State hospital plans approved under the Hospital Survey and Construction Act indicate a need for over hospital beds of primary health units and of auxiliary health units. To adhere to the standards set up under this Act and meet the backlog of hospital needs in the next ten years it would be necessary to spend more than billion dollars a year. Currently about billion dollars is being spent The accumulated requirements of local water and sewerage facilities are impressive. To eliminate the backlog of water facilities within five years and also provide for current growth of population annual expenditures would have to come to about billion dollars compared with a current rate of billion. Even more serious is the shortage of sewers and industrial waste facilities the capacity of which has not kept pace with the rapid urban growth of the last decade. To meet these requirements within five years as well as to provide for current growth annual expenditures of billion dollars are necessary which compares with a current rate of about billion. The needs for slum clearance and urban renewal discussed in Chapter add materially to the potential volume of local construction activity Federal projects The listing just made of construction needs in States and localities is by no means exhaustive. There is moreover an accumulated need for Federal public works. For several years now the Federal Government has held back certain construction projects authorized by the Congress for the Bureau of Reclamation the Corps of Engineers and the Public Buildings Service Some programs of the Forest Service National Park Service Soil Conservation Service and other agencies have likewise been properly held in abeyance because of the prior claim of war and defense requirements on manpower materials and public funds Current action The massive accumulations of need for local State and Federal public works are attributable to the growth of our population its migration the rise in income and living standards and the deferrals of construction during World War II and the Korean war. Some of the shortages especially of highways are retarding the growth and interfering with the efficient operation of the economy. Steps must be taken to extend and strengthen the Federally aided highway system A part of the Nation 's highway needs can be met by the States without straining their budgets through the construction of toll roads. Toll roads have come to be widely accepted. So far specific plans have been formulated by the States for only a fraction of the main rural highway routes that could be wholly self-financing toll roads. The development of plans for urban toll roads has proceeded even more slowly. The Federal Government should encourage studies of the economic feasibility of toll road projects together with engineering surveys by making advances available to the States for these purposes. It seems likely that by lifting legal impediments to immediate possession of rights of way and by pushing engineering plans even before projects are authorized it would become feasible for the States or their special authorities to commence a considerable volume of construction of toll roads within a year The local State and Federal governments should turn to the pressing tasks of eliminating step by step the deficiencies of other types of public works. It is necessary also to look ahead and to be prepared to step up the rate of public construction if business conditions make this advisable ADVANCE PLANNING OF PUBLIC WORKS Federal program The Federal Government is now equipped with a considerable volume of project drawings and specifications. For some blueprints are ready ; for others the work is organized to carry planning along just ahead of construction. The Federal Government would be able to expand its construction rapidly in the event of need. To a degree this could be accomplished without new legislation For some years the Bureau of the Budget has assembled annually the proposed six-year construction programs of all Federal agencies. In the spring of work was started to improve and organize this information so that a continuous inventory of plans would be available. Systematic information is required to reveal bottlenecks and to speed the initiation of useful projects. Hence the proposed projects are being sifted and classified according to their size type location status of plans urgency and other practical criteria. Many small Federal projects including renovation and repair of existing facilities ^ can be started upon short notice or terminated promptly There remains the large task of evolving truly integrated long-term programs of major Federal works in the fields of water and soil conservation to which effort will be devoted during the present year State and local programs It is easier to plan organize and coordinate Federal public works and to harmonize them with economic requirements than to bring to readiness the programs of thousands of State and local governments. Yet almost two-thirds of total public construction is for local account. While it is highly important that the planning scheduling and financing of local facilities remain the business of the States and municipalities the Federal Government should be prepared in case of serious need to help the State and local governments work out their problems The Federal Government must cooperate with State and local governments. To assist localities in building an inventory of drawings and specifications for high priority projects it would be desirable to make interestfree loans for this purpose In general State and local governments now have the financial means to implement a significant expansion of public works. However it is only realistic to recognize that in the event of serious unemployment their circumstances might make it difficult to continue a high rate of public construction. In such a case Federal financial assistance would be necessary COMMUNITY ACTION To REGULARIZE EMPLOYMENT The emphasis placed on public works in this chapter must not be interpreted to mean that they constitute the sole contribution that States and localities can usefully make to economic stability. Communities threatened with unemployment as a consequence of the decline of particular industries have in recent years taken active steps to regularize local employment Indeed civic groups in whole regions are attempting to overcome structural unemployment by a reorientation of their industry. With confidence in the determination and ability of the Federal Government to moderate fluctuations some local civic groups have marshalled the economic knowledge at hand and in an atmosphere of cooperative self-help and community pride have contributed to the development of their communities. Such civic programs usually aim at broadening and diversifying a community 's industrial base and seek to reveal latent resources. For the individual community program the essential needs are local leadership and technical skill. Some labor unions and business associations have established programs for organizing and assisting community groups to study and solve their local employment problems. The Federal Government can facilitate the process through provision of economic information and counsel ; but the drive and leadership must necessarily come from the local community itself In a dynamically evolving economy there is no end to the process of selfimproving adaptation by the community and the individual and the firm as well to the changing forces of economic growth Chapter Economic Relations with Other Countries HE BROAD ECONOMIC ADVANCE of the nations of the free world during to which we have referred previously is heartening evidence of the effective use made of the aid given by the United States to postwar reconstruction and development. Increasingly foreign countries are resuming domestic policies aimed at maintaining budgetary balance and stable prices. United States aid was intended to help and has helped these countries bridge the difficulties and reduce the burdens of postwar economic readjustment. It could not of course serve as a substitute for financial measures needed to achieve internal balance T PROGRESS TOWARD A FREE WORLD ECONOMY The vitality of free institutions has enabled them to survive the strain of two world wars and a world depression of great magnitude. In spite of the growth of economic controls arising from these events the trading system of the free world is still mainly one in which transactions are conducted by private enterprises rather than by governments. The interference of the State with competitive market forces has receded from its war-time peak. Economic reconstruction and the recovery of production have in most countries been accompanied by a relaxation or removal of price controls rationing state buying and trade and exchange restrictions In spite of new strains and temporary setbacks associated with the Korean war notable progress has been made since in returning to freer economic processes. But much remains to be done before an enduring balance of international transactions in goods and currencies is re-established There is a general recognition here and abroad of the need for a freer system of trade and payments. It is a responsibility of governments to create and maintain the circumstances in which private traders can conduct their transactions with the fewest impediments from exchange controls or trade restrictions. Sustained prosperity in an interdependent world is a task of all free nations working together The progress already made toward liberalization of international trade and payments should be continued by vigorous efforts to reduce the remaining barriers that stand in the way. Among these impediments are the uncertainties arising from the sensitivity of other economic areas to fluctuations of the United States economy. The program of action outlined in this Report to strengthen the forces of economic growth and resistance to deflation combined with the determination of the Federal Government to employ all of its powers to prevent severe slumps in the future should be as reassuring to the peoples of other countries as it is to the people of the United States. In common with other countries the United States is determined to continue its efforts to attain the common objective a steadily expanding world economy DOMESTIC ECONOMIC STABILITY A policy to promote economic growth and stability can not be limited to our domestic affairs but must of necessity extend to our relations with other nations. One of the basic lessons of history is the interdependence between prosperity at home and prosperity abroad ; between depression at home and depression abroad. This close link might conceivably be broken by the adoption of nationalistic measures tending to isolate individual nations and areas from outside fluctuations. The objections to such policies are however overwhelming. The sacrifices in economic efficiency and living standards which they involve have long been emphasized and need not be restated. The rigid controls necessary to keep such an economy in balance would be intolerable. Equally important economic isolation is no guarantee of internal stability. The severity of the depression of the thirties was aggravated by the nationalistic character of the programs devised to combat it as " beggar-my-neighbor " policies spread currency depreciation tariff increases import restrictions and exchange controls from country to country. Flexible trade and capital movements supplemented by cooperative policies between governments and central banks are far more likely to help stabilize national economies to cushion the impact of domestic disturbances and to prevent their spreading to the world at large The system toward which we must work is one which will provide increasing opportunities for mutually advantageous trade among the free nations and which can operate without the repeated extension of grantsof-aid from any nation. There is no single measure by the United States or any other nation which can bring such a system into being. Its achievement will call for a variety of measures on the part of all nations. The principal contribution that the United States can make to the achievement of an efficient system of international trade and payments is to maintain a vigorous healthy and expanding economy REDUCTION OF INTERNATIONAL BARRIERS This however is not enough. World trade has been conducted in years past under the constant threat of the erection of new trade barriers by all of the major importing countries. In the case of the United States as our foreign trade policy has been debated from year to year other nations have come to entertain doubts concerning its continuity. Although we have in fact carried out vigorous tariff-reducing programs in recent years we have undertaken these measures in an atmosphere of constant uncertainty. Our trade policy and customs administration should provide a sense of continuity stability and forward movement to the rest of the world These policies of the United States should facilitate and be accompanied by similar measures by other nations to reduce governmental interference with the free movement of goods and capital. In such a program high priority should be given to the elimination of bilateral and discriminatory trade and exchange techniques which strike at the very core of international competition and currency convertibility. This should lay the basis for further and continuing advances toward the general reduction of trade restrictions as agreed to and already begun under existing international agreements At the same time barriers to the movement of private capital should be removed so that it may play a fuller role in developing new sources of materials creating new productive facilities and contributing to an increase in standards of living throughout the free world The Administration is now intensively engaged in assessing the findings and recommendations of the newly completed report of the Commission on Foreign Economic Policy. On the basis of this study a comprehensive program will be presented to the Congress for action no Chapter Dealing with Economic Instability T HE PRECEDING CHAPTERS have outlined a program of action to stimulate the expansive forces of individual enterprise and at the same time to strengthen the ability of the economy to check either recessionary or inflationary trends. The program calls for action not only by the Federal Government but also by State and local governments. Business firms and financial institutions have important roles to play in the maintenance of prosperity and so do workers and consumers. If consumers should sustain an even rate of spending if businessmen should respond to changes in sales by varying the effort put into selling rather than investment outlays if financial institutions should use uniform credit standards whether business is booming or slackening then the tasks facing the Federal Government will indeed be greatly lightened. But what private economic groups do is not independent of the directions taken by public policy. By honoring the Employment Act and by demonstrating full determination to act as circumstances require the Government can create a climate of economic opinion that will foster stabilizing activities by private groups and thus ease the burden that the Federal Government itself need assume This Economic Report to the Congress the first one submitted by this Administration began by outlining general principles of governmental action and then developed a concrete program to foster an expanding economy free from the ravages of both deflation and inflation. Other reports will continue the work here begun. It is a duty of the Administration to inform the Congress and the people as clearly as it can of the major policies it aims to pursue. Economic life is by the nature of things surrounded by uncertainties and not the least of these in the past has been the course of governmental policy itself. A government that wavers in its policy or is excessively reticent about it can at times be as injurious to business and consumer confidence as a government that pursues punitive measures. It is desirable therefore before closing this Report to answer as far as we properly can at this time some of the questions about business fluctuations that are in the minds of many citizens NEED FOR CONSTANT VIGILANCE AND FLEXIBILITY In discussions of the relation of public policy to the business cycle this question is commonly raised : At what point should or will the Federal Government act in the interest of checking depression or inflation ? The thought seems to be that the Government can stand aloof until some price index or unemployment figure reaches this or that magnitude ill This is not a realistic concept of public policy. It overlooks the need for constant vigilance and preventive action day by day and week by week The decisions currently made by Government whether in the sphere of taxes or housing or defense or agriculture or bank credit or any other major area inevitably have implications for economic growth and stability if not immediately then in a later day. The new concept that is emerging in the practical art of government as Chapter may already have suggested is to subject every act of proposed legislation or administrative decision as far as that is humanly possible to review from the standpoint of the contribution it is likely to make whether in the immediate or a more distant future to the attainment of an expanding economy with maximum employment and without price inflation. That was the basic intent of the Employment Act of and it is a guiding principle of this Administration If our economy is to have a good chance of staying firmly on the road that separates inflation from recession the Government must be alert and sensitive to every economic development including its own myriad activities ; it must be prepared to take preventive as well as remedial action ; and it must put itself in a state of readiness to cope with new situations that may arise This Report has sought to convey these basic principles both in its review of the directions taken by governmental policy during the past year and in the new program of action that is being recommended. But the question may be asked : Is the proposed program sufficient to insure stable prosperity ? Does it deal adequately with the economic conditions that are currently emerging ? Or may it not go too far and unleash new inflationary forces ? To these questions no answer can be both short and honest The recommended program is sound. It is designed to meet the needs of the current situation to strengthen the basic expansive forces of individual enterprise and to protect economic stability But no one however learned or wise can predict with certainty the precise strength or influence of a particular governmental program. Further apart from what the Government does economic life continually turns up new problems and opportunities as fresh developments occur in one or another part of the domestic front or the international field. The Government must be ready to deal with numerous contingencies and beware of tying the fate of the Nation to a rigid economic program based on a categorical forecast INSTRUMENTALITIES OF POLICY In recognition of the fallibility of economic forecasts this Report has recommended several measures that will automatically tend to strengthen the ability of the economy to resist either recessionary or inflationary trends But automatic stabilizers can not be counted on to do more than restrain either an upward or a downward tendency of the economy. In view of their limitations and because of the impossibility of being entirely sure in advance of the precise effect of any governmental program the Government will pursue flexible policies in the future as it has in the past year that is policies that can be readily supplemented if they prove inadequate or quickly modified if they carry the economy to the threshold of price inflation The arsenal of weapons at the disposal of Government is very formidable It includes credit controls administered by the Federal Reserve System debt management techniques of the Treasury and the authority of the President to vary the terms of mortgages carrying Federal insurance apart from the wide extension of that authority recommended in this Report. It includes the administration of the budget which permits more flexibility than is commonly appreciated quite apart from new legislation or new appropriations by the Congress. It includes also other areas of action such as taxation public works accelerated depreciation for defense plants and the newly recommended agricultural supports. And if the powers possessed by the Executive should need to be increased to cope with some new economic development the Administration will promptly seek from the Congress the additional authority that it requires ACTIONS IN CASE OF NEED Since economic troubles have different causes and often require different treatment no detailed blueprint of specific actions can be responsibly laid down in advance of the event. There are however certain broad principles that will guide this Administration in dealing with the possible threat of a depression. These should be made clear The first and foremost principle is to take preventive action as was done during the past year and as is further recommended in this Report. The second principle is to avoid a doctrinaire position work simultaneously on several fronts and make sure that the actions being taken harmonize and reinforce one another. The third basic principle is to pursue measures that will foster the expansion of private activity by stimulating consumers to spend more money and businessmen to create more jobs so that the economy may resume its growth with new strength. The fourth principle is to act promptly and vigorously if economic conditions require it. The Government will not hestitate to make greater use of monetary debt management and credit policy including liberalized use of Federal insurance of private obligations or to modify the tax structure or to reduce taxes or to expand on a large scale the construction of useful public works or to take any other steps that may be necessary. The Government must and will be ready to deal with any contingencies that may arise. An essential part of this preparedness under present circumstances is a higher Federal debt limit which is already necessary for the efficient conduct of the Government 's current operations The need for constant vigilance and preparedness by Government does not however justify constant stirring or meddling. Minor variations in " activity are bound to occur in a free economy or for that matter in any type of economy. The arsenal of stabilizing weapons will be drawn upon by the Government boldly but not more frequently than is required to help maintain reasonable stability. Nor will flexible policies aiming to minimize economic fluctuations be permitted to interfere any more than is necessary with the fiscal objective of bringing down the scale of Federal expenditures reducing taxes and arriving at a budgetary balance THE BASIS FOR PROGRESS The Government can greatly help to maintain prosperity. But it is well to recall the accumulated experience of generations which has taught us that no Government can of itself create real and lasting prosperity. A thriving economy depends fundamentally on the enterprise of millions of individuals acting in their own interests and in the interests of their families and communities. The American people are highly skilled imaginative enterprising and forward-looking. The best service that the Government can render to our economy besides helping to maintain stability and insuring a floor of protection for the population is therefore to create an environment in which men are eager to make new jobs to acquire new tools of production to improve or scrap the old ones design new products and develop new markets increase efficiency all around and thus be able and willing to pay higher wages and provide better working conditions. The Federal Government is fostering and will continue to foster this kind of environment Our economy today is highly prosperous and enjoys great basic strength as Part II of this Report has indicated. The minor readjustment under way since mid-1953 is likely soon to come to a close especially if the recommendations of the Administration are adopted. These recommendations like the analysis of the current situation on which they are based envision a sustained improvement in American living standards and a broadly expanding economy. There is every reason for confidence that our system of individual enterprise which is one of the wonders of the world will long continue to be a producer of ever-increasing wealth and widely diffused well-being Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ARTHUR F. BURNS Chairman NEIL H. JAGOBY WALTER W. STEWART Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During During the period from January through March the functions of the Council of Economic Advisers were carried out by the Council that was established in pursuant to the Employment Act of that year. In April the functions were transferred to the Economic Adviser to the President who because of recent appointment was also a member of the Council. The functions remained with the Economic Adviser until the end of July when they were restored to the Council which was reconstituted pursuant to the Reorganization Plan No. of ACTIVITIES OF COUNCIL : JANUARY-MARCH Funds provided for the Council of Economic Advisers in the Appropriation Act for the Fiscal Year were sufficient to continue the agency only through March of that year. Consequently on February Mr Sherman Adams The Assistant to the President advised the Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee that while the President had not yet completed his plans for the Council of Economic Advisers he believed it highly important that the Council be continued. On behalf of the President Mr. Adams requested that the Committee consider a supplemental appropriation sufficient to continue the Council through the remainder of the fiscal year The President followed this request with the nomination of Arthur F Burns Professor of Economics Columbia University and Director of Research National Bureau of Economic Research as a member of the Council of Economic Advisers. At the hearing before the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency on March the Committee approved Mr. Burns ' nomination which was confirmed by the Senate March Before the Appropriations Committee acted on the request of the President for a supplemental apropriation to continue the Council until the end of the fiscal year the Council had practically exhausted its funds and was obliged to begin to wind up its affairs ECONOMIC ADVISER TO THE PRESIDENT : APRIL-JULY Instead of appropriating funds to continue the Council Congress provided in the Supplemental Appropriation Act approved March for the establishment of an Economic Adviser to the President and appro284874 HQ priated $ for such an Adviser and necessary staff for the remainder of the fiscal year. Mr. Burns was appointed to the post by the President and with a small staff continued to perform the functions previously performed by the Council Reorganization Plan No. of The President 's plans for the Council were set forth in Reorganization Plan No. of and in the President 's Message transmitting that Plan to the Congress on June On June Congressman Hoffman introduced House Resolution disapproving the Plan. Mr. Hoffman stated that the introduction of the resolution did not indicate that he approved or disapproved the plan but that his purpose was to enable committee consideration and appropriate action Hearings on the Plan were held July by a Special Subcommittee on Reorganization of the House Committee on Government Operations. The subcommittee consisted of Marguerite Stitt Church Chairman Katharine St. George and John W. McCormack. Mr. Burns accompanied by William F. Finan Assistant Director for Management and Organization Bureau of the Budget appeared before the subcommittee in behalf of the Plan. Mr. George D. Riley Member National Legislative Committee American Federation of Labor also testified in favor of the Plan. In a letter to the Committee Senator Ralph E. Flanders supported the Plan and at a subsequent meeting of the subcommittee July Congressman Jesse P. Wolcott testified in favor of it The Special Subcommittee by unanimous action voted to recommend to the full committee the disapproval of House Resolution This action was in effect a vote of approval of Reorganization Plan No. The recommendation of the Subcommittee was accepted by the House and the Plan was permitted to go into effect on August RECONSTITUTED COUNCIL Reorganization Plan No. of provided for several significant changes in the organization of the Council. To strengthen the internal administration of the Council the responsibility for employing staff specialists and consultants was transferred from the Council to the Chairman. To establish a clearer relationship with the President the function of reporting to the President on the Council 's views and activities was likewise transferred to the Chairman. The position of Vice Chairman of the Council was abolished The aim of the Reorganization Plan was to remedy certain deficiencies in the operation of the Council of Economic Advisers which had consisted of three members each of whom under the Employment Act of had coequal powers. ( See General Management of the Executive Branch U. S Commission on Organization of Executive Branch of the Government February ) At the same time the Reorganization Plan fully preserved the advantage of the balanced judgment that several individuals could bring to bear on economic problems Staffing the Council On July just prior to the effective date of Reorganization Plan No. of Mr. Burns was renominated as a member of the Council He was confirmed again by the Senate July On August he was designated as Chairman by the President Neil H. Jacoby Professor of Business Economics and Policy and Dean of the School of Business Administration University of California Los Angeles was appointed by the President as the second member of the Council August Mr. Jacoby took office September Professor Emeritus Walter W. Stewart School of Economics and Politics Institute of Advanced Study Princeton New Jersey was appointed by the President as the third member of the Council November Mr Stewart took office December Immediately after Mr. Burns took office six members of the staff of the old Council of Economic Advisers who had been assisting him as Economic Adviser were reappointed to the reconstituted Council and the recruitment of additional staff got under way. At present the Council has a staff of persons including full-time part-time and detailed personnel and consultants who report at frequent intervals. Fourteen members of the staff are expert economists of proven competence recognized for their ability to engage in objective economic analysis Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability An important feature of the reconstituted Council was not specifically spelled out in Reorganization Plan No. of although it was announced in the President 's Transmittal Message in which the President stated : In order to make the work of the Council of Economic Advisers more effective at the top policy level of the executive branch I am also asking the heads of several departments and agencies or the representatives they may designate to serve as an Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability under the chairmanship of the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. At all times close liaison must be maintained by the Council with all departments and agencies and with interdepartmental committees especially the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems It is contemplated that the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability supported by the existing staffs of the various departments and agencies will meet frequently and through its Chairman will keep me closely informed about the state of the national economy and the various measures necessary to aid in maintaining a stable prosperity The agencies designated June to be represented on the Board and the officials subsequently designated to serve on the Board are as follows : Department of the Treasury Marion B. Folsom Under Secretary Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Walter Williams Under Secretary Department of Labor Rocco Siciliano Assistant Secretary Bureau of the Budget Paul L. Morrison Assistant Director Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Mills Member of Board The White House Office Gabriel Hauge Administrative Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Arthur F. Burns Chairman Since its establishment the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability has met regularly once a week and at times more frequently Representatives of other interested departments and agencies have from time to time joined in the deliberations of the Board. The Board has been an effective body for reviewing and evaluating economic programs and policies of the Federal Government and for considering measures designed to strengthen the economy. It has also proved effective in achieving a mutual understanding necessary for coordinated action of the various departments and agencies to accomplish the objectives of the Employment Act of The Board is essentially a committee advisory to the Council. It is designed to meet a very concrete need in government namely to provide a forum at which thinking on economic policy of the various departments and agencies can be compared and coordinated. It expresses the principle that there should be one place in government at which all questions concerning the maintenance of production employment and economic growth shall be considered. Because of the Board the Council is now in a better position than formerly to review and evaluate the current economic situation and to formulate plans to cope with various economic contingencies Auxiliary Staff Committee As an adjunct to the Advisory Board there has been established an Auxiliary Staff Committee made up mainly of members of the senior staff of the departments and agencies represented on the Advisory Board. The members of this Auxiliary Staff Committee jointly review and analyze proposals to be presented to the Advisory Board. Individually they brief Board members in advance on issues to be considered at Board meetings The Auxiliary Staff Committee also provides a channel for tapping the resources of the collaborating departments and agencies represented on the Advisory Board. The Committee meets frequently with the Council Members of the Committee and the agencies they represent are as follows : Ewan Clague Commissioner Bureau of Labor Statistics Department of Labor Neal J. Hardy Assistant Administrator Division of Plans and Programs Housing and Home Finance Agency J. Weldon Jones Economic Adviser Bureau of the Budget Don Paarlberg Assistant to the Secretary of Agriculture Louis Paradiso Chief Statistician Office of Business Economics Department of Commerce Winfield W. Riefler Assistant to the Chairman Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Dan T. Smith Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury Ralph A. Young Director Division of Research and Statistics Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Task Forces In addition to the Auxiliary Staff Committee Interagency Task Forces were established during September for an intensive study of measures to promote the stability and growth of our economy and specific economic programs and policies to be pursued in the event of a general slowing down of economic activity. The chairman of each task force is a senior member of the Council staff and the task force consists of experts of the various Government agencies which have interest and competence in the specific programs and policies being examined Thus far task forces have examined the economic potentials of programs for home modernization and repair ; Federal credit aids to construction ; public works programs ; unemployment compensation ; tax revisions ; community and business programs to expand employment ; and programs to strengthen our financial system. Task forces will be organized to explore other areas of economic policy as needed The reports of the task forces include specific recommendations of actions to be taken to promote the growth and stability of our economy and to avert developments detrimental to our economic and social welfare. The reports are then reviewed and evaluated by the Auxiliary Staff Committee The recommendations of this Committee are taken into account in redrafting the reports for submission to the Advisory Board All major fields of economics under continuous review Staff assignments are made by the Council so that developments in every major field of economics embraced by the Council 's responsibilities national income public finance money and banking business organization construction and public works manpower agriculture international trade and finance technology social security prices productivity etc. are under the watchful eye of an expert. Staff members some of whom cover more than one field are responsible in their respective fields for eliciting the cooperation of government and non-government experts and specialists in analyzing and evaluating the significance of current developments Senior members of the staff including those on loan as well as consultants are as follows : Asher Achinstein Melvin G. de Chazeau Frances M James Albert R. Koch Clarence D. Long David W. Lusher Robinson Newcomb William H. Nicholls Alfred Reifman Raymond J. Saulnier Louis Shere Irving H. Siegel Collis Stocking and Robert Triffin Consultants Through the use of consultants the Council is able to secure the advice and assistance of outstanding experts who because of other obligations are unable to serve the Council on a full-time basis. These experts contribute greatly to the work of the Council. The Council benefits from their experience and research studies many of which they have made prior to becoming consultants. The results of these studies are made available to the Council in conferences memoranda and reports Cooperation The Council has enjoyed full cooperation from other Government agencies. Participation on the task forces has not been limited to the agencies represented on the Advisory Board. Other agencies have made members of their staffs available to work on special problems at the request of the Council. In addition all agencies have shown a gratifying willingness to obtain assemble and speed up the preparation of data needed by the Council. Special recognition is due the technical staff of the Departments of Agriculture Commerce Labor State and Treasury the Bureau of the Budget the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Department of Health Education and Welfare The Council has also received willing cooperation from educational institutions business and professional groups and labor and management organizations. Officials of the American Farm Bureau Federation American Federation of Labor the Congress of Industrial Organizations the United States Chamber of Commerce the Committee on Economic Development and a number of trade associations have given generously of their time in considering subjects with which the Council has been concerned. Plans are being made to extend and to formalize future working relationships with such groups. The Council intends in this way to obtain a balanced cross-section of opinion on economic developments and on recommendations of measures to promote the health of our economy The National Bureau of Economic Research has undertaken at its own expense at the request of the Council a basic study of economic forecasting techniques. Both the National Bureau and the Brookings Institution have made conference facilities available to the Council so that the best thinking in the country may be brought to bear on the problems considered by the Council The Council has received assistance from the Joint Committee on the Economic Report and its staff and in turn has continued to prepare Economic Indicators which is published monthly by the Committee. The continuous informal interchange of points of view on economic developments between the Council and the Joint Committee and its staff adds to the effectiveness of the Council Without this extensive cooperation and assistance it would be impossible for the Council to carry out its responsibilities effectively with its small staff Council budget for fiscal year The Council requested a budget of $ for the fiscal year The House of Representatives provided for an appropriation of $ plus the unobligated balance of funds amounting to approximately $ appropriated for salaries and expenses of an Economic Adviser to the President in the Second Supplemental Appropriation Act The Senate increased the amount to $ plus the unobligated balance. This amount was agreed to in conference The Director of the Budget Bureau has deducted $ from the total and set it aside in a reserve. Since receiving the appropriation the Council has moved cautiously in selecting its staff and has carried forward its work in accordance with Reorganization Plan No. with a determination to keep all expenditures down to a minimum to avoid requesting the release of any of the Budget Bureau reserve Council budget for fiscal year The Council has requested a $ increase in its budget for the fiscal year This increase will permit a balancing and strengthening of the staff which has been determined to be necessary on the basis of experience gained since the Council was reconstituted under Reorganization Plan No. of Appendix B EMPLOYMENT ACT OF AS AMENDED AND RELATED LAWS Employment Act of as Amended and Related Laws [ The Employment Act of was approved February Stat The following shows the Act as originally enacted with amendments and additions through the first session of the Eighty-third Congress. The related joint resolution of June Stat. which is also shown below is not a part of the Act. Parenthetical references at the end of each section indicate where the section is carried in the United States Code. ] EMPLOYMENT ACT OF SHORT TITLE SECTION This Act may be cited as the " Employment Act of " DECLARATION OF POLICY / SEC. The Congress declares that it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations'and other essential considerations of national policy with the assistance and cooperation of industry agriculture labor and State and local governments to coordinate and utilize all its plans functions and resources for the purpose of creating and maintaining in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work/and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power/ ( U. S. C. ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT SEC. ( a ) The President shall transmit to the Congress at the beginning of each regular session ( commencing with the year ) an economic report ( hereinafter called the " Economic Report " ) setting forth ( ) the levels of employment production and purchasing power obtaining in the United States and such levels needed to carry out the policy declared in section ; ( ) current and foreseeable trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power ; ( ) a review of the economic program of the Federal Government and a review of economic conditions affecting employment in the United States or any considerable portion thereof during the preceding year and of their effect upon employment production and purchasing power ; and ( ) a program for carrying out the policy declared in section together with such recommendations for legislation as he may deem necessary or desirable ( b ) The President may transmit from time to time to the Congress reports supplementary to the Economic Report each of which shall include such supplementary or revised recommendations as he may deem necessary or desirable to achieve the policy declared in section ( c ) The Economic Report and all supplementary reports transmitted under subsection ( b ) of this section shall when transmitted to Congress be referred to the joint committee created by section ( U. S. C. ) COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS TO THE PRESIDENT SEC. ( a ) There is created in the Executive Office of the President a Council of Economic Advisers ( hereinafter called the " Council " ) The Council shall be composed of three members who shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and each of whom shall be a person who as a result of his training experience and attainments is exceptionally qualified to analyze and interpret economic developments to appraise programs and activities of the Government in the light of the policy declared in section and to formulate and recommend national economic policy to promote employment production and purchasing power under free competitive enterprise. Each member of the Council shall receive basic compensation at the rate of $ per annum The President shall designate one of the members of the Council as chairman ( b ) The Council is authorized to employ and fix the compensation of such specialists and other experts as may be necessary for the carrying out of its functions under this Act without regard to the civil-service laws and the Classification Act of as amended and is authorized subject to the civil-service laws to employ such other officers and employees as may be necessary for carrying out its functions under this Act and fix their compensation in accordance with the Classification Act of as amended ( c ) It shall be the duty and function of the Council ( ) to assist and advise the President in the preparation of the Economic Report ; ( ) to gather timely and authoritative information concerning economic developments and economic trends both current and prospective to analyze and interpret such information in the light of the policy declared in section for the purpose of determining whether such developments and trends are interfering or are likely to interfere with the achievement of such policy and to compile and submit to the President studies relating to such developments and trends ; ( ) to appraise the various programs and activities of the Federal Government in the light of the policy declared in section of this title for the purpose of determining the extent to which such programs and activities are contributing and the extent to which they are not contributing to the achievement of such policy and to make recommendations to the President with respect thereto ; ( ) to develop and recommend to the President national economic policies to foster and promote free competitive enterprise to avoid economic fluctuations or to diminish the effects thereof and to maintain employment production and purchasing power ; ( ) to make and furnish such studies reports thereon and recommendations with respect to matters of Federal economic policy and legislation as the President may request ( d ) The Council shall make an annual report to the President in December of each year ( e ) In exercising its powers functions and duties under this Act ( ) the Council may constitute such advisory committees and may consult with such representatives of industry agriculture labor consumers State and local governments and other groups as it deems advisable ; ( ) the Council shall to the fullest extent possible utilize the services facilities and information ( including statistical information ) of other Government agencies as well as of private research agencies in order that duplication of effort and expense may be avoided ( f ) To enable the Council to exercise its powers functions and duties under this Act there are authorized to be appropriated ( except for the salaries of the members and the salaries of officers and employees of the Council ) such sums as may be necessary. For the salaries of the members and the salaries of officers and employees of the Council there is authorized to be appropriated not exceeding $ in the aggregate for each fiscal year JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE ECONOMIC REPORT SEC. ( a ) There is established a Joint Committee on the Economic Report to be composed of seven Members of the Senate to be appointed by the President of the Senate and seven Members of the House of Representatives to be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives The party representation on the joint committee shall as nearly as may be feasible reflect the relative membership of the majority and minority parties in the Senate and House of Representatives ( b ) It shall be the function of the joint committee ( ) to make a continuing study of matters relating to the Economic Report ; ( ) to study means of coordinating programs in order to further the policy of this Act ; and ( ) as a guide to the several committees of the Congress dealing with legislation relating to the Economic Report not later than March of each year ( beginning with the year ) to file a report with the Senate and the House of Representatives containing its findings and recommendations with respect to each of the main recommendations made by the President in the Economic Report and from time to time '31 to make other reports and recommendations to the Senate and House of Representatives as it deems advisable ( c ) Vacancies in the membership of the joint committee shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the functions of the joint committee and shall be filled in the same manner as in the case of the original selection. The joint committee shall select a chairman and a vice chairman from among its members ( d ) The joint committee or any duly authorized subcommittee thereof is authorized to hold such hearings as it deems advisable and within the limitations of its appropriations the joint committee is empowered to appoint and fix the compensation of such experts consultants technicians and clerical and stenographic assistants to procure such printing and binding and to make such expenditures as it deems necessary and advisable The cost of stenographic services to report hearings of the joint committee or any subcommittee thereof shall not exceed cents per hundred words The joint committee is authorized to utilize the services information and facilities of the departments and establishments of the Government and also of private research agencies ( e ) There is authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year the sum of $ or so much thereof as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section to be disbursed by the Secretary of the Senate on vouchers signed by the chairman or vice chairman ( f ) Service of one individual until the completion of the investigation authorized by Senate Concurrent Resolution Eighty-first Congress as an attorney or expert for the joint committee in any business or professional field on a part-time basis with or without compensation shall not be considered as service or employment bringing such individual within the provisions of sections or of title of the United States Code or of any other Federal law imposing restrictions requirements or penalties in relation to the employment of persons the performance of services or the payment or receipt of compensation in connection with any claim proceeding or matter involving the United States. ( U. S. C. ) JOINT RESOLUTION OF JUNE The Joint Committee on the Economic Report is authorized to issue a monthly publication entitled Economic Indicators and a sufficient quantity shall be printed to furnish one copy to each Member of Congress ; the Secretary and the Sergeant at Arms of the Senate ; the Clerk Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper of the House of Representatives ; two copies to the libraries of the Senate and House and the Congressional Library ; seven hundred copies to the Joint Committee on the Economic Report ; and the required number of copies to the Superintendent of Documents for distribution to depository libraries ; and the Superintendent of Documents is authorized to have copies printed for sale to the public. ( U. S. C. ) Appendix C REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. OF Reorganization Plan No. of MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES TRANSMITTING REORGANIZATION PLAN No. OF JUNE Referred to the Committee on Government Operations and ordered to be printed To the Congress of the United States : I transmit herewith Reorganization Plan No. of prepared in accordance with the Reorganization Act of as amended and providing reorganizations in the Council of Economic Advisers in the Executive Office of the President The legislative history of the Employment Act of makes it clear that it is the determination of the Congress to help develop a strong economy in the United States. A strong economy is necessary to preserve the peace to build our defenses and those of the free world to raise the living standards of our people and to stimulate trade and industry in friendly countries throughout the world A strong economy means a free economy with full opportunities for the exercise of initiative and enterprise on the part of all individuals It means a stable economy so that satisfying jobs are as numerous as the men and women seeking work and the production of goods is abundant to meet our needs It means an expanding economy in which workers managers and farmers using more and better tools constantly increase the output of useful products and services and receive steadily rising incomes in a dollar of stable value It means a humane economy to the end that the aged infirm and those suffering hardships receive every needed help The achievement and preservation of a strong economy an economy that is progressive as well as competitive an economy that remains free from the distortions of inflation and the ravages of depression an economy that forms the solid foundation for the flourishing of our democratic social and political institutions is everybody 's job. Workers businessmen bankers farmers housewives all have an important role to play. The Federal Government too shares in this vital task. For example the duties of the President require that he be fully informed of major economic trends and activities in order to recommend proper measures for the consideration of the Congress and to take into account economic realities in seeing that the laws be faithfully executed It is well that the Congress has declared in the Employment Act of the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to coordinate and utilize all its plans functions and resources for the purpose of creating and maintaining consistently with free competitive enterprise and the general welfare employment opportunities for all. That act dedicates the Federal Government to the promotion of maximum employment production and purchasing power To assist in carrying out those purposes the Congress provided for the establishment of the Council of Economic Advisers in the Executive Office of the President to make appropriate recommendations to the President and to assist in the preparation of his annual Economic Report to the Congress I believe in the basic principles of the Employment Act and it is my purpose to take the appropriate actions to reinvigorate and make more effective the operations of the Council of Economic Advisers. Our needs for proper advice on economic matters are equaled only by our needs to have the very best advice and planning on matters of national security In taking these actions I have the benefit of the study and work of the Economic Adviser to the President recently provided by the Congress The Economic Adviser has reviewed the past operations of the Council of Economic Advisers and has recommended to me a series of actions aimed at making it more fully effective in performing its statutory duties Accordingly I intend to appoint a full membership of three members to the Council of Economic Advisers and to recommend to the Congress that adequate funds be appropriated to operate the Council as a fully going unit capable of providing the kind of economic staff work required The accompanying reorganization plan provides changes which strengthen the internal administration of the Council and clarify its relationships with the President To achieve the first objective strengthened internal administration the reorganization plan will make the Chairman of the Council rather than the whole Council responsible for certain administrative functions of the Council. Because the Council is essentially an advisory body these administrative functions relate principally to managing the staff employed to assist the Council. Placing the Chairman in a position to perform these functions will obtain the benefits of single management of the staff. To make possible such an arrangement the accompanying reorganization plan transfers to the Chairman the functions vested in the Council of Economic Advisers by section ( b ) of the Employment Act which relate to employing the staff and other necessary specialists and consultants to work for the Council To further the other objective a clearer relationship with the President the reorganization plan transfers to the Chairman the function of reporting to the President on the activities of the Council. This change will improve and simplify the relationship of the Council to the President and enable the President to deal with the Council more directly through the Chairman The increased responsibilities placed upon the Chairman by this plan would in my judgment make it appropriate for the Congress to take action to increase the compensation of the Chairman The reorganization plan provides for the elimination of the Vice Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers whose designation is provided for in the last sentence of section ( a ) of the Employment Act of The objective of this step is to place the members of the Council other than the Chairman in an equal status. I shall make provision for one of the members of the Council other than the Chairman to act as Chairman of the Council on such occasions as necessity may arise therefor In order to make the work of the Council of Economic Advisers more effective at the top policy level of the executive branch I am also asking the heads of several departments and agencies or the representatives they may designate to serve as an Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability under the chairmanship of the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. At all times close liaison must be maintained by the Council with all departments and agencies and with interdepartmental committees especially the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems It is contemplated that the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability supported by the existing staffs of the various departments and agencies will meet frequently and through its Chairman will keep me closely informed about the state of the national economy and the various measures necessary to aid in maintaining a stable prosperity Because of the complexity of our economy and the variety of views regarding its problems I shall expect the new Council of Economic Advisers to seek advice energetically not only from the departments and agencies of the Federal Government but also from representatives of industry agriculture labor consumers and other groups concerned with economic matters from representatives of State and local governments and from universities. I want the best economic thinking in the country to be canvassed by the Council. Through advisory groups through the employment of expert consultants and through informal relationships with informed citizens the Council will make use of economic talent wherever it may be I deem it especially significant that the Congress has provided in the Employment Act for the Joint Committee on the Economic Report composed of Members of both Houses of the Congress to study matters relating to the economic report and to make recommendations to the two Houses for legislation. I expect to impress upon the Council of Economic Advisers the importance which I attach to the fullest cooperation of the Council with the Joint Committee to assist the Joint Committee in its important tasks After investigation I have found and hereby declare that each reorganization included in the accompanying reorganization plan is necessary to accomplish one or more of the purposes set forth in section ( a ) of the Reorganization Act of as amended The taking effect of the reorganizations included in the accompanying reorganization plan is expected to result in a more effective performance of the statutory functions of the Council of Economic Advisers and to provide the President with better advice upon economic matters. It is impracticable to specify or itemize at this time any reduction of expenditures which it is probable will be brought about by the taking effect of this reorganization plan The reorganization plan will make the Federal Government better able to carry out its responsibilities to the American people to foster a strong free and prosperous economy so that we may all enjoy an ever-rising standard of living. I urge the Congress to permit the reorganization plan to become effective DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER THE WHITE HOUSE June REORGANIZATION PLAN NO. OF ( Prepared by the President and transmitted to the Senate and the House of Representatives in Congress assembled June pursuant to the provisions of the Reorganization Act of approved June as amended ) COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The functions vested in the Council of Economic Advisers by section ( b ) of the Employment Act of ( Stat. ) and so much of the functions vested in the Council by section ( c ) of that Act as consists of reporting to the President with respect to any function of the Council under the said section ( c ) are hereby transferred to the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. The position of Vice Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers provided for in the last sentence of section ( a ) of the said Act is hereby abolished Appendix D GOVERNMENT FINANCES Government Finances On a consolidated cash basis the fiscal operations of the Federal Government are estimated to result in a deficit of million dollars for the fiscal year and in a surplus of million dollars for fiscal compared with a deficit of billion dollars for the fiscal year The conventional budget which excludes the trust accounts that are included in the consolidated cash budget and reflects certain intra-governmental transactions excluded from the consolidated cash budget is estimated to result in a budget deficit of billion dollars for the fiscal year and of billion dollars for fiscal compared with a deficit of billion dollars for the fiscal year ( See Table D-l. ) The State and local governments have been running small deficits for several years but for the fiscal year their consolidated cash statement shows a small surplus The consolidated cash budgets for the Federal Government for the State and local governments and for all governments combined for the fiscal years are shown in Table D-2 Federal State and local government expenditures for goods and services and the receipts on income and product accounts for the calendar years are given in Table D-3. An explanation of the difference between receipts and expenditures on the basis of ( ) national income and product accounts ( ) the conventional administrative budget and ( ) the consolidated cash statement is given for the Federal Government in Survey of Current Business March page The differences among the three bases are similar for State and local governments On the basis of government income and product accounts the Federal Government had a deficit of million dollars in calendar year compared with a deficit of million in the preceding year. The State and local governments shifted from a deficit of million dollars in to a surplus of million in For all governments combined the deficit was reduced from million dollars in to million in State and local government purchases of goods and services have increased by an annual average of over billion dollars since World War II and by the end of they were running at an annual rate exceeding billion dollars. ( See Tables D-4 and G-l. ) This rapid upswing reflects in part the rise in prices and in part an increase of three-fifths in the physical volume of purchases. These expenditures are still low relative to their importance in the economy of the thirties During the war years State and local governments realized budget surpluses totaling almost billion dollars. In the first two post- war years there were also surpluses. During the succeeding years deficits occurred but a surplus was again achieved in State and local governments now hold billion dollars of Federal securities compared with billion at mid-1945. During this period their aggregate bank deposits increased from billion dollars to billion dollars. A large portion of the increased liquid assets is attributable to deferred expenditures and is reserved to finance capital improvements The currently favorable fiscal situation of State and local governments is reflected in the improvement in their debt position. During the war years State and local debt actually decreased by more than billion dollars Since then it has risen from billion dollars to about billion ( see Table D-5 ) ; but after allowance for price inflation and the growth in income and population the debt burden has actually fallen below its prewar level Moreover the cost of carrying the debt has not changed appreciably relative to State and local expenditures The major factors in the increase in State and local purchases since have been the deferral of construction during the war years the increasing demands generated by a growing and shifting population the rising levels of personal income and the favorable financial position of State and local governments. Wartime materials and manpower shortages curbed State and local outlays for new construction to a point where the average annual volume fell to one-third of the volume of construction for the years ^ By the end of the war an immense volume of construction was needed to bring facilities in line with requirements. Outlays on construction rose sharply after the end of the war to an all-time peak in ( See Table D-6. ) TABLE D Federal receipts and expenditures : conventional budget and consolidated cash statement [ Fiscal years ; millions of dollars ] Actual Estimate Accounting basis Conventional budget : Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Consolidated cash statement : Receipts Expenditures Cash surplus or deficit ( ) llfi NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department TABLE D-2. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Fiscal years ; millions of dollars ] Actual Receipts or payments Total government : Cash receipts Cash payments Total cash surplus or deficit ( ) Federal Government : Cash receipts * Cash payments ' _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ State and local cash surplus or deficit ( ) ._ Federal cash surplus or deficit ( ) State and local governments : Cash receipts Cash payments ___ _ f374 i Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D Government income and product accounts [ Calendar years ; millions of dollars ] Eeceipt or expenditure Total expenditures ._ _ _ Surplus or deficit ( ) Total receipts Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services _ Transfer payments Net interest paid Less : Current surplus of Government enterprises _ State and local governments : Receipts : Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accounts Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Federal grants-in-aid Total expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments __ Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid... __ _ _ Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprise _ Total receipts Surplus or deficit ( ) Federal Government : Receipts : Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accounts Indirect business tax and nontax accruals C ontributions for social insurance Total Government : Receipts _ _. E xpenditures Preliminary estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Net of tax refunds NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State a ^ d local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total Government receipts have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-4. Gross national product : Total and Government purchases of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product Year State and local Federal State and local purchases as percent of Gross national product Billions of dollars Federal purchases Percent _. i Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D Gross State and local government debt : Total per capitay and as percent of national income Gross debt * Year Total ( bilPer capita lions of dollars current ( dollars prices ) prices ) Gross debt as percent of gross national product As of June Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D Construction by State and local governments State and local public construction Period Total ( current prices ) Total ( prices ) Per capita ( prices ) Billions of dollars $ annual avfiraga annual avp.ragft _ * Preliminary estimate Source : Department of Commerce Appendix E STATISTICS OF UNEMPLOYMENT Statistics of Unemployment The importance attached to figures on unemployment as a guide to economic policies makes it highly desirable that the methods by which these estimates are derived be thoroughly understood STATISTICS FOR Unemployment for mid-December as reported by the United States Census was just under million or percent of the civilian labor force It was at this level in January declined steadily to million in midspring went up no more than seasonally in mid-summer as youths out of school entered the labor force in search of jobs and was generally downward during late summer and early fall. In October it reached a figure that was below any recorded for the entire period since World War II : million or less than percent of the civilian labor force. It then rose significantly and in excess of the usual seasonal movement in November and again in December. In the latter month it was above the level of December by about These increases in unemployment were on the whole moderate and the year-end level was still below what many would regard as normal in a time of peace. Nevertheless the behavior was unusual in this respect : The increase in unemployment was less than the decline in employment In other words the labor force declined This decline in the labor force requires explanation since a rise of about might have been expected on account of population increase. Why did some persons leave and others fail to enter the labor force ? Were they squeezed out by difficulties of getting jobs ? Or was the unemployment at the year 's end much greater than the figures indicate ? The following considerations provide grounds for believing ( ) that the unemployment figures of the Census reflect with reasonable accuracy the number of workers without jobs and seeking work ; ( ) that the withdrawals from or decisions not to enter the labor force in were voluntary GROUPS LEAVING OR NOT ENTERING THE LABOR FORCE The " departing " workers were mainly persons who do not ordinarily have primary responsibility for the support of families but who came into the labor force during wartime military and economic mobilization. As the armed forces expanded rapidly after the third quarter of following the Korean outbreak the civilian labor force was replenished by young people and women. Many more females entered by the end of than could be attributed either to population growth or to the long-run tendency for more women to take up gainful work. Neither the armed forces nor the labor force manifested much net change in relation to population between the last quarter of and the first quarter of Nevertheless in the first quarter of both the labor force and employment were not only the highest they had been during any of the winter months since World War II but with allowance for seasonal variation they were also the highest they were to be during In the month of April following the sudden and well-publicized yielding of China on the prisoner-repatriation issue on March the civilian labor force instead of rising as usual by in that spring month fell by a net decline in the seasonally-adjusted labor force of SOOjOOO.1 Additional decreases occurred in May. An earlier instance under somewhat analogous circumstances occurred in early at about the time the German armies were breaking up. Both events took place well in advance of the disbanding of our armed forces. Some of the withdrawals and the failures to enter seasonally were by persons expecting an early return of husbands brothers sons or fiances. Wives with husbands absent and in the armed forces reduced their participation in the labor force sharply from percent to percent between April and April whereas wives with husbands present increased theirs somewhat.2 In fact of all the females single married widowed or divorced the wives with husbands absent in the armed forces curtailed their labor force participation the most Very little net change in the labor force beyond normal seasonal movement occurred between May and December ; but the fact that the usual inflow of workers from increase in working-age population was not realized during these seven months reflected a gradual dwindling in the rate of labor force participation Paradoxically in the months when the employment of females declined the most their unemployment also fell indicating that they were dropping out of the labor force faster than out of employment. This strongly suggests that many deliberately gave up their jobs or failed to seek new jobs after being laid off. For four months after the labor force exodus in April seasonally-adjusted unemployment was generally downward. There is always the possibility that individual workers or workers in some one1 The Census survey week in April immediately followed Easter and it is conceivable that a post-Easter contraction of retail trade may have modified the usual seasonal movement. However the Department of Labor employment data do not reveal a contraction in trade for April. In any case the effect of Easter should have disappeared by May but the labor force continued to rise less than seasonally The Census provides labor force information by marital status only for April of each year industry localities left the labor force because of the difficulty of getting jobs. But this can scarcely be regarded as a significant reason in view of the fact that most of the shrinkage in the labor force was concentrated in April and May when ( ) quits in manufacturing industries were well above and layoffs well below their levels of the corresponding months of the year before ; ( ) job openings reported by employers to local employment offices ( at the end of each month ) kept rising and were in excess of their levels ; ( ) labor demand as reflected by classifications of labor-shortage or balanced-labor-supply areas was as tight as in late and much lighter than in early ; and ( ) unemployment was settling to its lowest levels since World War II not only for the groups that were abandoning the labor force but also for the men who were staying in. The probability that it was not a decline in the demand for labor but rather the approaching end of the war which led persons to leave or to stay out of gainful work is further strengthened by the fact that the percentage of population in the labor force did not decline during the economic recession of ( for the labor force as a whole for males or females for youths or for men and women and older ) Of those not in the labor force more youths were attending school4 and more females were keeping house in December than would have been expected from population growth since December The rise in the number retired or otherwise not active was small The increase of persons in school and housekeeping at the expense of gainful employment was perhaps overdue in view of the upward movement since World War II in the birth rate and the leveling off since in the proportion of youths attending high school and college. While the expansion in the labor force during the Korean action was helpful in meeting the military and production demands for war without curtailment in civilian living standards with the prospect of an end to the action many persons understandably chose to resume school attendance or to give more care to their children even if that meant less employment and family income The areas were classified by surveys conducted in January March May July September and November by the United States Bureau of Employment Security and its affiliated State employment security agencies. The percentage of labor market areas classified as labor-shortage or balanced-labor-supply areas rose from around percent in March and May to around percent in these same months of ; conversely the percentage of areas classified as areas of moderateor substantial-labor-surplus fell. Aside from the changes in classification in the direction of greater labor scarcity there was very little change in the area composition of these various classifications. An allowance for some lag in reclassifying labor market areas does not affect these comparisons Total school attendance of persons including student workers rose from million in October to million in October although total population in these ages remained about the same. Thus the rise in school attendance was genuine and was not a mere reclassification of students who had dropped part-time jobs CENSUS METHODS FOR MEASURING UNEMPLOYMENT Recent public discussion has revealed some unawareness of the improve ment in methods of estimating unemployment since the thirties Formerly employment was subtracted from the labor force to obtain unemployment as a residual.5 For example if an employment estimate of million subject to a relatively small error of percent or was deducted from a labor force estimate of million subject to an error of the unemployment residual of million could have been in error by million or percent. Because of the obvious weakness of this method it was rejected in favor of direct enumeration when the device of household surveys was adopted in Currently the basic information for the Census estimates of employment unemployment and labor force rests on a set of reports obtained by enumerators from a sample of households distributed throughout the United States. Every individual years of age or over in each such household is classified as " employed " " unemployed " or " not in the labor force " on the basis of answers given to a standard set of questions by some responsible member of the household. Thus it is now asked directly whether the individuals have jobs and are therefore employed. If they do not have jobs it is next asked if they are seeking work and are therefore unemployed The labor force is then obtained by adding these two estimates. A person is classified as " not in the labor force " if he is reported to be neither working nor seeking work From this basic information for the individuals in each of these households the Census computes the percentage of persons in each sexcolor-age group who are employed unemployed or not in the labor force National estimates are then derived by applying these percentages to independent estimates of the total civilian population by sex-color-age groups Since the unemployment estimate is based on Census surveys of a relatively small number of households there is a possibility of sampling error With the size of the sample used and with unemployment at something like its present magnitude plus or minus sampling errors up to are to be expected on purely statistical grounds ; and it is therefore highly improbable that the sampling error for December was larger than this figure Actual errors of only a few thousand were revealed by a comparison at the regular Census of a 8/3 percent sample a percent sample and a full count. The validity of this range of sampling error depends on the assumption that the work on the survey actually is carried out in accordance with the survey specifications. In this respect the care taken by the Census is impressive and there is no evidence that its unemployment data are subject to sampling error beyond the levels indicated Unemployment has never been computed in this way by the Bureau of the Census A considerable disparity however was found for April between the two figures on unemployment then provided by the Census the one based on its regular monthly visits to households the other on its enumeration of all the Nation 's households. The two figures derived from virtually identical questions ought to have been apart by no more than sampling error ; yet the gap between them was much larger. The Census regards this discrepancy as owing not to sampling difficulties but rather to interview error and in this connection stresses the difference in competence between the small and well-trained corps of permanent samplesurvey interviewers and the temporary interviewers used in taking the regular census. It thus considers its monthly sample survey as more accurate and in support of this position points to a similar disparity for a matched sample of persons interviewed by both the Census and the sample enumerators PROBLEMS OF DEFINITION OF UNEMPLOYMENT The question has been raised whether the Census defines unemploy- ' ment in such a way as to exclude persons who want jobs but are too discouraged to seek them The monthly surveys have long anticipated this problem by including in their schedules the instruction to enumerators to " Enter cyes ' [ that the worker was actually seeking work and was therefore unemployed ] for a person who would have been looking for work except for [ the fact that ] * * * he believed that no work was available in the community or in his line of work. " Any persons who failed to look for jobs because they thought there was no use would if the intention of the questions were fully realized have been classed as unemployed There is tangible reason for believing that nearly all persons who strongly desire jobs are classified as unemployed. After World War II the Census made a special effort as part of its regular sample survey in the week ending May to determine whether there were many genuinely unemployed who for good reason did not hunt jobs and therefore were not classified as unemployed. At that time the unemployment rate was higher than during any month of Nevertheless of the ( on a sample basis ) who were not in the labor force in the survey week but who had worked or looked for work within the preceding two months said they were not looking because they were busy with home or school responsibilities did not want to work at that time were physically unable or were only occasional workers. About gave reasons that indicated " possibility of attachment to the labor force " and of these one-fifth were ill.9 * Two other surveys within a year of that date were unfortunately made during the summer and thus their results were obscured by the response of large numbers of vacationing school children. Even so they revealed small numbers of " inactive unemployed. " Thus the number who could have been " inactively unemployed " was relatively very small The Census defines unemployment in terms of persons seeking work who were without jobs ohiring the entire survey week. Accordingly it defines as employed many persons with jobs who were idle during part or all of the survey week for such economic reasons as short-term lay-off slack work shortage of materials repairs to plant and equipment or delays in being called to a new job. A small number with jobs but not working at all during the survey week because of " temporary lay-off " or " not yet called to a new job " are reported separately ; in December they amounted to or more than in December of the previous year The discussion so far has taken no account of part-time unemployment For a full understanding of the employment situation it would be necessary to know the amount of both overtime employment and part-time unemployment. No regular monthly canvasses of part-time unemployment are made by the Census. Estimates are made however at irregular intervals and from these data it appears that some increase in part-time unemployment has occurred recently ; but it is impossible to tell how much of the increase is accounted for by seasonal or other special factors ANOTHER SOURCE OF UNEMPLOYMENT INFORMATION INSURED UNEMPLOYMENT Data on insured unemployment are obtained as a by-product of the operations of the State unemployment compensation systems. These data are reported by the State agencies to the Bureau of Employment Security in the United States Department of Labor. When a covered worker becomes unemployed he reports to a local office of his State employment security agency and files an " initial claim " for benefits ( simply a notice of the beginning of unemployment ) In each subsequent week ( or biweekly in certain States ) he files a " continued claim " representing unemployment in the preceding week or weeks. In addition to these totally unemployed some persons working part-time may be eligible for partial unemployment compensation and are included in the totals The insured unemployment series is derived by adjusting the continued claims data for the lag between the week of unemployment and the time the claim is filed so that the adjusted series refers to the week in which unemployment actually occurred Insured unemployment can not of course be compared directly with the total unemployment estimates of the Census Bureau. The State unemployment insurance programs cover approximately million workers out of a civilian work force of over million. The main groups not covered are agricultural workers Government employees the self-employed domestic servants workers in very small firms ( in most States ) employees of non-profit organizations and railroad workers ( who have a separate un- employment insurance system under the Railroad Retirement Board ) In general persons in any of these groups who become idle are not included in the statistics of insured unemployment. Also excluded are new entrants into the labor force workers with insufficient covered employment or earnings prior to lay-off veterans filing claims under the Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act and unemployed persons who have exhausted their benefit rights. Although the number in the last category is currently small it could rise sufficiently in a time of prolonged unemployment to cause a marked divergence between the paths of insured and total Census-reported unemployment There are other differences from the Census estimates arising largely from diversities of definition. Counted among the " insured unemployed " are workers who may file claims and be eligible for State unemployment compensation but who are classed as " employed " in the Census data. Included in this category are persons not working because of bad weather workers on temporary lay-off with definite instructions to return to work in less than days those waiting to enter new jobs or businesses within days and certain part-time workers As the year began insured unemployment averaged a figure that was one of the lowest for January since World War II and more than below that for January Insured unemployment followed the general downward seasonal pattern through the late summer It continued to drop in September to though this decline was less than usual. In the last two months of the year insured unemployment rose sharply and in excess of the usual year-end upturn and at the close of the year was the highest for any December since except for December Nearly all of the major industrial States reported increases in insured unemployment. The variation among the States in the amount of increase was wide however and reflected differences in industrial composition For short periods of time the paths of the insured and the Census unemployment series may move rather far apart because of differences in their coverage and definitions. The concentration of unemployment insurance coverage in volatile sectors of the economy such as manufacturing aad construction would inevitably cause the insured unemployment series to react more sensitively to economic conditions than the Census unemployment series which covers in addition areas and industries much less subject to unemployment. And the fact that the definition of insured unemployment is such as to include persons on short-term layoffs who would be classed by the Census as " with a job but not at work " and therefore as employed would mean that the insured unemployment series would respond more sensitively to the initial stages of adjustment in industrial production. During such a period there is increased difficulty in determining the attachment to the labor market of persons recently laid off '55 Over longer periods of time there is very high correspondence between the two measures of unemployment. Both are indispensable to the appraisal of conditions in the economy especially in labor markets. The Census estimates make available a national over-all measure at monthly intervals of the total unemployment in the Nation by age sex and other characteristics. The insured unemployment series though less comprehensive in certain respects provides more up-to-date information on unemployment since it is reported weekly and tells what is happening to unemployment in different parts of the country Appendix F RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURES Research and Development Expenditures Scientific and engineering research and development activities are now widely used means of deliberately producing or accelerating technological changes. Such activities are undertaken by businesses seeking to reduce costs to perfect new processes or products or to improve the quality of existing products. They are pursued at the laboratories of universities and other nonprofit institutions in the quest for new scientific and technical knowledge. They are conducted by the Federal Government or organizations operating under Government contracts or grants to advance the design of military weapons and equipment expand the effective base of natural resources hasten the civilian application of atomic power improve agricultural practices and products or contribute to medical science. From an economic standpoint research and development activities are an instrument of growth and competition opening up new fields of investment TREND OF EXPENDITURES Comprehensive statistics on research and development expenditures are still crude but some idea of the scope and trend may be obtained from estimates compiled from a variety of sources by the Research and Development Board and by its successor now designated as the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense ( R&D ) These estimates are intended to exclude construction and other capital expenditures except as reflected in depreciation charges ; they include some research and development costs which are not covered in the research and development category of the Department of Defense budget. For these reasons and others the Federal Government component of the expenditures series shown in Table F-l differs from the Federal Government figures shown in The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year " Special Analysis H : Research and Development " and also in the report of the National Science Foundation entitled Federal Funds for Science : II. The Federal Research and Development Budget Fiscal Years and Since the differences are merely definitional the Government figures included in the totals in Table F-l are consistent and reconcilable with the figures presented in these other sources The cumulative expenditures of the Federal Government,1 industry and nonprofit institutions for scientific and engineering research during the State and local governments also make some contribution to scientific and engineering research and development especially indirect as in aid to schools of higher learning and medical centers ( included in our " nonprofit " category ) period approached billion dollars. In the total outlay was about billion dollars,2 well over four times the figure. The rise was of course due in part to inflation ; but much of it was real in view of the large increase in professional research personnel whose " productivity " may also be presumed to have advanced.3 During the period under consideration a significant change occurred in the relative shares of the total research and development cost borne by Government and industry.4 The Government expenditure in about billion dollars comprised over three-fifths of the national total ; the industry contribution about billion dollars comprised almost threeeighths ; nonprofit institutions accounted for the small remainder. In on the other hand the Government share was two-fifths and the industry share less than three-fifths Despite the change in the source of financing business enterprises continue to perform most of the research and development work. In activity at industrial laboratories accounted for about billion dollars or percent of the total outlay of billion dollars. The work done at Government laboratories accounted for about billion dollars or one-fifth of the national outlay. Thus the workload distribution between Government and industry was not much different from that prevailing in The Government-industry share of the total workload declined a little however as nonprofit institutions benefiting from Government contracts and grants increased their share from about percent in to about percent in TREND OF EMPLOYMENT About one out of every four scientists and engineers in the Nation is employed in research and development.5 The number engaged in such activity more than doubled between and reaching in the latter year. ( See Table F-l. ) During this period the distribution between Federal Government and industry did not differ much from the pattern of expenditures according to site of activity ; but the personnel share of the This estimate which incorporates a Government figure of billion dollars is consistent with the " current " national estimate of " between and billion dollars " shown in " Special Analysis H " of The Budget of the United States Government : Fiscal Year The latter version is based on a lower Government figure billion dollars which excludes " very substantial costs associated with research and development carried in other [ Defense ] budget categories. " A " productivity " advance is indicated in a survey made by the National Industrial Conference Board of the and research and development activities of companies The details presented here and in subsequent paragraphs on the participation of the Federal Government industry and nonprofit institutions are based on the statistics underlying Table F-l " Report of the Office of the [ Assistant ] Secretary of Defense ( R&D ) Department of Defense The Growth of Scientific Research and Development ( RDB 114/34 ) July p. nonprofit institutions ( percent in ) consistently exceeded their money share The personnel figures cited in Table F-l omit nonprofessional research workers and other supporting workers ( e. g. clerical and administrative ) It has recently been estimated that on the average full-time equivalent supporting workers are required in industry for each professional research worker.6 The ratio varies of course according to type of research activity ; but the figure appears reasonable for the three categories combined i. e. Federal Government industry and nonprofit institutions. On this basis it may be estimated that almost full-time equivalent professional and supporting personnel were engaged in or otherwise chargeable to research and development in EMPHASIS ON EARLY APPLICABILITY Most research and development activity is deliberately oriented toward early practical applications rather than toward increasing the store of " basic " or " fundamental " knowledge. This practical stress promises a significant early expansion of our investment potential The dominant interest of industry in applications is understandable Large companies however do recognize the need to expand the horizons of basic knowledge. A study of large companies for shows that percent of their research and development funds went toward the creation of new products or processes about percent toward the improvement of existing products or processes and the remaining percent to " programs uncommitted to specific problems. " Federal research and development funds are also being channeled mainly into activity promising early applications especially in the interest of defense A study made by the National Science Foundation shows that only percent of the Federal research and development obligations in the fiscal years and supported basic research.8 " Special Analysis H " of The Budget of the United States Government : Fiscal Year states that " more than percent " of the Federal expenditures are for " development applied research and new facilities. " The President 's Budget Message calls for more funds for the National Science Foundation so that basic research may be expanded and more graduate students trained This ratio is cited for January by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Research and Development Board Industrial Research and Development : A Preliminary Report ( Washington January ) p. ; and by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in cooperation with the Department of Defense Scientific Research and Development in American Industry : A Study of Manpower and Costs ( BLS Bulletin Washington ) pp. See De Witt G. Dearborn Rose W. Kneznek and Robert N. Anthony Spending for Industrial Research ( Harvard University Graduate School of Business Administration Boston ) p. Federal Funds for Science : II op. cit. p. CIVILIAN USE OF MILITARY RESEARCH Although most Federal research and development funds are now devoted to projects sponsored by the Department of Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission it would be a mistake to assume that the results will not be largely applicable sooner or later to civilian purposes. Indeed many products that are now familiar like steel alloys aluminum synthetic rubber and high-octane gasoline received encouragement in earlier periods of emergency. Similarly today 's research on guided missiles jet planes and engines helicopters heat- and corrosion-resistant metals and alloys electronic automatisms etc. will provide new civilian opportunities. The many thousand scientists and engineers now engaged in defense research and development are in effect being readied to facilitate this conversion Atomic research and development programs are also paving the way to new peacetime industries. Rapid progress is being made in harnessing atomic power for the production of electrical energy. Radioisotopes are finding new uses in industry agriculture and medicine. Even in early only two-fifths of the scientists and engineers engaged in atomic research and development were concerned with fissionable materials and weapons Another one-fifth were working on nuclear reactors which are needed for generating electrical energy. The remaining two-fifths were employed in basic and applied research in the physical sciences ( physics chemistry and metallurgy ) mathematics and the life sciences ( biology medicine and biophysics ) American Society of Mechanical Engineers Uranium Plutonium and Industry ( U. S. Atomic Energy Commission Washington March ) p. The discussion of Atomic Energy Commission programs in " Special Analysis H " of The Budget of the United States Government : Fiscal Year also emphasizes the nonmilitary applicability of military research and development results ABLE F-l. Estimated research and developmentl expenditures and employment in the United States * Expenditures ( millions of dollars ) Research scientists and engineers employed * ( thousands ) Year Year Research Expendi- scientists and tures * engineers ( millions of employed * dollars ) ( thousands ) 1953s i " Research and development " embraces basic and applied research in tho sciences ( including medicine ) and in engineering and the design development and testing of prototypes and processes. The term is meant here to exclude quality control product testing market research sales promotion sales service and research in social sciences and psychology Includes Federal Government industry and nonprofit institution programs * Expenditures include salaries of professional and nonprofessional research personnel and of administrative and other supporting workers ; other chargeable overhead ; and materials. Capital investment is excluded except as reflected in depreciation charges The Federal Government component of the series presented here may be reconciled with though it is based on a definition different from the Federal Government series shown in The Budget of the United States Government : Fiscal Year " Special Analysis H : Research and Development. " It excludes capital outlays ; but it incorporates a sizable adjustment for Department of Defense funds devoted to research and development although not explicitly budgeted for such purposes Presumably refers to full-time equivalents ; excludes nonprofessional research workers and supporting nonresearch ( e. g. clerical and administrative ) workers Preliminary Source : Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense ( R&D ) Department of Defense. ( For estimates see The Orowth of Scientific Research and Development [ RDB 114/34 ] July pp. ) Appendix G STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National income or expenditure : Page G-l. Gross national product or expenditure G-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices G-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices G-4. The Nation'sjncome expenditure and saving G-5. Personal consumption expenditures G-6. Gross private domestic investment G-7. National income by distributive shares G Relation of national income and personal income G-9. Personal income G-10. Disposition of personal income G-ll. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and prices G-12. Liquid saving by individuals G-13. Sources and uses of gross saving G-l Realized gross and net income of farm operators from farming average and Employment and wages : G-l Total population years of age and over and the labor force G-l6. Labor force employment and unemployment : Total males to years of age and all others G-l7. Employed persons with a job but not at work by reason for not working G Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment G-l9. Insured unemployment under State unemployment insurance programs by geographic division and G Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries G-21. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments G-22. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries G-23. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries G-24. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Production and business activity : G-25. Indexes of industrial and agricultural production G-26. New construction activity G-21. New nonfarm housing starts by source of funds and by type of structure G-28. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and G-29. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade G-30. Manufacturers ' new orders sales and inventories Prices : Page G-31. Consumer price index G-32. Wholesale price index G Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio G-34. Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign countries selected dates Credit money supply and Federal finance : G-35. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding G-36. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property mortgaged Gr-37. Deposits and currency G-38. Loans and investments of all commercial banks G-39. Member bank reserves and Reserve Bank credit G-40. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations G-41. U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations G-42. Bond yields and interest rates G-43. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public calendar years Corporate profits and finance : G-44. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations G-45. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and G-46. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and G ~ Sources and uses of corporate funds G-48. Business population International transactions : G-49. United States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services G U. S. Government grants and 'capital movements to foreign countries G-51. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and G Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption and of domestic merchandise exports by economic class average and Summary : G-53. Changes in selected economic series since and since NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE G-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private domestic investment Period Total gross national product Personal consumption expenditures i New construction Is ^ " C Net foreign invest ^ fl ment | <- ] r-j O * Federal B ! af " cS flg <o& II ^ Government purchases of goods and services ^ a o % tf I S e H ! o ._ __ _ * E ! S,SJ " cflGQ JZJ oM T3 t-i O CO ( ) ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) p ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) S ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. Second quarter. _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ : First quarter. Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter ; l See appendix table G-5 for major components See appendix table G-6 for more detail and explanation of components For " national security " expenditures include the items classified as such in The Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO The items are : military services im.ernational security and foreign relations development and control of atomic energy promotion of merchant marine promotion of defense production and economic stabilization and civil defense. These expenditures are not comparable with the " national security " category in the Budget for the Fiscal Year ending June " National defense " expenditures for goods and services correspond more closely to the new Budget definition ; they include items shown under the national security classification in the Budget and in addition defense production and economic stabilization military manpower selection promotion of aviation ( National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics only ) and civil defense. National defense expenditures for goods and services since are as follows : billion dollars ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion * Not available Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices * [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment New construction Total gross Pro- Change national in Nonducers ' busiproduct Total Dur- du- Serv- Total Residurable ness able rable ices denequipgoods Period Total tial Other ment ( nonfarm ) goods inventories [ * _ _ ___ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices J Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Gover nment pur chases of g ( ) ods and s<jrvices Federal Net foreign investment TJ- ^ l- J and Other local ( ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) _ _ _ State National Total * security __ ! Total ( ) ( ) ( ) i These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See appendix table G-3. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on " change in business inventories. " Net of Government sales which are not shown separately on this table. See appendix table G-l for Government salts in current prices See appendix table G-l footnote Not available Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE G-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment Total gross naPro- Change tional in New ducprodDu- Non- Servbusiducon- ers ' uct Total rable rable ices Total struc- duness rable invengoods goods tion equipment tories Net Gross forprieign vate inState prodvestment Total Fed- and uct * eral local i See Survey of Current Business January and A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business National Income edition for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices and for implicit deflators used a Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees * Estimate based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-4. The Nation 's income expenditure and saving [ Billions of dollars ] Economic group Excess Excess Excess of reof reof receipts ceipts ExExEx- ceipts Re- pendi- ( ) or Re- pendi- ( ) or Re- pendi- ( ) or ceipts tures ex- ceipts tures ex- ceipts tures expendipendipenditures tures tures ( ) ( ) ( ) Consumers : Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures... Personal net saving ( ) Business : Gross retained earnings Gross private domestic investment Excess of investment ( ) Net receipts Purchases of goods and services ._ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) on income and product account. Gross national product Total Government expenditures Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) Statistical discrepancy International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) > Government ( Federal State and local ) : Tax and nontax receipts or accruals Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) g i Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce ( except a noted ) TABLE G-5. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Total Services Nondurable goods Durable goods personal conAutosumpmotion Total biles Other Total Food ' Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other exings ings and pendiparts tures Period _ * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half. Second half : First half Second half * : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter * i Includes alcoholic beverages * Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-6. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Total Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment ResiNet change in gross plant and equipment and construction dential Other business inventories priprivate con- vate dostrucmestic ConCon- tion conNoninvest- Total i Equip- struc- Total * Equip- struc- ( non- struc- Total farm Farm ment tion i s ment tion farm ) is tion ment Period * _ __ .-_ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter i Items for and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years or with figures shown in appendix table G-26. Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment for all years are not comparable with those shown in appendix table G-28 principally because the latter exclude certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense * Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. These figures assume that farmers purchase and percent respectively of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to only < Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) Includes construction of hotels tourist cabins motor courts and dormitories since only Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private construction After revaluation adjustment Less than million dollars ' Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-7. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ! Total national income1 Period Business and professional income and inventory valuation adjustment Compensation Inof emcome ploy2 of ees Total unincorporated enterprises Income of In- farm ven- protory prievalu- tors ation adjustment Rental income of persons Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Net Corporate Total profits before taxes ( ) __ j ( ) _ __ .-_ __ _ _ _ In- inven- terest tory valuation adjustment s ' ) ( T ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half ( ) ( ) * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) tt : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * ( ) ( ' ) National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of 2durable capital goods and indirect business taxes Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table G-9 ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance ( see appendix table Q-8 ) Data are subject to revisions already reflected in appendix table G-14 See appendix table G-44 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes * Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Period National income Plus : CorpoExcess rate of profits Contri- wage and in- butions acfor ventory social cruals valu- insur- over disation ance burseadjustments ment Government transfer payments Equals : Net interest paid by government Dividends BusiPerness trans- sonal fer income payments _ _ _ ( ) ( 2> _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half * ( ' ) <2 ) : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter... Fourth quarter. _ : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter.. Fourth quarter * C2 ) ( ) i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers a Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-9. Personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Labor income and transfer payments Income of unincorporated enterprises Non- AgriTotal agri- culperBusiDivi- Inter- cul- tural sonal Wage Other TransRents dends est tural ness ininand fer inand come Total salary labor pay- Total pro- Farm income4 come re- come1 ments fesceipts sions Period : _ _ _ __ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half * : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter fl The total of wage and salary receipts and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in appendix table G-7 in that it excludes employer and employee contributions for social insurance and includes the excess of wage disbursements over wage accruals. Other labor income consists of compensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims Contributions of self-employed persons for social insurance which became effective in January have been excluded in and Therefore these totals will differ from total proprietors ' and rental income included in appendix table G-7 Data are subject to revisions already reflected in appendix table G-14 Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations ' Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G Disposition of personal income Less : Equals : Less : Equals : Personal Personal Dispos- Personal Personal conincome tax and able net nontax personal sumption saving expendipayments income tures Period Net saving as percent of disposable personal income Billions of dollars _ _ _ _ _ i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter l Fourth quarter _ : First half. Second half i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and pricest Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Per capita disposable personal income ( dollars ) Period Current prices prices Current prices Population ( thousands ) a prices * 1933._._ ; _ _ _. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half 4G5 : First quarter _ _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Dollar estimates in current prices divided by an over-all implicit price index for personal consumption expenditures * Population of continental United States including armed forces overseas. Annual data are as of July ; quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-12. Liquid saving by individuals * [ Billions of dollars ] Insurance and Liquf Securities Savpension reserves Liqui- dation ings of Total and debt liquid bank loan not U. S. Other Cor- mortsaving savgov- porate gage elsede- assoPri- Govciaernwhere posits tions Total vate ment Total a ings ern- and debt * classibonds ment * other fied * Cur- Period -H l.21 : First half Second half J-l. t : First half : First quarter... Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. i Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust and pension funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified. Liquid saving comprises saving in the form of currency and bank deposits equity in savings and loan associations private and Government insurance securities and repayment of mortgage debt and other consumer debt a Includes currency demand deposits and time and savings deposits Does not include net purchases by brokers and dealers or by other individuals financed by bank loans Includes armed forces leave bonds and other U. S. Government bonds ( .except savings bonds ) and all securities issued by State and local governments Mortgage debt to institutions on to 4-family nonfarm dwellings Largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumers ' goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. The other segments of individuals ' debt have been allocated to the assets to which they pertain viz saving in insurance and securities NOTE. In addition to the concept of liquid saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The series with the most complete coverage the personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce is derived as the difference between personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included with SEC liquid saving : Housing net of depreciation unincorporated business and farm items such as net plant and equipment changes in net receivables and changes in inventories. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see table of A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business National Income edition and table of the Survey of Current Business July Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE G-13. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ) Government surplus or deficit ( ) on Income and product transactions Gross private saving Period Total __ L2 ) _ __ _ _ __ _ _ Gross private Net fordomes- eign inTotal tic in- vestvestment ment _ Gross StatisPerbusitical Total Federal State sonal and ness saving saving discreplocal ancy Gross investment __ rj Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half _ * First half Second half ( ' ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter * First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ' ) ( ) s7 ( ' ) ( ) ? ( ) ( ) ( ) Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G Realized gross and net income of farm operators from farming average and Realized net farm income Period Realized Farm gross producfarm in- tion excome penses Amount Percent of realized gross income Millions of dollars Realized net income per farm Realized net income per farmfamily worker Purchasing power in Purchasing dollars a Amount power in Amount dollars a Millions of dollars Purchasing power in dollars * average $ $ $ $ _ ._ < Includes Government payments but unlike the net farm income series of appendix tables G-7 and G-9 excludes changes in farm inventories. Based on the latest revisions of the series on cash receipts from farm marketings and production expenses which the farm income series of appendix tables G-7 and G-9 have not yet taken fully into account. Realized net income per farm-family worker computed by Council of Economic Advisers * Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items converted from the reported base = to the base = a Realized net farm income for ( used in computing relatives in appendix table G-53 ) was million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Agriculture ( except as noted ) EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE G-15. Total population years oj age and over and the labor force Total labor force Total popu- ( includ- Armed forces i lation ing armed forces ) Period Civilian labor force Employment Total NonTotal Agricul- agritural cultural Total labor force as percent Unem- of total ploypopument lation Unemployment as ) ercent of civilian labor force Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : ISO M. * : First half Second half ' First half Second half * January February March April May July August _ September October November December _ See footnotes at end of table TABLE G Total population 14years of age and over and the labor force Con Civilian labor force Total labor Armed Total force popu- ( includ- forces i lation i ing armed forces ) i Period Employment Total UnemployNonment Total Agricul- agritural cultural UnemTotal ploylabor ment as force as percent percent of civilian of total popu- labor lation force Thousands of persons years of age and ov er : January * _ _ February March April May _ June July August September _ October November. December.. Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside of the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from estimates Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary layoff and industrial disputes Monthly averages except for population which are estimates for the middle of the period. See appendix table G-ll for total population * See Monthly Report on the Labor Force March and September series P-57 Nps. and respectively for revisions in estimating procedure. In order to make the data beginning with January comparable with prior months the following adjustments should be made : [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employment Total labor Period of year January February March- August S eptember-D ecember First-half average Second-half average Annual average _ _ _ ulation _ ___ civilian labor force Total Agricultural Nonagricultural NOTE. Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month. Monthly population data are for the 1st of the month Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE G Labor force employment and unemployment : Total males to years of age and all others [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed Civilian labor force * Period Unemployed Total _ Total Males to years All others ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) All others Monthly average : Males to years ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i ) ( ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) Males All to others years ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First half. _ Second half : First half.. Second half * _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March April May June Julv August September October November December ._ Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary layoff and industrial disputes Not available Since figures for the age group are not available those for the age group were used * Not entirely comparable with earlier data ; see appendix table G-15 footnote NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE G Employed persons with a job but not at work by reason for not working [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Period Monthly average : Total employed persons with a job but not at work Economic reasons Total Temporary layoff i New job or business All other reasons Second half : First half Second half : First half : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December Includes persons whofhad been temporarily laid off from their jobs with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff Includes persons who had a new job or business to which they were scheduled to report within the " following days | s * Includes persons who were not at work because of bad weather industrial dispute vacation illness and all other reasons NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment Duration of unemployment Total unemployed Period weeks and under weeks Average duration of unemOver ployweeks ment Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : _ Weeks i : First half. _ Second half : First half Second half _ _ _ _. ' January February.March A pril May June July August September October November December _ _ _ _ * Januarv February _ _ _ _ March April May June July August--. _September _ _ October November ___ December _ __._ _ _ Under months to months Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( \ TABLE G Insured unemployment under State unemployment insurance programs by geographic division and [ Thousands of persons ] Continental United States Period Weekly average : East West East West New Mid- North North South South South Moundle Eng- AtAtCen- Cen- lantic Cen- Cen- tain Pacific land lantic tral tral tral tral : First half Second half : First half Second half : January __ February March April... Mav June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ _ Represents weekly average volume of total or partial unemployment during the year for which claims were filed for waiting period credit or benefit payments. Regional composition : New England Maine New Hampshire Vermont Massachusetts Rhode Island Connecticut ; Middle Atlantic New York New Jersey Pennsylvania ; East North Central Ohio Indiana Illinois Michigan Wisconsin ; West North Central Minnesota Iowa Missouri North Dakota South Dakota Nebraska Kansas ; South Atlantic Delaware Maryland District of Columbia Virginia West Virginia North Carolina South Carolina Georgia Florida ; East South Central Kentucky Tennessee Alabama Mississippi ; West South Central Arkansas Louisiana Oklahoma Texas ; Mountain Montana Idaho Wyoming Colorado New Mexico Arizona Utah Nevada ; Pacific Washington Oregon California NOTE. State unemployment insurance programs exclude from coverage agricultural workers government employees self-employed persons domestic servants workers in very small firms ( in most States ) employees in nonprofit organizations and railroad workers ( who have a separate unemployment insurance system under the Railroad Retirement Board ) The data also exclude unemployed veterans filing claims under the Servicemen 's Readjustment Act or the Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE G Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Rates per employees ] Separation rates Discharge Accession rates military and miscellaneous * Period Total Monthly average : a Quit * Layoff : First half Second half.__ : First half Second half _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December ___ Prior to military and miscellaneous separations are included with quits Averages computed by Council of Economic Advisers from published monthly Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor ( except as noted ) rates TABLE G-21. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments l [ Thousands of employees ] Period Monthly average : Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total NonDur- duraable ble goods goods Mining TransCon- portatract tion and Trade Ficonnance struc- public tion utilities Government Serv- ( Federal ice State and local ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _.- * 16G ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June ._ July August __ September October November December 4S ] ; ; : January February March April May June__ July August September October November December * Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( appendix table G-15 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary layoffs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division j ; Not available Estimates based on incomplete data f NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department cf. Labor and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Manufacturing Period Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I 'except Hotels ing Tele- Whole- eating ( yearnous consale railNoncoal phone trade and Total Durable durable mining struc- roads * drink- round ) goods goods tion ing places ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) a ( ) I ( ) I960 ( ) : January February March April May June July August September.. October. _ November December : January February March April May June .July August September October November December 8_ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ ( ) I ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * New series. Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in basic workweek from to hours i Not available Not strictly comparable with previous data < 9-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning with June data relate to nonsupervisory employees only Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month. The annual figures for are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment Source : Department of Labor TABLE G-23. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Retail trade Manufacturing Period 1929__ BituNon- minous coal Dura- durable Total ble mining goods goods $ _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ $ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May__ June July August September October November December ing Class I Tele- Whole- ( except Hotels Agrieating ( year- cul- con- rail- phone sale struc- roads * tion ( ) trade and round ) drinking places ) ture ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) $ Build- ( ) $ fl.700 ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i New series. Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching 'and terminal Companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours i Money payments only ; additional value of board room uniform and tips not included Composite rate per hour. Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Not available Not strictly comparable with previous data 9-month average April through December. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees ? Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month. In the nonagricultural series the annual figures for are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Labor TABLE G Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ing con- railstruc- roads i coal Dura- Nonble durable mining tion goods goods $ $ $ $ $ $ : January. February March April May June July August.. September.. October November.. December : January. ._ February March April May June July August September October Novemberfl December _ Retail trade ( except Tele- Whole- eating Hotels ( year- sale and phone trade drink- round ) ing places ) _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( J ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ f3 ) $ $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) New series. Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours Money payments only ; additional value of board room uniforms and tips not included Not available * Not strictly comparable with previous data 9-month average April through December. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining 'construction workers in building construction and for all non supervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month. The annual figures for are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE G-25. Indexes of industrial and agricultural production [ = ] Industrial production Manufactures Period Total Minerals Total Durable Agricultural production a Nondurable _ Seasonally adjusted ' January February March April May _ _ June July August SeptemberOctober November December _ : January _ _ _ _ _ _ February March April May _ June July _ AugustSeptember.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ October November. _ December ___ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) % % S ( ? ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * Revised series. The index has been improved in this revision by ( ) incorporation of a number of new series ; ( ) revision of weights seasonal adjustment factors and working-day allowances ; ( ) adoption of a more recent comparison base period ; ( ) use of improved industrial classifications and ( ) development of an independent set of annual indexes from the more comprehensive data available at yearly intervals For a detailed description of the revision see the December issue of the Federal Reserve Bulletin Index of volume of farm production for human use. Converted from the reported base = Estimates based on incomplete data Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Agriculture TABLE G-26. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Total new construction Period Public construction NonNonmilitary resibuilding den- Other Total Militial tary High- Other pripubbuild- vate puband lic naval Resi- Non- way lics ing resi ( nonden- denfarm ) tial tial ResidenTotal tial pribuild1 ing vate ( nonfarm ) 193g ' -__. __ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half G50 * January February March April May. _ _ _ June July August September October November December : January February March April ._ May June ._ _ _ July August September October .__ November December First half- Second half Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product Includes public utility farm and other private construction not shown separately 'Includes sewer and water miscellaneous public service enterprises conservation and development and all other public construction not shown separately Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE G-27. New nonfarm housing starts by source of funds and by type of structure 1929-53l [ Number of units ] Source of funds Total nonfarm units Period Private Public Type of structure l-family Multi2-family family Private units seasonally adjusted annual rates * 98R. ( ) C7 ) C7 ) * First half Second half : First half Second half ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March .__ April ( ) ( ) _ -._ May _ June _ July August September October November December : January. February March April _ _ May June July August September October fl November * December fl _ ( ) These estimates are based on building permit records which have been adjusted for lapsed permits and for lags between permit issuance and start of construction. They are based also on reports of Federal construction contract awards and on field surveys in non-permit-issuing places. All temporary units are excluded Includes units in and 2-family structures with stores > Includes units in multifamily structures with stores * Seasonally adjusted annual rate data are based on privately owned starts only since the wide fluctuations of public housing starts are not due primarily to seasonal influences. For method of computing seasonally adjusted annual rates see special release of Aug. issued by the Department of Labor The number of starts for each of the years were as follows : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Estimates based on incomplete data ' Not available Less than units Source : Department of Labor TABLE G Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Total i Period Total Transportation Dura- Non- Mining Railble durable road goods goods ComPublic merutilicial and ties Other other * _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half. Second half.. : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Excludes agriculture and outlays charged to current account Includes trade service finance communications and construction Estimates for fourth quarter of and first quarter of based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in November < Annual total is sum of seasonally unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with average of seasonally adjusted figures in part because of adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data NOTE. These figures do not agree with those shown in column of appendix table G-6 which are included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover agricultural investment and certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. This series is not available for years prior to and for to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce TABLE G Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Millions of Ratio Millions of dollars dollars & of inventories InInto ven- Sales ' sales ven- Sales tories2 tories Period Wholesale trade Retail trade * Ratio Millions of Ratio Millions of Ratio dollars dollars of inof inof invenvenventories Intories Intories to ven- Sales3 to to vensales tories2 sales * tories2 Sales sales < Old series _- .._ ._ _ : New series Seasonally adjusted ' First half Second half ' First half Second half : January February March April May _June July August _ _ September October November December _ ; January _ _ __ February March _ April May June July August _September October November December ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method of estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census. Estimates shown in this table for are on the previously published basis and estimates for are on the new basis. For a description of the retail sales and inventory series see Survey of Current Business September and November Seasonally adjusted end of period Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month For annual and semiannual periods weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of average end of current and previous months inventories to sales for month Where December data not available data for year and half-year calculated on basis of no change from November Preliminary estimate * Not available NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G-30. Manufacturers ' new orders sales and inventories [ Millions of dollars not seasonally adjusted ] New orders * Inventories s Sales i Durable-goods industries Nondurable-goods industries Dura- Non- Dura- Nonble- durable- ble- durablegoods goods goods goods PurPur- Goods- Finindus- indus- indus- indus- chased Goods- Fininished chased intries tries tries tries shed mate- process goods mate- proc- goods rials rials ess Period Monthly average : : First half_ _ Second half : First half... Second half a_ 63C ' ( _ * January February March April May __ _ _ June July August September October November December : January February March April Mav June July August September October November _ Monthly average shown for year or half-year and total for month Book value end of period. This series has not been revised and is not directly comparable with the sales and orders figures in this table and the inventory data in appendix table G-29 s Based on data through November Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE G-31. Consumer price index For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] All items Period Monthly average : Housing Food Total Rent Read- Other Ap- Trans- Medi- Per- ing and goods cal parel porta- care sonal recrea- and tion care tion services ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ( ) ) : First half Second half * First half Second half _ ' January February March April May June July _. August September October November December _. _114.1 : January February March April May Junel5 _ _ July August September October November December _ _ i Not available Source : Department of Labor I ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ( ( ' ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ( ( ) ( ( ( ) ) TABLE G-32. Wholesale priceTindexf [ = ] * All commodities other than farm products and foods All commodities Period Farm products Processed foods Total Textile products and apparel Monthly average : ChemiRubber Lumber cals and and and wood allied prodprodproducts ucts ucts ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _1953 * : First half Second half : First half Second half ._ 1942_ _- : January February March April May June _. July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ See footnotes at end of table 2OO TABLE G-32. Wholesale price index Continued [ = ] * All commodities other than farm products and foods ( continued ) Hides skins and leather products Period Monthly average : Fuel power and lighting materials Pulp paper and allied products Metals Machinery and and metal motive prodproducts ucts Furniiture and other household durables ' NonTobacco ^ ^ msm metal- manulic factures Miscel- ^ minerand als bottled laneous ( struc- bevertural ) ages ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ._ First half Second half : First half Second half * _ _ _ _ _ : January February March April May June _ July AugustSeptember October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) __ _ _ _- _ _ _ -_ _ _ _ ( ) .._ _ * ( ) This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January These data from January through December represent the revised sample and the weighting pattern. Prior to JanuaryTl947 they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index. The only official index up to and including December is the former monthly index ( = ) The data from January through January differ from the official series due to a change in the method of eliminating excise taxes and discounts Not available Preliminary estimates Source : Department of Labor 2OI TABLE G-33. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratioy [ = ] Prices paid for items Parity index used in ( prices Prices paid received by interest Living Produce taxes and farmers wage tion rates ) Period Monthly average : _ _ : First half. Second half : First half Second half _ : January 15__ February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August _ September October November December _ _ _ __ _ Ratio M92 M96 _ ..._ _ _ _ _ Parity ratioi of prices received by farmers to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments paid on beef cattle sheep lambs milk and butterfat between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture 2O2 TABLE G-34. Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign countries selected dates [ = ] Wholesale prices Country January Latest data Index Date Cost of living January Latest data Index Date United States _ _ December Africa and Near East : Algeria J Egypt Iran Iraq _ ._ Israel Lebanon Morocco Tunisia Union of South Africa. September September November December November October November October November November September November December November October November October November December December November November >106 December December October November November October 3d quarter November November December December October 4th quarter December October November Western European countries : Austria Belgium Denmark France Germany ( Federal Republic ) Greece _ Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden _ _ _ Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Latin America : Argentina _ Brazil Chile Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic. El Salvador Guatemala _ Mexico _ Nicaragua Paraguay Peru Venezuela < ) ( ) ( ls ( fl ) Nownber November October November October December November October November November November December November December November December October August October Novornb ^ r ( ) October November November November October November ( ) October November October August October November 2d quarter September October November 3d quarter December October ( ) October August November ( ) Pacific and Far East : Australia India Indochina * Japan * New Zealand ._ Philippines Thailand October December October November September December Septftmhftr Other : Canada Finland _ November November i1949 = Food prices a Retail prices < = * 1st quarter Not available NOTE. The components of the indexes are not always the same for each country Source : International Monetary Fund November December November CREDIT MONEY SUPPLY AND FEDERAL FINANCE TABLE G Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of period Total Total Other Autoconmobile sumer paper goods paper Noninstalment credit Eepair and Permodern- sonal ization loans loans Total Charge accounts Other ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ._ 1931__ 1940_ _ : January February _ _ March April May June July August September October. November December _ : January February March April Mav June _July August September October November _ _ December ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit < Not available Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board " of Governors of the Federal Eeserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE G-36. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property mortgaged [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties All properties End of period Total to 4-family houses Multifamlly and commercial properties * Farm properties * : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ___ _ Derived figures which include negligible amount of farm loans held by savings arid loan associations Preliminary estimates Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ) TABLE G-37. Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] Total deposits and currency End of period Demand deposits adjusted and currency Total U.S Time Govdeposits ernad- ment Curjusted < derency Demand posits * deposits outside adjusted banks " _ _ _ : January February. March. __ April May _ June July August SeptemberOctober November December * January February March April May June July _ August September October November8 December ._ i June and December figures through June are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the month Includes deposits and currency held by State and local governments Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Includes U. S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE G Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] Total loans and investments End of period Loans Total June June < June * June * June June _ Investments Commercial and industrial loans > ( ) Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities : January _ _ February March April May June _ July August September October November December : January February March April May June. _ July August September October November6 December _ _- __ __ ( ) w ) ( c88 ) June and December figures through June are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net. Includes commercial and industrial loans agricultural loans loans on securities real-estate loans loans to banks and " other loans " some of which represent consumer credit a Beginning with data are shown gross i. e. before deduction of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years. Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on4 the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE G-39. Member bank reserves and Reserve Bank credit [ Millions of dollars ] Member bank reserve balances Reserve Bank credit outstanding Period Total Averages of daily figures : U.S Government securities Discounts and advances All other mainly float Total Required i Excess * : January February March April _ _ _ _ May June. July August September October November December : January _ February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ _ ._ Estimates Data on required and excess reserves from March through April for licensed banks only NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Billions of dollars par values ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of periu 'd Total Held Held by others by U.S GovNonbank private corernState Comporations and assoand Federal ment Total ciations held mer- Reserve local investcial by ment others govern- banks banks Corpoments acTotal rations B Other counts Individuals 2J _- : January February March. April May June July August September.. _ October _ _ November December : January February March _ _ April May _ June July August September October November. December _ United States savings bonds series A-D E F and J are included at current redemption values Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts s Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE G U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Gross public debt and guaranteed issues i End of period Marketable public issues Shortterm issues * Nonmarketable public issues United Treasury Treasury States tax and bonds savings savings bonds notes Investment bonds Special issues * _ _ _ _ : January February March April May June_ July August.. September October November _ December : January February March.. April May June July... August September October November December _ -_- __ _ _ _ Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes bills certificates of indebtedness and notes * Includes Series A bonds and beginning in April Series B convertible bonds Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held billion dollars of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Source : Treasury Department 2IO TABLE G-42. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U. S. Government securities Period 3-month Treas- month ury bills i issues Long-term taxable bonds ' Old Average : ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * January February March April ( ) ( ) May June __ July August September. __ October. _ _ November December : January February March April May June July August September October November.. December Aaa series Number of issues.-- _ New series ( ) ( ) i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) < ) ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ? ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Highgrade municipal bonds ( StandBaa ard & Poor 's ) Avg rate on shortterm bank loans to business selected cities Prime commercial paper months Federal Reserve Bank discount rate ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues Bonds in this classification were first issued in March ^ -percent bonds years and over prior to April and years and over beginning in April fi 3J4-percent bonds of first issued May Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available before August ' Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ) TABLE G Government cash receipts from and payments to the public calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Total Cash receipts _ __ _ ._ : Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) Cash payments Calendar year State and local Federal ( ) Excess of reCash Cash ceipts pay- ( ) or repayceipts ments ments ( ) +ll Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce adjusted to a cash basis Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE G-44. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] _ _ ( ) _ __ _. Corporate tax liability Period Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes ( ) ( ) <9.4 Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half __ : First half Second half ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter __ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ _ _ ___ _ ( ) _ ( ) ( ' ) <9.6 ( ' ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ' ) Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars s Not available * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table G-7 for profits before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals becausej ) f rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-45. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and ludnstry group average First Second Third Fourth First Second Third Year quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All private manufacturing corporations- Food Tobacco manufactures Textile-mill products Apparel and finished textilesLumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) __ Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products _. _ __ ._ __ Primary nonferrous metal industries --Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products.. _ Machinery ( except electrical ) _ _ _ Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments photographic and optical goods watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) ___ i ( ) ^ See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-45. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders9 equity and to sales> private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Continued Industry group average First Second Third Fourth First Second Third Year quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Profits in cents per dollar of sales All private manufacturing corporations. _ Food Tobacco manufactures Textile-mill pro ducts Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products. _ Furniture and fixtures __ _ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and refining Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products.. Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries .Fabricated metal products. _ Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments photographic and optical goods watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) _. ill.O ( ) Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined Not available separately for this period NOTE. Beginning with the third quarter of these series are based on a new sample. However the averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE ' G Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and average Asset size class ( thousands of dollars ) Year First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio cf profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All asset sizes Under to to to and over _ Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes _ _ Under to to to and over Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All asset sizes Under 250__ to to to and over Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes Under to to to _100,000 and over ' NOTE. Beginning with the third quarter of these series are based on a new sample. However the averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission 2l6 TABLE G Sources and uses of corporate funds [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) -_ Change in customer net receivables Cash and U. S. Government securities Other current assets Total uses Sources : Internal : Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation allowances Total internal sources External : Change in Federal income tax liability Other current liabilities Change in bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues _ _ Total external sources Total sources Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) ( ) C>.3 * Excludes banks and insurance companies ' Estimated to nearest half-billion dollars on basis of incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers * Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE G-48. Business population Business failures by size of liabilities Operating businesses and business turnover * DisOperat- New coning tinbusi- busi- ued nesses nesses businesses Period New busiAmount of current Number of failures ness liabilities Busi- incorness poratrans- tions Under $ Under $ fers Total $ and Total $ and over over Thousands of firms * _ _ ._ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Thousands of dollars Number of firms * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fi ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) H57,520 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) _ __ : January February March April May June July August September October November December ( " ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March April May June July August September. October November December ( ) ( ' ) Excludes firms in fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he has either an established place of business or at least one employee Industrial and commercial only ; excludes banks railroads insurance companies etc * Operating businesses are end-of-quarter data with annual estimate centered at June New and discontinued businesses and business transfers are totals for the year and half-year * Total for period Not available Revised series no longer carries group of agents and commercial services ( such as real estate and insurance brokers holding and finance companies tourist agencies etc. ) Revised series has more complete coverage of small firms Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc 2l8 INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS TABLE G-49. United States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Area and type of transaction WITH THE WORLD * Exports of goods and services : Total Less i Unilateral military transfers Net total Imports of goods and services : Military Other Total Unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) ] Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) ] United States private capital [ net outflow Errors and omissions Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and errors and omissions [ net outflow ( ) ] Si+3. U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets through transactions with the United States WITH WESTERN EUROPE AND DEPENDENCIES Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services fl Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) ] United States private capital [ net outflow Multilateral transfers _ Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets _ O o ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) CO ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) o ( ) ( ) WITH CONTINENTAL WESTERN EUROPE AND DEPENDENCIES Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services " Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) ] United States private capital [ net outflow Multilateral transfers Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ' ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets CO ( ) See footnotes at end of table TABLE G UnitedlStates balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Area and type of transaction WITH STERLING AREA Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services '__ _ _ _ Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) ] United States private capital [ net outflow Multilateral transfers Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i ( ) ( ) ( v ) Q fl ( ) WITH CANADA Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services " Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants _. United States private capital [ net outflow Multilateral transfers Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) c ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) WITH LATIN AMERICA Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers _ Imports of goods and services ' Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) United States private capital [ net outflow Multilateral transfers __ Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets -f- ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) See footnotes at end of table ( ) TABLE G-49. United States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Area and type of transaction WITH OTHER COUNTRIESs Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers ( ) Imports of goods and services ' Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants [ net outflow ( ) ] United States private capital [ net outflow ( ) ( ) Multilateral transfers Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government grants United States private capital and multilateral transfers.. _ ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( e ) ( ) U. S. Government credits and grants ( excluding transfers of military goods and services ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets _ _ ( ) ( ) January-September data at annual rates Includes international institutions Less than million dollars Includes billion dollars for subscription to International Monetary Fund and International Bank for5 Reconstruction and Development For geographic coverage see Survey of Current Business December Includes net unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government military and economic aid Includes errors and omissions ; ( ) indicates payment by the area Includes gold transactions with the United States only Not available Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G U. S. Government grants and capital movements to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid Disbursements on grants : Military goods and services : Mutual Defense _ _ __ Greek- Turkish aid China aid ._ .Other Government grants : EGA and Mutual Security : Europe Other areas -Army Civilian Supply Philippine Rehabilitation International Refugee Organization and other international relief agencies excluding TJNRRA UNRRA post UNRRA and interim aid Other grants _ _. * Total disbursements Less : Receipts Equals : Net unilateral payments _ _ g Long-term capital : Subscription to : International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund British Loan EGA and MSA Programs Export-Import Bank Surplus Credits ( including ship sales ) Raw material credits to occupied areas United Nations building loan Other g Total long-term capital outflow Less : Repayments Equals : Net long-term capital movements _. _ Short-term capital net U. S. Government grants of military goods and services Other U. S. Government grants net ._ U. S. Government long- and short-term credit _ January-September data at annual rates After includes disbursements in Germany administered by EGA from funds appropriated under the Army Civilian Supply Program Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G-51. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and [ Billions of dollars ] Area All foreign countries Sterling area Continental OEEC countries and dependencies Other Europe Canada Latin American Republics All other countries Preliminary estimates NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of U. S. S. R gold reserves. Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements ( both for its own and EPU accounts ) and of the Tripartite Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold are included with the holdings of Continental OEEC countries and dependencies. Figures represent ( ) reported and estimated gold reserves of central banks and governments and ( ) official and private dollar holdings reported by banks in the United States including foreign-held deposits U. S. Government securities maturing within months after date of purchase and certain other short-term liabilities to foreigners. Year-end estimates for all years except ; the figures are estimated on the basis of gold reserves at the end of that year plus dollar holdings reported by New York City banks as of May Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption and of domestic merchandise exports by economic class average and = ] Period Total Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semi-manufactures Finished manufactures Quantity Merchandise imports for consumption : i average Unit value average _ _- _- Quantity Domestic merchandise ports : i average _ ex100 UnitValue average -._ ._ The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Estimates based on data for the first months NOTE. Export indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs in some periods particularly those of unit value during are influenced by sales of large quantities of food products at prices considerably below market quotations. Such exports include sales from Government-owned surplus and shipments on which subsidies were paid by the Department of Agriculture Source : Department of Commerce SUMMARY TABLE G-53. Changes in selected economic series since and since Relatives on base Source : Appendix Table No Per- centage change Economic series to National income C ompensation of employees ( a ) G-10 Personal income Disposable personal income Personal net saving ._ G-ll Per capita disposable personal income : Current prices prices G-14 Realized net farm income G-ll Population : Total +t : o7 G-l Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services.. G-2 Gross national product in constant prices. Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services : Total Federal State and local- G-7 G-15 years of age and over Labor force including armed forces Civilian labor force Employment Agricultural Nonagricultural __ Unemployment G-21 Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments : Total Manufacturing Durable Nondurable Contract construction Government Allother G-15 G-23 Average gross hourly earnings : Manufacturing Durable goods... ._ Nondurable goods Building construction Retail trade ._ ._ __ G-24 Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Building construction __ __ ._ Retail trade G-25 Industrial production Durable manufactures _ Nondurable manufactures Minerals Agricultural produ ction ___ __ _ : o G-26 New construction current prices Private Residential ( nonfarm ) _ _ Public G-28 Business expenditures for new plant and equipment : Total Manufacturing __ TABLE G-53. Changes in selected economic series since and since Continued Relatives on base Source : Appendix Table No Economic series Percentage change to ( ) Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Processed foods Other than farm products and foods Prices received by farmers Parity index ( prices paid interest taxes and wage rates ) Loans and investments of all commercial banks : Total Loans. _ _ Investments in U. S. Government obligations G-41 Gross public debt and guaranteed issues G-44 Corporate profits before taxes Corporate profits after taxes Dividend payments Undistributed profits. ( ) ( ) ( ) G-31 Consumer price index : Allitems__ Food Apparel Rent .-Medical care * Q-32 G-33 G-35 G-38 Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding : Total _ Instalment credit Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from the relatives shown here Not available Based on data for the first quarters of each year * Based on percentage changes published in Department of Labor monthly reports on consumer prices O