Economic Report or the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING-OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. G Price of single copy cents ( H ) LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE January To the Congress of the United States : I am herewith presenting my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this Report I have had the assistance and advice of the Council of Economic Advisers. I have also had the advice of the heads of executive departments and independent agencies I present below largely in the words of the Report itself what I regard as its highlights Sources of Economic Progress With production and employment now increasing on a broad front the events of the past year have borne out the major conclusions of the Economic Report of January concerning the state of our economy and the policies needed to promote sound economic growth Economic well-being sustains our whole national life. A high and rising standard of living brings to more of our people the opportunity for continued intellectual and spiritual growth The main sources of our Nation 's economic strength are its free institutions and the qualities of its people their ambition skill enterprise and willingness to make great efforts in their own behalf and in behalf of their families and communities The need of our times is for economic policies that in the first place recognize the proven * sources of sustained economic growth and betterment and in the second place respect the need of people for a sense of security as well as opportunity in our complex industrialized society A free economy has great capacity to generate jobs and incomes if a feeling of confidence in the economic future is widely shared by investors workers businessmen farmers and consumers Many factors favor a continuation of our vigorous economic growth The population is increasing rapidly educational levels are rising work skills are improving incomes are widely distributed consumers are eager to better their living standards businessmen are starting new enterprises and expanding old ones the tools of industry are multiplying and improving research and technology are opening up new opportunities and our public policies generally encourage enterprise and innovation in With wise management of the national household our country can within a decade increase its production from the current annual level of about billion dollars to billion or more expressed in dollars of the same buying power In the future as in the past increases in productivity and in useful employment opportunities will be the core of economic expansion The role of the Federal Government in the achievement of these goals is to create an atmosphere favorable to economic activity by encouraging private initiative curbing monopolistic tendencies avoiding encroachment on the private sector of the economy and carrying out as much of its own work as is practicable through private enterprise. It should take its full part at the side of State and local governments in providing appropriate public facilities. It should restrain tendencies toward recession or inflation. It should widen opportunities for less fortunate citizens and help individuals to cope with the hazards of unemployment illness old age and blighted neighborhoods Last year the Government took many steps both legislative and administrative to encourage economic expansion. Fiscal and monetary measures fostered an expectation of improving economic conditions and encouraged people to maintain a high rate of expenditure. The opportunities of competitive enterprise were enlarged ; economic ties with other countries were improved ; the floor of personal and family security was strengthened ; and additions were made to our public assets The Economy Today The year was one of transition from contraction to recovery. The contraction reflected the efforts of businessmen to reduce inventories and was aggravated by a large reduction in military expenditures The contraction was relatively mild and brief because of a variety of timely public and private actions The Government cut taxes the Federal Reserve System eased credit conditions and the Treasury arranged its financing so as not to compete with mortgages and other long-term issues. A comprehensive program for encouraging private enterprise was submitted to the Congress. Apart from this the decline in private incomes was automatically cushioned by increased payments of unemployment insurance and other benefits and by sharp cuts in taxes due the Government on the reduced incomes Consumers maintained a high rate of spending businessmen kept capital expenditures at a high rate builders stepped up their activities trade unions conducted their affairs with a sense of responsibility farmers recognized the dangers of piling up ever larger surpluses private lenders made ample supplies of credit available on liberal terms States and localities carried out large construction programs and export demand remained strong Although manufacturing production fluctuated total output was fairly stable and disposable personal income reached record levels. But some IV industries and localities suffered from serious unemployment. The fortunes of most of them turned for the better when recovery got under way in the early autumn and they will benefit from further general economic expansion Instead of expanding Federal enterprises or initiating new spending programs the basic policy of the Government in dealing with the contraction was to take actions that created confidence in the future and stimulated business firms consumers and States and localities to increase their expenditures The vigor of the recent recovery which has already made up half of the preceding decline in industrial production suggests that economic expansion will probably continue during coming months. It holds out the promise that we shall achieve a high and satisfactory level of employment and production within the current year A further expansion of consumer spending may reasonably be expected ; we are soon likely to experience some rebuilding of inventories ; the decline of Federal spending next year will be less rapid than during the last two years ; State and local expenditure will probably continue to expand ; the outlook for housing and commercial construction continues to be good ; there is a prospect that plant and equipment expenditures may turn upward as the general economic advance proceeds ; the outlook for export demand is brightened by the economic resurgence of an ever-widening area of the Free World It is essential to keep a close watch on financial developments ; continued economic recovery must not be jeopardized by overemphasis of speculative activity Toward Sustained Economic Growth The wise course for Government in is to direct its program principally toward fostering long-term economic growth rather than toward imparting an immediate upward thrust to economic activity Further efforts to reduce Federal expenditures together with increasing revenues from a tax base growing as the economy expands should make possible some additional general tax reductions next year. Progress could then also be made in further lowering tax barriers to the free flow of funds into risk-taking and job-creating investments Government should persist in its efforts to maintain easy entry into trade and industry to check monopoly and to preserve a competitive environment. Continued encouragement should be given to small and new businesses Scientific research and development activities in all their phases should continue to have the earnest support of the Federal Government Measures by ourselves and other nations to reduce existing barriers to international trade payments and investment will make the Free World stronger and aid our own economic growth Measures should be considered to extend personal security against the hazard of unemployment to strengthen minimum wage legislation to protect savings in credit unions and to increase the President 's discretionary authority to vary the terms of insured mortgage loans in the interest of economic stability A great ten-year program to modernize the interstate highway system should be authorized Our partnership policies of water resource development should be further implemented by appropriate Congressional and local action Action should be taken this year to help meet our Nation-wide needs for school construction. I shall shortly send to the Congress a special message that will deal with methods by which the Federal Government can appropriately assist in this vital field Support should be provided for an Office of Coordinator of Public Works Planning in the Executive Office of the President and for a revolving fund for advances to the States and municipalities for public works planning Conclusion Our Nation 's recent history teaches that a foresighted Government can do much to help keep the economy stable but experience affords no good basis for a belief that the Government can entirely prevent fluctuations We should harness the idealism as well as the intelligence of our generation to the practical end of facilitating the growth of private enterprise and of increasing the stability of our economy The Government will shoulder its full responsibility to help realize that goal DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER VI CONTENTS Page CHAPTER THE EXPANSIVE POWER OF THE AMERICAN ECONOMY. I. Obligations of Federal Government Under Employment Act II. Paths to Economic Growth III. Steps Taken During to Build a Stronger Economy. CHAPTER A YEAR OF ECONOMIC TRANSITION I II III IV V VI The Onset of Contraction Gathering Forces of Recovery Why the Contraction Proved Mild Role of Federal Government Effects of Governmental Policies Lessons from Experience and Guides to the Future CHAPTER PROGRAM FOR SUSTAINED ECONOMIC PROGRESS I. Promoting the Spirit of Enterprise Fiscal Policies for Economic Expansion Assisting New and Small Businesses Improving the Basis of Technology II. Strengthening Economic Ties with Other Countries Freeing the Channels of Trade Fostering Foreign Investment III. Building the Floor of Personal and Family Security. Meeting the Hazard of Unemployment Extending Economic Security in Retirement Augmenting Low Incomes Protecting Workers * Savings Improving Homes and Neighborhoods IV. Expansion of Our Public Assets Modernizing the Highway System Accelerating the Development of Natural Resources Expanding State and Local Works Coordination of Public Works Planning V. Increasing the Stability of a Growing Economy vn APPENDICES Page A. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT B. SOME LEADING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS DURING I II III IV V VI The Nation 's Output and Its Disposition Employment and Earnings Price Changes Monetary and Credit Developments Government Finances Foreign Economic Developments C. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING D. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS { Chapters and Appendix B ) Tables Page Changes Since in Physical Volume of Production Recent Changes in Income Production and Employment Recent Changes in Gross National Product and Its Major Components Output of Some Rapidly Growing Consumer Commodities and Services B-l. Changes in Industrial Production B-2. New Construction Activity B-3. Gross National Product and Its Major Components B-4. Distribution of Personal Income Disbursements B-5. Distribution of Disposable Personal Income B-6. Alternative Measures of the Nation 's Total Output B-7. Changes in Nonagricultural Employment by Industry B-8. Number of Persons Receiving General Assistance B-9. Partial Unemployment of Usual Full-Time Workers B-10. Average Weekly Hours of Work in Selected Industries B-l Changes in Prices B-l Net Changes in the Ownership of the Publicly Held Federal Debt December to December B-l Net Changes in the Money Supply B-l4. Factors Affecting Member Bank Reserves December to December B-l Net Changes in Consumer Instalment and Noninstalment Credit Outstanding vm Tables { Continued ) Page B-16. Securities Offerings January to November and B-17. Federal Receipts and Expenditures : Conventional Budget and Consolidated Cash Statement B-l Effect of Financial Operations on the Federal Debt B-19. Consolidated Cash Statements of Federal State and Local Governments B-20. Gross State and Local Government Debt : Total and as Percent of Gross National Product B-21. Government Receipts and Expenditures as Shown in the National Income Accounts B-22. Reconciliation of Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures as Shown in the National Income Accounts with Receipts and Expenditures as Reported in the Consolidated Cash Statement and the Conventional Budget B-23. Growth of Western European Industrial Production Selected Countries B-24. Distribution of Nonmilitary Merchandise Exports and Imports of the United States by Areas January-October and B-25. Net Private United States Long-Term Foreign Investment by Areas and Ill Charts Growth of the Gross National Product Output Per Man-Hour in Major Industries Federal Receipts and Expenditures Indicators of Prosperity ( gross national product disposable personal income employment ) Gross National Product : Major Categories of Expenditure. Investment Expenditures Government Purchases of Goods and Services : Percent of Gross National Product Gross National Product : Final Purchases and Inventory Change Employment in Nonagricultural Establishments Employment and Unemployment Hours and Employment in Manufacturing Industrial Production Construction Expenditures Consumer Income and Expenditures Consumer Expenditures ( by type ) Manufacturers ' Inventories and Sales Manufacturers ' Sales and New Orders IX Charts ( Continue ^ Wholesale Inventories and Sales Retail Inventories and Sales Average Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing Corporate Profits Before and After Taxes Corporate Profits Before Taxes : Manufacturing and All Other. Liabilities of Business Failures Wholesale and Consumer Prices Wholesale Prices : Farm and Industrial Wholesale Prices : Industrial Materials and Goods Money Supply Bank Loans and Investments Consumer Instalment Credit Money Rates and Bond Yields Stock and Bond Prices Indicators of Investment Preparations Housing Starts and Financing Applications B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 Gross National Product ( in current and constant prices ) Farm Production Unemployment Rates ( by States ) Prices Received and Paid by Farmers Consumer Prices on a Postwar Base Consumer Prices on a Prewar Base Federal Reserve Bank Credit Member Bank Reserves and Borrowings U. S. Balance of Payments on Current Account Chapter The Expansive Power of the American Economy T HIS IS THE SECOND REPORT of the present Administration under the provisions of the Employment Act of which declares it to be a continuing responsibility of the Federal Government " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The earlier Report set forth the conditions of economic progress in our country and in our times. By and large the events of the intervening year have borne out the conclusions of that Report concerning the economic state of the Nation and the policies needed to promote sound economic growth I. OBLIGATIONS OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT UNDER EMPLOYMENT ACT The Employment Act The authors of the Employment Act wisely recognized that the main source of the economic strength of a nation consists in free institutions and the qualities of its people their ambition skill enterprise and willingness to make great efforts in their own behalf and in behalf of their families and communities. The Act therefore emphasizes economic growth rather than the mere stoppage or alleviation of business contractions. And it stresses the importance of using the powers of Government " to foster and promote free competitive enterprise " which has been the great energizer of our own Nation and of every other nation that has possessed the wisdom to submit to its discipline In framing the Employment Act the Congress recognized that the Government has no way of guaranteeing prosperity and that if a recession occurs no single action or rule of policy will necessarily suffice to generate a lasting recovery. The Act does not prescribe what means are to be used by the Federal Government in promoting the basic objective of maximum employment and production. It does however specify that the means must be consistent with the " needs and obligations " of the Government and with " other essential considerations of national policy. " In other words in implementing the Employment Act the Federal Government is subject to certain constraints. Among other things it must honor the constitutional rights of individuals ; it must respect the authority of the States ; and it must protect the integrity of the money in which contracts are expressed and payments made The obligation of the Federal Government under the Employment Act " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power " and to do so by means that are consistent with " other essential considerations of national policy " is not always remembered. Some citizens lacking faith in the ability of the private economy to generate a high level of activity espouse a steadily increasing role for Government. They urge new public undertakings and unbalanced budgets as devices for augmenting private demand often with little regard to the cause or magnitude of any deficiency in demand. Other citizens adhering to what they regard as the ultimate economic verities are critical of any governmental action that is designed to prevent or to minimize the rigors of depressed incomes and unemployment These are extreme and doctrinaire positions. If the one is insensitive to the inequities of inflation the other is insensitive to the misfortunes of depression. Each carries the danger of undermining sooner or later our system of free competitive enterprise. Neither is suited to our needs or our times. The American people believe firmly in economic freedom but will not passively accept depression or inflation. The need of our times is for economic policies that in the first place recognize the proven sources of sustained economic growth and betterment and in the second place respect the need of people for a sense of security as well as opportunity in our complex and industrialized society Basic Economic Tenets The economic actions of this Administration and its program for the future rest upon certain basic propositions. First competitive markets rather than governmental directives are as a rule the most efficient instruments for organizing production and consumption. Second a free economy has great capacity to generate jobs and incomes if a feeling of confidence in the economic future is widely shared by investors workers businessmen farmers and consumers. Third the Federal Government creates an atmosphere favorable to economic activity when it encourages private initiative curbs monopolistic tendencies whether of business or labor avoids encroachment on the private sector of the economy and carries out as much of its own work as is practicable through private enterprise Fourth the Federal Government generates confidence when it restrains tendencies toward recession or inflation and does this by relying largely on indirect means of influencing private behavior rather than by direct controls over people industries and markets. Fifth the Federal Government contributes to economic growth when it takes its part at the side of the States in promoting scientific research and in providing public facilities such as highways hospitals harbors and educational institutions on which the expansion of the private economy heavily rests. Sixth the Federal Government strengthens the foundations of the economy when it widens opportunity for its less fortunate citizens and working in cooperation with the States and localities helps individuals to cope with the hazards of unemployment illness old age and blighted neighborhoods These economic tenets are basic and inseparable. They constitute guides to policies which if pursued persistently will advance us toward the goal of an increasing national income shared equitably among those who contribute to its growth and realized in dollars of stable buying power. In broadest outline they constitute the framework of an economic system that is at once strong and humane a system that can provide both greater material abundance and a better quality of living II PATHS TO ECONOMIC GROWTH The Growth Potentials of Our Economy The American economy has created new jobs and produced marvels of abundance in the past. It should be able to do so in equal or even greater degree in the future. Our population is rapidly increasing educational levels are rising work skills are improving incomes are widely distributed consumers are eager to improve their living standards businessmen are actively engaged in starting new enterprises and expanding old ones the tools of industry are multiplying and improving research and technology are constantly opening up new opportunities and our public policies generally encourage enterprise and innovation. With so many favorable factors a continuation of rapid economic growth may reasonably be expected CHART GROWTH OF THE GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT WITH HYPOTHETICAL PROJECTION FOR BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( RATIO SCALE ) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( PRICES ) I <n i i i i I ( I M i I i i i i M i i N I I i I i I I i I I I I I i i i ( i i i ( I I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS An arithmetical calculation based on a number of technical assumptions the most important being that the average annual gains in productivity that we have had in recent times will occur in the future shows ( see Chart ) that our country can within a decade increase its production from a * current annual level of about billion dollars to billion or more with the figures expressed in dollars of the same buying power. Of course the record of the past sets no limit to our future achievements. Nor should we permit arithmetical projections to obscure the basic fact that an economy succeeds only as people succeed. Our economic future depends on the full use of the great treasure house of intelligence skill energy and confidence of the American people A glorious economic future may be ours but it is not vouchsafed to us We shall achieve it only by wise management of our national household. In the future as in the past increases in productivity and in useful employment opportunities will be the core of economic expansion ( see Chart ) The tools and equipment used by farm factory mine and office workers must be multiplied and improved. Industrial techniques materials and management must become more efficient and skills and morale enhanced so that the amount of production for each hour worked will increase. And unless there are satisfactory jobs for those who seek useful employment and unless human labor is devoted increasingly to the production of goods and services that improve the quality of life our gains in productivity may be dissipated Role of Government in Progress The history of our country ^ as well as of other parts of the Western World demonstrates that economic progress depends fundamentally on the enterprise and initiative of millions of people seeking to better themselves In such a process of economic expansion the Government can play however a highly constructive role. Within its own proper sphere the Government must be ready and willing to act. Indeed failure or reluctance to play its part can be a serious handicap to economic growth as would a similar lack of initiative on the part of private enterprise Among the activities essential to economic progress and in which there is a large public interest is the field of education extending from education for literacy to the highest reaches of theoretical inquiry. Scientific and technical knowledge research and development programs and industrial innovation and its diffusion are the wellsprings of an increasing output per man-hour upon which our hopes for a better life and more leisure in the future largely depend. An enlightened public policy must therefore focus attention upon augmenting the number of young people who have scientific engineering and technical skills ; upon encouraging creative thinking and invention ; upon inducing business enterprises and nonprofit organizations to support expanding programs of research ; upon enlarging the range and depth of Federal research and development programs in fields that can not be covered adequately by private efforts ; and upon hastening the industrial application of new methods and ideas through new investments CHART OUTPUT PER MAN-HOUR IN MAJOR INDUSTRIES INDEX = " ( RATIO SCALE ) INDEX = PRIVATE ELECTRIC UTILITIES STEAM RAILROADS r- AGRICULTURE 25L-7 MANUFACTURING r MINING II M I II I II I i I I M II I II I I I Ml II I M I I I II I NOTE : BROKEN LINE CONNECTING POINTS INDICATES OATA NOT AVAILABLE FOR INTERVENING YEARS SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS BASED ON DATA FROM VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SOURCES Public policy must also protect incentives and encourage a spirit of enterprise and innovation among people. The man or woman who in the hope of personal betterment works harder designs a new product creates a new method invests in a new business moves to a new job or suggests a new idea to his employer must believe that the rewards of initiative and effort are worth while. Through all of its policies the Government must encourage enterprising action by business managers investors and workers in an environment that is kept basically free and competitive Economic progress entails changes in technology and commerce and these changes require adjustments by people to new and altered ways of doing things. To insure that a dynamic economic environment involves a minimum of personal hardship and a maximum of new opportunity governmental policies should be designed to ease the movement of people to new areas or new occupations. Through an ever wider possession of education technical skill and capacity for movement new doors of economic opportunity can be opened and the remaining pockets of low income in our land can be reduced Expansion of private economic activity calls for great increases in the Nation 's physical stock of public capital as the Economic Report to the Congress in January pointed out. Government State and local as well as Federal has a responsibility to see that progress is promoted by adequate public works for education medical care transportation conservation and recreation The achievement of our economic goals requires that we further strengthen the floor of security for individuals and families in our industrialized society. When people have provided for minimum needs in their old age or in the event of misfortune they are apt to become more productive and more venturesome participants in an expanding economy. A wise Government can help people to provide for these needs without impairing their self-reliance A strategy for realizing our Nation 's growth potential must include as an indispensable part measures by ourselves and others for gradually clearing the channels of trade of payments and of investments between nations so that our people as well as others may devote themselves to the tasks in which they have a special advantage and so that the Free World may be bound together by a mutually beneficial economic intercourse. Thus our Nation 's security as well as its material welfare may be advanced Finally we must continue to coordinate all governmental programs especially monetary and fiscal policies in order to restrain and offset any tendencies that may develop toward recession or inflation. An expanding economy requires increases in the supply of money and credit but not on a scale that invites inflation in the present and possible depression in the future. The Federal Government should continue to manage its revenues debts and expenditures and conduct its regulatory activities so as to contribute to the expansive strength and stability of the economy III STEPS TAKEN DURING To BUILD A STRONGER ECONOMY During the year that has just closed the Government has taken many steps both legislative and administrative to put into effect policies that augment the expansionary powers of our economy and that express the basic economic tenets set forth in this Report. These actions have helped to generate confidence in the minds of the American people Fiscal and Monetary Actions The most powerful and pervasive of these actions have been of a fiscal and monetary character. The reduction in military and other outlays which occurred after the ending of the Korean conflict made possible sharp cuts both in taxes and in the Federal budgetary deficit ( see Chart ) Concurrently the Federal Reserve authorities made clear their intention to maintain an adequate supply of credit at moderate cost so long as this facilitated economic growth without inflation. These fiscal and monetary measures stimulated constructive economic attitudes and behavior on the part of consumers and businessmen. They fostered the expectation of improving economic conditions reasonably stable prices efficient housekeeping by Government and tax reductions in the future. Thus they encouraged the maintenance of a high rate of private spending and set the stage for successful application of other governmental policies to foster long-term expansion Enlarging the Opportunities of Competitive Enterprise Recent actions of the Congress and the Executive have enlarged and clarified the range of private enterprise. Of great potential significance is the new law which authorizes the Atomic Energy Commission to license with due regard to the public interest the use of special nuclear material in privately-owned reactors and which substantially broadens patent protection for private inventions in the atomic energy field. Opening the door to competitive enterprise in the development of nuclear power and other industrial uses of atomic energy will magnify the benefits our people are already deriving from this new resource The Government also made progress in redrawing the line separating private and public enterprise. Steps were taken to dispose of numerous enterprises for which public operation was inefficient or of doubtful advantage. Simultaneously the Government increased the amount of its contracting with private firms for necessary services and facilities as an alternative to producing them itself often at higher cost to the taxpayer. To hasten the economic development of our water resources and yet restrict Federal participation to what others are incapable of accomplishing the partnership principle of Federal cooperation with local interests public or private was launched The vigor of competitive enterprise has been promoted by many changes in our laws. Thus the recent tax law liberalized depreciation allowances CHART FEDERAL RECEIPTS A N D EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CONVENTIONAL BUDGET BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CASH BUDGET RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES ^ ^ SURPLUS u LJ ^ DEF C T -JO ^ ^ ^ ^ FISCAL YEAR ^ ESTIMATED SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET.- extended the period over which business losses can be carried back for tax purposes facilitated a ploughing back of earnings for expansion encouraged research and development expenditures and granted a limited tax credit on dividends received by shareholders. All of these measures should assist business firms especially those of medium or small size to grow and to provide new jobs at satisfactory wages. At the same time legislation was passed to relax Federal controls over farming. The introduction of flexible price supports for basic crops and the modernization of the " parity " formula will facilitate the adjustment of our farming enterprises to changing markets and thus help improve the outlook for the farmer Strengthening Economic Ties with Other Countries Although action on major proposals for changes in our foreign economic policy was deferred to this year several constructive measures to advance international trade and investment were adopted during Government controls of the export of many commodities to friendly countries were removed. The lending authority of the Export-Import Bank was increased from billion to billion dollars and a new export-credit program was introduced to facilitate trade. Action was taken to establish uniform and reasonable standards for the application of the Buy American Act Improvements in customs administration were made to benefit trade With the aim of enlarging private investment abroad the Foreign Operations Administration extended the coverage and halved the premium charge for government insurance against expropriation or currency inconvertibility Another advance toward the same objective was made by removing the over-all limitation on the extent to which foreign tax payments could be credited against United States income taxes and by allowing shareholders in regulated investment companies having more than one-half their investments in foreign countries to benefit by foreign tax credits Building the Floor of Personal and Family Security As a result of governmental actions during the past year many people are now better able to meet their housing needs and the problems of old age and unemployment. Over million men and women were brought into our system of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance. Social security contributions were increased but the scale of benefits paid to the aged was raised and the amount of their permissible earnings increased. At the same time pensions and disability compensation rates for veterans were raised The Federal-State unemployment insurance system was also strengthened Over million workers in smaller firms and million Federal civilian employees were brought into the system thus raising the total covered population to approximately million. Both the amount and the maximum duration of benefits payable under the unemployment insurance law in the District of Columbia were increased. A special Federal loan fund was established to assure uninterrupted payment of unemployment benefits by States whose reserve funds may become low. To meet acute personal problems provision was made for substantially larger grants to the States for vocational rehabilitation Important actions were also taken to extend home ownership conserve urban neighborhoods and speed the elimination of slums. Thus the terms on which mortgage loans could be insured by the Federal Housing Administration were liberalized for both new and existing dwellings and the application of mortgage insurance was extended to sale and rental housing in blighted areas. Federal grants and loan funds were provided to aid urban renewal. Along the same line the authority of the Administrator of Veterans ' Affairs to make direct home and farmhouse loans to veterans was extended and additional funds were made available for this purpose Expansion of Public Assets Recognizing that the provision of public roads schools hospitals and community facilities has long lagged behind our needs the Federal Government acted last year to augment a number of public works activities Federal highway grants to the States of million dollars were authorized for each of the fiscal years and thus greatly increasing the annual amount of Federal aid previously made available. One hundred and twenty-five million dollars was made available for school construction in areas where Federal activities had affected school enrollment. Substantial aid was authorized to the States for building hospitals and other medical facilities and was backed by an appropriation of nearly million dollars for the fiscal year After many years of debate concerning the St Lawrence Seaway a development corporation was finally created and authorized to cooperate with a Canadian agency in the construction of the Seaway our share of the cost to be financed on a self-liquidating basis Apart from this over billion dollars was authorized for the construction and repair of navigation flood control and other civil works. Additional authorizations for military construction were made supported by an appropriation of million dollars for the fiscal year Within the same category of legislation was the authority granted to the Executive to add to the tanker fleet. Finally important steps were taken to put advance planning of public works on a more systematic basis Plan of Report The effects of these and related governmental actions are considered later in this Report and its Appendices. The next chapter is devoted to a review of recent economic developments the principal measures taken by Government to influence their course and the prospects of the economy. This review should help us determine the next steps of a governmental policy aiming to promote a sustained and satisfactory rate of economic growth A program of proposed governmental actions is set forth in the third and final chapter Chapter A Year of Economic Transition T THE TIME last year when the Economic Report was submitted V to the Congress our economy was undergoing a contraction partly as a result of readjustments forced by the ending of the Korean conflict partly for other reasons. Today after a small and brief over-all decline though one that affected individual industries and localities unevenly production and employment are again increasing on a broad front. The recovery has already carried economic activity to the highest level of the past twelve months. And although aggregate production and employment during fell somewhat short of the levels reached in the year just concluded will go down in history as one of our most prosperous years. The following analysis of recent events is documented by the charts and tables of this chapter and by the evidence assembled in Appendices B and D I. T H E ONSET OF CONTRACTION In our economy or in any other of which we have definite knowledge occasional imbalances between production and sales are virtually bound to occur. Such a condition developed in After the steel strike in the summer of was settled production employment and incomes increased sharply. So too did consumer spending though at a somewhat lower rate TABLE Changes since in physical volume of production Percentage change from Type of output to to to to Gross national product Agricultural production Industrial production : Total Manufactures Minerals New construction * Consumer services ! * Railway freight carried Electric power production 8_ Based on preliminary estimates for Based on data in constant prices Consumer expenditures for services except housing in constant prices * Ton-miles of revenue and nonrevenue freight Production by electric utilities only Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Department of Labor Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Power Commission Interstate Commerce Commission and Council of Economic Advisers II CHART INDICATORS OF PROSPERITY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS DOLLARS PRICES TOTAL DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( LEFT SCALE ) J ^ > PE CAPITA DISPOSABLI PERSONAL INCOME f t * ? l6rtT SCALE ) I I I I I I I I i % f MILLIONS OF PERSONS I I I I \ &t > ^ I PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE EMPLOYMENT PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE ( RteHT SCALE ) _L i t t i i t t SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS than the increase of personal incomes. The rate of general economic expansion was reduced but continued to be fairly rapid during the early months of Total spending by consumers roughly kept pace with their rising incomes during these months ; however spending on commodities as distinct from services tapered off. Inventories therefore kept rising particularly those held by retailers. About the same time the flow of new defense contracts which tie up inventories of factories on a larger scale than civilian production diminished sharply. In view of these developments as well as the general quickening of deliveries many business firms deemed it prudent to bring their inventories into better balance with sales and incoming orders. The effort to adjust inventories led to scattered declines in production which became visible in the Nation 's aggregate of industrial production after July Within a few months total production fell short of consumption just as it had previously exceeded consumption. An inventory recession of the sort that occurred in and earlier times in our history was under way This economic readjustment was complicated and aggravated by the close of hostilities in Korea. With the war at an end the need for many types of defense goods diminished. At the same time basic defense plans were being modified to strengthen our economy for what might prove a very long period of " cold war. " The changed situation in Korea the revisions of military programs and improvements in the administration of our defense establishment brought about a sizable drop of military and related expenditures. A larger reduction was carried through during than had been anticipated and it called for further readjustments by the economy. For the decline of defense spending not only reduced the Nation 's stream of expenditures for final use ; it also accentuated the efforts of businessmen to cut inventories The primary contractive factor during the latter part of was the adjustment of inventories. This role shifted to defense spending after the turn of the year. In the second quarter of businessmen added to their inventories at an annual rate of billion dollars. In the first quarter of they reduced their inventories at a rate of billion. In the meantime expenditures on national security fell from an annual rate of billion dollars to billion while total Federal spending on goods and services fell from billion to billion. Thus the combined decline of inventory and defense spending over this nine-month interval was at an annual rate of billion dollars This reduction of expenditures was reflected rather promptly in production employment the flow of incomes business loans imports and other phases of the Nation 's economic life. The over-all decline of economic activity was small but its impact was very uneven and some industries and localities suffered seriously. The impact of inventory liquidation and of the cuts in defense expenditures was heaviest on those engaged in the manufacture of durable goods. Other factors added to the downward pressure T A B L E Recent changes in income production and employment Percentage change l from Item to _ugust July to March Ai DecemMarch to August to ber INCOME Industrial production : Total Manufactures : Total _ Durable goods Nondurable goods _ Minerals _ New construction * Employment : Total Nonagricultural establishments : Total.Manufacturing _ Mining Transportation _ Allother _ Man-hours worked in manufacturing : Total Durable goods Nondurable goods _ Personal Income ( before taxes ) : Total Labor income _ Proprietors ' income _ Investment income Transfer payments Disposable personal income ( after taxes ) Corporate profits : Before taxes After taxes PRODUCTION EMPLOYMENT Changes based on seasonally adjusted data Preliminary. For labor proprietors ' and investment income changes are based on data through November Changes in the last three columns are from second quarter of to first quarter of first to third quarter of and third to fourth quarter of Based on data in constant prices Data for total employment are Bureau of the Census estimates seasonally adjusted and for employment in nonagricultural establishments are seasonally adjusted estimates of the Bureau of Labor Statistics Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,National Bureau of Economic Research and Council of Economic Advisers T A B L E Recent changes in gross national product and its major components [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change from Item Gross national product : Total Additions to inventories Federal purchases of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic fixed investment Net foreign investment _ _ _ _ State and local purchases of goods and services _ Second Third First quarter quarter quarter to first to fourth to third quarter quarter quarter Preliminary NOTE : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers on this sector of the economy. Although total spending by consumers was virtually unchanged between the second quarter of and the first quarter of their outlays on durable goods were considerably reduced Investors in fixed capital likewise reduced their outlays on equipment though not on construction. In consequence while the physical volume of nondurable manufactures declined percent between July and March the production of durables declined percent and manufacturing production as a whole percent. About 1J4 million men and women lost their jobs in manufacturing during this period nearly a million of them in steel mills ordnance establishments shipbuilding yards automotive plants locomotive works and other durable goods factories. In the meantime overtime work was curtailed and the average length of the workweek declined. Wage rates continued to rise but their influence was swamped by reduced employment and working hours and the annual rate of wage income in manufacturing fell by J4 billion dollars or percent. As is usual at such a time profits fell more sharply ; dividend payments on the other hand were maintained or even increased Economic contraction was not confined to manufacturing industries Sizable reductions of activity occurred also in the mineral and transportation industries particularly in coal mining and railroading whose long-standing difficulties in maintaining a satisfactory market position were accentuated Agriculture continued to be characterized by large surpluses inadequate exports and lower prices received by farmers relative to those paid by them. Other branches of industry notably construction the electrical utilities and the great range of service industries were successful in resisting the forces of contraction and even continued to grow. Nevertheless by early March % million persons were unemployed an increase of about million from the preceding July. Another % million were temporarily laid off and a large number were working only part time. A cry of impending depression was raised II. GATHERING FORCES OF RECOVERY The depression that so many feared or expected did not however develop Toward the end of signs of improvement began to appear in financial and investment markets and these indications multiplied after the turn of the year. Stock prices started rising in September Contracts for residential building resumed their advance at about the same time. Contracts for commercial and industrial building joined the advance at the beginning of the new year as did new business incorporations and orders placed with manufacturers of durable goods. The liabilities of business firms forced into failure reached a peak in February then declined irregularly. Meanwhile money rates which had been falling since June continued to move downward. Credit became more readily available at progressively cheaper rates. The terms of mortgage financing which had already been extensively liberalized by the fall of continued to ease during and a buoyant market developed for new mortgages. Also the market for capital issues especially for State and local government bonds became increasingly active and confident The early recovery was most dramatic in the financial and investment spheres but it was not confined to them. After the turn of the year retail sales began to increase despite a substantial drop of outstanding consumer credit. Exports rose above the preceding year 's level despite a drop of imports. Inventories of manufacturers continued to decline and sales therefore continued to exceed production. But by the spring of the decline in production had abated and the economy stabilized. The combined output of manufacturing and mining industries traced an even course between March and August. The gross national product which expresses the dollar value of the Nation 's total output of goods and services was virtually the same for the second and third quarters of the year as for the first. Employment in nonagricultural establishments continued to fall ; but the rate of decline in employment diminished appreciably and the average length of the workweek in manufacturing actually increased somewhat The flow of total personal income as well as of labor income reached a low point in April and then began to rise gradually Meanwhile investment preparations especially of home builders proceeded on an expanding scale. Businessmen also continued their efforts to win better control over inventories. These efforts met with success Around the turn of the year the ratio of inventories to sales had ceased rising in most lines of industry. The ratio for manufacturing as a whole which was in January fell to in May and to in September. For retailers the ratio moved from in January to in May and in September. These readjustments were largest in the case of durable goods which had felt the impact of contraction most keenly With inventories under better control the gap between the orders received by manufacturers and their current sales became progressively narrower while commodity prices at wholesale and retail changed very little on the average. Wage rates continued to move upward but most adjustments were of moderate proportions and some decreases occurred. In these circumstances the retirement of marginal units of equipment reductions of overtime work and other economies resulted in lower unit costs for many businesses. By the late summer of a broad foundation had thus been laid for industrial recovery The transition from contraction to recovery is an intricate economic process worked out over time whose character is never disclosed by over-all measures of economic activity. The virtual stability of the gross national product over a good part of the past year concealed the fact that after the turn of the year the number of declining industries in the area of manufacturing progressively diminished. It also concealed the vital transformation that was taking place in the Nation 's stream of expenditure. Between the first and third quarters of total Federal spending on goods and services declined at an annual rate of billion dollars. Meanwhile other major categories of expenditure that is consumer spending private domestic investment foreign investment and State and local expenditures increased in the aggregate at approximately this rate. Not only that but each of these four broad classes of expenditure expanded. Thus while the gross national product stood still the civilian part of the economy kept moving forward enlarging its outlays taking up the slack caused by the continued decline of Federal spending. This adaptive power of the economy during a difficult period of readjustment from war to peace supported and strengthened a widespread feeling of confidence By the early autumn of the forces of recovery had gathered sufficient strength to lift total production and employment despite a continued drop of Federal spending. Total industrial production began rising gently in September then gained momentum as the virtual shutdown of automobile plants for model change-overs ended. Employment in nondurable goods manufactures reached a trough in July in durable goods manufactures in August in nonagricultural establishments as a whole in the same month. In early October unemployment fell below the million mark for the first time in By November economic improvement had again pushed the average length of the workweek in manufacturing above hours. The recovery was largest in the steel automobile household appliance and textile industries. It was felt also in coal mining railroad freight movements and a host of other activities. In the meantime the construction industry which had stubbornly defied the recession continued to advance. The flow of personal incomes reflecting all these improvements expanded at a more rapid rate. Weekly earnings in manufacturing reached a new record. Bank loans increased again and interest rates stopped declining. Commodity markets generally kept steady but rising demand for industrial raw materials pushed up their prices. Some tendency to lengthen inventory commitments developed and the flow of orders to manufacturers again exceeded their sales. When the year ended the traces of contraction had not yet been erased but a general economic recovery was in process III W H Y THE CONTRACTION PROVED MILD The course of the recent contraction raises important questions for all students of public affairs namely : Why did the economic setback of prove so mild on an over-all basis ? Why did our total national output of goods and services decline no more than percent ? Why did not the decline turn into the cumulative spiraling depression that many feared and some expected ? Why to put a still more exacting question did the gross national product decline from an annual rate of about billion dollars in the second quarter of to billion in the third quarter of or by billion dollars in all when the primary contracting factors inventory spending and Federal spending declined between them as much as billion dollars ? These are difficult questions and they will doubtless engage the attention of scientific investigators for a long time to come. Nevertheless some of the factors that contributed to the result are clear even today. Consumers not only maintained their spending at a consistently high level but reduced their rate of saving during Businessmen kept up their capital expenditures at a high rate increased the flow of dividends to stockholders and intensified their selling efforts. Builders and real estate developers stepped up their operations. Trade unions conducted their affairs with an eye to basic conditions and with a sense of responsibility. Farmers and their organizations recognized the danger of piling up ever larger surpluses Commercial banks and other financial institutions made ample supplies of credit available on liberal terms. States and localities carried out large and expanding programs of school hospital and road construction. And the continuing recovery of Western Europe helped to augment our exports and to bolster the prices of internationally traded raw materials Clearly many people had a part in stemming the economic decline and easing the readjustment from war to peace. The Federal Government also contributed significantly to the process of recovery. It influenced the economy in two principal ways first through the automatic workings of the fiscal system second by deliberately pursuing monetary tax and expenditure policies that inspired widespread confidence on the part of people and thus helped them to act in ways that were economically constructive IV ROLE OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT It is well to recall that we have developed in our country a fiscal system that tends to cushion or offset a decline in private income. When employment and income decline tax receipts decrease and certain expenditures such as unemployment insurance payments automatically increase These offsets can not be counted on to prevent a depression but they can be of very material assistance as recent experience indicates Between July and July total personal income derived from production decreased at an annual rate of billion dollars. In the meantime unemployment insurance and other social security payments to the public increased at a rate of billion dollars while tax payments by the public quite apart from the change in rates that became effective in January fell at the rate of another billion. These two factors alone served in very large part to offset the over-all decline of personal income from production and their effects were augmented by the operations of the farm price-support system The experience of corporations was similar to that of individuals. While corporate income decreased at an annual rate of billion dollars between the second quarter of and the second quarter of the tax liability of corporations was cut by billion dollars merely as a result of the decline in income and quite apart from any change in the tax law Once again therefore our taxing machinery automatically cushioned the impact of a declining income on the sums available to corporations for paying dividends or adding to their assets The Government was not content however to play merely a passive role in the economy. On the contrary definite and deliberate steps were taken to promote a stable prosperity. One of the earliest acts of the new Administration after taking office in January was to remove price and wage controls in order to restore the functions of competitive markets With a boom psychology existing at the time and unemployment at a vanishing point this reform carried the danger of inducing fresh inflation A precautionary policy of restricting credit expansion was therefore adopted The aim was to prevent a reckless increase of investment and a deterioration in the quality of new credits such as had often characterized the closing stages of economic booms in our history By May of it became clear that a policy of credit restraint had already accomplished this purpose and that its further continuance might incite an anxious scramble for cash. The Federal Reserve authorities therefore proceeded promptly to ease credit conditions first by expanding the reserves of commercial banks second by reducing the reserves that the banks were required to hold against their deposits. In line with these actions the Treasury arranged its financing so as not to compete with mortgages and other long-term issues. These steps were initiated before the peak of business activity had been definitely passed Later in September when it was not yet generally appreciated that an economic decline had already begun and that the curtailment of defense spending might carry it further the Secretary of the Treasury announced that the Administration besides relinquishing the excess-profits tax would not seek to postpone the reduction of the personal income tax scheduled for January The cuts served to reduce taxes during the next six months by billion dollars and it has been estimated that they will reduce taxes from July to June by billion dollars. Although the tax reductions were partly offset by increases in social security contributions that also became effective in January the net effect was to increase substantially the money available to people for spending or investing In January the Economic Report of the President developed a comprehensive program to stimulate competitive enterprise to strengthen the floor of security for the individual and to curb tendencies toward either depression or inflation. The program called for structural tax changes to encourage economic growth in particular for more liberal treatment of depreciation allowances for treating research and development outlays as a current expense for reducing the double taxation of dividends and for lengthening the period over which business losses could be carried back in reckoning the income tax. The program called also for tax adjustments to ease personal hardships an enlargement of the credit facilities for housing the speeding of slum clearance extension of the protective scope of old-age and unemployment insurance improvement of the highway system systematic planning of public works a realistic agricultural policy and an extension of the President 's authority to control the terms on which the Federal Government would underwrite housing loans and mortgages. The announcement in January of these legislative proposals nearly all of which were subsequently enacted by the Congress helped to inspire confidence in the economic policies of Government In later months additional steps were taken by the Government to stimulate the economy. Federal Reserve banks lowered their rediscount rates The reserves that member banks are required to hold in support of their deposits were reduced once again. Excise taxes were cut carrying a revenue loss of about billion dollars in the fiscal year in addition to the loss of billion dollars as a result of enacting structural tax changes. Some of our hard-pressed industries were aided notably shipbuilding through a new construction program and zinc and lead mining as a result of a revised stockpiling program. The Executive Branch attended to its housekeeping duties by expediting actions that involved the private economy as in the case of refunds of overpaid taxes and by announcing promptly its own commitments as in the case of grants to the States for road building The Government also attempted to assist localities suffering from unemployment by channeling contracts to them as far as feasible by boosting the allowable rate of accelerated amortization on facilities needed for the mobilization base and by expanding the activities of the Area Development Division of the Department of Commerce V. EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENTAL POLICIES This in broad outline is the record of recent actions of the Federal Government to stimulate the economy. What gave them a special character was their promptness and the heavy reliance on monetary policies and tax reductions. The shift from credit restraint to credit ease before an economic decline had begun the announcement of sizable tax reductions before it was generally appreciated that an economic decline was actually under way the submission to the Congress of a comprehensive program for encouraging the growth of the economy through private enterprise these early measures to build confidence were by far the most important. For they strengthened confidence when it was most needed and thereby rendered unnecessary any later resort to drastic governmental programs in an atmosphere of emergency The basic policy of the Government in dealing with the contraction was to stimulate business firms consumers and States and localities to increase their expenditures rather than to expand existing Federal enterprises or initiate new spending programs. The success of this policy is evident in the present recovery. It is evident also in some of the unusual and at first blush puzzling characteristics of the recent contraction the steady increase of disposable personal income the almost uninterrupted rise of consumer spending the expansion of State and local improvements the maintenance of private investment in fixed capital close to peak levels the expansion of the money supply and the steadiness of the price level Tax reductions along with unemployment insurance benefits and other social security payments supported powerfully the income at the disposal of individuals and families. This can be seen from a simple calculation for the interval from July to July If we combine the effects first of the automatic reduction of tax payments resulting from reduced incomes second of the deliberate changes of tax rates that occurred in January third of the expanded flow of unemployment insurance and related payments we get a sum of offsets to a declining production income that comes to billion dollars. Since the income derived from production declined by an annual rate of only billion dollars the income available to the public for spending or saving actually increased by nearly billion dollars. This remarkable result namely a rise in disposable personal income accompanying a percent decline of industrial production has no parallel in our recorded economic history Tax reductions not only offset reductions from production income ; they also helped to make production income itself larger than it would otherwise have been. As noted previously corporate profits before taxes fell at an annual rate of billion dollars between the second quarter of and the second quarter of Meanwhile the reduction of taxes that automatically accompanied the decline of income coupled with the removal of the excess-profits tax reduced the tax liability of corporations at an annual rate of billion dollars and thus offset the greater part of the reduction of corporate income. Had it not been for this reduction of taxes it is unlikely that corporations would have increased their dividend payments at an annual rate of million dollars during this period thus bolstering the flow of personal income. Nor is it likely that they would have maintained their capital expenditures at so high a rate thereby supporting the Nation 's income base. And if this is true of corporations it is not less true of individuals and families. With their disposable income increasing people spent money rather freely and thus supported employment and the flow of income to themselves their neighbors and others The effects of monetary and debt management policies on the community 's income stream are harder to trace than the effects of lower taxes but there can be no doubt of their significance or pervasiveness. These policies were adjusted swiftly to changing conditions and helped materially first to prevent inflation later to check contraction. Before the recession of economic activity in had commenced interest rates were already declining. Later in the year the easing of credit terms became general and extended from prime issues to those involving larger risks. Financial institutions amply supplied with reserves or cash sought opportunities to put their resources to use. With the demand for business and consumer loans relatively low they eagerly took up mortgages municipal bonds corporate issues and Treasury obligations. As a result the loans and investments of commercial banks increased by about billion dollars during and the money supply increased further especially in the second half of the year. Had it not been for the increased availability of credit and the easing of terms the fast pace of residential commercial and State and local construction which did so much to stabilize the economy during the past year would not have been attained. Nor would consumers have been able so easily to arrange financing for a part of their expenditure. Nor would the liquidation of inventories have proceeded with so little disturbance to markets or general economic activity It is well to recognize however that the reasons for the success of recent policies are not to be found in them alone. Tax reductions however attractive they may seem when the economy is declining will not necessarily lead to an increase of spending or investing. Easier credit conditions larger bank reserves even a larger money supply will not necessarily put new money to work in industry. Management of the public debt so as to avoid competition with mortgages and other capital issues will not necessarily increase private capital formation. If such policies are to be of material help in stemming a contraction there must be a pervasive feeling of confidence on the part of people. The effectiveness of a particular policy whatever be its sphere or expression is conditioned by the mood of the time and this is bound to reflect people 's attitudes toward governmental policies at large It is not merely the intrinsic merit of the individual policies that were pursued but also the fact that each was part of a cohesive program for strengthening the confidence of people in their own and their country 's economic future that accounts for our recent success in curbing economic contraction VI LESSONS FROM EXPERIENCE AND GUIDES TO THE FUTURE In the course of our latest encounter with the business cycle we have learned or relearned several lessons. First that wise and early action by Government can stave off serious difficulties later. Second that contraction may be stopped in its tracks even when governmental expenditures and budget deficits are declining provided effective means are taken for building confidence. Third that monetary policy can be a powerful instrument of economic recovery so long as the confidence of consumers and businessmen in the future remains high. Fourth that automatic stabilizers such as unemployment insurance and a tax system that is elastic with respect to the national income can be of material aid in moderating cyclical fluctuations. Fifth that a minor contraction in this country need not produce a severe depression abroad. Sixth that an expanding world economy can facilitate our own readjustments. These teachings of experience should serve us well in the years ahead though we must always be alert to the special needs of every new situation As our minds turn from the past to the future the basic fact to keep before us is that while the groundwork for the recent recovery was laid by the Government the recovery itself was brought about by the American people A mood of confidence about the economic future has been gradually de- veloping in recent years and the strength exhibited by our economy last year has reinforced this trend A large and increasing number of business managements have become accustomed to thinking in ambitious long-range terms. Expecting our economy to grow and prosper they do not permit minor variations in sales to divert them from the objective of strengthening or at least maintaining their competitive position five or ten years later. Hence they boldly allot large sums to research plan capital expenditures well beyond immediate needs launch extensive investment projects and even judge one another by these yardsticks no less than by profit-and-loss statements The economic horizons of consumers are also widening. One of the marvels of our generation has been the growth of consumer capital modern homes automobiles radios television sets washing machines air conditioning units electric dryers food freezers and so on in an ever longer list Perhaps at no time in the past has the desire for material improvement played so large a role in the economy as it does today. Consumers continue to visit bargain basements but their preferences run strongly toward the latest contrivances newest conveniences and premium grades. And if people are no longer timid about borrowing to expand their current spending they are also willing to work hard to acquire the incomes needed to live as they feel they should T A B L E Output of some rapidly growing consumer commodities and services Commodity or service Unit ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) COMMODITY Air conditioning units room Antibiotics Blankets electric Dryers clothes Freezers farm and home Frozen foods Furnaces warm air oil and gas Oil burners ? residential Oleomargarine Shavers electric Synthetic detergents Synthetic fibers other than rayon Television sets Waste food disposals Water heaters electric and gas Thousands Thousand pounds. Thousands Thousands Thousands Million pounds Thousands. Thousands.. Million pounds Thousands Million pounds Million pounds Thousands Thousands Thousands SERVICE Cleaning and dyeing. _ Repairs household durables Revenue passenger miles flown Index = Index = Billions Preliminary Production was relatively small Source : Department of Commerce based on data from various private and Government sources With the business cycle apparently under reasonable control with the size of population growing rapidly with science and technology adding new wonders each day with incomes distributed widely with mass markets expanding to match mass production and with governmental policy steering a middle course between the political extremes both material and psychological factors are peculiarly favorable to economic progress. Hence the business recovery now under way is powerfully supported by underlying forces of economic growth. While only of very recent date the recovery is widespread and has already made up half of the decline that had occurred in industrial production. The rate of inventory liquidation has sharply abated and we are soon likely to experience some rebuilding of inventories. The projected decline of Federal spending is less than in the past two years State and local expenditure will probably continue to expand and more than offset any further decline that may occur in Federal expenditure The recent increase of housing starts and the rush of applications to Federal agencies for mortgage insurance or guarantees promise that home building will continue to mount for some time. The recent high level of commercial building contracts is practically sure to mean a high level of expenditure for this type of construction over coming months. The prospects for plant and equipment expenditure are more uncertain ; however rising orders for machinery to say nothing of the new plans and revisions of old plans that are likely to accompany continued recovery give a basis for expecting that this broad category of expenditure will soon join though perhaps only modestly at the start the general economic advance. In view of the resurgence of the economy of Western Europe and the reduction of restrictions against dollar trade it seems likely that our exports will continue to increase. The spirited behavior of retail sales in recent months has borne out earlier surveys of consumer attitudes. Further expansion of consumer spending may be expected as economic recovery cumulates Beyond these indications of immediate or short-run prospects is the fact that new firms are being established at an increasing rate and that the offices of architects are reported to be bursting with plans for new homes schools and all sorts of commercial and industrial projects. Still further in the future but already a factor in business thinking is a new national highway system which will create great economic opportunity in many directions and of which something will be said later in this Report In the course of the current year the economic situation may therefore be expected to continue to improve. The gross national product increased from an annual rate of about billion dollars in the third quarter of to about billion dollars in the fourth quarter. With economic activity continuing to expand it is reasonable to expect that the Nation 's output within the coming year will approximate the goals of " maximum employment production and purchasing power " envisaged by the Employment Act. At this juncture of our economic life when confidence is running especially high it is well however to keep in mind the sobering fact that there is no way of lifting more than a corner of the veil that separates the present from the future. How long the current phase of expansion will continue before new international trouble or a cyclical reversal of business occurs or how far the expansion will carry it is impossible to say with great assurance. The uncertainty of economic predictions requires that the Federal Government be prepared to adjust its policies promptly if economic events should not bear out current expectations. Over coming weeks or months we should however be careful not to confuse seasonal fluctuations in employment or special fluctuations of individual industries or markets with over-all economic trends. It will prove helpful to keep in mind that a business recovery never retraces the precise path of the preceding contraction and that this divergence is apt to be sharpest in postwar movements. The prosperity that some industries and localities attained during the Korean conflict and which they have now lost will not be regained quickly in all instances. Here and there the process of readjusting to reduced markets may be prolonged although it will be greatly eased as general economic expansion continues We must also remember that just as economic expansion resolves old problems so it often brings new ones in its train. History tells us that industrial disputes have usually been more frequent in periods of expansion than in periods of contraction and that industrial disputes sometimes have serious economic repercussions. History also warns us that activities which involve the discounting of a long future as in the case of home purchases or the pricing of corporate shares may be carried to excess in the course of a business expansion. Fortunately when speculative trends develop they usually become self-corrective before they become excessive. It is highly desirable that corrective movements testing the soundness of various parts of the economy be scattered over a period of time rather than culminate at the same time. As the recent increase of stock margin requirements by the Federal Reserve Board has demonstrated the Government is mindful of its great responsibility to help assure balanced economic growth. It is essential to keep a close watch on financial developments Continued economic recovery must not be jeopardized by overemphasis of speculative activity CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT MAJOR CATEGORIES OF EXPENDITURE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT GROSS PRIVATE INVESTMENT I FEDERAL- ^ I I I I ^ PURCHASES OF GOODS AN0 SERVICES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART INVESTMENT EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ^ / r PRIVATE DOMESTIC FIXED INVESTMENT CHANGE IN BUS INESS INVENTORI ES ^ \ V ^ / NET FOREIC NINVESTMENT II I ^ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS \ \ I CHART GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT PERCENT OF GNP * PERCENT OF GNP * TOTAL GOVERNMENT r i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i ro TOTAL FEDERAL OTHER FEDERAL I 1M i l l * M M I II I I I I STATE AND LOCAL * BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT FINAL PURCHASES AND INVENTORY CHANGE BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT \ ..< ^ m INVENTORY CHANGE FINAL PURCHASES I i i i i ) i i l i i i i l i t i i i i i i i I o * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART EMPLOYMENT IN NONAGRICULTURAL ESTABLISHMENTS MILLIONS OF PERSONS MILLIONS OF PERSONS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA OTHER PRIVATE MANUFACTURING MINING ~ " AND TRANSPORTATION I STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT- FEDERAL GOVERNMENT MI.II i li SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT MILLIONS OF PERSONS7 MILLIONS OF PERSONS TOTAL LABOR FORCE CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE \ > NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT PERCENT PERCENT UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE i t I.I.I. ] i t l tt t U t ) l UU.i * YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I CHART HOURS AND EMPLOYMENT IN MANUFACTURING HOURS PER WEEK * HOURS PER W E E K * AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS ^ _I MILLIONS OF PERSONS * I MILLIONS OF PERSONS * r EMPLOYMENT OF PRODUCTION WORKERS \ V \ y II INDEX = * INDEX = * no { X \ k \ V ft SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH V j ! 111M1111 \ J ! no /EEKLY MAN-HOURS % n ) CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION I N D E X = INDEX * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION \ I M M lllllll I I I I I I I I I I I I III I I I I I I I I I I TOTAL MANUFACTURING ni i 1i DURABLE MANUFACTURES NONDURABLE MANUFACTURES I M i lll iililnin MMlh i n i SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM it MI mi CHART CONSTRUCTION EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ' " ' TOTAL NEW CONSTRUCTION i PRIVATE Illllllllll ^ ^ ....A PRIVATE RESIDENT IAL ( NONFARM ) ^ * o- ( " HER PRIV/1TE I l l l l l l l I I I MM,1,1,1 M l l l l i i l i i IIIMIMIII Mllllli.ll Illllllllll SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART CONSUMER INCOME AND EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME * ( LEFT SCALE ) PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES ( LEFT SCALE ) TOTAL RETAIL SALES ( RIGHT SCALE ) rJ SALES OF NONDURABLE GOODS STORES ' * * ' : ./ * " " " N J A A SALES OF DURABLE GOODS STORES I II * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J / N E W SERIES LINKED TO OLD SERIES SOURCES-. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL ' RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART CONSUMER EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF OOLLARS * BILLONS OF DOLLARS * NONDURABLE GOODS f A > r < r ^ < > : s S SERVICE < > > DURABL GOODS * * * \ > I I I ! I I I I i I i i i SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS i i i i ft CHART MANUFACTURERS ' INVENTORIES AND SALES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INVENTORIES i ^ II IM i i i i ^ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! RATIO RATIO INVENTORY / SALES RATIO DURABLE GOODS I I i i i i i I I I I I n i i i i i i i i I i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART MANUFACTURERS ' SALES AND NEW ORDERS BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * ALL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES \ \ A ^ ^ NEW ORDERS ALES ir / DURABL E GOODS INDLISTRIES SALES ORDERS T i i i i1 i i i i i i i i i i i i i t i i i i i i l i n i i .ii. ..i. i i... iT EXCESS OF ORDERS OVER SALES A | \ j ^ * ALL MANUFACTURING V J V \ JRABLE GOODS M M i l l | | | I M1 M1 I * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ' M \ ^ i i i i i i i i i CHART WHOLESALE INVENTORIES AND SALES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INVENTORIES TOTAL SALES H 5h- I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i I I I I I I I I I I RATIO RATIO INVENTORY/SALES RATIO A /'XA--- I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I I I I I I I i CHART RETAIL INVENTORIES AND SALES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED r \ TOTAL INVENTORIES TOTAL SALES io I- H P " * ^ I I I ! * w * l IIIMIIIIII1 IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII1 IIIII1 MIIIIIIIII1 IIIIII o INVENTORY/SALES RATIO ' " V i I i i i i i i * NONDURABLE GOODS I I I I I I I I I I I i ii iiIi iiii i iiii1 iiii i IIII1 IIIIII DATA BEGINNING JANUARY NOT COMPARABLE WITH DATA FOR EARLIER PERIODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART AVERAGE HOURS AND EARNINGS IN MANUFACTURING HOURS PER WEEK HOURS PER WEEK WEEKLY HOURS V W V o " M i n i IMMIMIII n IMMIMIII DOLLARS PER HOUR DOLLARS PER WEEK WEEKLY EARNINGS " ^ H O URLY EAR NINGS ( LEFT SCA LE ) r Mini.MM Minimi IMMIMIII MMlllllll NOTE. DATA RELATE ONLY TO PRODUCTION AND RELATED WORKERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR t m i l l M i l | O CHART CORPORATE PROFITS BEFORE A N D AFTER TAXES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * PROFITS BEFORE TAXES * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART CORPORATE PROFITS BEFORE TAXES MANUFACTURING A N D ALL OTHER BILLIONS OF DOLLARS7 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS7 * * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART LIABILITIES OF BUSINESS FAILURES MILLIONS OF DOLLARS MILLIONS OF DOLLARS QUARTERLY TOTALS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED / /I -J \ > v A / >- * A T y " ' i t i i i i i i i t i i SOURCES : DUN aBRADSTREET AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH CHART WHOLESALE AND CONSUMER PRICES INDEX = INDEX = CONSUMER PRICES i i i i i i i i i i i M M I M M | SOURCE : DEPARTMENTOF LABOR CHART WHOLESALE PRICES FARM AND INDUSTRIAL INDEX = INDEX = OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS > * AND PROCESSED FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL ) ~ ~ * ' AL _ COMMODITIES no " ^ ^ P R O C E : SSED FOODS FARM P R O D U C T S ^ ' ^ r ! I II ! I M i i i I I i i i i i i i i i I I i i i I I I i I i i i I i i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART WHOLESALE PRICES INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS AND GOODS INDEX = INDEX = i i i \ > * ^ " RAW INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS i z FINISHED GOODS \ V SEMI-P ROCESSED MATERIALS N s ~ II1 U J iJ i | i II i i i i i i i ^ ^ l \ ff SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM BASED ON DATA FROM DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART MONEY SUPPLY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED j CURRENCY+DEMAND DEPOSrrs +TIME DEPOSITS : s ^ I6O< rT " ^ S ^ ^ " ^ OE MAND DEPOSI TS+CURRENC Y ^ r ' " ^ ^ DE MAND DEPOSI ' PS ADJUSTED ^ * < i Cl o < TIME DEPOS ITS i I * * r ( \ f t IT i n \ iiift \ \ ttt <t n < f t t t >30 * i M * * T JRRENCY OUTJSIDE BANKS t M * f \ -t r At ( t END OF MONTH SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OFTHE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART BANK LOANS AND INVESTMENTS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS ^ T ^ > ^ ^ _ / * ^ \ " _ So INVESTMENT IIS I LI.S. GOVERNMENT SECPURITIES BANK LOANS r INVESTMENT IN ^ OTHER SECURITIES o i i i i i J '20 i X ' i i i i i i i O * END OF MONTH SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART CONSUMER INSTALMENT CREDIT BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL E X T E N D E D ^ A ? r-A * : AUTOMOBILE CREDIT REPAID h I I I I I ill ill ill SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART MONEY RATES AND BOND YIELDS PERCENT PER ANNUM PERCENT PER ANNUM CORPORATE Ada BONDS U. S. GOVERNMENT BONDS | ( NEW SERIES ) T ~ \ * s I I I I I I I I I I I J F M A M J J A S O N O SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART STOCK AND BOND PRICES INDEX INDEX * COMMON STOCK PRICES c ) RPORATE BOND PRICE * ; ^ M i ^ > m m ^ M i l l SOURCES : i r \ f \ t i t i I I I I i f i i STANDARD AND POOR 'S CORPORATION AND SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION i i i I I I I I i i i | CHART INDICATORS OF INVESTMENT PREPARATIONS I dD EX = * T O T A L CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ( VALUE ) INDEX = * RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ( FLOOR SPACE ) I ~ ~ | C O M M E R C I A L CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ( FLOOR SPACE ) L150 J I NEW ORDERS-DURABLE GOODS L i NEW ORDERS-NONELECTRICAL MACHINERY I i i I i i i i t i i t i i t I l I I l I l l I ^ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : F.W.DODGE DUN ft BRADSTREET DEPARTMENT OFCOMMERCE MC GRAW-HILL AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH CHART HOUSING STARTS AND FINANCING APPLICATIONS MILLIONS OF UNITS J.6 MILLIONS OF UNITS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES r>T i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i i t i i i I i i i i t T ANNUAL RATES NOT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED APPLICATIONS FOR FHA COMMITMENTS- I i i I | I I i i i I i UNITS IN MORTGAGE APPLICATIONS FOR NEW HOME CONSTRUCTION SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION ( FHA ) AND VETERANS ADMINISTRATION ( VA ) I Chapter Program for Sustained Economic Progress A S THE PRECEDING CHAPTER of this Report has made clear * L \ the mild recession of last year was arrested and a new phase of economic expansion got under way before the year closed. The vigor of the recent recovery taken in conjunction with the investment and expenditure plans already set in motion suggests that economic expansion will continue during coming months. It holds out the promise that we shall achieve a high and satisfactory level of employment and production within the current year. Of course this outcome of current tendencies is not and can not be assured and the Government must remain ready to deal with any setback that might develop. In view however of the likelihood that our economy is now undergoing a cumulative expansion of some strength the wise course for Government would be to concentrate this year on basic policies for fostering long-term economic growth. We should direct our program for principally to this purpose rather than seek to impart an immediate upward thrust to general economic activity The release of the Nation 's powers of growth can be aided by legislation that will encourage competitive enterprise strengthen our economic ties with other countries reinforce personal security and provide needed public improvements. Such a program for long-term growth is presented in this chapter. As we proceed we must however keep in mind the historical fact that growth has generally been attained by spurts of activity followed by pauses or setbacks. Actions to build confidence always carry the risk of generating overconfidence and subsequent reaction. Our economic policies must therefore be designed not merely to foster growth but to foster a rate of growth that can be sustained. The program of actions recommended in this Report will advance us toward this goal I. PROMOTING THE SPIRIT OF ENTERPRISE Fiscal Policies for Economic Expansion In accordance with the responsibilities of the Federal Government under the Employment Act " to use all practicable means to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power " Federal expenditure and tax policies should be shaped to serve the needs of an expanding economy Budget policies can help to promote the objective of maximum production by wisely allocating resources first between private and public uses second among various governmental programs. A careful budgeting of public funds is an indispensable safeguard against undue extravagance or excessive parsimony on the part of the Government. The budget should impose a strict discipline upon all public expenditures. At the same time it should provide adequately for the Nation 's defense and other urgent needs. It must also be used to promote stable economic growth. Properly coordinated with other measures a reduction of expenditure or increase in taxes can restrain inflationary tendencies just as a reduction of taxes or increase in expenditure can at times be an effective check on recessionary forces. There will therefore be occasions when the Government 's accounts are out of balance in one direction or the other During the past two years Federal expenditures were sharply reduced and although taxes were also cut substantial progress was made toward bringing the budget close to balance on a cash basis. The cuts in expenditures that followed the ending of the Korean conflict released resources for use by the private sector of the economy. Tax reductions spurred their reabsorption by strengthening private demand for goods and services during this period of readjustment. Last year 's tax reductions amounted to a total of billion dollars on a full-year basis ; this was offset by a billion dollar increase in social security contributions making a net saving of billion dollars. This lowering of taxes and the recently enacted reforms in the tax structure by reducing barriers to economic growth are strengthening the expansionary forces of the economy Since our economy is currently operating at rather high levels and a recovery from the mild decline of last year is well under way we should strive this year to bring Federal cash receipts and cash expenditures into balance With huge expenditures for our national security continuing the financial requirements of the Government will not permit reductions this year from present tax rates. Prudence requires that the lowering of the corporate income tax and of excises scheduled for April be postponed It should nevertheless be recognized that present taxes are still a heavy burden. Lower taxes would tend to encourage work promote more efficient business practices and create more jobs through new investments Fortunately with our economy continuing to expand we can look forward to larger Federal revenues from existing tax rates. This together with further economies in expenditure should make possible next year another step in the reduction of taxes. Congress might then consider enacting a general though modest reduction in taxes and at the same time continue the program which was begun last year of reducing barriers to the free flow of funds into risk-taking and job-creating investments While no changes in taxation are now recommended except on business income from foreign sources which will be discussed later there is a need for greater flexibility in the management of Federal finances and this requires an increase in the present statutory debt limit. During the past two years the Treasury has been obliged to manage the Government 's finances under the severe handicap of a debt limit which frequently was very little higher than the outstanding debt. In August the Congress modified the billion dollar debt limit by permitting a temporary increase of billion dollars to cover seasonal needs. This increase will expire on June when the outstanding debt is expected to be close to billion dollars. Since the anticipated balance in the cash budget for the fiscal year will involve a deficit in the conventional budget of billion dollars it is clear that the debt limit will have to be raised. The increase should be large enough to provide the Treasury with the necessary latitude to do its job. It would be imprudent to set a new statutory debt limit which left virtually no margin for unpredictable fluctuations in Federal receipts and expenditures. A higher limit will in no way lessen the persistent efforts of the Administration to reduce expenditures further but it will enable the Treasury to discharge its financial responsibilities more effectively Assisting New and Small Businesses A public policy to encourage the expansion of a free economy must assign a high place to measures that keep the doors to opportunity open for new and small enterprises. Our economy is strong and progressive because it contains in addition to its five million farm enterprises four million independent centers of business decision each potentially free to experiment with new ideas new men new methods and new products. Many of the revisions which were made in the tax laws last year were intended to meet the special problems that confront smaller businesses in their attempts to finance expansion and preserve their independence. These revisions should help to create the kind of environment in which small business can flourish The Government has a responsibility to maintain easy entry into trade and industry to check monopoly and to preserve a competitive environment All efficiently managed businesses benefit from such policies new and small firms most of all. Recognizing this fact the Attorney General appointed a National Committee to Study the Antitrust Laws composed of distinguished citizens and legal experts to recommend improvements in the substance and administration of our Federal laws to promote competition and prevent monopoly. Even prior to the submission of the report of this Committee it would be well to strengthen the deterrent to violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act by raising substantially the maximum fine that may be imposed under the Act The Congress established in a program for helping business concerns of small size to obtain access to adequate financing to a fair share of government procurement contracts and to competent counsel on management production and marketing problems. This program has made a useful contribution to the strength of small concerns. It should accordingly be continued. Further the lending authority for the program which is now almost fully committed should be enlarged so that loans may continue to be made to small concerns that can not obtain adequate financing on reasonable terms Improving the Basis of Technology Both the formation of new firms and innovations by existing firms are stimulated by research development work and experimentation. Out of these activities carried on in the laboratories of universities research institutes governmental agencies and business firms come the products methods and materials which afford new entrepreneurial opportunities and help to improve the quality of living. Recognizing the fundamental importance of research and development work the tax laws were revised last year to permit outlays for research to be treated as current expenses It may be expected that private expenditures for research which are already very large will continue to grow. The Federal Government itself plans to spend more on scientific research and development during the coming fiscal year than at any time in the past Since technological progress depends on scientific inquiries and human inventiveness rapid growth can not be expected unless the knowledge and skills of our people are properly developed for these tasks. A shortage of scientifically trained young men and women especially those competent in the physical sciences and in engineering exists at present. Unless steps are taken to relieve this shortage it may seriously limit the growth of research activities and retard their industrial applications. To deal with the problem the Congress should expand Federal programs for fellowships research teacher training and related activities In due course additional measures must be taken. Some shortages of trained personnel will be remedied by the passage of time but the national welfare requires special action to help relieve the classroom shortage that now exists in our schools and to help augment the supply of certain skills Some recommendations bearing on schools so vital to our country 's future appear on pages This subject will be treated in a forthcoming special message to the Congress II. STRENGTHENING ECONOMIC TIES W I T H OTHER COUNTRIES The foreign economic policies of the United States can be a powerful instrument for strengthening the security of our Nation and the Free World. The nations of the Free World are economically interdependent and no one of them can afford to act upon a narrow view of its own interests or with primary regard to the special interests of any particular industry or group. Now more than ever our own permanent interests of national security and the general welfare must take precedence over all other considerations It is to the advantage of each nation to attend to the barriers that have caused international trade and investment to lag behind the growth in production and incomes. Our own interest clearly calls for a policy that will in time extend into the international field those principles of competitive enterprise which have brought our people great prosperity with freedom. Against the Communist ideology of the omnipotent State own- ing all means of production and dominating all economic activity the United States holds forth the ideals of personal freedom private property individual enterprise and open markets. We should bear in mind that in the long run other countries are far more likely to rally to liberal ideals if we take the steps within our power to encourage them to join us in mutually beneficial economic intercourse. Hence our trade and investment policies affect our ability to increase the solidarity of the Free World This broad vision which pervaded the studies of the Commission on Foreign Economic Policy now guides the recommendation to the Congress to act so as to clear the channels of trade to foster foreign investment and to provide technical aid to underdeveloped nations. Such actions will not only help to increase world production and trade ; they also will help to assure a rising standard of living for our own people Freeing the Channels of Trade The Free World has sought to reduce restrictions on trade through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade currently being renegotiated by the governments adhering to it. Because this Agreement is one of the means by which the United States has sought to carry out the purposes of the Trade Agreements Act the current negotiations are of great importance to us. When the new Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has been satisfactorily concluded it will be submitted to the Congress for its approval It is of the utmost importance that we continue the gradual and selective revision of our tariffs through the tested method of international negotiation. A three-year extension of the Trade Agreements Act has therefore been recommended with amendments to empower the President as follows : First to reduce present tariff rates on individual commodities by as much as percent per year in each of the three years of the new Act ; second to reduce tariff rates in greater degree in the case of products now imported in negligible volume ; third to reduce to percent any rate in excess of that level. The present escape and peril point provisions of the Act should however be continued in order to avoid or mitigate any undue hardships that might develop under the operation of the proposed program Our customs procedures often impose unnecessary and unintended burdens on trade by causing disputes and delays. Progress has recently been made toward efficient customs administration but good business practice requires that more be done. An interim report by the Tariff Commission on means of simplifying the commodity definitions and rate structures of present tariff laws is expected shortly and will deserve serious study. In addition Congress should establish standards for the valuation of imported goods that are simple clear and logical in their application Finally it is recommended that Congress increase the duty-free allowance of foreign goods brought home by our tourists during any six-month period. In addition to its economic effects this encouragement to American tourism should pay large dividends in improved relations with other countries Fostering Foreign Investment We can strengthen our own economy and that of the Free World by increasing the flow of capital to nations that are able to use it productively for their development. The expansion of foreign investment would speed the growth in foreign countries of industries whose output is needed to meet our own increasing requirements of raw materials and other products. By augmenting our exports it would help to maintain prosperity at home Above all it would provide a convincing demonstration of our desire for economic partnership with countries seeking to improve their economies A great challenge of our time is to find constructive ways of aiding the economically underdeveloped countries in different parts of the world The complexity of the task is suggested by the factors that are often present in these places heavy concentration of people on limited land meager educational facilities great deficiencies of domestic capital lack of management personnel outmoded transportation systems low output of electrical power and inadequate public administration. Such countries can use assistance from us and from others so that they may build a solid foundation for their social institutions and realize the opportunities open to free peoples To an increasing degree our aid has taken the form of technical assistance under which our technicians work with other peoples to help improve their production their educational methods and their health. Aid in the form of commodities and services is also being extended to those foreign countries whose economic strength can not be built up rapidly enough in view of the security requirements of the Free World by the normal processes of trade and investment The program of technical and other assistance to economically underdeveloped countries should be strengthened. Even more important in the long run is an expanded flow of private international investment We should encourage investment in all countries whose desire to speed their economic development has led them to create a hospitable climate for business investment. An inflow of private American capital can serve as a catalytic agent in many places increasing production and incomes permitting greater consumption and local saving which in turn would expand local investment and so on in a widening circle. Although the Export-Import Bank is expected to expand its lending program the Federal Government can help also in other ways to raise the level of our foreign investment As recommended by the Commission on Foreign Economic Policy the tax rate on corporate income from all foreign sources should be reduced by percentage points making it equal to the rate already applicable to Western Hemisphere trade corporations. Our law now requires that income from foreign sources be taxed in the United States to the extent that it is not taxed abroad. This has two consequences. First American firms doing business in a foreign country with low tax rates operate under a tax disadvantage in comparison both with domestic firms of that country and with firms of other nations that levy low taxes on foreign income. Second countries desiring to attract American capital can not very well use favorable tax rates as an incentive. Indeed our present tax policy might even encourage a country in which American capital has already been invested to increase its taxes on business income. The proposed rate reduction would tend to improve the competitive position of our firms doing business in other countries ; it would reduce a barrier to further investment abroad ; and it may stimulate foreign countries to use favorable tax rates as a means of attracting American capital American corporations with foreign branches should also be permitted to defer the tax on branch income until it is withdrawn from the country in which it was earned. This will end the present unreasonable discrimination between operations conducted through branches and those handled through foreign subsidiaries We should supplement these tax changes by continuing to explore with other countries the use of the tax treaty as a method of fostering a more favorable climate for international investment. Under proper safeguards we should be prepared to give full credit for income taxes that are waived by a foreign country for a specified initial period just as we now grant credit for taxes that are imposed. This change would give maximum effect to the laws of other countries designed to encourage new enterprise Another measure to spur foreign investment is to establish an International Finance Corporation as an affiliate of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. This Corporation would receive its capital from countries now participating in the IBRD. Unlike the IBRD it would be permitted to invest without any governmental guaranty in new private enterprises needing capital. As now conceived the Corporation would assume an interest in a new enterprise only to get it started not for a long term of years. Nor would it participate in the management of the enterprises it helped to initiate. By providing on a business basis the margin of capital needed to attract other funds the Corporation would help to expand private investment abroad. Its international character and prestige would probably aid local citizens in bringing about a favorable investment climate in their countries. In view of the great promise of the proposed Corporation the Congress will be requested to authorize at the proper time a contribution by the United States to its capital Taken together these proposals to augment the international movement of goods and investment funds will have a salutary influence on our economy They will increase the efficiency of use of our own resources they will diversify and enlarge the amount of goods and services available to American consumers and they will expand foreign markets for our products III BUILDING THE FLOOR OF PERSONAL AND FAMILY SECURITY Significant steps were taken by the Government last year to help individuals and families make better provision for their security. The American people should continue on this path firm in the conviction that only when minimum human needs are provided in case of unemployment disablement or retirement and the opportunity exists for a decent home in a sound neighborhood will the individual make his greatest contribution to economic growth. Many of the measures to advance this objective including those to improve the Nation 's health are being presented in detail in other messages. The following discussion is confined to the larger economic measures Meeting the Hazard of Unemployment The Federal-State Unemployment Insurance System has proved its value as a first line of defense against economic recession. During the six months from April through September of benefit payments were billion dollars compared with billion dollars in the corresponding months of These benefits paid to workers as a matter of right under established law enabled many families to live without exhausting their savings and helped make possible record-breaking consumer purchases despite a fall in employment. Legislation passed in will greatly improve the workings of our unemployment insurance system in the future Nevertheless further revisions are desirable both to meet the needs of the economy and to meet the needs of the unemployed The coverage of the Federal unemployment insurance laws was extended last year to include Federal civilian employees and the employees of many small businesses. It is hoped that the States will soon act to include under the system the million employees of State and local governments not now covered. Government ought not to deny its own employees the protection it requires the private employer to provide for his. In addition the States that have not already done so should consider taking steps to extend unemployment insurance to those who work for firms employing fewer than four persons. These workers need protection against unemployment no less than the employees of larger firms From the standpoint of the unemployed worker weekly benefits should be sufficiently high to provide the basic necessities. From the standpoint of the economy benefits should be sufficient to enable the unemployed to maintain a substantial part of their customary expenditures thereby minimizing the spread of unemployment. The general level of benefits is now too low for either of these purposes. Our Federal-State unemployment insurance system was originally designed to pay benefits of approximately half of regular weekly earnings up to a dollar maximum that was adequate for its time. Since these legal maxima have not kept pace with rising wages the ratio of benefits to the wages of covered workers has fallen from percent in to percent currently and in several States below percent In many States a great majority of all beneficiaries receive the same weekly benefit the maximum regardless of the differences in their earnings This loss of a clear relation between benefits and a worker 's usual earnings or his customary living standard is inconsistent with the incentives of a free economy. It is highly desirable that the States change their laws so that the great majority of covered workers will be eligible for payments that at least equal half their regular earnings The adequacy of unemployment insurance depends also on the period for which benefits are paid. In the first eleven months of the number of persons who exhausted their benefit rights reached Last year the number jumped to during the corresponding months. In few States is the potential duration of benefits now as much as weeks for all beneficiaries. An increase in the usual duration of benefits is especially necessary during economic recession when the average duration of unemployment as well as its amount increases. For this reason the States are urged to lengthen the term of benefits to weeks for every person who qualifies for any benefit and who remains unemployed that long. It is recognized that an increase in the term and the level of benefits may call for a re-examination by the States and in some instances a tightening of the test of attachment to the labor force and of other legal or administrative safeguards against abuse The District of Columbia should have an unemployment insurance law that could be a model for the States. Last year the Congress improved the law by raising the maximum amount and duration of benefits ; but the new law made it more difficult for unemployed persons to receive benefits for the maximum period. This weakness should be remedied by providing weeks of benefits for all persons who qualify and who remain unemployed that long. The disqualification provisions of last year 's law should also be reviewed The Federal-State Employment Service has an important part to play in reducing unemployment. While the Employment Service can not create jobs it can help fill vacant jobs quickly and well. As recommended in the Budget Message the system should be strengthened to meet this need and to assure the best use of scarce manpower in any future national emergency Some employers and workers fail to use the Employment Service because they do not realize its value. They should acquaint the Service with their problems since the more it is used the better will it function Last year although the economy as a whole was prosperous some communities suffered from sizable unemployment. Their fortunes turned for the better when recovery got under way in the early fall and most of them will regain prosperity as economic expansion cumulates. In some places however unemployment stems from special causes such as a lasting drop in the demand for their wares an exodus of industry to new locations or a vanishing supply of some material basic to the local economy Such " structural " or " spot " unemployment may remain even when the Nation 's economy practically reaches full employment. The Federal Government should be willing to assist depressed communities to develop workable solutions of their problems. Accordingly the Area Development Program of the Department of Commerce which can be so helpful in revitalizing a community 's industry and trade should be further strength- ened. For the time being at least it is also desirable to continue the policy of granting special tax amortization benefits for new defense facilities located in surplus labor areas and of placing government contracts as far as feasible in these areas It would be well to recognize however that these programs can make only a limited contribution to relieving " spot " unemployment and that a large part of the adjustment of depressed areas to new economic conditions both can and should be carried out by the local citizens themselves The Federal Government can make its most effective contribution to their needs as well as those of others by steadfastly pursuing monetary tax expenditure debt management and general housekeeping policies that promise a high and stable level of employment in the Nation at large Extending Economic Security in Retirement Provision of a decent minimum income after retirement is a central element in a program for personal security. The Government acted last year to increase both the coverage and the benefits of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance. To continue the progress toward comprehensive coverage it is recommended that the Congress extend coverage on a permanent and full contributory basis to Federal personnel The major responsibility for security in old age rests of course upon the individual himself and is discharged through personal saving insurance and investments of various kinds. In addition private pension plans have multiplied during recent years under the encouragement of our tax laws. More than million employees of business enterprises are now covered by pension plans under which it is estimated that about billion dollars per year is currently being contributed by employers and employees Private plans for retirement income appear to be highly desirable but a number of questions merit further study by the Congress and the Executive Branch. For example how do such plans affect the mobility of employees and the willingness of employers to hire older workers ? How can or should these plans be fitted together with Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance into an integrated program for retirement income ? What are the effects of pension plans upon the spending and saving habits of people ? What influence does the investment of funds assembled through these plans have upon our financial markets and the supply of venture capital ? Augmenting Low Incomes A small and shrinking but still significant number of American families have cash incomes under $ per family. By current standards most of them must be considered poverty-stricken. These families are not concentrated in urban centers. They live chiefly on small farms or in rural areas and villages mainly in the Southern States. Raising the incomes of this group should be one of our continuing objectives The causes of low incomes are complex ; they include lack of education or skill poor health old age or prolonged unemployment. Solutions must be found through a long-run program to improve the skill versatility and mobility of low-income earners thereby increasing their productive capacity The elimination of remaining poverty in America would not only bring greater happiness and opportunity to these people ; it would draw them into the stream of progress enlarge the markets for consumer goods and promote the expansion of the economy. Means of raising low incomes by increasing the productivity of people have been the subject of study this past year by the National Agricultural Advisory Commission and by an interagency task force of the Council of Economic Advisers. Studies of this problem are continuing Under our system of free labor markets and free collective bargaining the wages of a preponderant majority of workers are determined fairly without government intervention. Minimum wage laws do not deal with the fundamental causes of low incomes or poverty. However minimum wage laws can assist the comparatively small number of workers who are at the fringes of competitive labor markets. The minimum wage under Federal law is now cents an hour a figure that became effective early in Since then the cost of living and average hourly earnings have risen providing reason for an increase in the minimum wage when as at present the economic outlook is favorable. An increase to cents an hour would be appropriate and consistent with over-all economic considerations at this time. It is recommended that the Congress increase the minimum wage to cents an hour Such action would increase the wages of about million workers by an average of about cents an hour. In addition some workers now earning more than cents an hour would probably receive wage increases to preserve customary differentials. Although these increases would add appreciably to the costs of certain industries notably in the South the general expansion of economic activity now under way should increase the demand for their products and lead to economies of operation besides those stimulated by the higher minimum thus enabling these industries to absorb a part or all of the wage increase. Nevertheless cents an hour is the highest minimum wage that can be economically justified in present circumstances. A higher minimum might well cause lower production and substantial unemployment in several industries and whether directly or indirectly it would probably bring generally higher prices in its wake Such effects would make the gains of covered workers illusory and they would lower the standard of living of uncovered low-wage workers The coverage of the minimum wage is no less important than its amount Only about million of the million employees of private firms are now subject to the Federal minimum wage an additional 3l/2 million being covered by the laws of States. As stated in last year 's Economic Report : " Neither the Federal nor the State laws now include the lowest-paid workers. " It would be well for both the Congress and the States to consider the question of bringing substantial numbers of workers now excluded from the protection of a minimum wage under its coverage. To ease the process of adjustment a gradual approach to this problem will need to be developed Protecting Workers3 Savings A significant financial development of recent years has been the rapid spread of the credit union. These cooperative agencies provide a means by which members primarily employees of the same firm or members of the same fraternal or similar association can invest their savings in an institution under their own management and from which they can when the occasion arises borrow money for personal needs. In December there were about credit unions in operation with State and with Federal charters having a membership of nearly persons and assets close to billion dollars. For the most part credit unions hold savings accumulated by individuals of small or moderate means and which represent for them a first line of defense against economic adversity. It is desirable therefore that Congress consider measures for protecting these savings Among other measures the Congress might well consider the merits of share-account insurance. An insurance system could be self-supporting with membership mandatory for Federally chartered unions and voluntary for those having State charters. If such a system were established it would be essential to maintain adequate safeguards for the insuring agency such as a limit on insurable accounts ample reserves proper standards of admission and thorough examination. In any event it would be well to review the regulations that now govern the lending and credit management practices of credit unions Investments in the shares of credit unions represent of course only a small part of the savings of workers. Far larger in total amount are the savings that go into bank deposits life insurance Federal savings bonds shares in savings and loan associations and pension funds. The integrity of all these savings depends not only upon the soundness of the institutions receiving them ; it depends also on the integrity of the dollar. Hence one of the great and continuing responsibilities of Government is to pursue policies which assure that a dollar saved today will not go to waste through inflation of prices tomorrow Improving Homes and Neighborhoods Last year the Federal Government moved energetically to broaden the opportunities for families to acquire new homes or to improve existing dwellings. Forward steps were also taken to assist communities to prevent the spread of slums and to rehabilitate deteriorated neighborhoods Further progress will depend partly on what the Federal Government does and in much greater degree on the efforts of civic organizations and on actions that can be taken only by State and local governments Federal funds are now available but more will be required during the next fiscal year for projects which look to the renewal of urban neighborhoods by conserving and improving what is still useful in blighted areas and by replacing what can not be restored. This program supplements the financial facilities previously available for total clearance and redevelopment of slum areas. In addition the Federal Housing Administration has been authorized to insure mortgages on new or rehabilitated structures in areas for which local governments have developed practical renewal programs. States and cities can obtain assistance from the Housing and Home Finance Agency in developing their renewal programs and should in their own interests take steps to expedite them. For its part the Congress should authorize the Public Housing Administration to enter into contracts for additional units of low-rental public housing in each of the next two fiscal years in order to assist in the relocation of families displaced as a result of slum clearance redevelopment or renewal programs The Housing Act of enables families to acquire homes under Federal programs of loan insurance on somewhat more liberal terms than were previously available. Furthermore by liberalizing the conditions which surround the use of loan guaranty privileges by eligible veterans and by permitting the Federal Housing Administration to insure supplementary loans under an " open-end " type of mortgage the Act facilitates the repair and modernization of existing dwellings. The States can give further effect to these actions by enacting where necessary legislation to permit the writing of " open-end " mortgages. The availability of this type of financing will prove especially helpful to the many homeowners whose growing families require better and more spacious dwellings The Federal Government should take additional steps to augment the facilities available for home ownership and improvement. To accommodate the increasing demand for mortgage insurance it will be necessary to increase the insurance authorization of the Federal Housing Administration. It is also recommended that national banks be allowed to make amortized real estate mortgage loans with maturities up to years. The present limitation of ten years for conventional mortgages unnecessarily restricts the availability of home financing in some areas. The Congress can at the same time increase the availability of funds for the financing of construction work and in a manner entirely consistent with sound credit practices by authorizing national banks to make construction loans with a maximum duration of say nine months. This rule should replace the present limitation of six months These various steps would effectively widen the opportunities of families to acquire homes or to improve those they already own. It must be recognized however that the progressive easing of mortgage financing terms is not without its hazards for the stability of the economy. It would be a wise precaution therefore to provide for prompt readjustments in the terms of mortgage loan insurance and guarantees when required by changes in economic circumstances. The Housing Amendments of authorized 6o the President at his discretion and in the light of economic conditions to alter the terms on which the Federal Government would insure mortgage lenders against losses on loans secured by residential properties. This authority was limited in its potential application but it nonetheless provided a useful tool for the control of credit during inflationary periods and for the stimulation of home building during periods of contraction. Last year 's Economic Report proposed that this discretionary authority be widened but the Housing Act of moved in the opposite direction The Congress should again consider this proposal and give the President greater latitude in the exercise of his power to vary the terms on which home mortgages are underwritten. In view of the magnitude of residential construction its variability and its responsiveness to changes in the terms of mortgage loans a wide Presidential authority over terms to be exercised with the aid of an advisory group could make a major contribution to the maintenance of stable prosperity IV EXPANSION OF OUR PUBLIC ASSETS Great accumulated needs for roads schools and hospitals for water sanitary and community facilities for conservation and recreational works now exist in our nation. This accumulation is the result of postponements in the face of growing needs during the past fifteen years when a large part of our resources was required by war and defense. The Economic Report of January noting the vast backlogs and the continuing expansion of needs recommended that a larger part of the Nation 's effort be devoted to public works in order that our economy may grow without hindrance. The Federal Government shares with State and local governments the responsibility for removing this obstacle to economic expansion Modernizing the Highway System Highways carry the stream of commerce to nourish all parts of the national economy. Over them pass freight and passenger vehicles and when necessary the mechanized weapons of defense. When these channels are inadequate congestion results ; this causes loss of life and property and checks economic expansion. Serious congestion now exists with million cars and trucks traveling billion vehicle-miles a year. Yet it has been estimated that at the present rate of highway improvement and general economic growth our country by may have about million motor vehicles and an annual traffic of over billion vehicle-miles With these considerations in mind the President 's Advisory Committee on a National Highway Program has sought to determine how the United States could best improve its highways during the next decade. After study and discussions with the Executive Committee of the Governors ' Conference and other groups the Advisory Committee has recommended the modernizing of the presently-designated National System of Interstate Highways together with urban connecting roads at an estimated cost of billion dollars over a ten-year period. Toll roads already built to accept- 6i able standards along'the designated routes could be included as segments of the National System. Our country would then possess an integrated network of safe controlled-access highways transcontinental borderto-border and interregional capable of carrying the heaviest loads operated under uniform traffic regulations and joining percent of all cities with a population over The National System of approximately miles has primary significance for the country 's economic growth and military defense. Hence the Advisory Committee has proposed that the Federal Government bear all but billion dollars of its cost. For their part State and local governments would be expected to assume principal responsibility for financing the construction work needed on the remainder of our total street and road network of miles. Federal grants-in-aid for roads would be maintained at approximately the current level. Taken altogether the States and localities would be expected to bear about percent of the estimated cost of about billion dollars required to modernize the Nation 's streets roads and highways over the next decade while the Federal Government would bear the remaining burden of percent The construction of the National System of Interstate Highways could be financed by obligations issued by an independent authority created by the Congress. The funds needed to pay interest and amortize the highway debt could come from the excess which may be expected to increase rapidly of the Federal revenue from present taxes on gasoline and lubricating oil over the current amount of Federal grants-in-aid for roads Although a steady pace of construction financed through the sale of bonds to the public would normally be the best procedure expenditure and financing plans could be adjusted in the interests of general economic stability It is being recommended that the Congress act affirmatively on a national highway program and with a view to its expeditious completion. A special message on the subject will be submitted shortly. Such a program would release enduring forces of economic expansion. As the construction of the National System progressed the States and localities could be expected to enlarge their own expenditures on other roads and on streets. In addition history shows that private investment mounts when new arteries of commerce develop. New factories and shopping centers would be constructed ; service facilities for food lodging and automobiles would be provided along the new highways. Markets for new cars and many associated goods and services would be lifted to higher levels. Above all this immense savings would accrue to the public from reduced accidents and lower transportation costs Accelerating the Development of Natural Resources It is desirable to expand investment in facilities for conserving and bringing into economic usage more of our soil water mineral and other resources. To speed this process the Federal Government has attempted to distinguish as clearly as possible the field of Federal enterprise from that of private or local enterprise. It must act vigorously in the former as this Administration proposes in the case of the national system of highways ; and it must foster and encourage activities by others in the latter as has already been done in the leasing of the Government 's submerged and other lands for private exploration of petroleum and other mineral deposits Of all our natural resources none requires more immediate attention than water. The effective conservation control and utilization of the Nation 's water resources requires energetic implementing of sound policies The present partnership policy of developing water resources is a particular expression of the Government 's general approach to resource development. This policy is simply to encourage State and local governments and private interests to provide all physical facilities that they can leaving for Federal execution those parts of water development projects which serve national purposes or which because of great size or complexity are beyond the capability of others This approach promises to accelerate the development of our water resources without involving the Federal Government in huge expenditures or operations. Thus during the last two years applications to the Federal Power Commission for permits to survey potential hydro-electric developments represented a larger total of kilowatts than was covered by the applications during the prior seven years. At the end of last year the volume of such permits outstanding was by far the greatest in the history of the Commission. The workings of the partnership policy are also illustrated by six multipurpose projects for which provision has already been made or is contemplated in the coming fiscal year. It is estimated that these projects will result in a Federal expenditure of about million dollars while an additional million dollars may be expended by local interests private or public Expanding State and Local Works The largest part of the demand for public assets is for new schools hospitals water systems streets and roads and other facilities of the kind traditionally provided by States and their governmental subdivisions Clearly every necessary step should be taken to facilitate the execution of these projects The capacity of most municipalities when judged from an economic point of view appears to be adequate for financing needed improvements However many communities are prevented from utilizing their financing capacities by outmoded tax-rate or debt limits. State legislatures might well review their limiting statutes and where advisable proceed to remove or relax barriers to local public investment In States where the barrier of tax-rate or debt limits can not be easily or quickly lowered consideration should be given to alternative financing measures. Some States have made loans or grants to local school districts for the financing of building programs. Other States have established independent authorities which raise funds for school building through the sale of revenue bonds secured by the leasehold rental payments of the districts for which schools are built. Use might be made of lease-purchase plans whereby municipalities can acquire needed buildings through instalment payments and yet stay within their existing debt limits It is also desirable to explore ways of broadening the market for bond issues of local governments particularly those of smaller localities. At least one State has established an agency to examine and approve all of its new local government issues prior to their sale to the public. The market for small issues of little-known municipalities could be broadened by encouraging the establishment of a type of investment trust which would specialize in the securities of State and local governments including their revenue bonds. To make the shares of such companies attractive to individual investors the Congress should revise the tax laws so as to permit a regulated investment company holding the bulk of its assets in the form of tax-exempt securities to pass through to its shareholders the tax-exempt status of the income received on such securities. Such a " pass-through " would be a useful extension of a principle already in use Finally it is apparent that many of our larger cities have far outgrown their traditional boundary lines. Nowadays the typical metropolitan community sprawls over a number of towns or cities in some cases over several States. The lack of congruence between the area of need and the area of governmental jurisdiction throws obstacles in the way of rapid and efficient construction of public works. The States are urged to study the problems of metropolitan areas so that area-wide transit systems sanitation systems water supplies or educational facilities may be provided with maximum returns from the public funds expended. For some of our larger metropolitan areas interstate action is indicated. The metropolitan problem is both a challenge and an opportunity Coordination of Public Works Planning Responsibility for different types of public construction is dispersed among many agencies of Federal State and local governments. Effective forward planning and execution of our Nation 's public works therefore involves coordination of the activities of numerous Federal agencies stimulation of advance planning by States and localities and cooperation with State and local agencies engaged in public construction. Recognizing that the enlargement of our public assets is a vital task in the era ahead and that the timing and coordination of public works activities have an important bearing on the growth and stability of the economy the Council of Economic Advisers last year established a small unit to devote itself to coordinating the planning of public works Among other activities this unit cooperated with the Bureau of the Budget in making an inventory of the status of Federal public works plans project by project. It also initiated a survey of State and local plans for public works which was carried out in cooperation with the Housing and Home Finance Agency and with the Bureau of the Census. The first study disclosed that Federal plans for sound projects are available in reasonable abundance for an accelerated public works program if economic conditions should make this necessary. The second study disclosed that public works programming by States and localities is extensive but that there is only a very small backlog of plans at the stage of drawings and designs. The experience gained by the Council in surveying the Nation 's needs and planning for public works has confirmed the wisdom of the many students of government who have repeatedly urged systematic attention to public works planning. To emphasize this vital activity and give it larger scope an appropriation is being requested of the Congress to set up an Office of Coordinator of Public Works Planning within the Executive Office of the President A problem of great interest in this connection is the stimulation of public works planning in States and localities. Many smaller communities have projects within their master development plans for which funds are not immediately available to produce preliminary engineering surveys and designs. Assistance to such communities would help them to develop plans for public works ready for initiation which otherwise would take months to prepare in case of need. Such a reservoir of planned public works should be of considerable magnitude to be effective. The sum of million dollars made available by the Congress last year for planning advances that is interest-free loans to States and municipalities was a good beginning but no more than that. It is recommended that the Congress enlarge substantially the appropriation for planning advances and that a revolving fund be established for this purpose. The need for building a reservoir of " ready-to-go " projects has been recognized in three separate programs of planning advances established by the Congress within the past decade. This experience indicates that the need for preparedness being itself continuous is not well met by programs of limited duration V. INCREASING THE STABILITY OF A GROWING ECONOMY A view fundamental to the economic program presented in this Report is that the best way to avoid economic recessions is to have the economy growing vigorously. Yet it is necessary to recognize that at times growth processes may falter and that on other occasions the forces of growth may generate price inflation. An expanding economy does not escape the need for moderating the business cycle. Hence the program recommended in this Report has been formulated not only to foster economic growth but to foster a reasonably stable process of growth The past quarter-century has taught our generation to be highly sensitive to economic changes. The protracted depression of the thirties and the inequities of wartime and postwar price inflation have made us intolerant of extensive fluctuations in incomes in employment or in prices. Economic statistics are now closely scrutinized and widely commented upon by men and women in different walks of life. The American people apply more exacting standards to the performance of our economy than they did fifty or even five years ago. They expect their Government to pursue policies that foster a smoother rate of economic growth than was experienced in the past The growing confidence of people in their Government 's ability to moderate economic fluctuations is desirable and not misplaced. A better-informed public with an increased awareness of economic change will tend to bring about higher standards of economic performance. This increased knowledge on the part of the public should however be accompanied by a realistic understanding of the practical difficulties in attaining increases in total production employment and personal income entirely free from interruptions. Neither in our own history nor that of any other country has an economy ever attained this ideal for a long period of time The experience of Government in dealing with fluctuations in employment and incomes is not of long standing and there is much yet to be learned about the problem of economic stability. For this reason it is to be hoped that rigidity of judgments will not interfere with continued flexibility of policies and administration. We have learned from experience that the Government can do a great deal to moderate economic fluctuations but there is as yet no good basis for the belief that it can entirely prevent them. A democratic government needs time especially when current reports are conflicting to meet a given economic situation Moreover the effects of its actions whether in augmenting or in restraining demand require time to work themselves out. Government ought not to be continuously veering its course although it should act promptly and decisively when a threat to economic stability emerges Statesmanship requires that we make every effort to harness the idealism of our generation to the practical end of minimizing economic fluctuations The economic effects of government operations are now so large and so pervasive that it is no longer reasonable to suppose that Government either can or should remain aloof from what goes on in the private economy We have learned from experience that Government can pursue policies that not only promise to bring a stabler prosperity to economic life but also to expand the scope and add to the vigor of private enterprise. Our aim must be to build on this experience to pursue policies that will facilitate the growth of private enterprise and to equip ourselves with better tools for checking any recession or inflation that might develop. Numerous actions taken last year by the Congress and the Executive have served these ends and the program recommended in this Report should advance us further toward our goal Appendix A SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Summary of Recommendations in the Economic Report of the President The following summary of recommendations in the Economic Report includes recommendations to the Congress and suggestions to the States and municipalities Taxes Business Regulation and the Public Debt ) Postpone the lowering of the corporate income tax and of excises scheduled for April [ Page ] ) Reduce the tax rate on corporate income from all foreign sources by percentage points. [ Page ] ) Permit corporations with foreign branches to defer the tax on branch income until it is withdrawn from the country in which it was earned. [ Page ] ) Allow a regulated investment company holding the bulk of its assets in the form of tax-exempt securities to pass through to its shareholders the tax-exempt status of the income from such securities. [ Page ] ) Strengthen the deterrent to violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act by raising substantially the maximum fine that may be imposed under the Act. [ Page ] ) Increase the present statutory debt limit to permit greater flexibility in the management of Federal finances. [ Pages ] ) Review State and local tax-rate and debt limiting statutes with a view to removing or relaxing where advisable these barriers to local public investment. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] Unemployment Pensions and Minimum Wage ) Amend the unemployment insurance law of the District of Columbia to provide weeks of benefits for all persons who qualify and who remain unemployed that long and review disqualification provisions [ Page ] ) Strengthen the Federal-State Employment Service [ Page ] ) Extend the coverage of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance on a permanent and full contributory basis to Federal personnel [ Page ] ) Consider including under the unemployment insurance system the employees of State and local governments and employees who work for firms employing fewer than four persons to the extent that these workers are not now covered. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] ) Consider revising unemployment insurance benefits so that ( a ) the great majority of covered workers are eligible for payments that at least equal half their regular earnings and ( b ) the term of unemployment insurance benefits is weeks for every person who qualifies for any benefit and who remains unemployed that long. ( State responsibility ) [ Pages ] ) Expand the Area Development Program of the Department of Commerce which is designed to help depressed communities. [ Pages ] ) Increase the Federal minimum wage to cents an hour ; consider extending the coverage of a minimum wage to substantial numbers of workers now excluded. ( Congressional and State responsibility ) [ Pages ] Education and Public Improvements ) Expand Federal programs for fellowships research teacher training and related activities. [ Page ] ) Take early steps to help relieve the classroom shortage that now exists in our schools. ( Congressional and State responsibility ) [ Page ] ) Modernize over a ten-year period the presently-designated National System of Interstate Highways. [ Pages ] ) Appropriate funds to set up an Office of Coordinator of Public Works Planning within the Executive Office of the President. [ Page ] ) Enlarge the appropriation for planning advances to States and municipalities and establish a revolving fund for the purpose. [ Page ] ) Study the problems of metropolitan areas so that area-wide transit systems sanitation systems water supplies or educational facilities may be provided with maximum returns from public funds expended ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] Housing and Finance ) Increase the insurance authorization of the Federal Housing Administration. [ Page ] ) Give the President greater latitude in the exercise of his power to vary in the light of economic conditions the terms on which home mortgages are underwritten by the Federal Government. [ Pages ] ) Allow national banks to make conventional real estate mortgage loans with maturities up to years and to extend the maximum duration of construction loans. [ Page ] ) Take steps to expedite urban renewal plans so as to obtain available Federal assistance. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] ) Consider where necessary enacting legislation to permit the writing of " open-end " mortgages. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] ) Authorize the Public Housing Administration to enter into contracts for additional units of low-rental public housing in each of the next two fiscal years. [ Page ] ) Continue the program for helping business concerns of small size to obtain access to adequate financing to a fair share of Government procurement contracts and to competent counsel ; and extend the program 's lending authority. [ Page ] ) Consider the merits of share-account insurance and other measures for protecting savings in credit unions. [ Page ] International Economic Relations ) Extend the Trade Agreements Act subject to present escape and peril point provisions for three years with amendments to empower the President : ( a ) to reduce present tariff rates on individual commodities by as much as percent per year in each of the three years ; ( b ) to reduce tariff rates in greater degree in the case of products now imported in negligible volume ; and ( c ) to reduce to percent any rate in excess of that level. [ Page ] ) Establish standards for the valuation of imported goods that are simple clear and logical in their application. [ Page ] ) Increase the duty-free allowance of foreign goods brought home by tourists during any six-month period. [ Page ] ) Authorize at the proper time a contribution to the capital of the proposed International Finance Corporation. [ Page ] ) Strengthen the program of technical and other assistance to economically underdeveloped countries. [ Page ] Appendix B SOME LEADING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS DURING I II III IV V VI The Nation 's Output and Its Disposition Employment and Earnings Price Changes Monetary and Credit Developments Government Finances Foreign Economic Developments Some Leading Economic Developments During The purpose of this Appendix is to present factual information on certain of the leading developments of These facts serve to document the analytical account given in Chapter and to elaborate on some matters that are only touched upon in that chapter. Section I of the Appendix discusses the changes which took place during the year in the Nation 's total output in different branches of production and in public and private expenditures. Section II deals with employment unemployment hours of work wages and industrial disputes. Section III discusses the broad movements during of commodity prices in wholesale markets as well as the prices of consumer goods and services. Section IV reviews monetary and credit developments during the year and gives a brief sketch of Federal Reserve and Treasury policies in the fields of credit and debt management Section V records the finances of Federal State and local governments The final part Section VI reviews economic developments outside the United States notably the industrial and financial progress of Western Europe and the foreign trade and investment of the United States over the year I. The Nation 's Output and Its Disposition The Nation 's output of goods and services declined slightly from to ( Chart B l ) According to preliminary estimates based on expenditures data the decrease in the gross national product was percent When allowance is made for price changes it appears to have been about percent. When the decline is measured from the highest quarter in to the lowest quarter in instead of from one year 's level to the next it is not much larger Although measures of change in the total output of goods and services from to are useful as broad indicators of the over-all performance of the economy they obscure the diversity of experience among major sectors. What is perhaps more important they veil the significant fact that total output was again rising as drew to a close. While industrial production declined by percent from mid-1953 to March it made a strong recovery in the latter part of the year with most of the component industries showing marked improvement. Activity in the construction industry during was above that in ; agricultural output as a whole continued at the high level ; and some of the service and utilities industries notably electric light and power continued to expand In contrast to the decline in total output the final demand for goods and services taken in the aggregate was well maintained ( Chart p. ) CHART B l GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN CURRENT AND CONSTANT PRICES INDEX : BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CURRENT PRICES ( LEFT SCALE ) CONSTANT ( ) PRICES ( LEFT SCALE ) IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATORS ( RIGHT SCALE ) SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Consumer expenditures which had fallen slightly in the fourth quarter of rose to a new record level by mid-1954 supported by a small but steady increase in disposable personal income. Outlays for fixed capital investment when taken as a whole showed few traces of the contraction Expenditures by State and local governments continued to increase at a moderate pace while Federal expenditure fell off substantially Since the contraction of output from mid-1953 to early was centered in industrial production attention is directed first to that sector of the economy CHANGES IN PRODUCTIVE ACTIVITY Industrial production The salient features of the contraction and recovery in industrial production are shown in Table B-l. For as a whole declines were greatest in metal mining in the production of primary metals and in coal mining Declines in the output of metal fabricating industries ranged from to percent and since their sales declined less than production the inventories of these industries were reduced substantially over the year In other branches of industrial production activity was better maintained Output of clay glass and lumber products and also of stone and earth minerals held close to levels. Output in the nondurable goods category declined less than the output of durable manufactures or minerals. Among the major nondurable goods industries the output of the food processing TABLE B-l. Changes in industrial production Percentage change1 from Industry group to Industrial production : total Manufactures : total Durable manufactures : total Primary metals Metal fabricating : totalFabricated metal products Electrical machinery Nonelectrical machinery Transportation equipment. Instruments and related products Clay glass and lumber products Furniture and miscellaneous manufactures Nondurable manufactures : total Textiles and apparel Rubber and leather products Paper and printing Chemicals and petroleum products Foods beverages and tobacco Minerals : total Coal __ Crude oil and natural gas Metal mining Stone and earth minerals July March August to Decemto to March August ber a Percentage changes for monthly data are based on seasonally adjusted indexes * Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System paper and printing and chemicals and petroleum products industries kept in close step with their sales. Textile and apparel production declined percent which was enough in view of the behavior of sales to accomplish sizable inventory reductions The shorter-term movements of industrial production shown in Table B-l and Chart page are more striking and more significant than comparisons of the full years and They reveal the pattern of contraction and recovery which characterized these two years. The drop in total industrial production from July to March was half again as large as the change indicated by yearly averages and the declines in industry groups were generally higher. From March to August durable and nondurable goods manufacturing showed no change while minerals production continued to decline Industrial production as a whole registered a substantial recovery from August to December ; all major categories and most component industry groups shared in this advance. The expansion was strongest in motor vehicles and primary metals ; electrical machinery textiles and coal also showed sizable gains. Though the output of clay glass and lumber products and of rubber and leather products also rose sharply these increases to a large extent reflected the settlement of strikes which had curtailed production in the lumber and rubber industries in July and August Construction activity The construction industry was a major source of strength in our economy during Total construction outlays which closely reflect changes in physical volume since costs for most types of construction appear to have changed very little rose percent from to ( Table B-2 ) OutTABLE B-2. New construction activity Item Millions of dollars New construction ' total Private * total Residential ( nonfarm ) Other Public : total _ Federal State and local * Percentage change from to +U Preliminary estimate 'Includes Federal aid ( Appendix Table D-30 ) Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor lays by State and local governments showed a substantial increase ; highway public school and sewer and water facility construction surpassed previous records. Federal outlays declined mainly as a result of lower expenditures for defense construction Private outlays for commercial religious and educational buildings increased sharply in Utility construction was about equal to the high rate but industrial building declined Current-dollar outlays for residential construction were at an all-time high in although the physical volume was below the peak of New housing starts in are estimated at million dwelling units compared with million in and a record million in The movement of residential construction within and is especially noteworthy ( Chart p. and Appendix Table D-29 ) On a seasonally adjusted basis residential construction outlays declined slightly during the second half of ; but from March to August when industrial production showed no over-all change these outlays expanded percent. Further gains were made in subsequent months Agricultural production In the past year farm output as a whole equaled the record level of ( Chart B-2 ) The wheat and cotton crops due to marketing quotas were respectively and percent smaller than in But since most of the million acres taken out of wheat and cotton were used to expand production of feed and oilseeds crop production as a whole declined only percent ( Appendix Table D-27 ) Livestock production in was higher than in any previous year. Hog numbers increased sharply as a result of plentiful feed supplies and the CHART B-2 FARM PRODUCTION INDEX = INDEX = LIVESTOCK mm / ^ ^ ^ ^ V o i < ^ " mmmmmm CROPS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE favorable hog prices in late and early Output of poultry and eggs also expanded. Cattle and calf slaughter and milk production set new records in Milk production in the second half of the year however was about the same as in the corresponding period of The movement of farm products into domestic consumption and export increased moderately from to One consequence was a sharp reduction in additions to price-support stocks. Whereas in the inventories and outstanding loans of the Commodity Credit Corporation rose by billion dollars ( equivalent in value to percent of total farm output ) the increase from November to November was billion dollars ( equivalent to less than percent of farm output ) Although price-support stocks were at a record billion dollars on November the production and utilization of farm products appeared to be approaching a balance as the year drew to a close. Nearly percent of the November stocks consisted of wheat corn cotton and cottonseed products ( oil and linters ) Net additions to price-support stocks from the crops of wheat and cotton will be relatively small and stocks of corn are expected to decline. Dairy products accounted for percent of total price-support stocks in November but purchases during the last quarter of were substantially below the same quarter of and sales and donations from stocks were much higher Transportation trade and services Freight carloadings declined percent from to reflecting mainly lower activity in coal mining and durable manufactures. Data for the first half of show a significant but smaller decline from a year earlier in the freight handled by intercity trucking firms The flow of goods through retail channels was well maintained largely as a result of the high and increasing level of disposable income ( Chart p. ) Retail sales in appear to have equaled their total a stability which contrasts sharply with the decline of percent in total industrial production. Reductions in inventories occurred especially in consumer durable goods Production of electric power and natural gas increased from to Data on employment in the service industries suggest an expanded flow of services to consumers in So too does a deflated series of consumer expenditures on services exclusive of housing ( Table p. ) CHANGES IN FINAL PURCHASES The Nation 's output may be considered as the sum of values added by current activity at each level of production and distribution. If there were no inventory changes it could also be viewed as the total value of goods sold and of services rendered to final users. In any year however part of the Nation 's output may be added to inventories or final sales may be sustained at a higher level than current output by depleting inventories The distinction between current output ( the gross national product ) and final purchases is especially significant in interpreting changes from to Gross national product declined billion dollars or percent between the two years but final purchases declined billion dollars or percent. This difference represents the changes in inventories in the two years an increase of billion dollars in and a decrease of billion dollars in ( Chart p. ) The major components of total final purchases are shown in Table B-3 Purchases of goods and services by the Federal Government in were about billion dollars lower than in but those of State and local governments increased. Gross private fixed investment ( that is the sum of expenditures on new construction and producers ' equipment ) totaled about the same as in and consumer expenditures rose by nearly billion dollars. The increase in consumption expenditures was largely accounted for by housing and other services ; expenditures for durable goods fell million dollars but expenditures on nondurable goods increased by billion dollars over the prior year The quarterly data in Table B-3 and Chart p. show the recovery which is obscured by the yearly totals. From the second quarter of to the first quarter of gross national product measured at seasonally adjusted annual rates declined billion dollars or percent 8o TABLE B-3. Gross national product and its major components [ Billions of dollars ] Change * from Component Gross national product : total Change in business inventories Final expenditures : total Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods __ Nondurable goods Services Gross private fixed investment New constructionResidential nonfarm Other Producers ' durable equipment Net foreign investment Government purchases of goodi and services _ _ Federal National security Other State and local to Second First quarQuarter ter to to fourth first quarquarter ter +l'.6 t.l Quarterly changes based on seasonally adjusted annual rates Preliminary * Less Government sales NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding ources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers However the decline in total final purchases during this period was very much smaller billion dollars or about percent. Though the contraction was mild it was reflected in several of the broad categories of final purchases. Expenditures for consumer nondurable goods declined slightly while outlays for consumer durables dropped percent ( Chart p. ) However consumer outlays for services and State and local government expenditures increased during this period ; and the balance of foreign trade also shifted in a direction which tended to support domestic production and income Consumer expenditures increased at an annual rate of about billion dollars from the first to the fourth quarter of Outlays for consumer durables were percent above the first quarter low and outlays for nondurable goods and for services were higher by percent and percent respectively. The upsurge in residential construction has already been noted. National security expenditures declined at an annual rate of about billion dollars from the first quarter to the fourth but the rate of decrease slowed down materially toward the end of the year In the first three quarters of declines in national security outlays were barely offset by increases in expenditures for all major categories of civilian goods and services. In the last quarter however the expansionary forces of the civilian economy prevailed : total final purchases rose billion dollars and inventory liquidation declined as gross national product increased more than did final purchases CHANGES IN INCOME PAYMENTS Income disbursements to individuals Total personal income rose slightly from to despite the decline in gross national product ( Appendix Table D-10 ) The increase was mostly in the fourth quarter of the year reflecting the general expansion in output and final purchases. Wage and salary payments declined about billion dollars but other labor income increased slightly and transfer payments increased billion dollars. Labor income and transfer payments combined declined slightly from Income of farm proprietors exclusive of receipts from net reductions of farm inventories fell slightly in but the change was much smaller than in either of the two preceding years ( Appendix Table D-10 ) Business and professional income also declined slightly but was higher than in any year prior to Rental and interest incomes continued their rising trends which have persisted for several years and dividend payments increased despite a decline in corporate profits after taxes As a percentage of personal income disbursements which are higher than total personal income by the amount of employee contributions for social insurance investment income increased slightly in ( Table B-4 ) TABLE B-4. Distribution of personal income disbursements Percent of total personal income disbursements> Personal income disbursements ( billions of dollars ) Year Labor income and transfer payments Total Investment income PropriWage etors ' and Other Trans- income ' salary labor fer Total dispayburse- income ments ments Rents Dividends Interest * Total personal income as shown in Appendix Table D-10 plus employee contributions for social insur ance ; beginning with includes social insurance contributions of self-employed persons Includes employee contributions for social insurance Beginning January includes contributions for self-employed for social insurance < Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on Department of Commerce data ( except as noted ) Such an increase occurred in and in other mild contractions. Rents and interest together accounted for a larger share than in other postwar years but the dividend percentage was lower than in any year of the period The income shares of both farm and business proprietors in percent and percent respectively were at postwar lows Wages and salaries accounted for percent of personal income in slightly below the percentage for and but higher than for other postwar years Changes in disposable personal income Although the disbursements of income to individuals increased very little from to the amount available for spending or saving disposable personal income increased billion dollars. This result reflects among other developments the fact that Federal taxes on personal income declined by more than billion dollars or percent while State and local taxes and employee contributions for social insurance increased by a much smaller amount The percentage distribution of disposable personal income among expenditure categories is shown in Table B-5 for and the postwar years. The percentage distribution changed only moderately from TABLE B-5. Distribution of disposable personal income Disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Year Nondurable goods Total Services Durable goods Food Clothing and shoes Other Housing Personal saving Other -_ __ _ * Personal consumption expenditures Percent of total disposable personal income Total personal income as shown in Appendix Table D-10 less personal taxes Includes alcoholic beverages Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers to The savings proportion declined a little as consumer spending rose during the latter part of The percentage spent on housing in continued the upward trend of recent years but the share spent for durable goods declined. Outlays for nondurable goods showed little change from Corporate profits Corporate profits before taxes declined sharply in the last quarter of but recovered a little in early ; in the first nine months of they averaged percent below the same months of ( Appendix Table D-49 and Chart p. ) The decline was sharpest in the durable goods industries in rail transportation and in textiles. Before-tax profits in nondurable manufactures as a group declined much less than in durable manufactures while profits in communications and public utilities actually increased Corporate profits after taxes were lower in the first nine months of than in the corresponding period of the previous year by about percent Corporate tax liabilities on the other hand appear to have been percent lower in January-September than in the same period of a decline on an annual-rate basis of about billion dollars Preliminary estimates for the fourth quarter of indicate a marked recovery in corporate profits both before and after taxes. The fourth quarter rise may bring after-tax profits for the full-year to within percent or so of Dividend payments in each quarter of were up from the previous year despite the moderate decline in after-tax profits. Correspondingly undistributed profits were down about percent in from the preceding year. At an annual rate of billion dollars they were about equal to the level and lower than in any other year since ADDENDUM : ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF THE NATION 'S TOTAL OUTPUT Although national income statistics in the United States have reached a high level of usefulness data on some sectors of the economy are far from perfect. Major changes in the Nation 's output are registered with sufficient accuracy for most purposes but small changes such as those from to or from to defy accurate measurement at present. Indeed the errors of estimation are sometimes of the same order of magnitude as the observed changes. While this is particularly true of estimates based on preliminary data some uncertainty attaches also to the final figures Throughout this Report the discussion of changes in the gross national product has been based on the figures that are conventionally designated in statistical reports by that name. In fact however two estimates of the gross national product are available. Since they are based on largely independent data a rough check is possible on the accuracy with which changes in the gross national product are now measurable. The difference between these two estimates the " statistical discrepancy " is regularly included in the national income accounts prepared by the Department of Commerce. Essentially it is the difference between gross national product as estimated first from information on expenditures for goods and services and second from data on incomes and other production costs The difference between the two often changes by a billion dollars or less from one year to the next or from one quarter to another. But occasionally it changes by as much as or billion dollars. Year-to-year changes of such size occurred in and According to preliminary data the statistical discrepancy changed by an even larger amount from to Quarterly changes of large magnitude appeared during and Economists conventionally use the gross national product estimates based on expenditure data ; to avoid confusion this practice has also been followed throughout this Report. On the basis of existing knowledge it is impossible to say whether the estimate of gross national product based on expenditure data is more or less accurate than the estimate based on income data Some implications of these alternative measures of the Nation 's output may be gathered from Table B-6. Based on the expenditure data the T A B L E B-6. Alternative measures of the Nation 's total output [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Period Gross national product or expenditure l Charges against gross Statistical national discrepancy product * : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter- : First quarter... Second quarterThird quarter-_ Change from fourth quarter of to fourth quarter of Change from second quarter of to third quarter ofJ1954_ i Estimates based mainly on expenditure data s Estimates based on income and non-income charges against production Source : Department of Commerce gross national product in appears to have been percent below Based on income data however the decline appears to be only percent. According to the quarterly expenditure estimates the decline in total output was smaller than that of But the estimates based on income data suggest precisely the opposite. The conclusion must be drawn that the available measures of total output are not sufficiently accurate to determine decisively which of the two contractions was greater II. Employment and Earnings Employment which fell from the summer of to the summer of rose again in the last part of and unemployment declined much more than seasonally in the last three months of A reduction in ' average hours worked per week due in large part to the decline of overtime was reversed in May. The continued rise in average hourly earnings which occurred despite the fall in employment was a striking feature of recent developments in employment and earnings. Also noteworthy was the small amount of time lost in industrial disputes in the smallest since World War II EMPLOYMENT According to statistics compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics nonagricultural employment began to fall after July ( Appendix Table D-22 and Chart p. ) Its decline accelerated in the late autumn and early winter and continued at a less rapid rate in the spring and summer of At its low point in August nonagricultural employment was below the peak reached months previously. It then began to rise but in December it was still below the levels of mid-1953 The decline in the number of persons employed in nonagricultural industries may well be somewhat overstated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics series which is based on business payroll records. This series counts twice a person who appears on two payrolls during the same payroll period either because he has changed jobs during the period or because he holds two jobs at the same time. Dual jobholding probably tends to decline during a contraction in business activity and labor turnover was definitely lower in the summer of than in the summer of These changes would cause a larger decrease in the number of persons on payrolls than in the number of individuals employed in any one week Nonagricultural employment is also estimated by the Bureau of the Census ( Appendix Table D-16 and Chart p. ) Its series unlike that of the Bureau of Labor Statistics includes the self-employed unpaid family workers and domestic servants. Because of this difference in coverage and some differences in concepts and method the Census series which is based on a household sample survey shows a somewhat different movement than that shown by the series based on payroll records. The first suggestion of contraction came earlier in the Census series which showed a slightly less than seasonal rise in the spring of However most of the decline in this series seasonally adjusted took place after July The adjusted series dropped from July to its low point in August From August to December the rise was about Like all data derived from sample surveys the Census data are subject to some error because the experience of the persons in a sample may differ to some extent from the experience of the population as a whole. Further the information given to interviewers may occasionally be inaccurate. The data of the Bureau of Labor Statistics are also not based on a full count of the employed ; they too involve some estimation. These factors as well as differences in concept and coverage presumably contribute to the differences in the movement of employment shown by the two series The decline in seasonally adjusted employment in nonagricultural establishments as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics occurred principally in manufacturing ( Table B-7 ) Between July and August emT A B L E B Changes in nonagricultural employment by industry [ Thousands of persons seasonally adjusted data ] Change from Industry August July to March to to December March August Nonagricultural employment : Total Mining _ _ Contract construction Manufacturing Durable goods industries : Total _ _ Ordnance and accessories _ _ Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) Furniture and fixtures _ Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries Fabricated metal products ( except ordnance machinery and transportation equipment ) Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery ___ _ Transportation equipment Instruments Miscellaneous manufacturing Nondurable goods industries : Total Food and kindred products.Tobacco manufactures ..Textile-mill products Apparel and otherfinishedtextile products Paper and allied products Printing publishing and allied industries Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Transportation and public utilities : Total Transportation Communication Other public utilitie " s-_ " -..I Wholesale and retail trade._ Federal State and local __ _ _._ it tl \ Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellaneous Government : Total _ _ _ _ ._- Based on preliminary data for December Sources : Department of Labor and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ployment also fell in other sectors transportation Federal Government mining and trade. Seasonally adjusted employment increased over this period in State and local government ; in finance insurance and real estate ; and in service and miscellaneous industries. Within manufacturing employment declined in every major industry group except printing publishing and allied industries From August to December seasonally adjusted employment rose in of manufacturing industry groups. The largest increases occurred in transportation equipment and in lumber and wood products The large output of new-model automobiles in November and December was the principal cause of increased employment in transportation equipment. In lumber and wood products employment recovered almost to mid-1953 levels following a strike in the summer of Agricultural employment which has long been declining fell more slowly during most of This suggests that reduced opportunities for nonfarm employment retarded migration away from farms or that fewer farm residents than usual shifted from farm to nonfarm work in their own areas during the off-season or both UNEMPLOYMENT During the first half of unemployment as estimated by the Bureau of the Census continued to decline and reached a level lower than that of any corresponding period since World War II ( Appendix Table D-16 and Chart p. ) The month-to-month movement of unemployment during the late summer and autumn of on the other hand is somewhat obscure. The Census was then preparing to shift from its old sample of households in areas to a new sample of households in areas During this period of preparation less attention than usual was devoted to the training and supervising of interviewers working on the old sample and this seems to have resulted in an underestimate of the number unemployed and of the size of the labor force. The unemployment figures originally published were later revised upward by the Census Bureau to reflect the higher level of unemployment shown by the 230-area sample for January as well as the increase in unemployment insurance claims. The revised data though admittedly somewhat arbitrary appear to be more accurate It is nevertheless clear that unemployment rose rather substantially between August and March The rise was due in part to the usual curtailment of outdoor employment in the winter months but the greater part was the result of contraction in business activity. This rise in unemployment was more rapid though less prolonged than that which occurred in The peak of ( percent of the civilian labor force ) reached in March was lower than the peak of ( percent of the civilian labor force ) reached in February During the spring and summer of unemployment declined following the usual seasonal pattern except that the number of young workers reported as seeking work rose less than is usual in June and July. After September the decline in unemployment was clearly more than seasonal ; in October unemployment fell below million for the first time in the year Thereafter the usual seasonal rise did not occur ; the December figure of was only slightly above the October level It is important to recognize that the unemployed are not all the same individuals month after month ; the turnover among them is substantial During the first eleven months of of those unemployed in a given month roughly one-third on the average had found employment the following month and roughly percent had left the labor force to return to school or to resume full-time household duties It should also be noted that some unemployment exists even when the demand for labor is strongest. The reason is that at all times there are some people in the process of changing from one job to another. Also at all times a considerable number of jobs are vacant because the right persons have not yet been found to fill them. It would be helpful to have adequate statistics on the total number of job vacancies in the economy The Bureau of Employment Security also compiles statistics on unemployment. Its figures on insured unemployment and initial claims for unemployment insurance exhibit the same general movement of unemployment that has already been described ( Appendix Table D-20 ) Insured unemployment was unusually low during the first nine months of dropping to a weekly average of in September. For the next six months the rise was much more than seasonal ; the weekly average in March was Seasonal reductions occurred from April through September but in the last part of the year the rise in insured unemployment was smaller and occurred later than usual as the normal curtailment of outdoor employment was offset by gains elsewhere particularly in durable goods manufacturing. The monthly averages of insured unemployment for November and December were and respectively but initial claims for unemployment insurance in these months were below the levels of a year earlier. The statistics of insured unemployment probably understate somewhat the amount of unemployment among workers covered by insurance programs because they do not include those who have exhausted benefit rights and still remain unemployed The impact of unemployment has been very uneven geographically. Insured unemployment under State programs during was percent of covered employment for the continental United States. However in six States it was less than percent and in nine it was percent or over ( Chart B-3 ) The principal cause of unemployment in those States in which unemployment rates were highest was depressed conditions in the coal textile shoe or apparel industries. Unemployment rates in most leading durable-goods producing States were close to the national average although they had been well below the national average in and In some areas the impact of unemployment was greater than is indicated by State averages. The problems of the communities where unem- CHART B-3 UNEMPLOYMENT RATES NOTE : Average week ? / Stole insured unemployment cofendar year as o percent of overoge monthly covered employment for the months ended June Preliminary dofo NATIONAL AVERAGE : PERCENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ployment rates were highest did not arise solely from the recent contraction in general business activity. They were often related to long-run declines in demand for particular products to changes in technology or to shifts in the location of production. Among the areas experiencing considerable unemployment for such reasons were Lawrence Massachusetts ; Altoona Johnstown Scranton and Wilkes-Barre Pennsylvania ; Providence Rhode Island ; and Charleston West Virginia The severity of unemployment depends not only on how many are involuntarily idle but also on how long their idleness lasts. As the total number of unemployed rises the number unemployed for long periods rises more than proportionally. Those unemployed weeks and over as reported by the Census numbered in August This group reached a peak of in April and May of and then fell gradually to in December. The number unemployed more than weeks reached a maximum of in August and was reduced to by December. The number in this group remained lower throughout than it had been in the first half of when it reached persons at its high point As extended unemployment rises so does the number of the insured unemployed who exhaust their benefit rights. Not all such persons remain unemployed however ; many soon find employment and others leave the labor force. For the continental United States the number of persons reported by the Bureau of Employment Security as exhausting benefit rights was approximately a month from August to October of This number rose rapidly from December to April when it reached and then increased gradually to in August. Beginning in September the number of exhaustions began to decline and by November it had dropped to The number of exhaustions in the first eleven months of was The proportion of insured unemployed who exhausted benefit rights tended to be highest in the States whose laws provided benefits of shortest duration The exhaustion of unemployment insurance benefits and the increased difficulty experienced by marginal workers in finding jobs caused some rise in the number of persons aided under State and local general assistance programs ( Table B-8 ) T A B L E B Number of persons receiving general assistance [ Thousands of persons ] Month January.. February. March April May June Increase from to Month July August September. October November. December. Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare Increase from to There was also an increase in partial unemployment early in Workers ordinarily employed full time who worked less than hours a week on all jobs because of economic factors may be regarded as " partially unemployed. " The number of such persons in nonagricultural industries apparently reached a peak in March and thereafter declined substantially ( Table B-9 ) The concept has less significance for agriculture where the series has moved irregularly because of seasonal changes. The number partially unemployed in November was about the same as in December TABLE B-9. Partial unemployment of usual full-time workers [ Thousands of persons years of age and overj Persons who usually work full time at their present jobs who were working part t i m e l because of economic factors * Area sample and month Total 68-area sample : : November. : December 230-area sample : : March May August November. In agriculture In nonagricultural industries * Less than hours In the survey week These factors include slack work job turnover materials shortages and repairs to plant and equipment Source : Department of Commerce The increase in unemployment from to was also accompanied by an increase in the number of persons temporarily laid off ( with instructions to report back to work within days ) and not seeking other work while awaiting recall. By long-standing practice these persons are not classified as unemployed. Temporary layoffs began to rise in late and were over in January From February through July they varied between and more than above the levels of the preceding year. In late temporary layoffs fell again to a low level ( Appendix Table D-18 ) AVERAGE HOURS WORKED PER WEEK The average number of hours worked per week in manufacturing is usually an early indicator of changes in business activity because adjustments in hours can be made more quickly and easily than adjustments in employment. Average weekly hours of production workers in manufacturing which had been in December began to fall in the first months of ( Table B-10 Appendix Table D-23 and Chart p. ) By early the average was below hours and in April it reached the T A B U S B-10. Average weekly hours of work * in selected industries Industry April April Latest data available All manufacturing Durable goods Industries Nondurable goods industries Bituminous coal mining Metal mining Building construction Retail trade Wholesale trade Class I railroads _ _ Gas and electric utilities * * * i December * November > October Source : Department of Labor low point of somewhat above the low point of reached in April Recovery also began early. After April the workweek rose more than seasonally reaching hours in December The decline in hours between and was largest in durable goods industries where it reflected primarily the decline of overtime. But by December the workweek in these industries was again at a level indicating considerable overtime work Among nonmanufacturing industries metal mining and bituminous coal mining showed the sharpest declines in average hours worked. Hours in bituminous coal mining recovered seasonally late in In the principal industries other than manufacturing and mining the changes in the workweek from April to April were slight WAGE RATES AND EARNINGS Average hourly earnings of production workers in all manufacturing industries moved upward moderately after mid-1953. The December level of $ was cents above that of July and cents above that of December ( Appendix Table D-24 and Chart p. ) During the economic contraction from November to November this series did not rise. As a result of the increase in hourly earnings and the recovery in hours of work weekly earnings by late were above their mid-1953 levels ( Appendix Table D-25 ) From a July level of $ weekly earnings rose to $ in December but they fell to $ by April as a result of shorter hours. They subsequently rose to the new all-time high of $ in December Outside manufacturing hourly earnings toward the end of were also above the levels of mid-1953 except in mining where there was virtually no change. Average hourly earnings in building construction rose cents from July to November ; in retail trade they rose cents. Average hourly earnings in Class I Railroads rose cents from July to October Within manufacturing the rise in average hourly earnings for most major industry groups was larger than that of the all-manufacturing average The latter was held down because employment contracted more in highwage than in low-wage industries. In durable goods manufacturing where the average rose cents from July to July the rise was cents or more in nine of eleven major industry groups and cents or more in four of them. Within many individual manufacturing industries wage rates rose more than average hourly earnings which were held down by reductions in overtime work at premium rates During a large proportion of the general wage increases negotiated in collective bargaining amounted to cents an hour or slightly more often accompanied by some improvements in pensions insurance plans or other fringe benefits. There was some tendency during the year to improve or preserve the relative earnings position of skilled workers by means of special wage increases or general percentage increases. Many workers in the basic steel aluminum aircraft electrical machinery shipbuilding steel fabricating meat packing rubber pulp and paper and telephone industries among others received wage increases in In addition to the wage increases that were negotiated increases of cents an hour were received by workers in the automobile industry and by some workers in the aircraft and farm machinery industries under the terms of the " annual improvement factor " clauses of prior long-term agreements. Since the consumer price index declined slightly during wages decreased cents an hour under the " escalator clauses " of these agreements leaving a net gain in money wages of cents an hour. A number of escalator clauses were discontinued during the past year. The wages of approximately million workers are now linked to the consumer price index one and a quarter million fewer than a year ago Where firms or industries have experienced persistent difficulties unions have in some instances foregone wage increases or accepted decreases. Since mid-1953 major contract settlements without wage increases have been made in the textile dyeing and finishing footwear and pottery industries and agreements in coal mining have not been reopened. In the full-fashioned hosiery industry employer contributions to pension funds have been discontinued. In the wool textile industry in the North wage cuts of cents an hour and up were accepted by unions after arbitration or after strikes. Workers of two automobile firms voted to discontinue incentive wage systems that had kept earnings on some jobs substantially above earnings for comparable work elsewhere INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES The time lost in industrial disputes during and the number of workers involved were at the lowest levels since World War II. During the year work stoppages involving workers were reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics compared with stoppages involving workers in The workers involved in these disputes were idle man-days in compared with in These figures are and percent respectively of estimated working time III. Price Changes PRICE STABILITY DURING The apparent stability of prices in the face of falling manufacturing and mining activity was one of the striking features of the recent contraction Since mid-1953 the indexes of wholesale and consumer prices have fluctuated narrowly around horizontal trends although the latter index for technical reasons may have failed to reveal fully the downward adjustments in the terms of purchase of durable consumer goods ( Chart p. and Table B-l ) Because of the over-all stability of prices the inventory adjustments during were not aggravated by adverse expectations concerning prices such as often tend to develop when economic activity declines TABLE B-l Changes in prices Percentage change i from Group to Wholesale prices : All commodities. Farm products Processed foods Other than farm products and foods Consumer prices : All items t \ Second quarter First quarter to to fourth quarter first quarter Change based on index ( = ) for each group Indexes for based on data through November Source : Department of Labor J The primary factor making for price stability was the high and well maintained level of final demand during the past year and a half as industrial activity first declined and then entered a new phase of expansion toward the end of the period. A number of independent influences also strengthened prices in primary markets and lent indirect support to prices of final products. These included government stockpiling and price-support programs and the vigorous economic expansion in Western Europe. The downward post-Korean adjustments in prices of industrial materials which had occurred prior to the contraction of also left their mark on the behavior of prices during the contraction WHOLESALE PRICES Industrial prices and their interrelations Industrial prices were stable on the average during the contraction partly because they had fallen during the preceding two years ( Chart p. ) The drop that occurred in the prices of raw and semi-processed industrial materials between early and early is especially noteworthy ( Chart p. ) Wide swings in these prices are normal during business cycles because current and anticipated changes in the demand for final products are magnified in primary markets through inventory adjustments at the various stages of production and distribution. The unusual feature of recent experience however is that the downward adjustment in prices of industrial materials which usually occurs during even a mild decline in business activity had been virtually completed before the contraction began. This was particularly true in nondurable goods manufacturing where prices of both materials and finished goods had declined sharply during and after the forward buying of the early months of the Korean conflict had run its course. In contrast the prices of many durable materials and goods which are usually more stable than those of nondurables and which were strongly influenced by defense production leveled off or rose gradually during and then moved up slightly after price controls were removed early in Prices of most finished durable goods and some materials held steady during the subsequent contraction and recovery but prices of most metals dropped between the summer of and the early months of before rising through the remainder of the year to levels approximating those of mid-1953 Raw materials The long decline in the prices of basic raw materials was arrested late in and the index began to rise early in ( Chart p. ) The expansion of Western European production was partly responsible for this upturn. Rising foreign demand helped to increase the prices of nonferrous metals and natural rubber and to cushion the decline in wool prices Domestic factors were more important however. The new long-range stockpile programs of the Federal Government called for larger quantities of some nonferrous metals. Domestic consumption of natural rubber increased after its price declined relative to synthetic rubber during and the early months of Finally the contraction in manufacturing which began in mid-1953 came to a halt after the first quarter of as the production of major household durable goods and most nondurable manufactures recovered from winter lows. All these developments combined to lift the index of prices of raw industrial materials during the first half of and further gains were recorded after August when the increase of durable goods production increased the demand for materials. By the fourth quarter the index of raw industrial material prices was percent above its first quarter level. The indexes of prices of semi- processed industrial materials and of finished goods remained stable as raw material prices advanced during the first six months of but they too rose moderately toward the end of the year Farm products and foods Prices of farm products at central markets fluctuated more widely than prices of industrial commodities during and by the fourth quarter of they were down percent from the second quarter of ( Chart p. and Table B-l ) In general this behavior represents a prolongation of the downward movement that began in as a consequence of approximately stable over-all demand combined with enlarged supplies of agricultural products. The average annual decline in the index of prices of farm products has been as follows : for percent ; for percent ; and for percent In the aggregate prices received by farmers at local markets followed a similar course but there were striking differences among the various commodity groups. Smaller production of wheat cotton and corn caused market prices to increase relative to support levels during but prices of livestock and their products declined substantially. Thus in the last quarter of crop prices averaged percent higher than in the fourth quarter of while prices of meat animals were down percent prices of dairy products percent and poultry and egg prices percent. These diverse trends combined to cause a decline in the index of prices received by farmers and the parity ratio ( the ratio of prices received by farmers to prices paid by them ) averaged in the last quarter of ( Chart B-4 ) Prices of processed foods fluctuated along with prices of farm products but around a horizontal rather than a declining trend ( Chart p. and Table B-l ) Processed food prices tend to be less flexible than farm prices partly because of additional costs incurred in processing. Wages an important part of these added costs continued to increase slightly CONSUMER PRICES The over-all stability of the consumer price index during the contraction conceals offsetting movements in the prices of commodities and those of services ( Chart B-5 ) Also as observed previously the index of consumer prices probably does not reflect fully the more favorable terms of purchase of durable goods. By the fourth quarter of retail commodity prices had declined percent from their peak in the third quarter of but rents had increased percent and the index of prices of other services ( which includes public utilities and public transportation as well as personal services ) had risen percent over the same interval. In general retail commodity prices have drifted slightly and irregularly downward since while service prices have increased steadily. These divergent trends produced a slight upward tilt in the consumer price index during CHART B-4 PRICES RECEIVED A N D PAID BY FARMERS INDEX = INDEX * PRICES RECEIVED ( PRICES PAID INTEREST TAXES AND WAGE RATES ) I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i i I i I1 Iri i i t i i i I i i ii i i i i i i i i i i i PARITY RATION I ! I | I ! I I M I I _L1 ^ J i I J J l i i i t i I i i i i i i i i ! i i i i i J / RATIO OF INDEX OF PRICES RECEIVED TO PARITY INDEX SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE CHART B-5 CONSUMER PRICES O N A POSTWAR ! BASE INDEX INDEX * IOO = SERVICES EXCLUDING RENT r ^ ^ C O M f l 40DITIES \ iiiiilinii SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR y IMIIIMIM and most of ; after the contraction got under way service prices rose more slowly and the over-all index leveled off ( Chart p. ) Substantial declines in the prices of new automobiles tires and household durable goods during were mainly responsible for a fall of percent in the index of prices for transportation goods and services and of percent for housefurnishings between the fourth quarters of and Consumers benefited from reductions in excise taxes on many durable goods in April and subsequent price reductions occurred as department stores and other retailers moved to meet the competition of discount houses. New car prices dropped in the fall of preceding introduction of the models but the transportation price index rose percent in November as dealers discontinued or reduced price concessions with the introduction of the new models. The prices of most nondurable commodities changed very little during the year. Apparel prices declined percent and the prices of foods sold for home consumption percent between October-November of and the corresponding period in Prices of many services are regulated by public authority by contract or by custom and they are still adjusting to postwar conditions of demand Although they have risen relatively more than commodity prices since ( Chart B-5 ) they have risen less from their prewar levels ( Chart B-6 ) The rising trend of service prices during the recent past has reflected sustained demand for services and from a longer point of view a growth in the supply of services that has lagged behind a steadily increasing demand CHART B-6 CONSUMER PRICES O N A PREWAR BASE INDEX = INOEX 1939s COMMODITIES I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I IV. Monetary and Credit Developments Some of the most significant economic developments of took place in the credit and financial markets. Perhaps the most important was the net increase of billion dollars in the loans and investments of the commercial banking system ( Appendix Table D-43 and Chart p. ) This expansion of commercial bank assets was accompanied by and to a considerable extent facilitated increased flows of funds from financial institutions into public and private construction which served importantly to sustain economic activity over the year. The process was facilitated by Federal Reserve actions and by the policies pursued by the Treasury in its management of the Federal debt EXPANSION IN BANK LOANS AND INVESTMENTS More than half of the over-all expansion in bank loans and investments was in holdings of United States Government securities. These increased by about billion dollars the increase being predominantly in intermediate and long-term securities. Bank holdings of State and local government securities and of corporate securities combined also increased in their case by billion dollars. The increase of billion dollars in total loans clearly was not due to commercial and industrial loans ; despite an increase in the second half of the year these loans were still lower at the year-end than they had been at the end of The increases in the total were in large part the result of increases in real estate loans in loans to brokers and dealers and to others for purchasing and carrying securities and to a minor degree in agricultural loans. Loans to consumers were slightly reduced These facts reflect the broad economic profile of the year. The movement of commercial and industrial loans was due in large part to the slackening and subsequent recovery of activity in industry and trade. The increased holdings of State and local government securities and of loans secured by real estate represent the accommodation by the banking system of increased demands for credit from these consistently buoyant sectors of the economy. And the moderate increase in security loans is associated with the rise of stock prices and the year 's heavy volume of underwriting activities. Had not commercial banks absorbed during the year about billion dollars of Federal securities the supply of money would have grown less rapidly and economic events during the year might have been very different Despite absorption of large amounts of Federal securities by the commercial banking system the total amount of Federal debt in the hands of the public including the commercial banks and the Federal Reserve Banks increased by only billion dollars during There was therefore some redistribution of the publicly held Federal debt among various types of holders ( Table B-12 and Appendix Table D-46 ) ioo The largest net reduction in holdings of Federal securities was by " other corporations " ( primarily nonfinancial businesses ) Individuals including partnerships and personal trusts reduced their holdings substantially and appreciable amounts were sold on balance by insurance companies and mutual savings banks. State and local governments were large net buyers of Federal securities. An important aspect of these shifts is that the expansion of commercial bank credit made funds available to insurance companies and mutual savings banks for investment over and above their receipts from new savings and from repayments of outstanding loans and investments. These funds were employed to a considerable extent in financing an expanding volume of residential construction State and municipal works and a continuing increase in outstanding corporate obligations TABLE B-12. Net changes in the ownership of the publicly held Federal debt December to December 31y [ Par value billions of dollars ] Ownership distribution Net change December December in ownership Investor group Debt held by the public : TotalCommercial banks Federal Reserve Banks Insurance companies._ Mutual savings banks Other corporations._ State and local governments IndividualsMiscellaneous investors iPreliminary Sources : Treasury Department and Council of Economic Advisers MONEY SUPPLY Rising bank holdings of loans and securities were crucial determinants of changes in the money supply during although other factors also had a bearing ( Table B-13 and Chart p. ) As measured by the total TABLE B-13.- Net changes in the money supply ^ Net change ' during Item Billions of dollars Demand deposits and currency : Total. Demand deposits adjusted Currency outside banks _. _ Time deposits _. __ __ __ Percent Based on data for end of year * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarly add to totals because of rounding Sources : Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers IOI of adjusted demand deposits ( exclusive of Government and interbank deposits ) and currency outside the banks the conventional definition of the active money supply monetary expansion was considerably greater in than in and only a little less than in In fact the expansion of demand deposits in exceeded that in The decline in currency outside the banks during doubtless reflected a reduced demand for hand-to-hand currency resulting from a lower level of business activity The expansion of time deposits exceeded the increases of both and BANK RESERVES AND FEDERAL RESERVE POLICY The expansion in bank credit and in the money supply was possible only because the commercial banking system was adequately supplied with reserves. The policies followed by the Federal Reserve authorities and the movement of member bank reserve balances are important elements therefore in the year 's financial developments ( Charts B-7 and B-8 ) During the opening weeks of the year commercial bank reserves were augmented by a substantial return of currency from public circulation reflecting cyclical as well as seasonal factors. The objective of Federal Reserve policy in this period was to absorb part of any reserves arising from the currency inflow and from other reserve-expanding factors and yet to maintain an adequate commercial bank reserve position. Federal securities were sold on balance in the first three months of the year ; were held in CHART B-7 FEDERAL RESERVE BANK CREDIT BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS WEEKLY AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES TOTAL CREDIT OUTSTANDING U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES \ SOURCJE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART B-8 MEMBER BANK RESERVES AND BORROWINGS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS WEEKLY AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES ~ V A >/ rJ \ \ f y \ jts * * R Q I E R S R E E UR D E E V S / ^ > A EXCESS R E S E R V E S v ^ KK h A " < > < BORROWINGS FROM FEDERAL RESERVE : BANKS > " " I \ < \ I t I I II I J SERVES " FREE " RE ft " F M WO \ LAA " Y V vW ! I ! i i i t i i i i i i A M J J A S SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM O N D April at about the March level ; and then were purchased on balance in May and June. Other factors affecting the reserve position of member banks from the beginning of the year until early June were a decline in deposits which reduced the amounts of reserves required to be held by the banks and a net outflow of gold. The combined effect of all these forces was to leave the reserve position of the member banks approximately the same in early June as it had been at the year 's beginning but in the interim there had been a decline followed by an increase in excess and " free " reserves. These were relatively low in early February but increased fairly steadily from then until the middle of the year ( Chart B-8 ) Steps were also taken in the first half of the year to bring the lending rates of the Federal Reserve Banks more closely into line with open market rates of interest which had been declining more or less continuously. In February discount rates charged to member banks were reduced from percent to % percent and buying rates on 90-day bankers ' acceptances from 21/Q to ^ ; in April-May rediscount rates were again lowered this time to \ l/i percent and buying rates on acceptances were reduced to ^ percent Important policy actions were taken in the second half of the year when a series of reductions in reserve requirements was made accompanied by open market operations. Reserve requirements for time deposits were cut from percent to percent for country banks on June and similarly for central reserve and reserve city banks on June On the latter date the reserve requirement for demand deposits in central reserve city banks was reduced from percent to percent and this change was followed shortly by three additional steps : the requirement for central reserve city banks was reduced from percent to percent on July ; the requirement for reserve city banks was lowered from percent to percent on the same date ; and the country bank requirement was cut from percent to percent on August Although these actions freed approximately billion dollars of reserves the volumes of excess reserves and of " free " reserves were relatively unchanged as the Federal Reserve Banks sold or redeemed about billion dollars of securities in July and August and other influences also tended to deplete reserves. These open market sales served to lessen the immediate impact of reduced reserve requirements on the money market. Net purchases of securities were made over the remainder of the year as other forces notably a net outflow of gold and a drain of currency into circulation tended to absorb reserves and as an expansion of deposit liabilities increased the amount of reserves which the banks were required to hold. It is important to note that almost all of the expansion of bank assets and liabilities took place in the second half of the year. Excess reserves remained roughly stable although toward the end of the year they declined somewhat and borrowing from Reserve Banks increased. A very small rise in money market rates and bond yields occurred toward the close of the year T A B L E B-14. Factors affecting member bank reserves December to December [ Monthly averages of daily figures ] Change ( millions of dollars ) Factor Factors increasing member bank reserves : Decrease in money in circulation Decrease in Treasury deposits with F. R. Banks _ Increase in F. R. Bank discounts and advances to others than member banks Decrease in other deposits with F. R. Banks Increase in Treasury currency outstanding Total increaseFactors decreasing member bank reserves : Decrease in U. S. Government securities Net gold outflow.. Decrease in float Decrease in F. R. Bank discounts to member banksOther factors Total decrease Member bank reserves : Total. RequiredExcess NOTE. Rounding accounts for the discrepancy between the excess of decreasing over increasing factors and the decrease in total reserves Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System A convenient recapitulation of the changes in member bank reserve balances over the year as a whole is given in Table B-14. The principal factors increasing member bank reserve balances were a decrease in money in circulation of something over million dollars a decrease of about million dollars in Treasury and nonmember bank deposits at the Federal Reserve Banks a million dollar increase in discounts and advances to others than member banks and close to a million dollar increase in Treasury currency outstanding. Together these factors added nearly million dollars to member bank reserves. The amount of required reserves was lower by roughly million dollars as the effect of reduced reserve requirements in releasing reserves was partly offset by a rise in deposit liabilities. At the same time the volume of reserve balances was being reduced by a net outflow of gold of something over million dollars by a reduction of over million dollars in holdings of Government securities by the Federal Reserve Banks and by a million dollar reduction in member bank borrowing from Reserve Banks The fact that excess reserve balances were virtually unchanged on balance over the year reflects inadequately the active policy of credit ease followed through practically all of this period. As pointed out above this policy was accompanied by a substantial expansion of bank credit and of deposit liabilities which entailed a greater commitment of reserves. It is interesting to note that if it had not been for the midyear reduction in reserve requirements the volume of reserves required at the year 's end would have been higher by around billion dollars BOND YIELDS AND INTEREST RATES The policy of credit ease resulted in readier availability of loan funds and lower borrowing costs during ( Chart p. ) For some months during the year interest rates and bond yields continued the downward trend that had begun in June-July The persistence and the degree of the decline varied in different sectors of the market. The rate on new issues of Treasury bills reached a low point in June ; it subsequently increased and ended the year at just over percent the same level as in the early months of the year but substantially below average rates in The rate on prime commercial paper also a short-term obligation of high quality did not reach its low point until August at which time it stabilized at V/4. to % percent. Here also money costs in were substantially below the levels In the long-term sector of the market the movement of bond yields followed somewhat the same pattern but with less amplitude. The yield on the } percent Treasury bond maturing in which was issued May fell to approximately percent in August and subsequently showed a slight tendency to rise. The downward movement of yields on high grade municipal bonds continued into August and that too was followed by a slight upward movement. Borrowing costs of State and local governments were substantially lower than those that prevailed in mid-195 Yields on high grade corporate bonds reached their low point in April earlier than did the public issues and held steady over the remainder of the year also at a level appreciably below that reached in mid-1953 The rates paid by business concerns on short-term loans also were reduced in The average rate on short-term business loans reported by banks in cities was percent in September contrasting with an average of for as a whole a modest decrease characteristic of the relatively sluggish movement of customer loan rates. A more pronounced change occurred in the rates paid by leading finance companies on their direct placements of finance paper with banking institutions and with other investors. This rate fell from slightly over percent in January to percent in July at which point it remained over the rest of the year. Rates on this type of paper averaged percent in These reductions in borrowing costs occurring in both the long- and short-term markets helped to moderate the decline in business activity which began in mid-1953 and encouraged the recovery which began in the early fall of Although systematic and reliable information on the movement of rates and yields for urban mortgage loans is not available scattered information suggests that financial developments after August were favorable to an increase of building activity. The increase to 4l/z percent in May of the interest rate on FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgages served to alleviate somewhat a shortage of funds in this market that had threatened seriously to hamper building activity ; insured and guaranteed mortgages sold at increasing discounts as interest rates rose in the first half of This downward movement of mortgage prices was checked shortly after the middle of the year and for the rest of and much of they moved closer to par. The trend of yields reflected conditions of availability of credit in that favored an increase of building activity. The part played by the commercial banking system in these developments of the money and capital markets was highly significant CONSUMER CREDIT In the first quarter of additions to the flow of consumer expenditures generated by new extensions of instalment credit were less than the drain on consumer income arising out of repayments on old contracts with the result that consumer instalment credit was on balance a contractive factor in the economy ( Table B-15 and Chart p. ) This was TABLE B-15. Net changes in consumer instalment and noninstalment credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Net change i n Instalment credit Total consumer credit Period : First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : January February March April May June July August September October November1 December Total Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper Repair and modernization loans Personal loans Noninstalment credit [ * Preliminary Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers sharply in contrast to the situation in when consumer instalment credit was a consistently expansive factor. The impact of consumer credit on the economy changed in April however when total new instalment credits came approximately into balance with repayments. In the following eight months new credits were in excess of repayments by varying amounts The impact of the aggregate of instalment and noninstalment credit on consumer expenditures was contractive on the whole in the first quarter of but the net effect later was distinctly beneficial to the recovery movement notably in the last four months of the year Rising unemployment during the last half of and early in was not accompanied by any appreciable increase in delinquencies on instalment credit contracts. Delinquencies as reported by the American Bankers Association were somewhat higher in the first half of than in the first half of but not significantly so. In almost all categories of consumer instalment loans delinquencies were lower in than in The favorable record may doubtless be attributed in part to the fact that disposable personal income increased over the year ISSUES OF CORPORATE STATE AND MUNICIPAL SECURITIES Offerings of State and municipal securities increased sharply in reflecting the increase in capital outlays by State and local governments ( Table B-16 ) The gross proceeds of corporate issues were also higher in TABLE B-16. Securities offerings ^ January to November ; and [ Millions of dollars ! JanuaryJanuaryNovember November Security State and municipal securities ( principal amounts ) Corporate securities ( gross proceeds ) Proposed uses of estimated net proceeds from corporate offerings : New money Plant and equipmentWorking capital Retirements of securitiesOther purposes Source : Securities and Exchange Commission the first eleven months of than in the corresponding period of ; but this gain was due wholly to an increase in refinancing issues which was probably stimulated by the lower level of interest rates. The over-all volume of corporate securities issued for new money was somewhat lower than in The decline was limited entirely to issues for working capital purposes ; reflected in this fact were the considerably reduced demands of sales finance companies. The volume of funds obtained for investment in plant and equipment on the other hand was higher in the period from January to November than in the corresponding period of Only a high level of confidence on the part of business could account for the fact that while the economy was undergoing some contraction many corporations made increased demands on the market for funds to expand or modernize producing capacity Developments in the market for existing shares were of a more spectacular nature. The Securities and Exchange Commission index of stock prices covering common stock issues rose from its low of ( = ) in September to in December an increase of percent ( Chart p. ) Trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange increased from a daily average of shares in July to a daily average of million shares in December The unusually rapid increase in share prices resulted in a sharp decline in the yield on shares : the Moody index of yields on industrial common stocks ( ratios of dividends to market price ) was percent for the week ended December contrasting with the postwar high of percent in May For the year ended December loans to brokers and dealers for purchasing and carrying securities ( other than U. S. Government obligations ) by weekly reporting banks in New York and Chicago ( which account for percent or more of such loans of reporting banks ) increased by million dollars to a total of million dollars and comparable loans to " others " rose by million dollars to a total of million dollars Amounts owed to member firms of the New York Stock Exchange maintaining margin accounts by their customers were billion dollars at the end of November contrasting with the low in January of billion dollars The upward movement of security prices and the volume of transactions accelerated in the closing days of the year and in the first days of In view of these developments the Federal Reserve authorities at the close of business on January increased the margin requirement from to percent MORTGAGE CREDIT The high level of construction and real estate activity in the past year made heavy demands on finance. During nonfarm mortgage debt outstanding rose by billion dollars with the greatest percentage increase in debt on homes ( Appendix Table D-41 ) Nonfarm mortgage recordings of $ or less rose by slightly over percent in the first nine months of the year but still larger developments were suggested by some indicators of future activity. In VA appraisal requests were percent higher and applications for FHA home mortgage insurance percent higher than in ( Appendix Table D-32 and Chart p. ) The large volume of home building in which played a significant role in sustaining the economy over the year and which after allowance for seasonal influences was still rising at the year 's end can be attributed in large part to the ready availability of credit on liberal terms. Individuals financed their purchases of homes on lower down payments and longer maturities in and financial institutions showed an increasing willingness to invest in home mortgages on these conditions. As indicated above the yields on mortgage investments tended to decline over the year ; but the attractiveness to lenders of home mortgages particularly those protected by Federal insurance or guarantee relative to other long-term investments tended to increase The adequacy of the supply of mortgage funds can be attributed in part to the volume of savings flowing into investment through financial intermediaries notably life insurance companies mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations. However the more favorable position of mortgages in the capital market which came about without imposing higher log current interest costs on borrowers and in some cases in the face of declining current interest charges played a major part in easing the home mortgage situation TREASURY DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICIES During the year the Treasury followed the policy of restricting its issues to those of intermediate and short term thereby working cooperatively with the Federal Reserve in its policy of credit ease. The effect of Treasury policy was that it avoided interfering with the demands for long-term funds arising from the rapid expansion of private and State and local construction The satisfaction of these demands for funds was a major factor both in moderating the contraction in late and early and in facilitating the recovery movement The Treasury was able to pursue its policy of improving the structure of the debt even though it offered no really long-term security during In all four of the major Treasury refundings during in February May August and December investors were offered an intermediate-term security as well as the usual one-year certificate ; and the two major cash financing operations in May and October were accomplished through the issuance of intermediate-term notes. Around billion dollars of the Treasury securities issued through December were beyond the one-year area. As a result the average length of the marketable debt rose over the year reversing the steady six-year decline which virtually ended in and leveled out in and the floating debt was reduced V. Government Finances Federal expenditures were reduced during On the other hand expenditures of State and local governments rose as these governments continued their efforts to meet the need for public improvements and services resulting from increased population and the deferral of construction during the war years Although Federal expenditures were cut in fiscal year the Federal debt continued to rise. The gross debt of State and local governments also rose during the year but taken in the aggregate these governments appear to have increased their holdings of cash and securities by almost as much as the increase in their indebtedness. Much of these increased liquid assets was held in sinking funds and trust fund accounts ; a part took the form of larger working capital balances FORMS OF GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS Government accounts can be drawn up in a number of ways each method serving a different purpose. Conventional administrative budgets are used by Federal State and local governments in the formulation of their fiscal programs. Consolidated cash budgets are set up to reflect differences in no the cash income and outgo of the government under consideration. Finally an account can be set up which employs the estimates of government receipts and expenditures that are reported in the national income and product accounts as prepared by the Department of Commerce These three sets of accounts differ significantly both in the way they are constructed and in the view they give of governmental operations. For the Federal Government the conventional and cash budgets are developed from accounting records ; receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts however are budgetary data supplemented by estimates developed to adapt them to the needs of national income accounting. For State and local governments there are no consolidated conventional budgets and the consolidated data on a cash basis and on a national income basis are partly estimated. Receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts and to a certain degree as shown in the cash accounts are therefore subject to the same type of reservation as the estimates of gross national product. ( See Appendix B-I pp. ) FEDERAL FINANCES : CONVENTIONAL AND CASH ACCOUNTS Federal finances may be considered first in terms of the cash statement In fiscal year cash expenditures of the Federal Government were reduced substantially from the postwar peak reached in fiscal year ( Table B-17 ) ; cuts in national security expenditures accounted for the T A B L E B Federal receipts and expenditures : Conventional budget and consolidated cash statement [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipts or expenditures Conventional budget : Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) _ Consolidated cash statement : Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) _ ( esti ( estimated ) mated ) ) Cash surplus of million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because o Grounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget bulk of the total reduction of billion dollars. A further reduction estimated at billion dollars is being made in the current fiscal year For fiscal year cash expenditures are estimated at billion dollars that is billion less than estimated for fiscal year but billion below fiscal year ( Chart p. ) Cash receipts for fiscal year were billion dollars approximately equal to those of fiscal year Receipts did not fall in fiscal year in mainly because of the relatively high tax collections from corporations reflecting the profits realized in calendar year In fiscal year however receipts are expected to fall to billion dollars due to the effect of the recent contraction in economic activity and of various tax reductions as follows : The excess profits tax was repealed effective January On the basis of profits this action reduced tax liabilities of corporations by an estimated billion dollars Personal income taxes were reduced by about percent in the lower and middle income brackets and by amounts graduating down to between and percent in the highest brackets. These changes which also became effective on January are expected to reduce receipts for fiscal year by about billion dollars An excise tax reduction was enacted effective April which it is estimated will reduce receipts from selected excises during fiscal year by about billion dollars. With a few exceptions all ad valorem taxes previously ranging from to percent were reduced to percent and the rates on many household appliances were reduced from to percent A program of structural tax changes was enacted under the Internal Revenue Code of Many of these changes were designed to encourage economic growth ; they include more liberal depreciation allowances a tax credit to reduce double taxation of dividends a lengthening from one to two years of the period over which net business losses may be carried back and more liberal tax treatment of research and development expenditures of business. Other revisions designed to correct inequities include increased allowances for medical expenses and for certain dependents a new allowance for child-care expenses and more liberal rules governing the personal tax treatment of medical insurance and sick benefits received by employees. It is estimated that these structural revisions will reduce receipts in fiscal year by approximately billion dollars On the other hand on January old-age insurance contributions rose from 1J4 percent to percent of covered earnings for both employers and employees raising cash receipts by an estimated billion dollars in fiscal year The changes made by the Social Security Amendments of in the coverage of the old-age insurance system and in the base for computing contributions will have relatively small revenue effects until fiscal year Altogether last year 's tax reductions totaled approximately billion dollars on a full-year basis while social security contributions increased billion dollars producing a net reduction in cash receipts of billion dollars. For fiscal year the net reduction was somewhat over a half billion dollars ; for fiscal year it has been estimated at only billion dollars less than the full-year effect of billion dollars The deficit in the cash budget of the Federal Government for fiscal year when national security expenditures were at their post-World War II peak was billion dollars. Guts in expenditures reduced the deficit to billion dollars in fiscal year Despite a continued drop in expenditures the cash deficit in fiscal year is expected to be billion dollars primarily because of the loss in revenues resulting from the recent decline in economic activity and the tax reductions made last year. For fiscal year a cash surplus of billion dollars is expected as expenditures are cut further and receipts rise in response to economic expansion The margin between expenditures and receipts of the Federal Government during the past few years has been considerably larger in the conventional budget than in the cash budget ( Chart p. ) Unlike the cash budget the conventional budget includes intra-governmental transactions and eliminates the transactions of the Social Security and other TABLE B-18. Effect of financial operations on the Federal debt [ Fiscallyears billions of dollars ] ( esti ( estimated ) mated ) Item Budget deficit Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in Treasury general fund balance Other transactions * Federal debt outstanding : > Beginning of the year Increase during the year- End of the year. Increase in d e b t i Includes changes in the clearing account for outstanding checks net expenditures ( including investments ) of trust accounts and other transactions * Securities issued or guaranteed by the U S Government excluding guaranteed securities held by the Treasury Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget trust funds. Since these trust funds now accumulate substantial surpluses the conventional budget provides a less accurate measure than the cash budget of the impact of Federal finances on the economy. In the conventional budget the Federal Government ran a deficit of billion dollars in fiscal year This was reduced to billion dollars in fiscal year and is expected to be billion dollars in the current fiscal year. In fiscal year the deficit in the conventional budget is expected to be billion dollars ( Table B-17 ) The Federal debt including debt held by trust funds and other investment accounts of the Federal Government as well as that held by the public amounted to billion dollars at the beginning of fiscal year Although as pointed out above the conventional budget deficit was billion dollars in fiscal year the public debt increased by only billion to billion dollars because billion of the deficit was financed by drawing down the Treasury 's cash balance ( Table B-18 ) In fiscal " year the Federal debt increased by billion dollars to billion dollars. Of this increase billion represented the amount necessary to finance the budget deficit and billion represented the net effect of an increase in the Treasury 's cash balance less minor offsetting items The net cash borrowing of the Federal Government in both years was considerably less than the increase in the Federal debt mainly because part of the increase consisted of securities issued to trust funds and government agencies and another part reflected accrued discount on savings bonds and bills. Were it not for year-to-year changes in the Treasury 's cash balances the net amount of cash borrowing from the public or of cash repayments to the public in any given year would closely approximate the cash deficit or cash surplus for that year STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCES : CASH ACCOUNT The combined cash expenditures of State and local governments ( exclusive of Federal grants-in-aid ) were billion dollars in fiscal year TABLE B-19. Consolidated cash statements of Federal State and local governments [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipts or payments Federal Government : Cash receipts Cash payments Federal cash surplus or deficit ( ) State and local governments : Cash receipts Cash payments State and local cash surplus or deficit ( ) Total government : Cash receipts Cash payments Total cash surplus or deficit ( ) ) Cash surplus of million dollars Estimates by the Council of Economic Advisers on the basis of incomplete data NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) and billion dollars in fiscal year Both current operating expenses and capital outlays increased. The increase in current expenditures reflected higher wages and salaries and larger employment. Expenditures on school and road construction accounted for most of the increase in capital outlays. Receipts of State and local governments also continued to rise in though at a slower pace. Cash receipts and expenditures of all State and local governments combined have been fairly close to balance during the past three years ( Table B-19 ) Corresponding figures on the basis of conventional budgets are not available According to preliminary estimates the gross debt of State and local governments rose from billion dollars at the end of fiscal year to billion dollars at the end of reflecting increased outlays on schools highways and other public improvements. Borrowing to finance self-liquidating projects was an important factor in this rise. Nevertheless the debt of State and local governments is a much smaller percentage of the gross national product than it was during the prewar years ( Table B-20 ) T A B L E B -Gross State and local government debt : total and as percent of gross product Gross debt ( billions of dollars current prices ) Year Total State Local national Gross debt of State and local governments as percent of gross national product 1950_ 1951_ * Fiscal year for debt calendar year for gross national product s As of June Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers The fact that the gross debt of all State and local governments combined rose substantially at a time when their cash budgets were almost balanced is explained by the large increases in their holdings of cash and securities. Part of these assets are held in retirement funds for government employees and sinking funds. Therefore although the cash and security holdings of State and local governments are large in relation to their annual expenditures only a part of these are available for current operating expenses or for capital outlays RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS : NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS Total government purchases of goods and services Federal State and local rose to a post-World War II peak of billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) in the second quarter of calendar year They were only slightly lower in the fourth quarter of that year as an increase in State and local government purchases offset part of the decline in purchases by the Federal Government. During these trends continued but the decline in Federal purchases was more pronounced ( Chart p. ) In the last quarter of total government purchases of goods and services were being made at an annual rate of billion dollars or billion less than the peak rate reached a year and a half earlier ( Appendix Table D l ) The decline in Federal purchases of goods and services was due primarily to a reduction in national security outlays. Following three years of growth these outlays reached an annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of more than three times the pre-Korean rate. By the end of they were reduced to an annual rate of billion dollars the lowest level since State and local government purchases of goods and services rose to billion dollars in up billion from This increase was considerably above those of the preceding four years and applied to all major types of goods and services purchased with new construction showing the greatest proportionate rise Total receipts and expenditures of Federal State and local governments as shown in the national income accounts are given in Table B-21 for Tax reductions and increases in transfer payments ( principally unemployment compensation and social security benefits ) offset the recent decline in purchases of goods and services by the Federal Government Because business taxes are shown on an accrual basis in the national income accounts these accounts reflected the effect on Federal receipts of the contraction in economic activity and the tax reductions more promptly than did the cash and conventional budgets. This is particularly noticeable in the second half of and in the first half of For State and local governments the national income accounts showed a rising trend of both receipts and expenditures during and A reconciliation between Federal receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts and those in the cash and conventional budgets for fiscal years is given in Table B-22. The concepts and methods used in preparing the estimates of government receipts and expenditures for the national income accounts are discussed in detail in National Income Edition A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Department of Commerce pp. n6 T A B L E B-21. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts [ Calendar years billions of dollars } Keceipt or expenditure First SecFirst SecTotal halfi ond Total halfi ond halfi halfi Total Government : Eeceipts Expenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) Federal Government : Receipts : Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Total receiptsExpenditures : Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid-14 Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises : '9.7 Total expenditures 70.fi Excess of [ receipts or of expenditures ( ) State and local governments : Receipts : Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals. _ Contributions for social insurance Federal grants-in-aid Total receipts.. Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Net interest paid_ Less : Current surplus of government enterprises Total expenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) * Seasonally adjusted annual rates NOTES. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected In Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been ad Justed to eliminate this duplication Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers T A B L E B Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures as shown in th national income accounts with receipts and expenditures [ as reported in the consolidated cash statement and the conventional budget [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure National income accounts : Receipts Expenditures Excess of expenditures ( ) Reconciliation of receipts : Receipts as shown in the national income accounts Less : Excess of taxes included in national income accounts over cash collections : Personal Corporate profits _ _ Other -_ Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds _ Veterans life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Plus : Realization upon loans and investments Interest dividends and other earnings Proceeds from sale of government property Recoveries refunds and other adjustments District of Columbia revenues Trust fund receipts not included in national income receipts Statistical errors and omissions Equals : Consolidated cash receipts _ Less : Trust fund receipts ___ _ Plus : Inter-fund transactions _ Seigniorage Equals : Conventional budget receipts Reconciliation of expenditures : Expenditures as shown in the national income accountsFederal Government contributions to Employee retirement funds Veterans life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds. Accrued discount on savings bonds and bills less interest paid on savings bonds and bills redeemed Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed nonrecourse loans Excess of goods delivered to Government over payment therefor Miscellaneous adjustments Plus : Loans excluding Commodity Credit Corporation Interest received and proceeds of government sales netted out of national income expenditures District of Columbia expenditures Renegotiation adjustment _ Purchase of land and existing assets Trust and deposit fund expenditures not included in national income expenditures Other adjustments Statistical errors and omissions Equals : Consolidated cash expenditures Less : Trust account expenditures Plus : Inter-fund transactions Net accrued interest and other noncash transactions Equals : Conventional budget expenditures _ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department u8 VI. Foreign Economic Developments In general the expansion that marked production and trade in the Free World outside the United States in was continued in Industrial output maintained its strong upward movement in Western Europe a highly significant development from the standpoint of the Free World economy and reached a record level rising percent in the third quarter of over the corresponding period of the preceding year ( Table B-23 ) TABLE B-23. Growthjtf Western European industrial production selected countries Percentage increase from Country or area Third quarter Third quarter to third to third quarter quarter All OEEO countries France Western Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom g Source : OEEC Statistical Bulletin Although some raw material prices declined on balance the movement was upward. World trade volume also increased slightly over the level of Foreign holdings of gold and dollars increased by an estimated billion dollars during the year to a record amount of nearly billion dollars The gold and dollar holdings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development rose by million dollars These developments were mutually reinforcing. The expansion of industrial production played a strong part in maintaining world raw material prices at a time when United States demand was declining. The steadiness of these prices helped support the economic position of many raw material exporting countries which helped maintain a high level of demand for the exports of the industrial countries. These conditions combined with United States military expenditures abroad other United States Government credits and grants and foreign gold production enabled most countries especially those in Western Europe to augment their reserves of gold and dollars. Increased reserves and an improved balance in the trading relations among countries of the Free World enabled a number of nations to liberalize further their import policies including relaxation of restrictions against dollar imports. Notwithstanding a decline in United States imports in United States exports were maintained at a level slightly above which was a stabilizing factor in the United States economy. And in avoiding serious contraction the United States economy in its turn operated to sustain confidence throughout the Free World RISING INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ABROAD Several factors account for Western Europe 's strong performance in industrial production in recent years. Perhaps the fundamental ones were greater political stability and the successful attack on inflation by sound fiscal and monetary policies which led to the dismantling of many direct government controls. These factors combined to restore confidence in the value of money to stimulate savings and investment and to encourage private enterprise. In the improving atmosphere investment in plant and equipment and residential construction expanded. More plentiful supplies of materials for production helped to raise productivity During the past year production in Western Europe received a special impetus from sharply rising consumer demand and expanding export markets. The increase of consumer expenditures was supported in some countries by the readier availability of consumer credit. It was accompanied by only a nominal increase in price levels because productivity advanced and imports remained available at fairly stable prices Not all countries outside Western Europe experienced a high rate of increase in industrial production during the year. Japanese production was increasing early in but leveled off in the spring mainly owing to the cessation of hostilities in Korea. Price inflation which was unchecked at the beginning of the year was ended by measures to tighten credit. These had the effect of reducing the demand for imports and increasing exports In Canada industrial production followed a course somewhat similar to that in the United States though the decline was less. Other countries outside Europe that did show substantial growth included Australia Brazil India and the Union of South Africa. The performance in each case reflected the stimulus of new investment activity FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION The volume of agricultural production outside the United States appears to have been maintained in at about the same level as in While coarse-grain production in Western Europe was about percent less than in the exceptionally good harvest year of most other categories of farm production held up well. Most areas of free Asia had some expansion of output in the crop year mainly of rice and cotton. In Latin America production of coffee lagged while that of corn rice sugar and tobacco increased Significant declines in agricultural production occurred during the year in Canada Turkey and Australia in each case chiefly as a result of poor harvests. Canada 's wheat output was only about half that of the very good harvest of The wheat harvests of Turkey and Australia also decreased sharply. Wool production in Australia however registered a gain The physical supply of major agricultural commodities entering the world market continued to be abundant PAYMENTS RESERVES AND EXCHANGE RATES Most countries of the Free World continued to improve their international financial position in although the improvement was generally less rapid than during The improvement was the result of the increased volume and better balance of world trade and of continued large United States expenditures abroad under the Mutual Security and other programs Most countries of Western Europe showed a marked improvement in their balance of payments during the year. Germany continued to have a large trade surplus in spite of further liberalization of restrictions on imports from Europe and the dollar area. Switzerland and the Netherlands both of which have large surpluses on current account increased their foreign lending In Latin America the record for the year was not uniform among countries. For the area as a whole gold and dollar reserves did not change substantially ; several countries experienced moderate increases in their reserves and others lost reserves. The short-term external debt of the area increased mostly as a result of changes in Brazil 's position. Formal currency devaluations occurred in Chile and Mexico while the Government of Brazil increased its buying rate for exchange arising from coffee exports In general monetary reserves increased for the Free World outside the United States and at the end of they were more evenly distributed in relation to trade volume and international liabilities than at any other time in recent decades. At the end of the year gold and dollar reserves in the various areas were as follows : Continental Western Europe billion dollars ; sterling area billion dollars ; Canada billion dollars ; and Latin America billion dollars. The trend in such holdings since is shown in Appendix Table E-57 UNITED STATES TRADE W I T H FOREIGN COUNTRIES The principal changes between the first ten months of and the corresponding ten months of in the foreign trade of the United States were a reduction of about percent in merchandise imports and a percent increase in exports excluding military transfers under aid programs ; and for the first nine months a decline of about percent in military transfers Highlights of the movement of nonmilitary merchandise trade are shown in Table B-24 which compares results for the ten-month periods in the two years by major trading areas. Merchandise exports to Continental Western Europe increased by percent and those to Latin America by TABLE B-24. Distribution of nonmilitary merchandise exports and imports of the United States by areas \ January-October and [ Millions of dollars ] Imports Exports Area January- January- January- JanuaryOctober October October October _ Total Continental Western Europe * United Kingdom ____- .._ Canada * Latin America * Sterling area exclusive of the United Kingdom Other i OEEC countries excluding the United Kingdom Ireland and Iceland ; also includes Finland ! Spain and Yugoslavia * Includes " special category " exports Source : Department of Commerce percent. On the other hand United States shipments to Canada declined approximately percent. There was a small decline in United States imports from all areas shown UNITED STATES LONG-TERM INVESTMENT IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES Net private United States long-term foreign investment during increased over the preceding year ( Table B-25 ) Net direct investments in foreign branches and subsidiaries of United States businesses were about the same as in while net United States purchases of foreign stocks and bonds and long-term bank loans ( portfolio investments ) changed from a negative amount in to a positive sum in The aggregate net outflow of long-term United States capital amounted to slightly less than billion dollars in During the year United States private investors received from foreign sources an estimated billion dollars of interest dividends and branch profits. It should be noted that the record in TABLE B-25. Net private United States long-term foreign investment by areas and * [ Millions of dollars ] Direct investments Area Continental Western Europe United Kingdom Canada Latin America Sterling area exclusive of United Kingdom Other f * Total * Minus sign indicates inflow into the United States * Includes new issues redemptions and other private long-term investment * January-September data at annual rates Includes international institutions Source : Department of Commerce * Portfolio Investments Table B-25 covers the net not the gross outflow of long-term private capital during the year. Moreover Table B-25 excludes earnings reinvested by foreign subsidiaries of United States companies which have averaged about million dollars annually since The largest amount of United States new direct investments continued to be made in Canada. However direct investments in Latin America and " other " areas chiefly the Middle East countries were also of considerable importance. Most of the funds were placed in petroleum and manufacturing industries United States investors in increased their portfolio investments in Canada and in the obligations of international institutions while their portfolio investments in other areas showed a decline During the year net foreign direct investments in the United States and net purchases of United States securities other than government securities not shown in Table B-25 are estimated at million dollars UNITED STATES BALANCE OF PAYMENTS There was little change between and in the export balance on goods and services of the United States when military-aid shipments are included with United States exports and military expenditures abroad are treated as United States imports ( Chart B-9 ) However it is estimated CHART B-9 U. S. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS ON CURRENT ACCOUNT BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS GOODS AND SERV.CES S EXPORTS EXCLUDING MILITARY GRANTS- T T A L E X P R T S " L CURRENTACCOUNT WW&ZM&i&P ' IMPORTS EXCLUDING U.S. MILITARY EXPENDITURES ABROADi/ I I I I I ( I I i / INCLUDES UNILATERAL TRANSFERS OTHER THAN U. S. GOVERNMENT GRANTS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS on the basis of preliminary data through November that the current account of the United States excluding transfers of military aid goods but including United States military expenditures abroad will show a surplus for in the neighborhood of million dollars ( Appendix Table D-55 ) This contrasts with a balance in this account during The net movement of private capital from the United States combined with nonmilitary grants much more than offset the current account deficit of other countries with the United States in Thus the Free World continued to build up economic and financial strength in adjusting itself to a reduction of United States economic aid ( including loans ) in recent years and to the mild contraction of in the United States. Foreign gold and dollar reserves have continued to increase and at the end of the year were nearly billion dollars above reserves six years earlier Changes since in the current account balances between major trading areas and the United States shown in detail through in Appendix Table D-55 indicate the progress that has been made in balancing current trade with the United States. In the world 's current account deficit with the United States was billion dollars which was considerably in excess of the value of all United States imports of goods and services. The deficit of Continental Western Europe amounted to billion dollars ; that of the sterling area to billion ; of Canada to billion ; and of Latin America to billion. By when the world achieved approximate balance in current transactions with the United States both Continental Western Europe and the sterling area showed a current account surplus with the United States while Latin America registered a slight deficit and Canada a deficit of nearly a billion dollars Preliminary data for indicate an increase in the sterling area current account surplus with the United States a decline in Continental Western Europe 's surplus a slight decrease in the Canadian deficit and a small increase in the Latin American deficit. Both Canada and Latin America however continued to attract substantial quantities of long-term capital from the United States which largely offset their current account deficits Appendix C REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report for the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ARTHUR F. BURNS Chairman * NEIL H. JAGOBY WALTER W. STEWART Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Employment Act of declaring it to be the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power established the Council of Economic Advisers within the Executive Office of the President. In its relation to the President the Council functions in the economic realm in many respects as the Joint Chiefs of Staff function in military matters While the Council is merely one of numerous agencies within the Executive Branch that deal with economic affairs it is unique in that it is a purely advisory agency without routine administrative duties of any sort. The Council gives its undivided attention to analyzing how the entire economy is faring to exploring ways and means of adding to its strength and to advising the President on appropriate economic policies Major Activities During the Tear The Council assisted the President in the preparation of his Economic Report to the Congress transmitted January Since this was the first Economic Report of the present Administration it was important that it describe fully how the Administration proposed to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. Accordingly the Report analyzed the proper role of the Government in working toward these objectives diagnosed the existing economic situation and set forth recommendations of the legislation needed to attain the objectives stated in the Employment Act. Following the transmittal of the Report to the Congress the Chairman of the Council met with the Joint Committee on the Economic Report to discuss the findings and recommendations of the Report The Council continued the task of reviewing economic trends and the Federal Government 's economic programs and policies. Special attention was given to ways of marshalling the forces of recovery and to stimulating the long-term expansion of the economy. The Council also assisted the President in planning and preparing the Economic Report to be transmittedjn January A representative of the Council generally the Chairman reported personally to the President on economic matters once a week sometimes more often. A representative of the Council also appeared regularly at Cabinet meetings to present the Council 's thinking about the state of the economy and ways of dealing with the changing economic situation Need for Improving Economic Intelligence In view of the heavy responsibilities assumed by the Federal Government under the Employment Act the Council has called to the personal attention of the President as well as of the Cabinet and Congressional Committees the need for improving our economic intelligence The Council has urged various statistical agencies of the Federal Government to accelerate the reporting of economic information. Notable progress has been made in timely reporting of changes in employment hours and earnings of nonagricultural workers retail sales exports and imports and industrial production In its efforts to improve economic information as well as in other matters the Council has worked closely with the Joint Committee on the Economic Report. In response to a request by the Joint Committee 's Subcommittee on Economic Statistics the Council submitted a memorandum on tour categories of statistical needs : more prompt and frequent reporting desirable improvements of existing data desirable improvements in their presentation and desirable additions to existing information. The Chairman of the Council supplemented this memorandum with personal testimony before the Committee which was published in hearings before the Subcommittee on Economic Statistics of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report Eighty-Third Congress Second Session July and In cooperation with the Joint Committee the Council also undertook a review of Economic Indicators which is a monthly statistical compendium prepared by the Council and issued by the Committee. In the course of this appraisal the Council and the Joint Committee received the benefit of suggestions from business and labor organizations and from professional economists in universities government and private research agencies The review disclosed that Economic Indicators could be readily improved in a number of ways. Some improvements have already been put into effect and others will follow shortly Public Works Planning At the President 's request the Council extended its activity in the field of public works planning. With the aid of a special appropriation from the Congress a Coordinator of Public Works Planning was appointed to the Council 's staff and authorized to recruit a small group of experts on public works. Among other accomplishments considerable progress has been made by this unit toward devising a system of cataloguing information on all Federal State and local public works projects under serious consideration showing the type of project its location estimated cost financing status stage of planning and how soon construction could be started if funds were available. As a result of the work of this unit the Federal Government is better prepared than previously to accelerate public construction if the need for doing so should arise Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability The Council has received continuing valuable assistance from the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability. This Board established by the President in mid-1953 assures close liaison between the Council and government agencies that have administrative responsibility for various economic programs. It also provides the Council with timely information and advice on a wide range of current economic issues. The exchange of views that takes place at the Board 's weekly meetings is of great help to the Council in its deliberations and in the preparation of its reports to the President and the Cabinet The present membership of the Board is as follows : Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Walter Williams Under Secretary Department of Labor Arthur Larson Under Secretary Department of State Samuel Waugh Assistant Secretary Department of the Treasury Marion B. Folsom Under Secretary Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Mills Member of the Board Bureau of the Budget Donald R. Belcher Assistant Director The White House Office Gabriel Hauge Administrative Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Arthur F. Burns Chairman Work with Other Agencies In addition to its work with the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability the Council maintained liaison with other policy-making and advisory groups in the Executive Branch including the National Security Council Operations Coordinating Board Defense Mobilization Board and National Advisory Council on International Financial and Monetary Problems The Council also organized five interagency task forces of staff experts to study intensively the following subjects : raising the status of low-income families Federal credit aids to private construction public works planning measures for dealing with local unemployment and ways of strengthening the financial system Most government agencies have participated one way or another in the Council 's work. Many have prepared special tabulations and made comprehensive analyses at the request of the Council. In particular the Council has been aided by the reports it has received on how long-term growth in various segments of our economy may be promoted. More than a score of experts from other agencies have given the Council the benefit of their specialized knowledge through membership on various task forces and the Auxiliary Staff Committee which is an adjunct of the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability Private research agencies have shown no less willingness than government agencies to assist the Council in carrying out its responsibilities. Two of these the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Brookings Institution have arranged conferences with professional economists for the benefit of the Council. In addition to assuming the burden of making detailed arrangements for such conferences these institutions have paid all costs incident to them In conformity with Section ( e ) of the Employment Act the Council has met frequently with business labor and agricultural groups. These exchanges of views on economic policies and developments have proved very helpful to the Council Other Activities Mr. Neil H. Jacoby participated in two meetings held in Paris of the Organization of European Economic Cooperation and associated countries The first in April was a meeting of experts to exchange views on economic conditions and prospects. The second meeting in September considered in addition the written submission to the OEEC on United States economic developments and outlook which had been prepared by the Council Members of the Council 's staff participated in training conferences and seminars held by other government agencies for new employees and visiting foreign experts. Staff members also served on a number of interagency committees initiated by other agencies The Council handled a large volume of correspondence on economic questions some of which was received directly but a considerable part of which was referred by other agencies and by the White House The Council and Its Staffing On February the Senate confirmed the President 's recess appointments of two members of the Council Mr. Neil H. Jacoby and Mr. Walter W. Stewart. Mr. Jacoby had been serving since September and Mr. Stewart since December A number of changes were made in the Council 's staff during the year Five experts who had joined the staff from university faculties with the understanding that they would remain with the Council for not more than one year returned to their teaching posts. These men were replaced and several additions to the senior staff were also made. The rebuilding of the staff which the Council began after it was reconstituted last year is now largely completed At present the full staff including detailed personnel and consultants consists of persons. The following are members of the senior staff : Asher Achinstein John S. Bragdon Lowell J. Chawner George H. Deming Karl A. Fox Bert G. Hickman Frances M. James E. Gordon Keith David W. Lusher John A. Meek Joseph A. Pechman Albert E. Rees Virgil Salera Raymond J. Sauinier Charles L. Schultze Irving H. Siegel and Collis Stocking As previously staff assignments are made by the Council so that developments in every major field embraced by the Council 's responsibilities industrial production agriculture construction work employment and unemployment wages and prices the national income and its distribution money and banking public finance international trade and finance technological developments business organization social security public works planning etc. are under the scrutiny of a senior staff member Each of these experts is responsible for eliciting the cooperation of governmental and private specialists in analyzing and evaluating the significance of current developments in the field assigned to him Budget for Fiscal Years and During fiscal year the Council 's obligations ( including $ for the office of the Economic Adviser to the President from July to August ) were $ The appropriation made available to the Council for this period was $ The Council requested $ for fiscal year Of this amount $ was for a Coordinator of Public Works Planning and members of his staff. The Congress appropriated $ plus the unobligated balance from the preceding year 's appropriation. Since this balance came to $ the Council has $ at its disposal for the current fiscal year Appendix D STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National income or expenditure : Pagt D ~ l. Gross national product or expenditure D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices D-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices D-4. Gross private and government product in current and prices D-5. The Nation 's income expenditure and saving D-6. Personal consumption expenditures D-7. Gross private domestic investment D-8. National income by distributive shares D-9. Relation of national income and personal income D-10. Sources of personal income D-l Disposition of personal income D-12. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and prices D-13. Liquid saving by individuals D-14. Sources and uses of gross saving D-l Realized gross and net income of farm operators from farming average and Employment and wages : D-16. Total population years of age and over and the labor force D-l Employment and unemployment by age and by sex for year group D-l Employed persons with a job but not at work by reason for not working D-l Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment D-20. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and D-21. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 1929-f D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries D-24. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Production and business activity : D-26. Industrial production indexes D-27. Farm production indexes D-28. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and D-29. New construction activity D-30. New public construction activity D-31. New nonfarm housing starts by source of funds and by type of structure Production and business activity Continued Page D-32. Private nonfarm housing starts and proposed home construction : Government underwritten D Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade D-34. Manufacturers ' new orders sales and inventories Prices : D-35. Wholesale price indexes D-36. Consumer price indexes D-37. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio D Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign countries selected dates Credit money supply and Federal finance : D-39. Short-and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding D-40. Instalment credit extended and repaid D-41. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property mortgaged D-42. Deposits and currency D-43. Loans and investments of all commercial banks D-44. Member bank reserves and Reserve Bank credit D-45. U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations D-46. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations D-47. Bond yields and interest rates D-48. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public calendar years Corporate profits and finance : D-49. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations D-50 Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and D-51. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and D-52. Sources and uses of corporate funds D-53. Current assets and liabilities of all corporations D-54. Business population and business failures International transactions : D-55. United States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services D U. S. Government grants and capital movements to foreign countries D-57. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and D-58. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption and of domestic merchandise exports by economic class average and Summary : D-59. Changes in selected economic series since and since NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE T A B L E D-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private domestic investment Period Total gross national prod uct Personal consumption expenditures New construction Federal Net foreign investment : i o __ Government purchases of goods and services ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter, Second quarterThird quarterFourth quarter : First quarter__ Second quarter Third quarter-r Fourth quarter See appendix table D-6 for major components * See appendix table D-7 for more detail and explanation of components P For " national security " expenditures include the items classified as such in The Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO The items are : military services International security and foreign relations development and control of atomic energy promotion of merchant marine promotion of defense production and economic stabilization and civil defense. These expenditures are not comparable with the " national security " category in the Budget for the Fiscal Year ending June " National defense " expenditures for goods and services correspond more closely to the new Budget definition ; they include items shown under the national security classification in the Budget and in addition defense production and economic stabilization military manpower selection promotion of aviation ( National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics only ) and civil defense. National d e fense expenditures for goods and services since are as follows : billion dollars ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; and billion Not available separately * Less than million dollars * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totasl because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices * [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Gross private domestic investment New construction Total gross Pro- Change Nonnational in ducers ' busiResiproduct Total Dur- du- Serv- Total able rable ices durable ness dengoods goods Total tial Other equip- invenment ( nontories farm ) _> ._ * ' : m : See footnotes at end of table O Q TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices -Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Government purchases of goods and services Net foreign investment Period Federal Total Total _ _ * _ _ ( ) ( ) ( } i ( ) i i i ( i ) ( ) _ _ Other State and local National security ( ( ) ( ) These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See appendix table D-3. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on " change in business inventories. " Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in ^ this table. See appendix table D l for Government sales in current prices See appendix table D l footnote Not available separately Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices * [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Gross private domestic investment Total gross naPro- Change tional New ducin prodDu- Non- Servducon- ers ' busiuct Total rable rable ices Total struc- duness goods goods rable tion equip- invenment tories Government purchases of goods and services Net Gross forprieign vate inprodState vestment Total Fed- and uct * eral local '.9 See National Income Edition A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business for explanation of 2conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices and for implicit deflators Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) I4O TABLE D-4. Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] Current prices prices Gross Gross private product Total Gross private product * govern- Total gross gross ment national national prod- product Total Farm Nonproduct Total Farm Nonuct * farm farm Year Gross government products 1954< _ Gross national product less compensation of general government employees ; i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world * See Survey of Current Business August pp. for estimates in both current and prices and for the implicit price deflators Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-5. The Nation 's income expenditure and saving [ Billions of dollars ] Economic group Consumers : Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures __-_---_ Personal net saving ( ) Business : Gross retained earnings Gross private domestic investment Excess of investment ( ) __ Excess Excess Excess of reof reof reEx- ceipts ReEx- ceipts ReEx- ceipts Re- pendi- ( ) ( ) ( ) ceipts tures or ex- ceipts pendi- or ex- ceipts pendi- or extures penditures pendipenditures tures tures ( ) ( ) ( ) Net receipts ~ ~ ~ ~ Purchases of goods and services Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) on income and product account Gross national product " I8.T Total government expenditures Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) Statistical discrepancy International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Government ( Federal State and local ) : Tax and nontax receipts or accruals Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) i Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) 14a TABLE D-6. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Period Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services personal consumpAutotion moex- Total biles Other Total Food * Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other ing ' ing ' and pendiparts tures Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half * : First quarter Second quarter. Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter. : First quarter.... Second quarter. Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter * i Includes alcoholic beverages Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel * Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Dotail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-7. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Total Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment gross plant and equipment and construction private doConConmestic nvest- Total i Equip- struc- Total * Equip- strucment tion * ment tion ment Period Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Other Net change In pri- business inventories vate construcNontion * Total farm Farm i ( .i I I _ -i ! o ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter.. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter. Fourth quarter * i Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment are not comparable with those shown in appendix table D-28 principally because the latter exclude equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense and also investment by nonprofit organizations and professional persons * Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and fanners ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles * Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private construction After revaluation adjustment ' Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-8. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Business and proCorporate profits fessional income and inventory and inventory valuation valuation adjustment In- Rentadjustment Comcome al inTotal penNet of naIn- inIn- farm come Intional sation of ven- terest ven- pro- perin- of emcome Cor- tory tory prie- sons come ployof ees porate valuunin- valuTotal corpo- ation tors ' Total profits ation before adrated adtaxes * justjustenter- ment ment prises Period fi. i ( ) ( ) _ ) -t ( s ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half 6__ : First quarter __ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ! i i National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes * Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to farm inventories during the period * See appendix table D-49 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Departments Oommerce. ( exceptjas noted ) TABLE D-9. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Period Equals : Plus : Less : CorpoExcess rate of profits ContriNational and in- butions wage acincome venfor tory social cruals over valu- insurdisation ance burseadjustments ment Government transfer payments Net interest paid by government Dividends Business Pertrans- sonal fer pay- income ments * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half * : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter i_ Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) I46 TABLE D-10. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Period Proprietors ' Labor income income * ( wage and Rental Per- TransTotal salary income Divi- sonal fer paypersonal disburseBusiof dends interest ments income ments income and other Farm ness and persons profeslabor sional income ) * Less : Personal Noncontri- agriculbutions tural for personal social income insurance * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First h a l f Second half : First h a l f Second half : First quarter Second quarterThird quarterFourth quarter : First q u a r t e r Second quarterThird quarterFourth quarter * * The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of emoyees in appendix table D-8 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and ] includes plo e the excess of wage disbursements over wage accruals Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to inventories during the period * Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D l Disposition of personal income Equals : Equals : Personal income Personal taxes l Period Dispos- Personal conPersonal able personal sumption saving expendiincome tures Saving as percent of disposable personal income Billions of dollars .__ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half _ Second half * : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.-_ Fourth quarter * Includes also such items as fines penalties and donations Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-12. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and 1954prices Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Per capita disposable personal income ( dollars ) Period Current prices prices i Current prices Population ( thousands ) * prices i [ i [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half. : First half.. Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter> _._ * Dollar estimates in current prices divided by consumer price index on a base using data through November Population of continental United States including armed forces overseas. Annual data are as of July ; quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-13. Liquid saving by individuals l [ Billions of dollars ] Period Cur * Total rency liquid and saving bank deposits * Insurance and Sav- pension reserves ings and loan Govassocia- Total Pri- ern- Total vate ment tions LiquiLiqui- dation of dation debt of not U S Other Cor- mort- elsesav- gov- porate gaee where ings ern- and debts classibonds ment * other fied Securities _ : First half Second half : First half : First quarter... Second quarter Third quarter.- Fourth quarter : First quarter.-. Second quarter Third quarter.. * Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust and pension funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified. Liquid saving comprises saving in the form of currency and bank deposits equity in savings and loan associations private and Government insurance securities and repayment of mortgage debt and other consumer debt * Includes currency demand deposits and time and savings deposits Does not include net purchases by brokers and dealers or by other individualsfinancedby bank loans * Includes armed forces leave bonds and other U. S. Government bonds ( except savings bonds ) and all securities issued by State and local governments * Mortgage debt to institutions on to 4-family nonfarm dwellings * Largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumers ' goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. The other segments of individuals ' debt have been allocated to the assets to which they pertain viz. saving in insurance and securities NOTE. In addition to the concept of liquid saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The series with the most complete coverage the personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce is derived as the difference between personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included with SEC liquid saving : Housing net of depreciation unincorporated business and farm items such as net plant and equipment changes in net receivables and changes in inventories. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see table of National Income Edition A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-14. Sources and uses of gross savings [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Period Total Total Personal saving Gross busi- Total ness saving Federal State and local Gross investment Gross private Net fordomes- eign inTotal tic in- vestvestment ment Statistical discrepancy 1932_ ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half.. : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. -Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) a TABLE D-15. Realized gross and net income of farm operators from farming average and * Realized net Realized net Infarm income come per farm Realized Farm gross producfarm tion income expenses Cur1954 Current rent prices > prices prices prices Period Millions of dollars average. _ .__ Realized net farm income as percent of gross farm income prices ( percent ) Realized net income per farm family worker Current prices Dollars Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half. : First half Second half _ : First quarter Second quarter. Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter i Includes Government payments but r unlike the net farm income series of appendix tables D-8 and D-10 includes income resulting from net farm inventory reductions but gives no credit as income for net additions to farm inventories Based on the latest revisions of the series on cash receipts from farm marketings and production expenses which the farm income series of appendix tables D-8 and D-10 have not yet taken fully into account * Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items converted from the reported base = * to the base = ^ Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE D Total population 14years of age and over and the labor force Period Civilian labor force Total Total Unemploylabor labor ment as Total force Armed Employment * force as popu- ( includ- forces * Unem- percent Per ? of civillation i ing ploy- of total ian Total armed popuAgricul- Non- ment lation labor forces ) i agriTotal tural force cultural Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent 68-area sample Monthly average : 62,1Q5 ~ Revised series * : First half.. Second half : January February March. April May June .July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE D-16. Total population 14years of age and over and the labor force Con Period Total labor Total force Armed popu- ( includ- forces lation ' ing Total armed UnemTotal ploylabor force as ment as percent Employment percent Unem- of total of civilian ploypopuNon Agricul- agrilabor lation ment Total tural force cultural Civilian labor force Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent 230-area sample Monthly average : * : First h a l f Second half.. ! ! : January February March April May June July. August September October November December i Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside of the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from estimates Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary layoff and industrial disputes Pertains to civilian labor force data only Monthly averages except for population estimates which are for the middle of the period. See appendix table D-12 for total population of all ages Labor force data for have been revised by the use of a new estimating procedure to provide greater comparability with the data from the 230-area sample and to improve the reliability of the data themselves. For a description of the revisions see Current Population Reports : Labor Force Series P-57 No. January Data of appendix tables D-17 D-18 and D-19 are as originally published by the Department of Commerce NOTE. Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month Monthly population data are for the 1st of the month Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor ( labor force ) and [ Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-17. Employment and unemployment by age and by sex for year group [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed > Total civilian labor force Period years Total Unemployed years FeMales males years and over Total years years FeMales males years and over 68-area sample Monthly average : _._ : First half... Second half. : January February March April... May June _ July August September October November December : January February _ | ___ 230-area sample Monthly average : : First half... Second half. : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ 64,0H3 i Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary layoff and industrial disputes NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age and age/sex groups above Data for shown above are those originally published by the Department of Commerce and therefore do not agree with the revised series for shown in appendix table D-16 Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D Employed persons with a job but not at work by reason for not working [ Thousands of persons years of age and over Total employed per- T e m p o r a r y New job or sons with business layoff a job but not at work Period Monthly average : Vacation Illness All other L,044 _ L L,073 L L L,361 : First half_. Second half : First half.. Second half lflfiSI : January February March April May .Tune July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December __ _ Includes persons who had been temporarily laid off from their jobs with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and who were not seeking other work * Includes persons who had a new job or business to which they were scheduled to report within the folowing days * Includes persons who were not at work because of bad ] weather industrial disputes and all other reasons NOTE. Data through are based on a 68-area sample ; those for on a 230-area sample. Data for shown above are those originally published by the Department of Commerce and therefore do not agree with the revised series for shown in appendix table D-16 Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce I56 TABLE D-19 * Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment Duration of unemployment Total unemployed Period weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : _ ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _. : First half Second half : First half Second half _ ) ) i For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to months ( ) a Not available NOTE. Data through are based on a 68-area sample ; those for on a 230-area sample. Data for shown above are those originally published by the Department of Commerce and therefore do not agree with the revised series for shown in appendix table D-16 Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-20. Unemployment insurance programs ^ selected data and Initial claims * Period State and veteran programs * State programs State Benefits paid insured under State prounemgrams Exhaus- ploytions ment State as perproState cent of Total Average programs covered ( millions weekly grams * employ- of dolcheck ment lars ) ( dollars ) ' ( percent ) Insured unemployment * All programs * Weekly average ( thousands ) : First half.. Second half : First half.. Second half : January February.. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December. : January February.. March April May June July August September October NovemberDecember. ' Indicate in general instances ' ^ new unemployment Data relate to veterans under the following programs : Servicemen 's Readjustment Act ( which became effective in October and expired for most veterans in July ) and unemployment compensation ( Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of effective October ) * Represents the number of unemployed workers covered by unemployment insurance programs who have completed at least one week of unemployment * State veteran and Railroad Retirement programs State unemployment insurance programs during the period shown excluded from coverage agricultural workers Government employees domestic servants workers in nonprofit organizations unpaid family workers the self-employed and ( in most States ) workers in very small firms Represents payment for the final week of compensable unemployment in a benefit year. Workers who have exhausted benefit rights do not necessarily remain unemployed some find employment and others withdraw from the labor force ' For total unemployment only Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Rates per employees ] Separation rates Period Total Monthly average : Quit * Layoff Discharge Accession rates military and miscellaneous i L.O L.3 '2.4 * _ ] L.I ] L.2 ] L.I : First half..Second half_ : First half Second halfJ : January.. FebruaryMarch April May June July August September. October NovemberDecember. ] L.5 L.I : January.. FebruaryMarch April May June L.I L.O ] L.O L.1 L0 July August SeptemberOctober November. * Prior to military and miscellaneous separations are included with quits Averages computed by Council of Economic Advisers from published monthly rates Based on data through November NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor ( except as noted ) TABLE D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of employees ] Period Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total MinDu- Noning rable durable goods goods TransCon- portatract tion Trade ' Fiand connance struc- public utilition ties Service * Government ( Federal State and local ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) L,398 ( ) : L,382 * % ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted : January February March April... May June July August September. October November. December.. : January-- February. March April... May June ^ B81 July August September- October November * December * i Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( appendix table D-16 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary layoffs and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments > Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Durable goods BitumiNon- nous coal dur- mining able goods Retail trade Build ( except ing Class I Tele- Whole- eating Laun3 conrailsale and struc- roads l phone trade drink- dries tion ing ( * ) I <42.2 ( ) ( ' ) : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December.. : January February. _ March April May June July August- September. _ October November December ( ) ( ) i Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICO and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in basic workweek from to hours * Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available * Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods * Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April * Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month. The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthlyfiguresand not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period BituNon- minous Dura- dura- coal ble Total ble mining goods goods Retail trade Building Class I Tele- Whole- ( except Laun- Agrirail- phone a sale conculeating dries struc- roads trade and ture * tion drinking places ) $ $ $ w ; ; ! ) ( * ) ( ) $ ( ) $ $ 1Q50 19f> ? ( February.._ _ March April Mav June July August September October November December February... March April May June July August September.. October November 7.._ December January January 1929-54f w a ( ) $ ( ) ( <j $ $ $ $ ? ? I ? ? 1.3fi " " " i Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours * Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Composite rate per hour. Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis * Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April ' Preliminary NoTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month. The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture l62 T A B L E D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I ( except Tele- Whole- eating Launnous ing con- TQli and rail- phone sale coal Dura- Nondries structrade drinkroads durable mining tion ble ing goods goods places ) Manufacturing Period Total $ $ $ $ $ $ : January February. _ March April May June __ July August September. October November. December.. ( > ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ * $ $ $ * ( ) : January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November December fl ( ) _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available * Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month. The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE D-26. Industrial production indexes [ = ] Industrial production Manufactures Durable Period Total Pri- FabriTotal mary cated Total met- metal als products FurClay Non- Elec- Trans- Instru- glass niture elecments and and trical trical porta- and re- lum- miscellanema- tion lated maous ber chin- chin- equip- prod- prod- manery ment ucts ery ucts ufactures 1949_ i. Seasonally adjusted : January-. February- March April May June July August September October November December : January. _ FebruaryMarch April May June July August September October November December * See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-26. Industrial production indexes Continued [ 1947-49-100J Industrial production Output of consumer durables Manufactures Nondurable Period Total MinChemTex- Rub- Paper ical Foods erals ber tiles and beverand and and leather print- petro- ages apleum and toproding parel ucts prod- bacco ucts Major Other conTotal Autos house- sumer hold duragoods bles i Seasonally adjusted : January. _ February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May _ June July August September October November December ^ __ _ Preliminary NOTE. Prior to detail not available Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-27. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Farm output * All livestock and products Year _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ All crops * Feed used by farm horses and mules * Net production during year which could be made available for sale or farm home use. Excludes production of feed for horses and mules J Includes production of feed for horses and mules * Not included in total farm output Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-28. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Period Total i Total Transportation Dura- Nonble durable goods goods Mining Railroad Other ComPublic mercial utiliand ties other Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half.. Second half.. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * : First quarter : First half Second half * ._. i Excludes agriculture * Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction * Annual total is sum of seasonally unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with average of seasonally adjusted figures in part because of adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data * Estimates for fourth quarter of and first quarter of based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in November NOTE. These figures do not agree with those shown in column of appendix table D-7 which pre included In the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover agricultural investment and also certain equipment aDd construction outlays charged to current expense This series is not available for years prior to and for to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce TABLE D-29. New construction activity [ Value put In place millions of dollars ] Private construction Period Total new construction Nonresidential building ( nonfarm ) ResidenTotal tial buildprivate * ing ( nonfarm ) Commercial and industrial Other private * Total public construction Other 19311932_ 1933_ 1939_ 10,6P0 * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half... Second half : First half Second h a l f : January FebruaryMarch April May June 6,G60 July August September October November. December : January FebruaryMarch April May June July August September. October November. December i Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product iIncludes public utility farm and other private construction not shown separately * Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor * TABLE D-30 New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Total new public construction Major types of new public construction Federal Year All public sources Direct Federal aid State and local Highway Sewer and Hoswater pital Educa- and and tional institu- misc tional public service Conservation and development Military facilities All other public 1941_ 1953_ i For ownership combine " Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE D-31. New nonfarm housing starts by source of funds and by type of structure * [ Number of units ] Source of funds Period Total nonfarm units Private Public Type of structure 1-family Multi2-familys family * | ! " ( ) ) Private units seasonally adjusted annual rates ( ) : First half... Second half. : First half.... Second half 569,5ti0 ( ) : January._ February. March April May June July August September. October November. December. w January.. February. March April May June July August September.. October November 8_ December ( fl ) ) : CO These estimates are based on building permit records which have been adjusted for lapsed permits and for lags between permit issuance and start of construction. They are based also on reports of Federal construction contract awards and on field surveys in non-permit-issuing places. All temporary units are excluded Includes units in and 2-family structures with stores Includes units in multifamily structures with stores The number of starts for the years respectively was as follows : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Preliminary Not available Less than units Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Private nonfarm housing starts and proposed home construction : Government underwritten [ Number of units ] Private nonfarm housing starts Period Government underwritten Total Proposed home construction Units VA in FHA appraisal applica- requests tions Total FHA U,196,100 : First half... Second half. : First half... Second half.. * : January February March April May __ June July August September.. October November.. December.. : January February March April May June July August September.. October November.. December,. U05.800 * w < Data since June are based on VA first compliance inspection ; prior data are estimates of units started which resulted in VA-guaranteed first mortgage loans Units in mortgage applications for new home construction FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in * Preliminary Sources : Department of Labor Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administra * tion ( VA ) T A B L E D-33. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and tradey Total manufacturing and trade Period Manufacturing Wholesale trade Millions of Ratio Millions of Ratio Millions of dollars dollars dollars of inof in venvenIn- tories InIn- tories to to venSales * ven sales * Sales ' ven- sales * tories tories ' tories Retail trade * Ratio Millions of dollars of inventories Into Sales : ventories ' Ratio of inventories to sales * Old series | : ! | < ! * 3ft 1.30'l2,87318,390 ! Oil | " 6fil ! ! L ! 1.3O | 1.30J14.071 21V _..__ New series ~ \ ; i i Seasonally adjusted : First half Second half. : First half Second half K : January February March __ April May June July August September. October November. December. : January February.. March April May June July August September.. October November * December 6_ " 1.72'24.256 ' " : ! | ll,689j ll,718j ! Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method of estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census. Estimates shown in this table for are on the previously published basis and estimates for are on the new basis. For a description of the retail sales and inventories series see Survey of Current Business September and November * Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month * Seasonally adjusted end of period < For annual and semiannual periods weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of average end of current and previous month 's inventories to sales for month Where December data not available data for year and half-year calculated on basis of no change from November * Preliminary NOTE.- The inventory figures hi this table do not agree with the estimates of " change In business Inventories " included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce 17a TABLE D-34. Manufacturers * new orders sales and inventories [ Millions of dollars not seasonally adjusted ] New orders Period Sales Inventories * Durable-goods industries Nondurable-goods industries ! ! DuraNon- DuraNonble- durable- ble- durablegoods goods goods goods PurPur- GoodsFinindus- indus- indus- indus- chased Goods- Fininished chased intries tries tries tries mate- process goods mate- proc- ished goods rials rials 1941.___ /,482 : First half Second half : First half Second half : J a n u a r y February March April May June July August September October. November December 13t 8,J 8,0d8 _ : January February. _ March April May June July.. August September October November * Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month Book value end of period * Based on data through November Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE D-35. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] * All commodities other than farm products and foods All commodities Period Monthly average : Farm products Processed foods Total _ * : First half Second half : First half Second half * Chemicals Rubber Lumber and and and wood allied prodprodproducts ucts ucts Textile products and apparel * January February March _ April May June ._ _ July August September. October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November See footnotes at end of table : : s ( ) TABLE D-35. Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] All commodities other than farm products>nd foods ( continued ) Hides skins and leather products Period Fuel power and lighting materials Monthly average : ._ .__ 1948-_____ * _ : January February March April May June _ July August September.. October November December : January February March.. _ April May June July August September.. October November December ( ) Metals and metal products Machinery and motive products ( ) ( ) ? R ( ) Furniture and other household durables Nonmetallic minerals ( structural ) : First half- Second half : First half.. Second half4 Pulp paper and allied products ( * ) Tobacco manufactures Misceland bottled laneous beverages * ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) HI.8 y ( ) ( ) This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January These data from January through December represent the revised sample and the weighting pattern Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index. The only official index up to and including December is the former monthly index ( = ) a The data from January through January differ from_the official series due to a change in the method of eliminating excise taxes and discounts * Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Labor '75 TABLE D-36. Consumer price indexes For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ ] Housing Period Monthly average : All items Food Total Rent Apparel Trans- Medi- Per- Read- Other porta- cal 8onai ing and goods and tion care care recrea- services tion ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) _ ) ) ) ) ) ) ) 1945_ * _ : First half Second half : First half Second h a l f : January.. February March April May June July August September October November. December.. : January.. February March April May June July August September. October November. ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) Not available Based on data through November Source : Department of Labor ) TABLE D Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ ] Parity index ( prices Prices paid received interest by taxes and farmers Produc- wage tion rates ) Prices paid by farmers for items used in Period Family living Parity ratio i Monthly average : * * J236 : First half __ Second half : First half Second half 1930._> 1937_._ _ __ : January February March __ _ April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ _ ,_ ^ _ _ Ratio of prices received by farmers to parity index * Includes wartime subsidy payments paid on beef cattle sheep lambs milk and butterfat between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-38. Indexes of wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign countries ^ selected dates [ = ] Cost of living Wholesale prices Country January Latest data Latest data January Index Index Date December November July September October October October October September October October October September October August October September October August October November October November November September November November October October October October September October October November * October Third quarter October October October September September October October September October * October September September November October October ( ) ( ) ( ) September September October July August October October October August Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Mexico Nicaragua October November October October August Paraguay Peru Venezuela August September September September November August October * Third quarter September August September September November September * Third quarter October September October November November October United States Africa and Near East : Algeria ^ ._ Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Morocco Tunisia .__ Union of South Africa. _- __ Western European countries : Austria Belgium Denmark France Germany ( Federal Republic ) Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway. _ Portugal _ _ _ _ _ _ Spain Sweden _ __ Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom Latin America : Argentina Brazil Chile Costa Rica Cuba Pacific and Far East : Australia India Indochina Japan New Zealand Philippines Thailand Other : Canada Finland _ _ = Includes food costs only '1950 = First quarter Not available NOTE. The components of the indexes are not the same for all countries Sources : International Monetary Fund and United Nations Organization I7 Date November August September October August September September March CREDIT MONEY SUPPLY AND FEDERAL FINANCE TABLE D-39. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of period Total Total Other Autoconmobile sumer paper goods paper * Noninstalment credit Repair and Permodern- sonal ization loans loans Total Charge acOther * counts 1951_ 8_ : J a n u a r y _ February._ March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December : January February __ March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November- December ___ _- Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-40. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Automobile paper Total Other consumer goods paper Repair and modernization loans Personal loans Period Extended Repaid ExExExEx- Repaid tended Repaid tended Repaid tended Repaid tended i : First half Second half- : First half Second half * " July August September. _ October November. _ December : January February. __ March April May June __ ^ '.88 July. August September. October November. _ December l * : January February March April May June Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail for preliminary estimates will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-41. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property mortgaged [ BUliona of dollars ] Nonfarm properties All properties End of period Total to 4-family houses Multifamily and commercial properties * Farm properties : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter _ _ i Derived figures which include negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations NOTE. Data for first quarters of and all data for are estimates Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE D-42. Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] End of period Total deposits and currency Demand deposits adjusted and currency Total U.S GovTime deposits ernadCur- Demand ment rency deposits justed2 * deoutside adjusted * posits banks : January February.. March April May June 0G0 July August SeptemberOctober November. December. _ : January February.. March April May __ June J u l y ' _ August T September October 7___ November6 December _ June December and end-of-year figures are for call dates. Other data are for the last Wednesday of the month Includes deposits and currency held by State and local governments Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection * Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Includes U.S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve Banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes CJ. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-43. Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period * Loans Total loans and investments Total Investments Commercial and industrial loans Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities June * June * June4 : January February. __ March April May June July August September. October November. _ December. June June * June * : January February March April May June July August T September October -._ November December i J u n e December and end-of-year figures are for call dates. Other data are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net. Includes commercial and industrial loans agricultural loans loans on securities real-estate loans loans to banks and " other loans " some of which represent consumer credit a Beginning with data are shown gross i. e. before deduction of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years. Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary NOTE.- Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-44. Member bank reserves and Reserve Bank credit [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Period Total U.S Government securities Discounts and advances Member bank reserve balances All other mainly float Total Required Excess * > : January.. February _ March April May June July August September October.. November December : January.. February. March April May June July August September October November December * Estimates Data on required and excess reserves from March through April for licensed banks only Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E D U S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt End of period Gross public Marketable public issues debt and guaranteed issues Short- Treasury term bonds issues2 Nonmarketable public issues United States savings bonds Treasury tax and savings notes Special Investment bonds : J a n u a r y February. March April May June July August September October. _November December : January-_ FebruaryMarch April May June July August September October. November December- 1929._._ 1933_ _ _ _ Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Includes Series A bonds and beginning in April Series B convertible bonds < Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held billion dollars of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Source : Treasury Department TABLE D-46. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Par values billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues * End of period Held by U.S GovernTotal ment Federal CominvestTotal Reserve mercial ment Banks banks accounts Held by others Mutual State Miscelbanks Other and and in- corpor- local Indivi- laneous invessurance ations * govern- duals tors comments ' panies : January February,- March April May June July August September October November. December. " T ' [ [ : January February.. March April May June July August September October November December United States savings bonds series A-D E F and J are included at current redemption values Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; figuresexclude securities held in trust departments < Exclusive of banks and insurance companies * Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of 9Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE D-47. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U. S. Government securities Period Number of issues Average : _ _ _ _ 1949.._ _ : January Long-term 3-month taxable bonds Treas- month ury Old New bills i issues series * series Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on shortterm bank loans to businessselected cities Prime commercial paper months federal leserve Bank discount rate ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) February March April May June July August September. October. __ November. December. : January.__ February2.38 March April May June July August September. Octobers2.32 November December. Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues Bonds in this classification were first issued in March ^ -percent bonds : Prior to April due or callable after years ; beginning in April bondsfirst callable after years } -percent bonds of first issued May Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly hi Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was hi effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ) ( ) ( ) TABLE D Government cash receipts from and payments to the public calendar years Billions of dollars ] Total Calendar year Cash re- ceipts * Cash State and locall Federal Excess of receipts pay- Cash re- ments or pay- ceipts ments Cash Excess of receipts Cash re- pay- Cash pay- ments or pay- ceipts2 ments ments Excess of receipts ( " ) or pay- ments ( ) ( ) Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers on the basis of incomplete data Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Less than million dollars * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE D-49. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability * _ Period Dividend payments Total Undistributed profits Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter : First quarter... Second quarterThird quarter.. Fourth quarter * i Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes a million dollars * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment profits before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) See appendix table D-8 for TABLE D-50. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Industry group average Year First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equityAll private manufacturing corporations Food _ Tobacco manufactures Textile-mill products Apparel and finished textiles _ Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products. _ Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining _ Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products. Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) ._ Motor vehicles and parts. _ Instruments photographic and optical goods watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) See footnotes at end of table ( ) TABLE D-50. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Continued Industry group average Year First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All private manufacturing corporations. Food _ Tobacco manufactures Textile-mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products.. Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) _ Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining.. Ul.O Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products __ _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products_Machinery ( except electrical ) _ Electrical machinery __ Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts. __ Instruments photographic and optical goods watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined * Not available separately for this period NOTE. Beginning with the third quarter of these series are based on a new sample. However the averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Co mmission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-51. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and Asset size class ( thousands of dollars ) average First Second Third Fourth First Second Third Year quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All asset sizes Under _. _ and over Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes Under and over _ Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All asset sizes Under and over L3.1 Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes Under and over NOTE. Beginning with the third quarter of these series are based on a new sample. However the averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for United Stales Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-52. Sources and uses of corporate funds 1946-54l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change in customer net receivables3 Cash and U. S. Government securities Other assets Total uses Sources : Internal : Betained profits and depletion allowances _ Depreciation and amortization allowances Total internal sources External : Change in Federal income tax liability Other liabilities Change in bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues Total external sources Total sources Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) ( * ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Estimated to nearest half-billion dollars ; by Council of Economic Advisers Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately * Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financia data ( except as noted ) TABLE D-53. Current assets and liabilities of all corporations [ Billions of dollars end of period ] Asset or liability March June September December March June September Current assets Cash on hand and in banks. _ U. S. Government securities.Receivables from U. S. Government. Other notes and accounts receivable Inventories Other current assets Total current assets Current liabilities Advances and prepayments U. S. Government Other notes and accounts payable _ Federal income tax liabilitiesOther current liabilities Total current ities Net working capital liabil- * All corporations in the United States excluding banks and insurance companies. Data for are based on Statistics of Income covering virtually all corporations in the United States. Data for are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Commission. As more complete data become available estimates are revised Receivables from and payables to U. S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U. S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U. S. Government advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books * Includes marketable securities other than U. S. Government NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-54. Business population and business failures Operating businesses and business turnover Period Business failures by size of liabilities > New busiAmount of current Disness Number of failures * liabilities * Operat- New con- Busi- incortinporaing busi- ued trans- tions * businesses * busi- fers * Under $ Total Under $ Total $ and and ness $ over over es * Number of firms Thousands of firms ( ' ) C O < ) 1952._ 1953._ 8_ : January.. February. March April May June ( ) July August September October.. November December8. $ ? ! '36,310 " " '242,010 '14,788 ( ) ( ) U82,520 J \ } * HJ L O&<J ) U U July August September. _ October November. __ December : January-. February March April May June ( ) ( ) Thousands of dollars Excludes firms in fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he8 has either an established place of business or at least one employee Industrial and commercial only ; excludes banks railroads insurance companies etc Annual estimates are end-of-quarter data centered at June ; half-yearly estimates are for end of period Total for period Not available Revised series no longer carries group of agents and commercial services ( such as real estate and insurance brokers holding and finance companies tourist agencies etc. ) ' Revised series has more complete coverage of small firms Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS T A B L E D U n i t e d States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Area and type of transaction WITH THE WORLD Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers : Merchandise exports Transportation Travel Income on investments Other Total exports excluding military transfers Military transfers under aid programs ( excluded from balances ) __ Imports of goods and services : Military expenditures abroad Merchandise imports Transportation Travel Income on investments Other services and other than grants [ net [ net outflow Total imports Unilateral transfers other than U. S Government grants [ net outflow \ ) \ Balance on goods and unilateral transfers U. S. Government outflow ( ) ] U. S. private capital I ( * ) Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers excluding grants U. S. private capital and errors and omissions [ net outflow ( ) j U. S. Government capital and grants excluding military transfers ) Errors and " omissions Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets through transactions with the U. S- Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers excluding grants [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. private capital [ net outflow ( * ) WITH CONTINENTAL WESTERN EUROPE AND DEPENDENCIES fl Multilateral transfers ~ Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers excluding grants U. S. private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] -_ U. S. Government capital and grants excluding military transfers Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets * = = = = = See footnotes a t end of table ( * ) ( * ) T A B L E D U n i t e d States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Area and type of transaction WITH STERLING AREA Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers _ Imports of goods and services m -A -A ; : Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers excluding grants U. S. private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] _ U. S. Government capital and grants excluding military transfers if ) Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers excluding grants [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. private capital [ net outflow Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers excluding grants U. S. private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government capital and grants excluding military transfers if ) < * ) __ Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets _. Multilateral transfers Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers excluding grants U. S. private capital and multilateral transfers [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. Government capital and grants excluding military transfers Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers excluding grants [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. private capital [ net outflow ? ! WITH CANADA Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers excluding grants U. S. private capital [ net outflow Multilateral transfers ( ) if ) ( * ) <> < * ) if ) < * ) <Q : < > WITH LATIN AMERICA fl Multilateral transfers See footnotes a t end of table i S3 ( ) ( ' ) ( ) TABLE D-55. United States balance of payments excluding U. S. Government grants of military goods and services Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Area and type of transaction WITH OTHEE COUNTRIES Balance on goods and services and unilateral transfers excluding grants [ net outflow ( ) ] U. S. private capital [ net outflow Balance on goods and services unilateral transfers excluding grants TJ. S. private capital and multilateral transfers U. S. Government capital and grants excluding military transfers Increase ( ) or decrease ( ) in foreign gold and dollar assets ) COCO Multilateral transfers _ <M f+ Exports of goods and services excluding military transfers Imports of goods and services Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes international institutions Not available < Less than million dollars Includes billion dollars for subscription to International Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development For geographic coverage see Survey of Current Business July Includes net unilateral transfers other than U. S. Government military and economic aid Includes errors and omissions ; ( ) indicates payment by the area Includes gold transactions with the United States only NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D U. S. Government grants and capital movements to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid Disbursements on grants : Military goods and services : Mutual defense2 Greek-Turkish aid Chinese aid Other Government grants : ECA and mutual security : Europe.. _ _ _ Other areas Army civilian supply Philippine rehabilitation International relief agencies excluding UNRRA. UNRRA post-UNRRA and interim aid Other grants Total disbursements Less : Receipts Equals : Net unilateral payments Long-term capital : Subscription to : International Bank for Reconstruction and Development _ _ International Monetary Fund British loan ECA and MSA programs _ Export-Import Bank Surplus credits ( including ship sales ) Raw material credits to occupied areas United Nations building loan Other Total long-term capital outflow Less : Repayments _ Equals : Net long-term capital outflow. Short-term capital net outflow U. S. Government grants of military goods and services Other U. S. Government grants net U. S. Government long- and shortterm capital net outflow '86 January-September data at annual rates Includes loans and returns of military equipment Less than thousand dollars Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E D Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and [ Billions of dollars end of year ] All foreign countries Sterling area Continental OEEC countries and dependencies Other Europe Canada Latin American Republics All other countries i Preliminary NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of U. S. S. R gold reserves. Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements ( both for its own and E P U accounts ) and of the Tripartite Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold are included with the holdings of Continental OEEC countries and dependencies. Figures represent ( ) reported and estimated gold reserves of central banks and governments and ( ) official and private dollar holdings reported by banks in the United States including foreign-held deposits U. S. Government securities maturing within months after date of purchase and certain other short-term liabilities to foreigners. Year-end estimates for all years except ; the figures are estimated on the basis of gold reserves at the end of that year plus dollar holdings reported by certain New York City banks as of May Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption and of domestic merchandise exports. by economic class average and s [ = ] Period Total Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity Merchandise imports for consumption : i average-1947 2G3 Unit value average _ _ Quantity Domestic merchandise exports : i average Unit value average i The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics Estimates based on data for the first months NOTE. Export indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs in some periods are influenced by sales of large quantities of food products at prices considerably below market quotations. Such exports include sales from Government-owned surplus and shipments on which subsidies were paid by the Department of Agriculture Source : Department of Commerce 2OI SUMMARY TABLE D-59. Changes in selected economic series since and since Relatives on base Source : Appendix Table No D-l Economic series Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product prices Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services : Total Federal State and local Perchange to Ill Gross private product prices. Farm Nonfarm Government product Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods Services D-8 National income Compensation of employees... Business and professional Farm proprietors Rental income Corporate profits before taxes and inventory valuation D-ll Personal income Disposable personal income..Personal net saving D-12 Per capita disposable personal income : Current prices prices D-15 Realized net farm incomeD-12 Population : Total D-16 years of age and over_ D-16 Labor force including armed forces. Civilian labor force Employment Agricultural Nonagricultural Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments D-22 Manufacturing Durable Nondurable Contract construction GovernmentAll other Average gross hourly earnings : Manufacturing D-24 Durable goods. _ _ Nondurable goods Building construction Retail trade D-2 D-4 D-6 See footnotes at end of table T A B L E D-59. Changes in selected economic series since and since Source : Appendix Table No Relatives on base Economic series D-25 Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Building construction Retail trade D-26 Continued _ ._ Industrial production Manufactures Durable Nondurable Minerals _ D-27 Agricultural production Percentage change to D-28 Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Manufacturing _._ D-29 New construction current prices.. Private Residential ( nonfarm ) Public D-35 Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products. Processed foods Other than farm products and foods _ D-36 Consumer price index : All items.__ Food _ Apparel-_ _ Rent-._ Medical care D-37 Prices received by farmers Parity index ( prices paid interest taxes and wage rates ) D-3< D-41 Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding_ Instalment credit _ Automobile paperMortgage debt outstanding D-42 Demand deposits adjusted and currency D-43 Loans and investments of all commercial banks Loans Investments in U. S. Government obligations Gross public debt and guaranteed issues D-45 D-49 Corporate profits before taxes Corporate profits after taxes Dividend payments Undistributed profits D-54 New business incorporations Business failures D-58 Merchandise imports ( quantity ) Merchandise exports ( quantity ) i Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from the relatives shown here Based on percentage changes published in Department of Labor monthly reports on consumer prices