i * < f : > ' -j.. * Economic Report or trie President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. G Price of single copy cents LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE January To the Congress of the United States : I am herewith presenting my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this Report I have had the assistance and advice of the Council of Economic Advisers. I have also had the advice of the heads of executive departments and independent agencies Since my Report is long I present below largely in the words of the Report itself what I regard as its highlights Recent Economic Achievements Full employment rising incomes and a stable dollar have been cherished goals of our society. The practical attainment of these ideals during was the year 's great economic achievement The past year has brought fresh witness to the basic strength and resiliency of our economy. We have broken through to new and higher ground and have reached the threshold of a billion dollar economy Whether we observe economic activity at the stage of production or employment or income disbursement or consumer spending we find evidence of progress and prosperity. The Nation 's expanding income is being shared widely. Employment and wages are at record levels. Both investment and consumer spending are going forward at a good pace. Some groups of people have not however enjoyed a full measure of prosperity and we must keep that fact before us as we build for the future The Role of Government The mainspring of our economy is to be found in the qualities of the American people. Given free institutions and a favorable physical environment an expanding economy is the natural fruit of the enterprise of such a people Today we believe as strongly in economic progress through free and competitive enterprise as our fathers did and we resent as they did any unnecessary intrusion of Government into private affairs. But we have also come to believe that progress need not proceed as irregularly as in the past and that the Federal Government has the capacity to moderate economic fluctuations without becoming a dominant factor in our economy in Our governmental policies have concentrated on building an economic environment that favors an orderly expansion of private activities. The Federal Government has not sought to maintain good times by expanding our already huge governmental outlays or by permitting the value of money to depreciate The Administration has sought in cooperation with the Congress to discharge its responsibility through a series of closely related policies. First by removing direct controls over prices and wages which had outlived their usefulness. Second by preserving an actively competitive environment and assisting new and small businesses. Third by curtailing governmental activities that could be handled as well or better by private enterprise. Fourth by restricting public expenditures and yet adding to the country 's defensive strength and its stock of public assets especially highways hospitals and educational facilities. Fifth by lightening the burden of taxes imposed on individuals and businesses. Sixth by extending the ties of trade and investment with other nations of the Free World Seventh by tempering the impact of unemployment old age illness and blighted neighborhoods on people yet not impairing self-reliance. Eighth by extending the automatic workings of our fiscal system that tend to offset or cushion changes in income arising from changes in economic activity Ninth by attacking fundamental causes of weakness in the farm situation Tenth by acting promptly and resolutely when either recessionary or inflationary influences in the general economy became evident To help keep our surging economy in a healthy condition the Government in held the tax line. The Federal Reserve System shifted from a policy of active credit ease to one of moderate restraint. These policies contributed in large degree to the achievement and maintenance of prosperity without price inflation Extending Prosperity A period of general prosperity such as we have recently been experiencing presents a challenge to an intelligent citizenry. We must find ways and means of extending prosperity to the less flourishing sectors of our economy The position of farmers in our dynamic economy has aroused deep concern. It is imperative that we strengthen farm programs on the basis of a realistic appraisal of the present situation The persisting decline in farm prices and incomes reflects a continuing imbalance between farm output and its ultimate disposition. The imbalance and resulting huge surpluses are to be traced largely to the technological revolution in American agriculture changing domestic demands for farm products the expansion of agricultural production abroad and the repeated extension of wartime price-support levels long after the end of World War II Many parts of our agricultural policy are working well and require only moderate changes. Together with the nine-point program built around IV the Soil Bank put forward in the recent Message on Agriculture they constitute a many-sided attack on the ills that beset agriculture. There is no easy cure for persisting surplus conditions. The programs now recommended if framed wisely and adopted promptly will promote the welfare of farmers and the Nation The basic cause of low incomes is low productivity irregular employment or both. The Government can do a great deal to help people who have been left behind in the onrush of progress by undertaking special programs for raising their productivity One of the largest groups of low-income families is in rural areas mostly on farms too small for efficient operation. The Rural Development Program is a soundly conceived approach to helping these farm families raise their productivity and thereby improve their economic status. Legislation is needed which will permit the program to be expanded in line with recommendations made last year To cope with chronic unemployment which has persisted in some communities despite the attainment of practically full employment in the Nation at large a new Area Assistance Program is recommended Vocational rehabilitation widened coverage of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Program and housing needs of older people are fields in which advances should be made Relatively few people are as yet protected by insurance against catastrophic illness. The pooling of risks by private carriers or if need be through a Federal program would help meet this problem A joint Federal-State program for indemnifying flood victims on losses to real property business inventories, and household effects should be authorized Building for Future Prosperity Lasting prosperity of the Nation depends far more on what individuals do for themselves than on what the Federal Government does or can do for them. The rate of our economic advance in the years ahead will depend largely on our ability as a people to preserve an environment that rewards individual initiative and encourages enterprise innovation and investment Government can contribute to the strengthening of competitive enterprise through monetary fiscal and housekeeping policies that promote high and rising levels of economic activity ; by helping small and medium-sized businesses overcome impediments to their expansion ; and by vigorous measures for preventing monopolistic practices and combinations For the present fiscal year a balanced budget is in prospect. Once a budgetary surplus comes definitely into sight and economic conditions continue to be favorable we should begin reducing our huge public debt. Such an act of fiscal integrity would signify with unmistakable clarity that our democracy is capable of self-discipline To help meet the pressing need for more schoolrooms the Congress is urged to authorize a program of Federal aid for school construction which over a five-year period could be expected to stimulate the States and localities to sufficiently greater efforts to remove the accumulated shortages The country urgently needs a modernized interstate highway system to relieve existing congestion to provide for the expected growth of motor vehicle traffic to strengthen the Nation 's defenses to reduce the toll of human life exacted each year in highway accidents and to promote economic development The development of consumer instalment credit has been highly beneficial to our economy. However it sometimes accentuates movements in the buying of consumer durable goods. Although present conditions do not call for the use of any authority to regulate the terms of instalment credit this is a good time for the Congress and the Executive Branch to study the problem Sound policies to promote the expansion of the international flow of goods capital enterprise and technology will powerfully advance our national security and economic welfare and help to build a stronger and more unified community of free nations Early passage of legislation authorizing membership of the United States in the Organization for Trade Cooperation and providing for further customs simplification is of high importance Conclusion Foresight has helped our Nation make great strides in recent years toward a balanced and sustained prosperity. We have succeeded in expanding the scope of free enterprise and yet increased the sense of security that people need in a highly industrialized age Taking recent developments all together it is reasonable to expect that high levels of production employment and income will be broadly sustained during the coming year and that underlying conditions will remain favorable to further economic growth Great opportunities lie ahead for American businessmen consumers workers farmers and investors. The recommendations of this Report should be helpful in the realization of these opportunities DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER VI CONTENTS Page CHAPTER REGENT ECONOMIC ACHIEVEMENTS I. New Levels of Economic Activity II. Expansion Through Free Enterprise III. Role of Government in Moderating Economic Fluctuations IV. The Challenge of Prosperity CHAPTER PROSPERITY WITH GENERAL PRICE STABILITY I. How the Process of Expansion Cumulated II. Governmental Policy in a Time of Expansion III. Adjustment of Monetary and Fiscal Policies to the Needs of the Economy Holding the Tax Line Containing the Rise in Stock Market Credit From Active Credit Ease to Moderate Restraints Consumer Credit Policies Housing Credit Policies Adjusting the Stockpiling Program IV. Effectiveness of Monetary and Fiscal Policies V. The Current Economic Situation CHAPTER BROADENING THE SCOPE OF PROSPERITY I II III IV V Promoting Agricultural Readjustments Helping Local Communities Reduce Unemployment Lifting Incomes by Raising Productivity Improving the Economic Status of Older Persons Coping With Personal Hardships CHAPTER BUILDING FOR FUTURE PROSPERITY I. Preserving Sound Federal Finances II. Fostering Competitive Enterprise III. Extending Home Ownership and Improving Neighborhoods IV. Enlarging Public Assets V. Improving Skills and Technology VI. Promoting the International Flow of Goods and Capital. VII. Increasing the Stability of Our Expanding Economy VIII. The Creative Power of a Free Economy VII APPENDICES Page A. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT B. SOME LEADING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS DURING I II III IV V VI VII The Nation 's Total Output and Income Employment and Earnings Prices and Inventories Agricultural Developments Financial Developments Government Finances Economic Relations with Foreign Countries C. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING D. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS { Chapters and Appendix B ) Tables Page Changes in Production Employment and Personal Income Changes in Gross National Product and Its Major Components Distribution of Personal Income Disbursements and Changes in Average Gross and Net Spendable Weekly Earnings of Production Workers in Manufacturing Constant Prices Changes in Average Gross Weekly Earnings in Selected Industries Constant Prices B-l B-2 B-3 Gross National Product and Its Major Components Contributions to Growth in Final Purchases Distribution of Disposable Personal Income and B-4. Changes in Industrial Production B-5. Output of Some Rapidly Growing Consumer Commodities and B-6. Changes in Nonagricultural Employment by Industry B-7. State-Insured Unemployment as a Percent of Covered Employment B-8. Hours and Earnings of Production Workers in Manufacturing B-9. Changes in Wholesale and Consumer Prices B-10. Changes in Wholesale Prices of Crude and Intermediate Materials and Finished Goods B l l Realized Net Income of Farm Operators by Regions vm Ill Tables { Continued ) Page B-12. Value of Farm Real Estate and Real Estate Debt B-13. Changes in Commercial Bank Holdings of Loans and Investments and B-14. Changes in Ownership of Publicly Held Federal Debt B-15. Changes in Short- and Intermediate-Term Consumer Credit Outstanding B-16. Security Offerings B-17. Changes [ in Deposits and Currency B-18. Federal Receipts and Expenditures : Conventional Budget and Consolidated Cash Statement B-19. Consolidated Cash Statements of Federal and State and Local Governments B-20. Gross State and Local Government Debt : Total and as Percent of Gross National Product and B-21. Government Receipts and Expenditures as Shown in National Income Accounts B-22. Balance of Payments B-23. Agricultural Exports Under Specified Governmental Programs B-24. Distribution of Nonmilitary Merchandise Exports ( Including Reexports ) and General Imports by Areas JanuaryOctober and Charts Measures of Economic Activity Government Purchases of Goods and Services Gross National Product : Major Categories of Expenditure. Changes in Gross National Product : Major Categories of Expenditure Production and Consumer Prices Steel and Automobile Production Industrial Production Construction Expenditures Labor Force Employment and Unemployment Average Hours and Earnings : All Manufacturing Industries. Corporate Profits Before and After Taxes Wholesale Prices Consumer Expenditures Gross Private Domestic Investment Consumer Income and Expenditures Stock Prices and Credit Money Rates and Bond Yields Bank Loans and Investments Money Supply Member Bank Excess Reserves and Borrowings Consumer Credit Outstanding Consumer Instalment Credit Mortgage Debt Outstanding : to 4-Family Nonfarm Properties DC Charts { Continued ) Page Increases in Private Debt Wholesale and Consumer Prices Indicators of Investment Preparations Housing Starts and Applications for Financing Manufacturers ' Inventories and Sales Retail Inventories and Sales Farm Income Prices and Output Home Ownership Automobile Ownership Federal Receipts and Expenditures Number of 18-Year-Olds Exports and Imports Indicators of Prosperity B-l. Gross National Product : Current and Constant Prices B-2. Changes in New Construction B-3. Employees in Nonagricultural Establishments B-4. Weekly Earnings in Manufacturing B-5. Wholesale Prices on a Prewar Base B-6. Wholesale Prices : Economic Sectors B-7. Consumer Prices on a Postwar Base B-8. Consumer Prices on a Prewar Base B-9. Farm Output B-10. Fertilizer and Machines Used on Farms B-ll. Carry-over of Selected Crops : Total and Amount Held by CCC B-12. Prices Received and Paid by Farmers B-13. Farm Income B-l4. U. S. Balance of Payments on Current Account B-l5. Industrial Production : Western Europe Chapter Recent Economic Achievements T EN MOMENTOUS YEARS have elapsed since passage of the Employment Act. Opinions may differ concerning the economic policies that have been pursued in this critical period in national and world affairs. Yet there is broad agreement that the American economy has met severe tests with considerable success and that the Employment Act has provided sound guidance and serviceable procedures for promoting economic growth and stability. The past year brought fresh witness to the basic strength and resiliency of our economy its expansive power and its contribution to improving the living of Americans. As we look to the future there is ground for confidence that our economic progress will continue despite occasional strains and setbacks that means of easing strains and moderating setbacks are at hand and that the good times we are now generally experiencing will be extended to sectors of the economy which have lagged in the advance of prosperity I. N E W LEVELS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY Our economy has broken through to new and higher ground which the charts and tables of this Report delineate. We have reached the threshold of a billion dollar economy and the recent advance has been accomplished without the specious aid of price inflation The rapidity of recent progress is seen most clearly in aggregate measures of economic activity that allow for seasonal variations. The most comprehensive of these measures is the gross national product that is the dollar value of the Nation 's total output of commodities and services. In the second quarter of our national product was being turned out at an annual rate of billion dollars. A year later it was billion or about ^ percent larger. At present it is billion if not higher. The level of activity in when the rate of output was billion dollars at its highest is well behind us Another comprehensive measure of economic activity is civilian employment that is the number of men and women outside the Armed Forces who work in their own businesses or are employed by others. At the peak of the economic expansion which culminated in July about million men and women were at work. A year later employment was reduced to million. Since then employment has risen rather steadily passing CHART Measures of Economic Activity BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES I I I I I I I MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS the million mark in April and reaching million in December Here too even the best levels of have been surpassed Still another comprehensive measure of economic activity is the amount of income disbursed to people by private industry and government. In the second quarter of incomes were flowing to individuals at an annual rate of slightly over billion dollars. A year later despite some contraction in economic activity incomes were a half billion higher. The recent expansion has brought income disbursements to an annual rate of billion dollars. This increase in dollar income during the past two to three years has constituted a genuine addition to buying power since average prices in consumer markets have been virtually steady while taxes have been lower Moreover the Nation 's expanding income has been shared widely. For example the average weekly wage of manufacturing workers exclusive of the clerical and supervisory forces was $ last December in contrast to $ eighteen months earlier. Farm operators on the whole have lagged behind other groups though many farm people are sharing in the increase of employment opportunities off the farm. Labor income that is the sum of wages salaries social security benefits and related payments amounted to percent of the total disbursement of individual incomes during Last year this fraction reached percent which is as high as it has ever been. The share of proprietors fell correspondingly with the brunt of the decline borne by farm proprietors. The share of investors remained unchanged With incomes generally improving the spending of people has mounted Consumer expenditures counting investments in new homes besides ordiT A B L E Changes in production employment ^ and personal income Percentage change * Item Fourth quarter to fourth quarter to Second quarter to fourth quarter Third quarter to fourth quarter PRODUCTION Gross national product ( constant prices ) _ Industrial production New construction ( constant prices ) EMPLOYMENT Total civilian employment __ Nonagricultural employment Employees hi nonagricultural establishments 4_ PERSONAL INCOME Personal income disbursements 8_ Disposable personal income Quarterly changes based on seasonally adjusted data Based on preliminary data for fourth quarter Based on Bureau of the Census data. See Table D-17 for definition * Based on Bureau of Labor Statistics data. See Table D-22 for definition Total personal income plus personal contributions for social insurance. See Table D l l Total personal income less personal taxes Sources : Department of Commerce Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE Changes in gross national product and its major components [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change to fourth quarter from Fourth quarter Item Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic fixed investment Change in business inventories Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services : State and local Federal Gross national product : Total Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE Distribution of personal income disbursements and 1946-55l Total personal income disbursements ( billions of dollars ) Year Percent of total personal income disbursements Labor income and transfer payments Proprietors ' income Investment income Nonfarm Farm * _ The distribution is'calculated from the totals of the various types of income. Changes In numbers of people receiving different types of income are ignored. They should be taken into account for a more complete interpretation Total personal income plus personal contributions for social insurance. See Table D l l Dividends interest and rents * Includes estimates for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Percentages will not necessarily add to percent because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) nary outlays on consumption increased from an annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of to billion in the final quarter of Consumers have benefited not only from the growth of the economy but also from the extensive shift of resources to civilian uses that the close of hostilities in Korea and continued governmental economies made possible. While the annual rate of the Nation 's total output has increased about billion dollars since the spring of the rate of expenditure in the consumer sector has increased a full billion. Thus the physical resources and manpower released by the Federal Government CHART Government Purchases of Goods and Services PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT TOTAL GOVERNMENT r ^ \ y ^ / V >f I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I TOTAL FEDERAL / * ) " V " * ^ NATIONAI SECURITY /i t i t f t / OTh IER FEDER ^ i i r * I l l STATE AND LOCALs < J_ i_ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ! I * B A S E O N SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I I have been used preponderantly in the production of homes automobiles television sets and the thousand-and-one articles and services that flow directly to consumers and enrich the everyday lives of people. At the same time the provision of new and improved tools of production on which future advances in our living standards depend has gone forward on an extensive scale Thus whether we observe economic activity at the stage of production or employment or income disbursement or consumer spending we find evidence of progress and prosperity. Employment and wages are at record levels. Profits are satisfactory in most industries. Both investment and consumer spending are going forward at a good pace. Some groups of people have not however enjoyed a full measure of prosperity and we shall need to keep that fact before us as we build for the future II. EXPANSION THROUGH FREE ENTERPRISE Many factors have been quietly adding to the strength of our economy and the current expansion is fundamentally an expression of their cumulating force. Among these factors are the unexpectedly large upsurge of population in the past decade the continued growth of scientific knowledge the onrush of technology the rapid obsolescence of what is sometimes regarded as fixed capital the recent development of long-range investment planning by industry the improved control over inventories the intensified pace of business competition the wide diffusion of well-being among people their insistent and growing desire to earn more and live better the development of mass markets to match mass production the rebuilding of Western Europe the general recognition of government 's responsibility in helping to maintain a stable prosperity and the growing understanding that public policy must protect economic incentives if enterprise innovation and investment are to flourish. All these factors are and probably will continue to be basic to our progress but several of them are especially noteworthy in the current situation The recent expansion of our economy has occurred in an environment of growing production and trade in the Free World. Western Europe in particular has gained a level of economic well-being hitherto unknown on the Continent. Production and incomes have been rising rapidly. Unemployment has virtually disappeared in Great Britain and is low everywhere except in Italy. Barriers to trade and currency movements have been reduced. Private enterprise and competitive markets are again widely respected. These improvements in conditions abroad have reinforced our prosperity at home The Federal Government has played a constructive part in the prosperity that the American people are now experiencing so widely. It has not however sought to maintain good times by expanding our already huge governmental outlays or by permitting the value of money to depreciate Recognizing that these alluring short cuts to a high level of economic CHART Gross National Product Major Categories of Expenditure BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ALL OUTLAYS EXCEPT FEDERAL V FEDERAL OUTLAYS ON GOODS AND SERVICES I I I J I ALL OUTLAYS EXCEPT FEDERAL " ' ( ENLARGED SCALE * CONSUMER NONDURABLE GOODS AND SERVICES CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS AND RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION BUSINESSf<7 * INVESTMENT- ^ -'NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT NOT SHOWN ^ NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTFUJCTION PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT VAND CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS activity have all too often brought disaster to nations our governmental policies have concentrated on building an economic environment that favors an orderly expansion of private activities The demands of modern life and the continuing threat of Communist aggression require a much higher level of taxes and a larger role of Government in economic affairs than suited earlier generations. This very fact imposes a responsibility on the Government to pursue policies that will help to keep the private economy strong and growing. The Administration has sought in cooperation with the Congress to discharge its responsibility through a series of closely related policies. First by removing direct controls over prices and wages which had outlived their usefulness. Second by preserving an actively competitive environment and assisting new and small businesses. Third by curtailing governmental activities that could be handled as well or better by private enterprise. Fourth by restricting public expenditures and yet adding to the country 's defensive strength and its stock of public assets especially highways hospitals and educational facilities. Fifth by lightening the burden of taxes imposed on individuals and businesses. Sixth by extending the ties of trade and investment with other nations of the Free World. Seventh by tempering the impact of unemployment old age illness and blighted neighborhoods on people yet not impairing self-reliance. Eighth by extending the automatic workings of our fiscal system that tend to offset or cushion changes in income arising from changes in economic activity. Ninth by attacking fundamental causes of weakness in the farm situation. Tenth by acting promptly and resolutely when either recessionary or inflationary influences in the general economy became evident By recognizing the vital importance in our times both of free enterprise and of a sense of economic security these directions of governmental policy have served to enlarge the horizons of businessmen workers investors and consumers and have stimulated people to bolder economic actions and undertakings. This in essence has been the Government 's role in the recent expansion The expansion itself has been carried through by private citizens who freely applied their energies and resources to bettering themselves their families and their communities. Between the second quarter of and the last quarter of the annual rate of Federal spending on goods and services was reduced by about billion dollars. In the meantime the rate of consumer spending apart from new homes increased by billion dollars the rate of residential construction billion the rate of business investment billion while the rate of State and local spending rose another billion If we go back to the reduced reliance of our economy on Federal expenditures becomes still clearer. Between the second quarter of that year and the final quarter of the annual rate of Federal spending on goods and services declined by billion dollars while spending by the rest of the economic community increased by billion. Thus in the short span of CHART Changes in Gross National Product Major Categories of Expenditure CHANGE IN BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * SECOND QUARTER TO FOURTH QUARTER FEDERAL ^ PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION BUSINESS INVESTMENT ^ STATE AND LOCAL ^ SECOND QUARTER TO FOURTH QUARTER FEDERAL- ^ PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION BUSINESS INVESTMENT ^ / STATE AND LOCAL -1/ I I _L I * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES 1/ PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES 1/ NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES AND NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS two and a half years a substantial transformation of our economy has occurred. On an increasing scale Americans have taken the initiative to make jobs for one another instead of waiting for the Federal Government to do it for them This is the well-tested process that has brought enduring results throughout our history. Americans have long been noted for a combination of characteristics that make for economic growth. These include a strong devotion to family life ; a deep-seated widespread urge to improve one 's position his possessions and his children 's opportunities ; a drive to work and save to these ends ; steady working habits ; an ambition to excel ; and the cherishing of freedom independence and individual initiative. To achieve what we regard as a more abundant life we are willing to work plan venture spend and save far beyond the limits that mere subsistence or comfortable existence would require. The mainspring of our economy consists in these qualities of the American people. Given free institutions and a favorable physical environment an expanding economy is the natural fruit of the enterprise of such a people III ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN MODERATING ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS It is essential to recognize however that the very qualities of Americans which largely account for the expansive power of our economy also make the process of growth irregular. The flow of money against goods need not match precisely the rate at which goods leave workshops for markets Hence an imbalance between production and sales is occasionally bound to occur and give rise to inventory adjustments which in turn may lead to reduced spending for consumption and capital expansion. Moreover the confidence that generates prosperity may turn into overconfidence and set off an inflationary boom just as the normal caution that preserves balanced growth may degenerate into pessimism and lead to depression Experience with these tendencies over many years has gradually led the American people to broaden their concept of government. Today we believe as strongly in economic progress through free and competitive enterprise as our fathers did and we resent as they did any unnecessary intrusion of Government into private affairs. But we have also come to believe that progress need not proceed as irregularly as in the past and that the Federal Government has the capacity to moderate economic fluctuations without becoming a dominant factor in our economy Although governmental efforts to curb inflationary or recessionary influences have not always proved successful knowledge of how business fluctuations arise and of ways of dealing with them is steadily improving The events of the past three years have been heartening. We have seen that our economy can continue to grow with a minimum of instability of employment and without any appreciable change in the value of money We have seen that wise and timely actions by the Government can help sustain a healthy expansion of economic activity and prevent it from turning into an inflationary boom ; that soundly conceived and well-timed governmental policies aided by private stabilizing influences can prevent a minor contraction from turning into a spiraling depression ; and that neither direct controls over prices and wages nor huge public spending programs are needed to achieve a reasonably stable prosperity. The recent success of governmental policies in moderating economic fluctuations and even more in indicating that this goal may be reached in ways that enlarge the scope of individual enterprise carries a promise of great significance for our own future and that of other nations IV T H E CHALLENGE OF PROSPERITY The underlying goal of Americans is better living in all of its aspects not merely indefinite increase in per capita income and possessions. The cherished intangible components include improved health of mind and body ; more wholesome family life ; availability of useful work full-time or part-time ; lessened drudgery severity and monotony of labor ; more leisure and increased opportunities for learning ; greater opportunity for all and lessening of indefensible disparities ; and larger protection against the hazards of life. Gains in all of these respects profoundly improve the quality of living to which we attach high importance. The notable advances registered in the past have been in part a by-product of our economic progress but in part also a response to major innovations by private groups and all levels of our Government A period of general prosperity such as we have recently been experiencing presents a challenge to an intelligent citizenry. How may the good times be maintained and extended into the future ? How may our greater material wealth help us to improve the quality of living ? How may conditions be developed that will help the less prosperous groups to join in the economic advance ? These are difficult questions but no thoughtful individual can escape them. Nor can the Federal Government do so in view of its heavy responsibilities under the Employment Act and the Nation 's leadership in the Free World. Later chapters will recount how the Government has grappled with these issues during the past year and how the Administration proposes to deal with them over the coming months. But a few general observations are pertinent here To meet the challenge of prosperity we must above all things avoid complacency. The continuance of general prosperity can not be taken for granted. In a high-level economy like ours neither the threat of inflation nor the threat of recession can ever be very distant. We live in a world in which economic changes both domestic and foreign are continuous and many. If our economy is to advance firmly on the narrow road that separates recession from inflation the Federal Government must pursue monetary fiscal and housekeeping policies with skill and circumspection We must be alert to changes in economic conditions and be ready to adapt II our policies promptly to them. The only rigid rule that we can afford to admit to our minds is the principle that the best way to fight a recession is to try to prevent it from occurring. That principle has of late ruled and it must continue to rule our economic policies We must also take every practicable step to strengthen the foundations of future prosperity. The incentives to work to save to invest and to venture must be protected and enhanced. Monopolistic tendencies must be curbed whenever they appear. Sound improvement of our systems of social insurance must be continued. The encouragement of home ownership and the clearance of slums must be extended. Maladjustments in agriculture that find expression in overproduction and reduced farm incomes must be corrected. Those communities which even in these good times continue to be burdened with extensive unemployment must be aided. Remaining pockets of relative poverty urban as well as rural must be reduced. Provision for schools highways and medical facilities must be substantially increased. Action in these vital areas has lagged sadly behind our accumulating needs. If economic growth is not to be seriously retarded in the future we must with due regard to the need for staying within the limits of Federal revenues strive to make up for the neglects of the past Finally we must never lose sight of the fact that the prosperity of our country is heavily dependent upon the international economic and political environment and upon what we do in cooperation with other nations to improve that environment. Unstable markets balance of payments crises and economic fluctuations abroad can seriously complicate the task of maintaining stability at home. Moreover the continued growth of our production is in no small degree dependent upon an expanding resource base in friendly countries and upon an expanding world market for the products of our factories farms and mines. A program for maximum growth in America requires therefore intensified efforts to reduce barriers to the international flow of goods capital and business enterprise as well as the maintenance of active cooperation with other nations in dealing with problems which hamper their progress Chapter Prosperity With General Price Stability T HE EXPANSION of the economy continued without pause throughout the past year. Virtually every month new records were achieved in production employment trade and income only to be exceeded again a month or two later. The average level of consumer prices on the other hand remained quite steady. Full employment rising incomes and a stable dollar have been cherished goals of our society. The practical attainment of these ideals during was the year 's great economic achievement. To derive from recent experiences useful guidance for the future we must first analyze the processes that led to that achievement. The diversities of fortune in our vast economy will receive full attention later in this Report I. How THE PROCESS OF EXPANSION CUMULATED With governmental policies fostering a mood of widespread confidence the general economic readjustment that followed the close of hostilities in Korea proved brief and mild. Prompt and extensive easing of credit conditions prompt and sizable tax reductions for both individuals and businesses improved housekeeping policies on the part of government and a broad program for reinforcing the floor of security for individuals all helped to pave the way for a resumption of economic growth. But the basic drive of the expansion came from private citizens who were willing to risk accumulated savings on many new tools of production to borrow as well as to save to work longer hours and in increasing numbers and to spend freely on new homes and current consumption in order to meet the better their aspirations for good living. Foreign economic conditions especially in Western Europe also favored domestic expansion. Our commercial exports which during most of ran well above the levels of the preceding year spurted in the closing months of the year to a still higher level Already in the fall and winter of some signs of emerging recovery became visible. Stock prices which are an imperfect but nevertheless significant indicator of business sentiment began rising in September and approached the year 's highest values before the year ended. In December the new orders for durable goods received by manufacturers began a slow recovery from their brief but sharp decline of preceding months. The following month contracts for commercial construction commenced a sustained advance reinforcing the continued rise of housing starts. Liabilities involved in business failures which had increased sharply during reached their peak in February then moved to lower levels. In the same month bank debits outside New York City which have long provided economic observers with a rough clue to the circulation of money in commercial and industrial markets resumed their advance In the meantime interest rates on loans of both short and long maturities which had been falling for some months kept on their downward course and credit became more readily available to businessmen homeowners and consumers These early improvements in financial markets and in the preparatory stages of investment spread quickly to other parts of the economic system The slow but continued rise in the Nation 's disposable personal income which kept defying the contraction of output and employment also made its influence felt. So too did the high level of exports which reflected the resurgence of the economy of Western Europe. In December the decline in the production of nondurable manufactures came to a halt In February retail sales resumed their advance. In April the decline of the average workweek in manufacturing ceased. Business inventories which had been exerting strong downward pressure on economic activity continued to decline. However their rate of decline diminished materially so that a larger part of people 's increasing purchases was met by current production instead of withdrawals from warehouses or dealers ' shelves. Federal outlays on goods and services accelerated their downward course but the rest of the economy was in a mood to absorb the substantial resources released by the Federal Government. Between the first and second quarters of consumer expenditures increased and so too did private investment in fixed capital foreign investment and State and local expenditures. In response to these developments total production stopped declining early in then held to a sidewise course for several months while the realignment of orders sales and inventories smoothed the path for a fresh advance About mid-1954 with the drop in Federal expenditure abating the continued surge of private spending tipped the economic balance definitely on the side of expansion. Between July and September the output of durable manufactures as a class mineral production and nonagricultural employment resumed their advance. By then the recovery had already gathered sufficient strength to launch both total production and total employment on a new expansion. Imports soon began rising again as they usually do when economic activity increases. The economic contraction one of the very briefest and mildest in the entire history of business fluctuations was over It had lasted about months during which total output declined to percent while employment declined 2J4 percent and personal incomes after taxes actually increased CHART Production and Consumer Prices INDEX * INDEX INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION SEASONALLY ADJUSTED I I I Illllllllll CONSUMER PRICES fiO 11LL11 LJli L ' ! .mil,mi n | | | | Illllllllll M m | | | H i SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART Steel and Automobile Production INDEX * * INDEX = * 'STEEL PRODUCTION 111ul n S E A S O N A L L Y ADJUSTED SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART Industrial Production INDEX I947>49s INDEX SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION In ii mi iiln [ i n inl | ii ii I npil n in I in ii I inn ill i in in I mi rl II In in I TOTAL MANUFACTURES /Twi I IIIII I l l l l l l l l l l I l l l l l l l l l l I l l l l l l l l l l I l l l l l l l l l l I I1t I I f t l l t l M i l l DURABLE MANUFACTURES it h u t i m t i l it..l..i IIIM.I .....I.... .....Im.i i n l i iliiniliiiiil SOURCE. : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART Construction Expenditures BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS VALUE PUT IN PLACE TOTAL NEW CONSTRUCTION PRIVATE PUBLIC I'l'iiliiii iliiiiiliiiiiliiiiiliiiiiliiniliiiiiliiiiilini iliiiiilini i liiiiiliiiiiMiiiilniiil o i n / .PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL ( NONFARM ) ^ / ^ ' * * O T H E R PRIVATE COMMERCIAL AND.INDUSTRIAL inliiii i iiiiihiiii IIIHIIIIII i i i i i l i i i i i n i n I i n i n I I I I I I I i i n i i l i i i u SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCEST DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ANO DEPARTMENT OF LABOR IIIIIIIIIII CHART Labor Force Employment and Unemployment MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE PERCENT UNEMPLOYMENT AS PEROENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE r \ * ' \ j'ifi-Hfiiti f l u ! ) : unlink YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE iiiiiLit'tti ti I f f tiM-i J I ^ ifctilifti ii ^ K ti ^ li i CHART Average Hours and Earnings All Manufacturing Industries HOURS PER WEEK HOURS PER WEEK WEEKLY HOURS I- I II11 H n H M DOLLARS PER HOUR DOLLARS PER WEEK ~ ~ WEEKLY EARNINGS ( RIGHT SCALE ) / / X IRLY EARr INGS HO. ( LEFT SCALI ) inn hi ill III n Inn inn i hi in linn III inlim i In I II linn I ill nil mi II In nil NOTE : DATA PERTAIN ONLY TO PRODUCTION WORKERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART Corporate Prof ts Before and After Taxes BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLION ! } OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ,ANNUAL RATES \ ^ V TS AFTE R TAXES PROF J _ wl f r \ PROFITS BEFORE TAXES ^ ^ S V i t DIV IDENDS i i i i i i i \ I i I i i i ^ NO ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART Wholesale Prices INOEX INDEX * OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND PROCESSED FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL ) ^ LL COMMODITIES no _ m w " PROCEJ SED FOODS i inn ' ? Mill FARM PR ( D U C T S ^ Illllillll Hl | | | | ll | | II I I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR _ * \ jiiiiUii i Q A CHART Consumer Expenditures BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ' ' ' ' ' ' I ' > ' I ' ' ' ' > ' ' I ' SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART Gross Private Domestic Investment BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES TOTAL / ^ F I X : D BUSINESS INVESTMEN U RE : SIOENTIAL CJONSTRUCTIO M / * 1X i i i ! iESS INVENT ) RIES CHANGE IN BUSI t PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT AND NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS | I In succeeding months while activity in some parts of the economy remained dull the scope of the expansion became progressively wider. The decline of business inventories stopped in October and a gradual process of rebuilding stocks to meet the larger requirements of manufacturers and distributors got under way. The increase of industrial production was gentle at the start. But it rapidly gained momentum once the newly designed automobiles which were destined to capture the public 's fancy and pocketbooks began rolling off the assembly lines in the fall of A spectacular advance of automobile production and rapid expansion of homebuilding stimulated expansion in the steel lumber glass and a host of other industries over the entire country. Allowing for seasonal factors automobile production increased percent and housing starts percent between August and January ; total industrial production increased percent Before long even industries which had been hard-pressed for years such as the railroads coal mining and textiles felt the impulse of increasing activity all around them. The output of consumer soft goods industries which generally increased throughout rose more rapidly in the first half of The like was true of commercial construction except that the acceleration was greater and continued longer. Outlays on industrial plant machinery and equipment which kept declining until the early months of joined the expansion in the spring. Total business expenditures on plant and equipment increased sharply after the first quarter of rising percent by the end of the year. The major impetus of expansion thus shifted increasingly from the automobile and homebuilding industries to business construction and the machinery and equipment trades. In the course of this process the expansion became more widely diffused and better balanced and a groundwork was laid for continued growth of productivity in the future As industrial activity grew part-time operations diminished and the resort to overtime increased. The average length of the workweek in manufacturing rose crossed the 40-hour mark in November and still kept rising. Between June and June the average length of the workweek increased hours in metal mining hours in bituminous coal mining hour on the railroads hours in durable manufactures and hour in nondurable manufactures. The numbers employed rose slowly in the initial stages of the expansion since many businesses found that they could handle moderate increases in output with the employees on hand. However after the turn of the year as the advance of production continued and spread outward jobs expanded swiftly. Between the last quarters of and employment increased by over million. Meanwhile unemployment declined despite the tremendous numbers especially of women and young people who were attracted into the labor market by high wages and widening opportunities. By mid-1955 unemployment at large was well below percent of the labor force. The unemployment rate among married men living with their families who form the hard core of the labor force fell below percent In the initial stages of the expansion both wage rates and prices on the whole moved little. Since increases in production ordinarily did not require proportionate increases in labor input labor costs per unit of output declined on the average. With unit profit margins widening at the very time when the volume of sales was increasing profits rose rapidly. But shortly after the turn of the year unit labor costs stabilized then began rising. The increase of overtime at premium rates of pay higher wage rates and fringe benefits greater resort by business firms to older and less efficient units of equipment in order to meet the pressing requirements of their customers and the growing difficulties in finding suitable workers all served to increase unit labor costs. Their advance became marked around the middle of and in turn exerted persistent and increasing pressure on both profit margins and prices. Favored by the state of demand the average of industrial prices in wholesale markets which had increased only about percent between August and June rose 3y2 percent in the next six months. The rise in aggregate profits tapered off after the first quarter of but profits generally continued to improve. With varying shifts of pace both wages and profits therefore reflected the advance of prosperity and favored its continuance but only if due restraint were exercised by both business and labor Not only did the flow of incomes to individuals from production rise but the rate of rise increased. Corporations paid out larger dividends to their stockholders and at the same time increased still more rapidly the earnings retained for reinvestment. Interest payments increased. So also did the income of proprietors except of farm operators whose record output during added to the excessive supply of agricultural commodities. Much the largest increase both in dollars and relative to the whole occurred in labor income. Taken altogether the annual rate of disbursement to individuals from production increased by billion dollars between the second quarter of and the first quarter of The disposable personal income that is income after taxes increased a little more. In these months the restraints on the growth of disposable income which are ordinarily exercised during an economic expansion through a rise in income tax payments and a decline of unemployment compensation were more than offset by the effects of the tax and social security legislation of After the first quarter of the normal fiscal restraints on the growth of disposable income became operative again ; but in the meanwhile personal income from production increased rapidly and disposable income was able to grow at a much higher rate than before In these circumstances substantial increases of consumer spending could be expected and actually occurred. The rise in consumer spending was not however a passive accompaniment of rising incomes. On the contrary it was a highly dynamic factor in the process of economic expansion. Gon- CHART Consumer Income and Expenditures BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * y ~ ~ DISPOSABLE PERSONA INCOME ^ ( L E F T SCALE ) r PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES y r ' ^ ] V h / ' ' * TOTAL RETA L SALES ( RIGHT S CALE ) -I V * i y ^ ^ SALES fNONDURABL : GOODS STOP ES U " J V ^ S A L E S O rDURABLE GC ODS STORES _ iir v s ; < i ] li i i i 11l I n I i ii I i O ' " SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES -'NEW SERIES LINKED TO OLD SERIES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS sumers were of a mind to buy better things and increase their spending This pervasive attitude combined with the willingness of women and young people to take on jobs so that their families might better approximate the plane of living they wished to attain has been an outstanding feature of recent experience. These factors were basic and they were reinforced by aggressive selling efforts of businessmen who sought out customers more energetically than had become customary in recent years and offered liberal credit terms and often bargain prices as well. Consumer spending increased in all directions but credit purchases of expensive items notably of the automobile models increased with special rapidity. Between the first and third quarters of the annual rate of disposable personal income rose by billion dollars ; the expansion in the rate of consumer spending was much larger billion. Over the next year disposable income increased billion and the increase of consumer spending was again larger billion. Reflecting these developments net personal savings out of current income diminished both in dollars and in relation to income. Personal savings which constituted percent of disposable personal income in the first quarter of fell to about percent by the first quarter of and remained at that level through the third quarter Consumers made huge commitments for new homes besides spending freely on current consumption. The confidence in the economic future so dramatically displayed by them was likewise felt and displayed by businessmen and investors. Favored by easy mortgage terms homebuilding grew rapidly throughout and the early months of Expenditures on residential construction increased percent between November and November then rose another percent by mid-1955 When they declined somewhat later in the year expenditures on business construction and producers ' equipment kept on increasing. The reason was that soon after the turn of the expansion of business capital outlays had spread from the commercial sector to practically the entire range of industry. With sales rising profits improving depreciation reserves increasing and more and more shortages of facilities emerging or impending established firms were both willing and able to risk increasingly large sums on the expansion or modernization of plant and equipment Meanwhile the formation of new firms proceeded at a high rate and they added to the demands on the construction machinery and equipment industries. Between the first and final quarters of the annual rate of business expenditures on new plant and equipment rose from billion dollars to billion. Manufacturers of durable goods and of nondurables commercial establishments mining concerns and public utility enterprises all participated in the expansion of investment. Even railroads whose low earnings had previously forced a sharp reduction of capital outlays raised the annual rate of such outlays from million dollars to million The financial markets both reflected the growing exuberance of the economy and added to it. Prices of common stocks fluttered at times but their trend continued upward and outstripped the rise in corporate profits. The rise in stock prices facilitated corporate financing by equity issues which had seriously lagged in recent years. At the same time it kindled the financial imagination of some people fostered favorable expectations and stimulated the use of credit for speculative trading in securities. The revaluation of risks became general and was reflected in shrinking differentials between yields of corporate securities and the yields of Federal issues. Plans for business and bank mergers multiplied and an appreciable number were executed. Borrowing expanded rapidly especially on the part of consumers. To finance the larger scale of their operations corporations also borrowed more heavily during than in the previous year. However a significant part of the increase in corporate obligations represented borrowing by sales finance companies to meet the growing demand for consumer loans Much of the newly created mortgage debt especially in the case of veterans ' new home purchases was marked during and the early months of by a pronounced lengthening of maturities and reduction of downpayments. A similar tendency became prominent in automobile instalment loans early in and to some degree occurred also in other markets. The changes in credit terms helped to widen the dollar gap between new borrowings and repayments. Although repayments increased newly extended credits increased more rapidly so that the outstanding debt tended to grow at a high and increasing rate. Consumer instalment debt which had remained steady during the greater part of and increased only slightly toward the close of the year rose about ^ billion dollars during The home mortgage debt which increased by billion dollars in rose by billion in At the end of the year the total debt of individuals including noncorporate businesses stood percent higher than at the beginning. However monthly payments on the loans proceeded on schedule and delinquencies were not only very low but even lower than in past years The huge demand for credit by consumers and business firms was augmented by governmental requirements despite the larger tax revenues that accompanied the expansion of the economy. The Federal budget moved toward a balance during but did not yet reach it. In the States and localities considerable support developed both for raising taxes and for increasing debt to finance essential public improvements such as roads bridges schools water systems and sewerage plants. The total governmental debt grew during although its rise was only a small fraction of the increase in private debt. The net borrowing by the Federal Treasury during the year was billion dollars while the States and localities added about billion to their debt The surging demands for credit could be met from only two sources first an expansion of the money supply second current or past savings Between mid-1954 and the end of May the money supply that is the sum of demand deposits and currency outside banks increased by billion dollars. This increase occurred while there was still considerable slack in the economy and it facilitated the growth of production employment and real incomes. But by the late spring of the expanding demand for the products of industry swollen by heavy borrowings was already pressing hard against the Nation 's industrial capacity. Shortages of steel nickel copper paperboard cement plumbing fixtures some types of lumber and other materials developed. Unemployment was low overtime extensive and many types of skilled labor scarce. Wages and prices were beginning to stir. Accommodation of the pressing demands of borrowers by any substantial increase in the money supply would in these circumstances have served to raise prices rather than increase production Interest rates reflected the growing demand for credit in the face of a more slowly growing supply of loan capital. They began rising gradually in the principal money centers toward the end of then rose more rapidly as the excess reserves of commercial banks kept declining and their borrowings at Federal Reserve Banks increasing. Beyond meeting seasonal requirements there was little increase in the money supply between May and the end of the year. Borrowing continued on an extensive scale but it was largely confined to the loan funds available from the savings of individuals businesses and the various private and governmental trust funds. This process of confining credit to available savings which is a protection against inflation in the future was obscured by the continued and rapid increase of loans by commercial banks. These loans were made possible principally by the sale of government securities ; in other words the buyers of government securities indirectly provided the funds that financed borrowers from banks. The process of confining credit to available savings was much plainer in the case of mortgage-lending institutions many of whom found that their supply of savings available for mortgage loans was smaller than the amounts they needed to accommodate customers. Interbank borrowings smoothed these and other necessary financial adjustments and so too did higher interest rates more selective screening of credit demands by lenders and reduced credit commitments by financial institutions Despite elements of strain in the money and capital markets the demand for commodities and services continued to grow as the year advanced Their supply also kept growing although many businesses encountered obstacles in increasing production in certain cases because their available plant was already operating at or close to capacity in others because some essential materials or skilled labor were in short supply in still others because credit had become harder to obtain. Orders received by business firms generally multiplied faster than sales backlogs grew and delivery periods lengthened. Despite the growing pressure of demand on the Nation 's physical resources production as a whole continued to increase albeit at a reduced rate. And despite the boom atmosphere that to some degree accompanied these developments the over-all level of prices in both consumer and wholesale markets did not change appreciably. The index of consumer prices which stood at in July moved to in January and in December The index of wholesale prices moved from in July to the following January and in December When the year ended the scope of the expansion had narrowed and its pace had slackened. The Nation had practically reached full employment and was accommodating itself to a necessarily slower rate of advance II. GOVERNMENTAL POLICY IN A TIME OF EXPANSION The preceding sketch of recent economic experience is amplified in Appendix B and documented by the charts and tables in this Report But even this brief summary has sufficed to suggest how the unfolding of prosperity generated a degree of exuberance which if left to itself could have led to widespread increases in prices speculative buying new price increases and eventual economic recession. The Federal Government keenly aware of its responsibilities under the Employment Act moved resolutely to prevent such developments That conditions in might require a different emphasis in economic policy was foreshadowed in last year 's Economic Report. It noted that in the course of resolving old problems expansion " often brings new ones in its train. " It called attention to the danger of excesses in periods of expansion particularly in activities which involve the discounting of a long future as in the case of home purchases or the pricing of corporate shares It warned that " continued economic recovery must not be jeopardized by overemphasis of speculative activity. " And it urged concentration of governmental policy on facilitating long-term growth rather than on measures for imparting an immediate upward thrust to the economy Thus the Government was prepared for the problems that confronted our economy in the year just ended and policies to restrain undue expansion were evolved to meet threats to stability as they emerged. It is well to recall that the expansion which got under way in the late summer of started from a high level of economic activity. Since the Nation 's financial and commercial markets reflected that fact as well as the promise of a still better future the Government deemed it prudent to restrain incipient inflationary tendencies even at an early stage of the expansion. As a Nation we are committed to the principle that our economy of free and competitive enterprise must continue to grow. But we do not wish to realize this objective at the price of inflation which not only creates inequities but is likely sooner or later to be followed by depression. On the other hand it is necessary to exercise great care that a policy of avoiding inflation does not interfere with attaining a satisfactory rate of economic growth. Premature measures and restraints which are too potent may bring on or hasten the very reactions that the restraining policies are intended to prevent just as excessively delayed action would fail of its purpose Moreover market forces themselves tend to correct many maladjustments and governmental policy must take account of the direction and strength of these forces. The rise in interest rates during for example was to a significant degree a result of market developments tending to restore balance between the vigorous demand for investment funds and the limited supply of savings available for investment. In such a situation it is essential to appraise with care the speed and strength of market adjustments so that they together with the governmental measures that are being contemplated may exercise an effective yet not overpowering corrective influence. This type of appraisal is often difficult and it is always subject to the fallibility of human judgment. The following review of recent monetary and fiscal policies will show how the Government went about the delicate task of preventing inflation without impeding economic growth III ADJUSTMENT OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES TO THE NEEDS OF THE ECONOMY The first departure from the vigorous expansionary policies pursued during much of and occurred toward the end of the latter year As we have seen economic expansion was well under way by the late summer of This development was accompanied by a brisk demand for credit which the commercial banks and other financial institutions were able to meet as a result of the ample lending power that the policy of active credit ease which then prevailed had helped to create and maintain Although conditions in the latter part of did not call for a policy of restraint a mild change in the degree of credit ease seemed desirable in the light of the unfolding economic situation. Accordingly the Federal Reserve System restricted its purchases of government securities in December This action made it necessary for commercial banks to increase their borrowings to meet the unusually large increase in year-end currency and credit demands. It also placed the monetary authorities in a better position to move toward a policy of restraint if economic conditions should warrant it. The move exemplified one of the advantages of general monetary and credit policies : they can be adjusted gradually and if need be promptly reversed to meet changing economic conditions Holding the Tax Line As the year opened the economic expansion was proceeding vigorously on a widening front. In keeping with this fact the Administration recommended in January a budget which brought expenditures and receipts of the Federal Government into balance on a cash basis over the coming year. This required a tight rein on expenditures and the avoidance CHART Stock Prices and Credit INDEX = INDEX,I939O00 COMMON STOCK PRICES V in ni nt M II II II 1hII m III M h l l l l I l l ' ' ULJ M i n i M M i STOCK MARKET CREDIT- ^ ( END OF MONTH ) ^ \ mill tun MlllllMH MMll.MM U 11II ll I I l i t I M I l l l l l l l t i l 11II111 IIIIIIIIIII CUSTOMERS ' NET DEBIT BALANCES ANO BANK LOANS TO OTHERS THAN BROKERS AND DEALERS. EXCLUDES U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES SOURCES ; SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE CHART Money Rates and Bond Yields PERCENT PER ANNUM PERCENT PER ANNUM CORPORATE Aaa BONDS U.S. GOVERNMENT BONDS T SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT,BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S AND STANDARD & POOR 'S of drains on revenue through any reduction of tax rates. Consequently the Congress was urged to postpone the tax reductions which were scheduled to take effect on April Without such affirmative action Federal taxes would have decreased by approximately billion dollars in a full year. The corporate tax rate would have declined percentage points involving a loss to the Treasury of about billion dollars. The revenue from excise taxes would have been cut by approximately billion dollars. These tax reductions did not seem appropriate at a time when aggregate economic activity was at a high level and expanding rapidly while the budget was still unbalanced. However desirable tax adjustments may be to facilitate the long-run expansion of the economy it is imprudent to initiate them when the budget shows a deficit and when they may interfere with the objective of maintaining balanced economic growth Although a bill to reduce individual income taxes was passed by the House the Congress in the end accepted the President 's tax program The recommendation to defer the scheduled tax reductions was adopted on March Containing the Rise in Stock Market Credit The proposal of early January to hold the tax line was preceded by a step that dealt with specific credit excesses. A few days earlier the Federal Reserve authorities had acted to restrain the use of credit in the stock market where speculative tendencies had become clearly evident The rise in stock prices which began in September and continued almost without interruption through was accompanied by a significant increase in the amount of credit used for financing stock purchases Customers ' debit balances with member firms of the New York Stock Exchange rose over million dollars in or almost percent and more than three-quarters of the rise was concentrated in the last six months of the year. Loans by banks to individuals for purchasing or carrying stocks also increased. The volume of security trading on margin had grown noticeably during Experience provides ample evidence that excesses in the stock market can be transmitted quickly to other markets and eventually create economic trouble. It is important to prevent such developments. Hence the Federal Reserve authorities moved in January to restrain the use of credit in security speculation by increasing margin requirements on loans for the purchase of securities from to percent. Since the borrowing from brokers and banks in connection with security transactions of individuals continued to increase fairly rapidly in the next three months margin requirements were again raised in April this time to percent. Stock prices especially of the largest and best known industrials continued upward through much of the rest of the year but the rate of increase of stock market credit declined substantially soon after this second action was taken From Active Credit Ease to Moderate Restraints Besides taking steps to contain stock market excesses the general credit policy of the Federal Reserve System was modified early in in the direction of restraint. In January and February the Reserve Banks reduced their holdings of government securities by about billion dollars. This reduction was designed to absorb funds that normally become available to commercial banks as a result of the seasonal return of currency and the seasonal decline in loans. But in view of the continuing strong demand for bank credit the sales and redemptions by the Reserve Banks had the effect of tightening the reserves of their members. The commercial banks responded by selling securities to meet the growing demand for loans Simultaneously they increased their borrowings from the Reserve Banks The Treasury also adjusted its financing programs to the change in economic conditions. Treasury financing in was carried out with short- and intermediate-term securities many of which were bought by commercial banks and served to increase the money supply. In early there was no longer much reason for avoiding competition with other borrowers in the long-term capital market. Nor was there any special need to stimulate the expansion of the money supply. Hence the Treasury issued almost billion dollars of percent 40-year bonds in February. Besides absorbing funds from the long-term market the new issue helped to meet the needs of long-term investors such as pensions and trust funds insurance companies and endowment funds. An additional million dollars of these long-term bonds were issued later The policy of restraint of early was extended as the expansion of credit continued. Loans to business firms automobile purchasers and homeowners the three groups which provided the major impetus to economic expansion rose sharply during the spring. Business loans of commercial banks which normally decline in the first half of the year increased by billion dollars in the first six months of The outstanding instalment debt of consumers expanded nearly billion dollars in the second quarter the largest increase on record over so brief a period. The value of home mortgage loans recorded during the first six months of exceeded recordings in the corresponding period of by a third if not more Although interest rates stiffened other credit terms such as the required downpayment and length of maturity became more liberal particularly for automobile and home purchases. In view of these credit and business developments the Federal Reserve discount rate was raised in April from 1J4 to percent. This action brought the discount rate in line with the market level of short-term rates and made borrowings from the Reserve Banks more costly During the summer employment reached a new peak of about million Although pockets of unemployment persisted in some local areas unemployment generally was close to a practical minimum. Total output broke all previous records. Upward pressures on wages and prices became more CHART Bank Loans and Investments BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF O O L L A R S * ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS TOTAL I I INVESTMENT IN U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES * END OF MONTH SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART Money Supply BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DEMAND DEPOSITS AND CURRENCY V y ^ * ^ l25 < TIME D E P O S I T S ^ _ L-L I I I I I I I953 I I I I I r i I I I ! END OF MONTH SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I I I I I I CHART Member Bank Excess Reserves and Borrowings BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES v ^ BORROWINGS FROM FEOERAL RESERVE BANKS i A- A i \ jr \ V | i \ \ /i RESERVES * A / EXCESS/ i 9i i / I-/ ; A ^ i i i i i * Af / i i i I i i t i i I i i i i SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM intense. New collective bargaining agreements in major industries called for substantial wage increases which in some cases were followed by substantial price advances. Shortages of steel copper aluminum and of a variety of building materials developed or became more acute. The credit expansion supporting the high level of demand in practically all sectors of the economy reached a pace which if continued for long would threaten the stability of the economy To help avert this threat the Federal Reserve Banks reduced their holdings of government securities on a considerable scale between late July and midSeptember. The effect of this policy was to put added pressure on bank reserves at a time when the demand for loans was piling up. To bolster their reserve position and continue lending the commercial banks further reduced their own holdings of government securities and also increased their borrowing at the Reserve Banks. But when they borrowed money they had to pay a higher price for it. Early in August the discount rate was increased by one Reserve Bank to % percent and by the others to percent. By midSeptember discount rates were raised to * percent by all Reserve Banks The pace of economic expansion slowed down somewhat during the fall but incomes continued to increase and demand remained at a high level When stock prices declined in late September and early October a note of uncertainty crept into the thinking of some people. Within a few weeks however the averages of stock prices returned to their prior peaks. It became evident that business firms were laying plans for further increases in investment outlays and that business and consumer demands for credit showed few signs of slackening. In view of this situation the monetary authorities maintained pressure on the reserves of commercial banks Although the Reserve Banks purchased a sizable amount of government securities toward the end of September and the following weeks the amount fell short of meeting the seasonal requirements of commercial banks before the Christmas season. In November the discount rate was raised to 2/2 percent the fourth increase of the year. In December the reserve position of the banks eased somewhat but pressure in the credit markets continued As the pressure on bank reserves increased during the year the commercial banks took care of their customers ' requirements by huge sales of government securities and by borrowing at the Reserve Banks. However increasing tightness in the credit markets in time led both the commercial banks and other financial institutions to screen their loans more carefully Mortgage money in particular became less plentiful. Simultaneously the increased cost of borrowing moderated the demand for long-term credit by some borrowers. This effect became noticeable during the summer when a number of State and local governments and turnpike authorities deferred their scheduled financing. The restricted supply of loan funds made its influence felt also in the short-term credit market though to a smaller degree. The net result was some restraint of private and public expenditures which was salutary in an environment in which excessive demand could well have resulted in sharply rising prices Consumer Credit Policies To supplement the general monetary policy of reducing the ease of borrowing specific actions were taken during the spring and summer in two areas which in addition to the stock market caused some concern One of these areas was consumer credit Most of the expansion of consumer credit occurred in connection with automobile loans which in the early months of were being made on increasingly liberal terms. In the case of new car purchases instalment contracts with maturities as long as and months became more prevalent Downpayments of less than a third became fairly common and they were sometimes nominal because of the tendency to overvalue trade-ins. The frequent combination of low downpayments and lengthy maturities meant that the outstanding debt on many instalment contracts exceeded the market value of the car for appreciable periods. In the case of used cars downpayments also declined though there was little change in maturities The authority of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to establish maximum terms on consumer credit had ceased in Consequently apart from general monetary policies the means of influencing consumer credit were limited to what could be accomplished by moral suasion and bank supervision. Government officials met repeatedly with representatives of financial institutions and noted the hazards that may attach to excessively liberal credit terms. In July the Federal bank supervisory authorities that is the Comptroller of the Currency the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation added a section on consumer credit to their regular examination reports with a view to providing a better basis for evaluating the quality of consumer loans extended by banks. Partly in response to these measures but mainly in response to the general tightening of the money market many lenders put a halt to further liberalization of terms and some began to stiffen terms However maturities and downpayments generally remained liberal by contrast with those of prior years Housing Credit Policies Several steps were taken by the Government to help cope also with the threat of overexpansion of housing credit. We have already noted the great upsurge in residential construction between the fall of and the spring of This was stimulated by increasingly easy credit during and the eagerness of financial institutions to acquire and make forward commitments for mortgage loans at a time when rates of return on other investments were less attractive. The demand for new housing generally remained strong during this period. Nevertheless by the spring of a surplus of housing became evident in some scattered localities CHART Consumer Credit Outstanding BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS END OF M O N T H J TOTAL CONSUMER CREDIT J S TOTAL ^ INSTAt .MENT CR : DIT.. # # AUTOM DBILE NSTALME j l CREDI " o inn lii II i i II nl II in i n m i iI HI I | l | I I n n mi Inn i II i li linn ll ! lUiL o i SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART Consumer Instalment Credit BILLIONS OP DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED AUTOMOBILE CREDIT EXTENDED V AUTOMOBILE CREDIT REPAID i | i M I I | H i l l | HI I I I 1I1 II I II I I II I I I II I SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Easy mortgage credit manifested itself most conspicuously in the terms offered on government-guaranteed loans for veterans although it was by no means limited to this segment of the market. In the spring of mortgage loans with maturities of to years represented nearly twothirds of the total number of veterans ' loans on new homes compared with about one-third a year earlier. The like was true of no-downpayment mortgages. The extensive and growing resort to mortgages requiring no downpayment raised the serious question whether such loans were in the best interest of many of the veterans attracted into home purchase and whether the sale of homes on increasingly easy terms could be maintained without deterioration of credit standards and unsettling effects on home building activity in the future In addition strains in the mortgage market began to be evident in the spring and summer of Finding it difficult to handle the record volume of mortgage loans and commitments mortgage lenders resorted increasingly to short-term credit. Savings and loan associations stepped up sharply their borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Banks. Other mortgage lenders arranged for temporary financing by " warehousing " large amounts of mortgages with commercial banks a development which led the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to advise caution in the extension of this type of credit. Advances by Home Loan Banks to savings and loan associations together with mortgage " warehousing " loans by commercial banks in major cities increased by billion dollars between August and August The strains on the financial system were paralleled by pressures on the resources available to the construction industry. Building materials such as cement steel copper and brass products gypsum board hardwood flooring even bricks and nails were reported in short supply in more and more areas. Wages were rising generally. The price of land for residential developments was increasing rapidly as were prices of building materials In view of these developments the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Administration issued regulations in late April which required the home purchaser who obtained a mortgage underwritten by the Government to pay legal recording and related fees in cash. The inclusion of such costs in mortgage loans was one of the unsound though not widespread practices that had developed under competitive pressures. At about the same time the field offices of both agencies were instructed to intensify their surveys of local housing markets and to take coordinated steps to restrain Federal underwriting of mortgages in localities where housing surpluses were found to exist. In July both agencies reduced from to years the maximum maturity of mortgages that could henceforth be insured or guaranteed by the Government. Simultaneously the minimum downpayment on homes bought under the veterans ' program was raised from zero to percent of the purchase price while minimum down- CHART Mortgage Debt Outstanding to 4-Family Nonfarm Properties BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS OTHER GOVT. UNDERWRITTEN END OF YEAR SOURCES : HOME LOAN BANK BOARD FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION VETERANS ADMINISTRATION AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART Increases in Private Debt BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ALL OTHER TOTAL PRIVATE DEBT NONFARM MORTGAGE DEBT- CONSUMER CREDIT I i/ I TO 4-FAMILY HOUSES SOURCES : VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES payments on homes purchased under the program of the Federal Housing Administration were increased correspondingly. In line with these measures the Federal Home Loan Bank Board took steps in the summer and fall to restrain the rapid growth of lending by the Home Loan Banks All these steps were parts of a general and concerted credit policy. Housing loans insured or guaranteed by the Federal Government now represent over two-fifths of the entire home mortgage debt. For this reason if for no other the Government has a direct responsibility in helping to maintain a sound housing and mortgage market. It has a corresponding duty to use its own programs wisely so as to promote stable economic growth as well as progress toward better housing. The objective of stable growth is clearly in the national interest. It is also in the long-term interest of those who have so greatly benefited from the Federal housing programs the millions of consumers with a stake in their homes jobs and debt obligations the hundreds of thousands of workmen in the construction industry and the thousands of enterprises engaged in home building and mortgage lending Adjusting the Stockpiling Program After the basic decision of January to hold the tax line monetary and credit policies were largely relied on to keep the excesses that tend to arise during prosperity from cumulating. However the Government 's housekeeping operations were also managed so as to relieve the pressures of an expanding economy. Among other things the stockpiling program was adjusted during the past year within the limits permitted by law to avoid undue hardship to the civilian economy. Quantities of copper aluminum and nickel under contract for delivery to the Government were diverted to industrial use and in the case of copper some holdings outside the stockpile were sold for essential industrial uses. It was possible to do this without injury to the defense program because of the substantial progress that had previously been made in stockpile accumulations. Also the expansion of capacity in some major industries notably of aluminum is now contributing to domestic mobilization potentials and is decreasing correspondingly the need for stockpiles IV EFFECTIVENESS OF MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES Monetary and fiscal policies influence different activities in varying degree and these effects have varying time dimensions. Thus financial developments during reflected not only the restraints placed on borrowing in that year but also the credit ease of the preceding year. In addition they mirrored the strength of credit demands accompanying the rapid business expansion of as well as the efforts to moderate these demands. Final evidence of the effectiveness of recent governmental policies must therefore be sought in the economic annals that are yet to come as well as those for Even now however it can be said with confidence that the early recognition of a need for monetary and fiscal caution and the gradual but persistent application of a policy of restraint during the greater part of contributed in no small degree to the achievement and maintenance of prosperity without price inflation The vigorous expansion of economic activity during was accompanied by little change in the average level of wholesale or consumer prices. To be sure the substantial stability of the price level reflected in some degree the opposite movements of industrial and farm prices in wholesale markets. However the increase even in the average level of industrial prices was not large for a period of high prosperity. Because the over-all change in prices was small speculative accumulation of business inventories such as has often led to economic recession in the past was largely avoided last year. And since consumer prices remained virtually stable higher earnings due to increased basic rates of pay and longer or more regular hours of work were not dissipated but resulted in rapidly rising real incomes for wage earners. The advances occurred in a general atmosphere of industrial peace Although we have not entirely escaped the financial excesses that commonly develop in a time of economic exuberance the policies of restraint pursued by the Government helped to moderate the growth of debt and to protect its quality. A balanced Federal budget is now definitely within CHART Wholesale and Consumer Prices INDEX " INDEX * CONSUMER PRICES WHOLESALE PRICE : SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR TABLE Changes in average gross and net spendable weekly earnings of production workers in manufacturing constant prices Net spendable average weekly earnings Gross average weekly earnings Period Workers with no dependents Workers with three dependents Percentage change : to to to to to to to to to Earnings in constant prices are obtained by dividing earnings in current prices by the consumer price index Gross weekly earnings less Federal social security and income taxes Based on preliminary data for Source : Department of Labor TABLE Changes in average gross weekly earnings in selected industries constant prices Manufacturing Period Building conNon- strucDurable durable tion goods goods Retail Wholesale trade trade Class I railroads Telephone Laundries Bituminous coal mining Percentage change : to to to to to to to to to For production workers or nonsupervisory employees. Earnings in constant prices are obtained by dividing earnings in current prices by the consumer price index Based on preliminary data for Source : Department of Labor reach. There has been little change in the amount of stock market credit outstanding since last June and its quality has improved. The tendency toward increasingly liberal terms on consumer instalment loans has been arrested. Mortgage lending is proceeding on a more prudent basis. For some months now the expansion of borrowing has in the aggregate been largely restricted to the loan funds made available from past or current savings. Because the creation of new money has been kept down the recurring problem of preventing inflation should be less difficult in the future While the monetary and fiscal restraints of last year contributed significantly to economic stability they did not interfere with the attainment of a very high rate of economic growth. Expansion continued throughout the year and the rate of growth slowed down only when output began pressing against the ceiling of physical resources. On the whole then the performance of the economy in the year just ended indicates considerable success of the Government 's stabilizing efforts just as the annals of demonstrated that the Government helped to overcome the forces of economic contraction and facilitate recovery In some ways the lesson of is perhaps the more significant one Success in preventing depression depends in large part upon a willingness to avoid the excesses that can so easily develop during prosperity and upon skill in doing this. Governmental measures of monetary and fiscal restraint are not as readily accepted as are measures of economic stimulation. The manufacturer who sees an opportunity to expand his activities by borrowing can not always understand why his bank is so short of funds that he must put up with a smaller loan than he requested. Nor can the homebuilder or merchant or consumer. Nor for that matter can the banker. To each participant in the economic process a shortage of credit may appear as a restriction on his own opportunities. But the basic shortage under conditions of high prosperity is on the side of physical resources not on the side of money or credit. If credit on easy terms were available to everyone at a time when the economy is already working close to capacity the consequence would be a scramble for limited resources and a cumulative bidding up of prices. If taxes were simultaneously reduced this inflationary process would only be speeded up. A government that sought to prolong prosperity by such devices would be taking a road that all too often has ended in disaster Prompt and resolute governmental action to contain undue expansion requires courage and a willingness to focus on the less apparent and the longer-term interests of the economy. The fact that the Government during acted in this fashion and the degree to which people accepted and approved the program of fiscal and monetary restraints as the better part of wisdom testify to our increasing maturity as a Nation in dealing with the problem of economic instability. Another challenge to meeting the objectives of the Employment Act was met as the first decade of operations under this novel legislation came to a close V. T H E CURRENT ECONOMIC SITUATION Once an economy operates close to full capacity further expansion of economic activity is bound to proceed at a slower rate. At such a time moreover crosscurrents multiply and become more prominent. As was to be expected the scope of the economic expansion has narrowed in recent months and its pace has slackened. Declines have lately been under way in housing starts automobile production and other activities but they are being amply offset by increases elsewhere. The flow of orders to business firms remains high and in the aggregate continues to exceed current production and sales. Many shortages particularly of metals persist. In short the rapid expansion of six or twelve months back has given way to a tamer movement but the underlying trend still appears to be upward The economy is starting the new year from a strong financial as well as a strong industrial position. Although stock prices are substantially higher than a year or two ago credit is not a very large factor in today 's stock market. Although consumers have recently added heavily to their debts they also have added substantially to their liquid assets and earning power. The current liabilities of business firms have risen but their current assets have risen still more. Agricultural inventories are very high but they are largely held by the Government and their disposal will not be permitted to disrupt markets. The recent expansion of industrial production has been accompanied by an increase in business inventories but a preponderant part of the increase has been in goods locked up in the productive process. Apart from the automobile industry which is now bringing its production into better adjustment with market demand there is little evidence in the business world of excess or speculative inventory holdings. Taking recent years as a standard the current ratio of inventories to sales is generally low for both manufacturers and distributors. The increase of inventory investment in the fourth quarter of which stands out prominently in the most recent statistical summary of the gross national product is largely attributable to automobiles and does not have a more general significance As just noted housing starts have recently been declining. Such indicators as we have of proposed home construction are also pointing downward These movements largely reflect the limited supply of mortgage money in the recent past rather than a slackening demand for new homes. Basic conditions of the home-building industry are on the whole satisfactory. In good part because of the governmental steps taken during to avoid overbuilding local housing surpluses are now fewer than last spring. In the Nation as a whole the vacancies currently available are only about percent of the total stock of dwellings. Although that figure is somewhat higher than in recent years vacancies still fall short of the reserves that people need in order to shift their housing accommodations without excessive delays The demand for new dwellings remains strong and there are some signs also of improvement in the conditions affecting their supply. Shortages of building materials have been reduced somewhat in recent weeks. More- CHART Indicators of Investment Preparations BILLIONS OF DOLLARS THOUSANDS TOTAL CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ( VALUE ) NEW BUSINESS INCORPORATIONS MILLIONS OF SQUARE FEET RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ( FLOOR SPACE ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS A V \ A NEW ORDERS DURABLE GOODS j " ft 'V _ \ MILLIONS OF SQUARE FEET COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS ( FLOOR SPACE ) INDEX NEW ORDERS NONELECTRICAL MACHINERY NOTE : ALL DATA ARE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED c SOURCES : F.W.DODOE DUN BRADSTREET DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE M GRAW-HILL AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH over the condition of the mortgage market is beginning to improve. Quotations on government-underwritten mortgages have stabilized of late. Commitments by life insurance companies for making home mortgages seem to have turned up. By last December the savings and loan associations had already succeeded in bringing their commitments into reasonable adjustment with their inflows of cash and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board therefore relaxed the restraints on borrowing from the Home Loan Banks. More recently in view of the adjustments that have already taken place in the home-building and home-financing industries the maximum permissible term of governmentally underwritten mortgages has been restored to years. All these developments favor a good rate of residential building CHART Housing Starts and Applications for Financing MILLIONS OF UN ITS MILLIONS OF UNITS ANNUAL RATES .NEW PRIVATE NONFARM HOUSING STARTS UNITS IN MORTGAGE APPLICATIONS FOR NEW HOME CONSTRUCTION SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR VETERANS ADMINISTRATION ( VA ) AND FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION ( FHA ) during although it seems unlikely that the exceptionally high volume of the past year will be attained On the other hand business investment has been rising vigorously in recent months and the indications are that the increase will be extended in the months immediately ahead. Orders for machine tools freight cars engines and turbines and durable goods generally have been expanding The excess of orders over sales of durable goods in the past twelve months has built up a large backlog of unfilled orders. New business incorporations CHART Manufacturers ' Inventories and Sales BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INVENTORIESs / / TOTAL SALI y o< J M11111111111 l 111111M M i 111111M111 iII11111111 i n RATIO RATIO _ INVENTORY/SALES RATIO DURABLE G O S O D / ; \ / ' _ * * \ A TAL ^ ^ f * NONDUf [ ABLE G ( O 1mull II ii I I i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART Retail Inventories and Sales BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INVENTORIES * / TOTAL Si II I n II m m M I i l l I I i M I I 1II l1 I1 iI l I i r i i i i f f I n i RATIO RATIO INVENTORY/SALES RATIO V : \ A / TO ' RABLE/ O D O S \ i rAL A _ ^ \ V NOND JRABLE G0 ( ) Ds/ < O ^ Illllllllll i l I M M l l l M I iiMihiin I l l l l l l l l l l * DATA BEGINNING JANUARY NOT COMPARABLE WITH OATA FOR EARLIEF PERIODS SOURCEt DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE have been proceeding at a high rate. When allowance is made for the erratic movements intrinsic in monthly records it is clear that construction contracts for commercial and industrial structures have been moving to higher levels. Surveys of business plans for capital spending many of which represent firm commitments for likewise suggest a rising volume of business outlays on plant and equipment. In view of the investments that are projected or already under way the outlook for business capital expenditures in coming months is good The prospective high volume of private investment in fixed capital that is business investment in plant and equipment together with residential construction is likely to be supplemented over coming months by further expansion of State and local spending. The pressures for local improvements are continuing to mount over the country and the scale on which construction contracts are proceeding strengthens the expectation of a higher rate of State and local outlays. Federal expenditure on goods and services may also move a little higher over coming months The basis for judging other parts of the economy is less clear at present However foreign trade probably will continue at a high level at least over the months immediately ahead. How soon and in what degree the decline of farm incomes and farm spending is checked will largely depend on how promptly the Congress acts on the Administration 's newly proposed farm program. The future course of consumer spending is always shrouded in uncertainty but it is well to note that retail sales last quarter were at their highest level of the year and that retail sales in December quite apart from the normal seasonal bulge were at the highest level of the quarter Thus the trend of aggregate consumer spending continues to be upward despite the recent decline of expenditures on durables. If it is unlikely that consumers will buy automobiles in at last year 's extraordinary rate they may spend more freely on home improvements home furnishings and nondurables. The urge to maintain and improve living standards is so strong nowadays that continuation of a high level of consumer spending can be reasonably anticipated Under current conditions the economic growth of our Nation is limited by industrial capacity and accretions to the labor force. When the economy has reached so high a level its near-term course is inevitably surrounded by a margin of uncertainty and minor movements can occur without involving a change in general trend. Taking recent developments all together it is reasonable to expect that high levels of production employment and income will be broadly sustained during the coming year and that underlying conditions will remain favorable to further economic growth The clearest lesson of recent economic history is the need for alertness to economic change and for prompt adaptation of economic policies to changing business conditions. It is important to avoid complacency and to bear in mind the uncertainties that always surround the future But it is no less important to recognize that the opportunities which lie ahead for American businessmen consumers workers farmers and investors are much greater than the uncertainties. The basic objective of governmental policy in the economic sphere during the coming year should be to help in the realization of these opportunities. The following chapters present for the consideration of the Congress a program to help widen the scope of our current prosperity and to help extend it into the future Chapter Broadening the Scope of Prosperity T HE PRECEDING CHAPTER has focused on the Nation 's success in attaining general prosperity without price inflation during the year just ended. But the economic life of a dynamic people is full of crosscurrents. No matter how rapidly the economy as a whole may be advancing there are always some industries and areas that are standing still or even declining. Progress of technology is by its nature uneven ; new products and new firms continually disrupt economic routine ; shifts of demand keep occurring and recurring ; foreign developments have widely divergent effects on domestic industry ; and the weather itself is sometimes the arbiter over the lives and fortunes of people. These factors and many others like them diversify the economic life of a Nation. If our economy is to continue growing it will have to remain fluid and resilient and broadly responsive to market forces. The general welfare may however be greatly enhanced by fostering conditions under which adjustments can be accomplished with a minimum of hardship or difficulty It is precisely because good times have spread so widely among the American people that we should give serious thought to ways and means of extending prosperity to the less flourishing sectors of our economy. Many branches of agriculture have failed to participate fully in the Nation 's prosperity. Unemployment has persisted in some urban communities despite the attainment of full employment in a practical sense in the Nation at large. Even in these highly prosperous times a relatively small yet significant number of American families have for one reason or another incomes that are much too low. We must try to extend the magnificent performance of our economy. The first and most pressing problem requiring the attention of the Congress is the continued decline of agricultural incomes I. PROMOTING AGRICULTURAL READJUSTMENTS American agriculture is a highly varied part of the national economy The commercial farms where the income of the operator 's family depends primarily on the sale of farm products vary greatly in size in degree of specialization in productive efficiency and in financial return. In addition there are many part-time and residential farms. The Nation has a stake in the welfare of all agriculture and all farm people. National programs must take account of the divergent problems of the different groups CHART Farm Income Prices and Output BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OP DOLLARS INCOME OF FARM OPERATORS y NET INDEX INDEX I9IO-I4 IOO BY PRIGES RECEIVED FARMERS > \ C \ C \ o INDEX INDEX * FARM OUTPUT I I I I I I l I I I I I t I I I I I ! / INCLUDES GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS AND NET CHANGE IN FARM INVENTORIES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE I I I I I ! The commercial farmers who produce the bulk of our farm output are ingenious adaptive and progressive. They take advantage of the rich flow of technical knowledge materials and machinery made available by research and industrial development. Their farms are better equipped and better managed than they have ever been. Operator-owned family farms continue to predominate and the acreage and capital per farm are increasing. Farm wage rates have risen as the high level of industrial activity in the postwar decade has drawn into more remunerative nonfarm occupations many low-income farmers sharecroppers and hired hands Farm people are taking advantage of opportunities for off-farm employment full-time or part-time which yields important supplements to their income ; and their living has improved far above prewar levels. Since January farmers have participated in our national system of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance. Continuing large increases in population coupled with high and rising levels of national income and employment have maintained a strong domestic demand for farm products in recent years Nevertheless the economic condition of agriculture is not satisfactory and the position of farmers in our dynamic economy has aroused deep concern. Experience varies widely from year to year in different farming sections and enterprises and from farm to farm. Yet gross and net incomes from farming have been declining since in sharp contrast to improving rewards in industry commerce and finance. Readjustment to peacetime conditions of demand and production has not been fully achieved. It is imperative that we strengthen farm programs on the basis of a realistic appraisal of the present situation Farmers responded magnificently to wartime and postwar challenges to produce abundantly and generally enjoyed great prosperity in the 's Farm incomes rose to new highs after World War II as a result of price inflation high domestic demand and extraordinary exports largely financed by grants and loans from the Government. Substantial declines in farm prices and incomes in and were due mainly to subsidence of this abnormal export demand record crop production in and some contraction in the domestic economy. The outbreak of the Korean conflict and fears of a return of wartime shortages stimulated increases in both the domestic and foreign demand for agricultural products. This coupled with renewed inflation raised farm prices and gross incomes to new peaks in The containment of hostilities led to a fall in abnormal demands for stocks and there was a sharp decline of agricultural exports in Enlarged supplies of meats and dairy products in as well as temporarily reduced consumer demand for the latter also contributed to the decline in farm prices and incomes from their exceptional peaks. The further declines in and were associated with a general enlargement of production and stocks The decline in gross farm income since has been accompanied by an even sharper decline in net income. Farm production expenses in in- creasing degree consist of machinery fertilizer and other items purchased from the nonfarm economy. Prices of these items have declined little in recent years and in many cases have risen as nonfarm demands for steel gasoline and other products continued to increase. Thus farmers have been subjected to a " cost-price squeeze. " Although the market conditions that prevailed during and immediately after the war could not be expected to continue indefinitely the protracted decline and current low levels of income in a period of generally good times are of increasing concern On certain points the evidence is clear. Commercial farmers have been producing and are geared to produce more than could be commercially disposed of at supported prices. Government restrictions on acreage of several crops notably wheat and cotton have insufficiently curtailed production of these crops and have led to expansion of others. Huge carryovers have piled up far beyond liberal estimates of desirable reserves Government holdings acquired under price-support programs have kept rising in spite of intensive and effective efforts to dispose of surpluses The persisting decline in farm prices and incomes reflects a continuing imbalance between farm output and its ultimate disposition. The imbalance is to be traced largely to the technological revolution in American agriculture changing domestic demands for farm products the expansion of agricultural production abroad and the repeated extension of wartime price support levels long after the end of World War II The most recent upsurge in our agricultural technology began in the late 's. It has taken many forms such as better varieties of seeds improved breeds of livestock more and better machinery increasing use of fertilizer improved feeding practices extension of electrification and more effective controls of weeds insects and plant and animal diseases. Favorable prices higher incomes and the steadily improving asset position of farmers during the war made it possible to adopt the new technology at a rapid pace between and After the war the broad uptrend in farm output continued and there is no sign that the current phase of the technological revolution has run its course. The index of total farm output rose percent during percent in and percent in ; new records were set in each of the past five years. The latest increases have far exceeded the expectations of competent specialists. In output per acre per livestock unit per farm worker and per man-hour remarkable advances have been registered Demand has not risen enough to absorb all of the enlarged farm output. Indeed technological developments on and off farms have of themselves reduced the demand for several important farm products. Notable examples are the nearly complete replacement of horses and mules by automotive equipment in farm and nonfarm uses and of horsefeed by motor fuel ; inroads of synthetic fibers paper and other products on the consumption of cotton and wool ; and the adverse effect on the demand for fats and oils from increasing displacement of soap by detergents. Apart from such changes as incomes rise the demand for farm products tends to increase at a rate below the rate of increase in disposable personal income. Per capita consumption of food in was only percent higher than in whereas per capita disposable income in constant dollars was percent higher. Retail food sales have risen with population and incomes but much of the increase in consumer expenditure has gone for additional services associated with processing and distribution rather than to enlarge the per capita demand for raw foodstuffs For some products such as wheat and potatoes rising personal incomes entail a decrease in demand as consumers shift to more highly preferred foods. And per capita consumption of meat poultry and most dairy products has of late been so high that further increases encounter greater competition from other desired goods and services Notable gains by the economies of Western Europe and many other parts of the world since might have been expected to enlarge normal export markets for American farm products. Several factors have severely limited the extent to which this has occurred. Agriculture abroad gradually recovered from wartime destruction and disorganization. Under the stimulus of national measures aimed at self-sufficiency enlarged exports and protection to farmers the output of major crops wheat cotton rice sugar and others has sharply increased. Even several of the low-income countries have greatly expanded their production of foodstuffs and fibers. As increased supplies have brought world prices down the levels of price supports in this country have tended to price our products out of world markets The tendency to surplus production in the United States was strongly reinforced by legislative and administrative actions in An Act of July extended price supports on the six " basic " crops at percent of parity through and postponed until the application of " modernized parity " formulas. By administrative decisions in acreage allotments and marketing quotas were not applied to wheat for harvest in the following year price supports for dairy products were maintained and the support prices of many nonbasic commodities were raised These measures imposed heavy burdens on this Administration. Farm output rose to a new high in the very year when the abnormal demands arising from the Korean conflict disappeared. Large portions of the output of supported crops and dairy products including one-third of the farm marketings of basic crops had to be acquired by the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) The stimulus to overproduction of basic crops continued in From mid-1952 to mid-1955 when prices of all six basic crops were supported at percent of old parities CCC inventories and commitments for these commodities rose from billion dollars to billion As soon as previous regulations could be terminated this Administration took steps to cope with the growing surpluses under discretion permitted by the Agricultural Act of The price-support level for dairy products was reduced on April to percent of parity with the aim of reducing surplus stocks encouraging consumption and thus improving the position of dairy farmers. Price supports were lowered for flaxseed soybeans and dry beans harvested in and for feed grains and cottonseed harvested in so that these products might compete more effectively in the markets for which they are produced. Acreage allotments and marketing quotas were authorized for crops of wheat cotton tobacco and peanuts. To avoid extreme acreage reductions in one year the Congress determined that the full reductions should not be applied to cotton and wheat until The Congress incorporated major Administration proposals in the Agricultural Act of which was designed to strengthen the foundations of agriculture and to yield beneficial results over the years. This Act authorized the first departure from price supports on basic crops at percent of parity which had been inaugurated in to stimulate production to meet war needs. It provided for flexibility in these price supports eventually within the range of to percent of modernized parities Thus far however percent supports have continued to apply on cotton tobacco and peanuts ; and despite the adjustment in price supports on wheat and rice for harvest in these products have not moved freely into domestic use or export. The attainment of a balance between production and market demand has been severely handicapped by the huge stocks accumulated under provisions of earlier legislation and also by the failure of acreage allotments to bring about corresponding reductions in farm output Cotton acreage allotments in and were set at the minimums permitted by law with the object of reducing production to million bales in Actually because of remarkably increased yields the crop exceeded the production goal by percent and the crop by nearly percent. Wheat yields have not risen as rapidly but the amounts produced on the minimum acreage allotment permitted by law ( million acres ) have continued to exceed domestic and export needs. Similar results have been experienced with other basic commodities. Hence carryovers of these commodities and feed grains have risen in For most commodities moreover the proportion of total carry-overs held by the CCC has been increasing ; on June about percent of the wheat carry-over was in its hands The production-control programs that have been operated for basic commodities which account for about one-fourth of the total income from farm marketings have indirectly contributed to lower incomes for the producers of other important commodities. Farmers with acreage diverted from basic crops have deemed it more profitable to produce feed grains or other crops even at lowered support prices than to let this part of their land lie idle. Many have expanded their hog and beef cattle numbers to use the additional feed thus produced adding further to the expansion induced by relatively favorable livestock prices in earlier years. Dairy feeding rates have also been increased. These factors have been largely responsible for lower prices of beef cattle and sharply lower prices of hogs in and a continued increase in production of dairy products Unrealistic supports have not merely overstimulated production of several basic farm products in this country and abroad ; they have also impeded normal flow into feed use and export. Feed use of wheat is no larger than in former periods of scarcity while food use has been virtually constant for many years and seed use has dropped as acreage has been restricted. Practically all our wheat and flour exports now move only under direct subsidy or under special export programs. In fiscal year the average subsidy on wheat exported under the International Wheat Agreement was about cents per bushel. In December American wheats were selling on domestic markets around cents per bushel above equivalent export prices Our cotton is steadily losing ground in competition with synthetic fibers and paper and is rapidly losing export markets to foreign producers who have stepped up their production at prices made remunerative by American price supports. In over percent of our cotton exports were moved under special programs including Export-Import Bank loans. In the current marketing year the disparity between prices of American and foreign cottons is much wider than hitherto and commercial exports are running extremely low. In short cotton growers now face the threat of a drastic permanent shrinkage of their commercial markets. Tobacco exports are holding up well despite expansion of foreign production but increasing proportions are moved under special export programs. Since commercial exports of American rice have declined radically and outlets for surplus rice in CGG hands are found with great difficulty either at home or abroad With additional authority granted by the Congress during the past two years the Administration has made great efforts to dispose of surplus accumulations at home and abroad as well as to enlarge the domestic use of livestock products that tend to be in surplus. The Agricultural Act of authorized the GCC to use million dollars annually to increase the consumption of milk by school children and to make available to the Armed Services dairy products acquired in price-support operations. The Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of gave the CCG additional authority to use surplus agricultural commodities in barter transactions and for famine relief or other emergencies in friendly countries It also authorized in Title I the sale of these products to friendly nations for foreign currencies. In mid-1955 the authorization to reimburse the CCC for losses on sales under Title I was increased from the original million dollars to million dollars for the three fiscal years In fiscal exports sold for foreign currencies totaled million dollars ; exports bartered for strategic and other materials amounted to million dollars ; and shipments under grant programs of the International Cooperation Administration totaled million dollars. The moderate rise in our total agricultural exports from the low of is more than accounted for by subsidized sales sales for foreign currencies sacrifice sales and donations Recent administrative actions have helped in other ways to alleviate temporary market surpluses and to reduce CCG stocks. Examples are ( ) liberal donations for school-lunch programs to charitable institutions and with the aid of private philanthropic organizations to needy people overseas ; ( ) payment of export subsidies on certain citrus fruits ; ( ) in view of the large crops payments to divert white potatoes to starch and feed use and the purchase of sweet potatoes for use in school lunches ; ( ) inauguration in the fall of of a program of purchase of pork products and lard ; and ( ) gradual sale of CGC holdings of wool on competitive bids beginning in November The Administration is intensifying its efforts in these directions. Yet experience shows that there are limits to expanding the noncommercial disposal of farm products. Beyond some point commercial sales are merely displaced without increasing total consumption. At home the displacement may be of the same or competing commodities ; abroad our own commercial exports or those of friendly nations may be displaced. Moreover domestic producers in an importing country even if its people are ill-fed and ill-clothed may feel adversely affected. The difficulties are greatest with our largest surpluses those of cotton and wheat. Extreme care is necessary to avoid disrupting world markets and damaging the delicate fabric of our foreign relations Increasingly vigorous surplus disposals have achieved substantial reductions in CCG stocks of some commodities and retarded the increase of others. Surplus disposals of agricultural commodities by the CCC have risen from million dollars in fiscal year to million in fiscal and million in fiscal The realized losses on such disposals account for much of the increase in total costs of " programs primarily for stabilization of farm prices and income " which were million dollars in fiscal million in fiscal and about million in fiscal Meanwhile total CCC inventories and commitments rose from billion dollars in mid-1952 to over billion in mid1955. Chiefly because of huge feed grain supplies and extraordinarily high cotton yields CCC stocks in will probably be still higher The Federal Government has thus assumed heavy financial burdens on behalf of agriculture during the past three years. Increasing proportions of gross and net farm income have come from the public Treasury. In spite of this farm income has declined and many fanners have continued to be subject to tight restrictions. In considerable part these are conse- quences of price supports that are out of line with market conditions and of production restraints that do not work well It is clear that price supports at percent of parity for basic commodities after thorough test have failed in recent years to maintain farm prices and farm income. They have delayed realistic adjustment of farm output to altered domestic and export demands. They have indeed cushioned declines of prices for producers of supported commodities ; but contrary to intentions they have prolonged the period and extended the scope of declines in farm prices and incomes. To go back to high rigid price supports as some have urged would only make the situation worse The position we have reached clearly requires further revision in agricultural programs that will lead toward the goals of a stable and prosperous agriculture with production in balance with market demand at costs and prices that permit good farmers to earn remunerative returns with substantial freedom in managing their enterprises. In view of the size of stocks accumulated and the persistent tendency to annual additions these high goals can not be reached at once but we must move energetically toward them Present agricultural conditions call for an attack on several fronts Surplus stocks must be reduced. Annual surpluses of important products must be cut at their source and soil conservation must be extended on land now contributing to such surpluses. Additional voluntary reductions in crop acreage must be induced by payments to offset the consequent loss of income from farming. Various modifications in commodity programs and a relaxation of present restrictions on farmers where feasible are required Stress should be laid on enlarging outlets for farm products on means of reducing production costs and on ways of helping farm people to earn more income The special Message on Agriculture of January therefore recommended a number of measures to promote economic readjustments in agriculture. Chief among these is the two-part Soil Bank Program designed to reduce current output of farm products particularly of those commodities in greatest surplus. Also included are proposals to speed surplus disposal broaden outlets for farm products reduce farm production costs improve farm credit facilities and expand agricultural research The Message recommended that the Congress consider a program for stimulating voluntary additional reductions in the acreage planted to wheat cotton corn and rice. Under the proposed Acreage Reserve Program growers of these crops will be asked to reduce plantings below their allotments in return for negotiable certificates entitling them to cash or to specified quantities of the commodity from CCC stocks. Thus surplus stocks can be used to meet portions of current market demand without reducing the net farm income of the growers. Under existing conditions special problems arise in connection with corn. If therefore the Congress should choose not to authorize the Acreage Reserve Program for corn an alternative might be considered namely to eliminate acreage allotments and put corn price supports on a discretionary basis comparable with other feed grains. This course might also be considered with respect to rice on which both acreage and marketing controls are in effect The proposed Conservation Reserve Program the second part of the Soil Bank is designed to alleviate the declines in income of producers of cultivated crops and livestock that have resulted from the increased supplies of feed grains and other crops grown on " diverted acres. " All farmers will be offered the opportunity to withdraw some cropland from current production. To achieve this reduction in acreage and to assure the conservation of this land for future use as needed the Federal Government will provide financial assistance to farmers in establishing the appropriate protective cover and will also make annual payments related to the length of time needed to establish the new use of the land. It is anticipated that this program will reduce the acreage planted to feed grains thus restricting the expansion of livestock production To insure that the increased acreage in protective uses will not lead to expansion of forage-consuming livestock it has been recommended that grazing be prohibited on the land put into the Acreage Reserve and for a specified period on land retired from crop production under the Conservation Reserve Program The Soil Bank Program will of course be operative in the Great Plains States. It should be supplemented there by a special Great Plains Program which has been developed through intensive studies and cooperative efforts of Federal State and local interests. In portions of ten Western States between the Corn Belt and the Rocky Mountains high prices during and after World War II drew into hazardous crop production notably wheat much land that should be in permanent grass. To speed the return to sounder land use and better-balanced farm practices in this area additional legislation is being proposed The Rural Development Program was initiated in as a long-run cooperative undertaking to help farm families in a low-income range to improve their earning power. Most of these farmers do not contribute appreciably to farm marketings or benefit from price supports. Some are small-scale commercial farmers who come under price-support programs especially for cotton and tobacco but their incomes have been low even when farm prices have been highest. While the Rural Development Program can not yield substantial results quickly it is of high importance as a means of developing agriculture 's human resources as explained further below Many parts of our agricultural policy are working well and require only moderate changes. These together with the new measures now put forward as set forth in the recent Message on Agriculture and the Budget Message constitute a many-sided attack on the ills that beset agriculture in spite of and in part because of its great productive strength. There is n * sure and easy cure for persisting surplus conditions. We must continue to be on guard lest measures designed to help do harm instead and we must be ready to adjust our programs as experience may dictate. The programs now recommended if framed wisely and adopted promptly will promote the welfare of farmers and the Nation II. HELPING LOCAL COMMUNITIES REDUCE UNEMPLOYMENT Just as the recent decline of agricultural income requires the attention of the Federal Government so too does the problem of substantial unemployment which has persisted in some urban communities despite the attainment of practically full employment in the Nation at large. Local unemployment often proves stubborn when it stems from special causes such as a dwindling market for the products in which a community has specialized the removal of one or more of its key firms to other places a lag in the technology of its principal industry or the depletion of a natural resource on which the local economy is based. As noted in last year 's Economic Report " such 'structural * or 'spot ' unemployment may remain even when the Nation 's economy practically reaches full employment. " The expansion of general economic activity during the past year has indeed sharply reduced the number of areas suffering from chronic unemployment but it has not eliminated the problem any more than have previous expansions in our history or in that of other industrialized nations The fate of distressed communities is a matter of national as well as local concern. At present numerous private groups as well as State and local agencies are assisting communities troubled with serious unemployment in working out practical solutions. The Federal Government has also actively interested itself in the problem. As far as feasible government contracts are being placed with firms in labor surplus areas. An inducement has been given to the location of defense production facilities in such areas by allowing tax amortization benefits beyond those granted elsewhere Also the Office of Area Development in the Department of Commerce has been enlarged so that it could better serve local needs. Although these programs have proved helpful experience demonstrates that bolder measures are needed. To this end a new Area Assistance Program is recommended for aiding communities that have experienced persistent and substantial unemployment The program is designed around four major principles. First Federal assistance should aim at helping communities to help themselves. Major responsibility in planning and financing the economic redevelopment of their communities must remain with local citizens. Second the program should aim at lasting improvement of job opportunities by the establishment or expansion of productive industries. Projects that generate only temporary employment do not help a community solve its basic problems and may even worsen its predicament. Third Federal assistance should be contingent on the active participation of governmental authorities who are close to the troubled community ; that is the State or local government or a community-sponsored development or credit corporation must provide part of any financial assistance required for specific projects Fourth Federal aid must not be extended to a community if the proposed project will create unemployment in some other area In line with these principles a new unit Area Assistance Administration is proposed in the Department of Commerce to be headed by an Administrator and to be aided by an Advisory Board consisting of the Secretary of Commerce as Chairman the Secretaries of Labor Agriculture Treasury and Health Education and Welfare and the Administrators of the Housing and Home Finance Agency and the Small Business Administration. The Area Assistance Administration will provide technical assistance to communities or larger areas either directly or through grants for studying their resources and preparing practical plans for industrial development. It will also extend capital improvement loans for projects that promise to improve a community 's long-run economic outlook but for which financing can not be obtained on reasonable terms from private sources. The loans should be made in participation with the State or local government acting either directly or through a proper community agency. The Federal loan should not exceed say percent of the cost of the project while the State or local share must not fall short of say percent. This loan program should be confined to communities that have had an unemployment rate of around percent or more during the greater part of the preceding two years. But the loans should be available for a wide range of projects such as the construction of industrial facilities the purchase and alteration of existing facilities or the consolidation and development of tracts for industrial sites Areas suffering from chronic unemployment could also be helped to develop their economic base by changes in certain programs currently administered by the Housing and Home Finance Agency. Congress should authorize the Housing and Home Finance Administrator to give priority to applications received from areas of substantial and persistent unemployment for Federal aid in financing needed public facilities under Title II of the Housing Amendments of Also Title I of the Housing Act of should be amended to make benefits under the Urban Renewal Program available for industrial redevelopment of business sections in these areas Besides undertaking the functions of technical assistance and of lending for capital improvements the Area Assistance Administration will need to concern itself with aiding communities in making effective use of the numerous Federal programs already available to local economies such as the inter-area placement service of the United States Employment Service and its State affiliates the lending program of the Small Business Administration and the program of vocational education of the Department of Health 6a Education and Welfare. Only by properly coordinating its own functions with related activities of other agencies including those of the States and localities will the projected Area Assistance Administration be able to realize the great promise of reducing pockets of chronic unemployment without unduly heavy costs to the Federal Government or undue interference in local affairs To put the new program of community assistance into effect it has been recommended that a revolving loan fund of million dollars be established for the Area Assistance Administration and that an adequate appropriation be made to cover its technical assistance program. The latter program should not be confined to areas of chronic unemployment. On the contrary its scope should be wide and designed to aid both urban and rural communities in developing balanced and progressive economies. Attention should also be given to skill improvement programs. All these are activities in which State universities and other local institutions can be very helpful and they deserve encouragement III. LIFTING INCOMES BY RAISING PRODUCTIVITY The wide diffusion of expanding incomes in the United States is the outstanding social achievement of our time. As tens of millions move steadily from one rung of the income ladder to the next and higher rung disparities of income are lessened. The ownership of a good home and automobile by an American family is now the rule rather than the exception Opportunities for cultural as well as material improvement have become larger. The past year has brought additional and widespread advances in general well-being. Nevertheless too many families and individuals still have to get along on incomes that are inadequate by American standards. The situation keeps changing and the dimensions of present-day poverty are not reliably measured. Yet there can be no better time than the present when the Nation as a whole is enjoying unprecedented prosperity to make a special effort to improve the economic status of the least fortunate among us The causes of low incomes are many. Special measures both private and governmental are needed to cope with some of them such as protracted illness and they are considered later. But the basic cause of low incomes has always been low productivity irregular employment or both By pursuing policies that foster a high level of employment extensive investment in new and more efficient tools of production the improvement of general education and the extension of research and development the Government makes the largest contribution of which it is capable to the lifting of low incomes. When jobs are readily available and the productivity of labor is rising as has been notably the case in recent years the most powerful forces of all are already at work for lifting low incomes. The Government can however still do a great deal to help people who have CHART Home Ownership MILLIONS OF UNITS MILLIONS OF UNITS NUMBER OF OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNITS PERCENT PERCENT PERCENT OF DWELLING UNITS OWNER-OCCUPIED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ANO COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I960 CHART Automobile Ownership MILLIONS OF FAMILIES MILLIONS OF FAMILIES NUMBER OF FAMILIES OWNING AUTOMOBILES ofLJL-i t rnv I t : -j PERCENT PERCENT OF FAMILIES OWNING AUTOMOBILES NOTE : DATA RELATE TO OWNERSHIP EARLY I THE YEAR N SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM been left behind in the onrush of progress by undertaking special programs for raising their productivity. It is highly important that efforts in this direction be extended One of the largest groups of low-income families is in rural areas mostly on farms too small for efficient operation. It includes many part-time farmers. These low-income farm families are widely distributed but a large proportion live in the South. The Department of Agriculture explored this problem in a detailed report Development of Agriculture 's Human Resources presented in April Subsequently a special Message to the Congress urged the prompt launching of a long-range rural development program aimed at helping these families improve their economic status and requested a special appropriation for the purpose Under the leadership of the Department of Agriculture the Rural Development Program was inaugurated in June The program rests on two basic principles. First lasting improvement can be achieved only by increasing the productive capacities of individuals and by enlarging the economic base of rural communities. Second cooperation of Federal and State agencies as well as of local and private groups is essential for success By the end of pilot operations had been started under State and local leadership in counties and local trade areas in States. The selected areas vary widely in type of farming economic resources and potentials extent of industry and other respects. Thus the local programs being developed will vary over a wide range and should yield invaluable experience as the whole program is expanded Numerous constructive activities are already under way. Improvements are being made in the facilities for general education and for vocational training. Improved health and nutrition are being promoted. Members of farm families are being helped to make fuller use of State employment counselling and placement services. Farm business and civic groups working cooperatively with Federal and State officials are attempting to bring more industry into low-income rural areas and to develop better-rounded rural economies. The Federal Government is assisting in still other ways. The Farmers Home Administration has allocated funds for loans to small farmers in pilot areas where additional capital unavailable through private sources is needed to make farm improvements that promise to raise productivity. The Soil Conservation Service and the Forest Service are assisting the pilot programs in their respective fields of competence. The Agricultural Research Service is attempting to determine how small farmers may most successfully conduct their farm operations. All Federal activities connected with the Rural Development Program are being coordinated by an interagency committee and the Federal Extension staff is assisting the State Extension Services in guiding the pilot operations The Rural Development Program is a soundly conceived and basic approach toward solving a highly important social and economic problem This promising program requires greater Federal support. The Congress is urged to enact legislation which will permit the Federal Government 's contribution to the program to be expanded in line with recommendations previously made As a result of the White House Conference on Education the need for improving our scheme of elementary and secondary education is better understood across the Nation. But we must also seek to improve the effectiveness of adult and vocational education in both urban and rural areas Well-directed programs of vocational training can help people those in the middle or advanced ages of life as well as young men and women to become more skilled workers and earn larger incomes. The major part of the extensive facilities now available for this type of education is supplied by State and local governments. The Federal Government should continue its program of grants to aid and stimulate the States in this important work Vocational rehabilitation provides a means by which specialized treatment and education help disabled individuals to improve their incomes Over veterans who became disabled during World War II and the Korean conflict have received special training under a program of the Veterans Administration. Also the Office of Vocational Rehabilitation of the Department of Health Education and Welfare administers a program of grants-in-aid to the States designed to restore handicapped men and women to lives of usefulness and independence. Since about persons have been rehabilitated annually. As a result of legislation in the States now have an opportunity to expand this vital activity It is hoped that the States will enlarge their programs of vocational rehabilitation accordingly so that the productivity of their disabled citizens may be increased. It is also hoped that the acceptance of these rehabilitated workers in useful employment will continue to grow through the activities of the President 's Committee on Employment of the Physically Handicapped and associated efforts Despite all that may be done through education and other means to raise the productivity of individuals and thereby improve their economic status some will continue to receive low incomes. Minimum wage laws do not deal with the fundamental causes of low incomes. Accordingly this condition can be corrected only to a limited extent by such laws However as pointed out in the last Economic Report minimum wage laws can assist the comparatively small number of workers who are at the fringes of competitive labor markets. Last year 's Report therefore urged the Congress to increase the minimum wage from cents to cents an hour. It also pointed out that the lowest paid workers are currently excluded from the protection of the minimum wage that its coverage is no less important than its amount and that an effort should therefore be made by the Congress and the States to bring additional workers under cover of the law. Some advances were made by the States during and it is hoped that this progress will continue. The Congress also raised the minimum but did not act on coverage. By setting the minimum at one dollar per hour instead of cents it has become more difficult to widen the coverage without causing serious economic disturbance in certain areas and fields of activity. Yet the need for an extension of coverage remains and the Congress is again requested to proceed as far as is practical in this direction IV IMPROVING THE ECONOMIC STATUS OF OLDER PERSONS Families headed by older individuals account for a large proportion of the families with low incomes. To a considerable extent therefore the task of lifting low incomes consists in raising the productivity of older persons facilitating their access to employment and strengthening the private and public programs that contribute to their economic security. This aspect of the low-income problem will become increasingly important as the number of older persons and their proportion in the adult population increase. For that reason an Interdepartmental Working Group on Aging is concerning itself now with policies favoring the employment of older persons including those who have yet to reach retirement age and with the consideration of their needs in programs for education rehabilitation housing health and recreation. A broad study of employment-hiring practices of the productivity of older workers of counselling methods and other aspects of this important subject is under way in the Department of Labor The Federal Government has already taken significant steps to improve the economic status of older persons both before and after retirement age To enlarge their access to employment the Federal-State Employment Services give special attention to older workers in job placement. In about million additional workers were brought into the system of Old Age and Survivors Insurance ( OASI ) At the same time the benefits were raised and the law was modified to encourage retired persons to engage in some remunerative work. At present about out of every workers are covered or are eligible for coverage under this insurance system which helps sustain the independence and dignity of people in their declining years. About two-fifths of all persons years or older are now receiving OASI benefits and this proportion will increase. As a result fewer persons will be obliged to seek public assistance. Contributing to the same end are the pensions available to elderly veterans who have nonservice-connected disabilities and receive limited incomes Business firms have also made great strides in providing retirement benefits for their employees. Private employee pension plans now cover some million persons. The number of retired workers drawing benefits under these plans has been estimated at about about twice the number of beneficiaries four years ago Additional measures both private and governmental are needed to advance the status of the elderly. One is the further extension of the coverage of OASI to self-employed groups and other workers not yet included. Since the Federal Government employs many in the latter group it should grant the basic protection of OASI to its personnel and make suitable adjustments in present retirement programs. It would also be helpful if business firms reviewed their pension programs with a view to making the vesting privileges more liberal and to adjusting the conditions for retirement so that older persons who remain vigorous and highly productive can remain longer in useful work. As a safeguard for our rapidly increasing private pension funds it would be desirable to require Federal registration of these plans and reports on their administration and finances Private welfare funds should be handled in similar fashion and the Congress is requested to enact legislation toward both purposes Another need of many elderly persons is greater protection against the economic hardships of illness. This need of retired workers should be borne in mind as far as practicable in employer-sponsored health insurance programs. Also the extension of commercial prepaid health insurance plans to older people requires encouragement. Reinsurance through pooling of risks by private carriers or if need be through a Federal program would be a constructive step in this connection The problem of adequate housing for the elderly requires special consideration. It would be desirable to give preference to older persons and their immediate families in admission to Federally assisted public housing projects. States and municipalities should consider adopting a similar policy The National Housing Act should be amended to authorize insurance under especially favorable mortgage terms for apartment projects built by nonprofit organizations for occupancy by elderly persons. Favorable mortgage insurance terms should also be accorded other multiunit rental projects designed for at least partial occupancy by the elderly. Finally provision should be made to permit third parties which could be either organizations or individuals to guarantee monthly interest and amortization payments in behalf of older persons buying a home under a Federally insured mortgage V. COPING W I T H PERSONAL HARDSHIPS In considering the problems of agriculture of chronic " spot " unemployment of low-income families and of elderly persons we have seen that it is possible to design constructive programs to improve the economic status of people who have not participated fully in the advance of prosperity and that it is not necessary to rely exclusively on the Federal Government in doing so. We now turn to other economic difficulties those which sometimes bring financial ruin or a loss of security to individuals and families. Sound ways of mitigating such hardships can be found and we should go about this task with determination The severity of the floods that occurred last year in the Northeast and the Far West has emphasized again the need for protection against the human and economic losses resulting from such catastrophes. Many private groups and individuals as well as the Federal State and local governments offered prompt and generous assistance to the communities and citizens struck by disaster. Nevertheless needs of this type should be reduced in the future and when they arise should be met more systematically. Toward these ends it is recommended first that the Federal Government accelerate work on practical flood control projects and second that it provide reinsurance for private carriers offering flood insurance. We must not stop however with the second measure since private carriers lacking a firm actuarial basis may be unable to offer the desired protection on the scale that is needed. To provide against this contingency a joint FederalState program for indemnifying flood victims on losses to real property business inventories and household effects should be authorized. The necessary costs can be met partly by premiums paid by private citizens desiring flood protection and partly by Federal and State contributions As experience under the proposed program accumulates private carriers may be able to offer policies at costs which will render unnecessary the continued operation of a government-supported indemnity plan Reduced economic circumstances of people are frequently associated with misfortunes which carry with them financial costs that exceed the resources of even provident folk. Prominent among the causes of such personal hardship is severe and protracted sickness sometimes requiring long hospitalization. The cost of providing for catastrophic illness through regular insurance payments would be modest but insufficient progress has as yet been made with this type of insurance despite the remarkable spread of voluntary health insurance plans. Very recently some business firms have begun to provide broadened health insurance for their employees and this development deserves every encouragement. Also private insuring organizations should be encouraged to extend voluntary health prepayment plans in two directions first to cover catastrophic illness second to cover persons not now being reached through usual group enrollment methods Permissive legislation for private pooling of risks or Federal reinsurance may be needed for this purpose Our oldest form of social insurance is workmen 's compensation now universally accepted as a fair means for relieving the financial burden on individuals of industrial injuries and occupationally connected diseases With the encouragement of the Department of Labor State legislatures acted in to strengthen their legislation on workmen 's compensation In States these legislative changes brought an improvement in benefit provisions. The States are urged to extend this great advance by making further necessary improvements. At the same time to meet more adequately the industrial hazards faced by workers under Federal jurisdiction the Congress is urged to increase the benefits available under the Longshoremen 's and Harbor Workers ' Compensation Act as recommended last year. But we must keep in mind that compensation and rehabilitation despite their obvious importance are poor substitutes for the prevention of occupational injuries and diseases. Much progress has been made in this field but efforts to improve occupational safety and hygiene should be intensified ; they deserve the fullest support of the Government employers employees and labor unions Loss of income as a result of temporary disability that is not workconnected no less than unemployment caused by economic factors or by work-connected disability causes serious drains on family resources. Many private firms have voluntarily sought to protect their employees against this hazard and four States now require that they do so. Legislation to provide nonoccupational temporary disability insurance for workers in the District of Columbia was recommended in the State of the Union Message The Congress is requested to require District employers to provide the needed insurance either directly or through private carriers on a basis that would divide the costs of the stipulated benefits between the employer and his employees. The States are also urged to consider the neglected problem of loss of income through nonoccupational temporary disability The personal and family hardships that arise from loss of employment have been considerably alleviated by the Federal-State system of unemployment insurance. Important improvements have been made in this system in the last two years but further progress is needed. We return to this problem later in the Report There is also a need for attending constructively to some human difficulties that arise in the process of carrying out urban renewal programs The scope of this activity which promises so much for the future of our cities is increasing. Since renewal programs involve the demolition of large areas many urban families inescapably lose their homes in the process Large numbers of them find satisfactory housing elsewhere ; but in view of the part that the Government plays in urban renewal it should where necessary assist the displaced families. To meet this need largely through private enterprise the Congress was requested in to establish a program of Federal loan insurance which would have made home mortgage credit on exceptionally favorable terms available to individuals displaced from their homes by urban renewal or other public projects. The program enacted by the Congress fell short of the Administration 's proposal and has so far made little contribution to the solution of the problem. It is recommended that the Congress amend the present law so that it will conform more closely to the recommendations previously made Chapter Building for Future Prosperity I T IS FITTING and proper as the preceding Chapter has urged that we make the extension of prosperity to lagging sectors our peculiar concern at this favorable juncture of the Nation 's history. In the measure that we succeed in drawing into the stream of progress the less flourishing parts of the economy to that extent shall we strengthen the base of future prosperity as well as enhance the general welfare. But as we go about the task of extending the scope of prosperity it is essential that we never lose sight of the fundamental objective of extending prosperity itself into the future. We must always keep before us two great truths : First lasting prosperity of the Nation depends far more on what individuals do for themselves than on what the Federal Government does or can do for them. Second the rate of our economic advance in the years ahead will depend largely on our ability as a people to preserve an environment that rewards individual initiative and encourages enterprise innovation and investment A Government that earnestly seeks to build for the Nation 's long-range prosperity has clear-cut responsibilities. It should administer the public finances with a keen sense of awareness of the impact that the Government 's huge operations have on the economy. It should safeguard competition and firmly resist any outcroppings of monopoly. It should encourage home ownership better homes and sound neighborhoods. It should lead the States and localities in a mutual endeavor to fill the Nation 's vast needs for public facilities on which the growth of the private economy so largely depends. It should foster education science technology and creative research. It should constantly strive to strengthen our ties of trade investment and enterprise with other nations of the Free World And it should improve the defenses of our economy against the threat of both inflation and recession. These objectives are worthy of our best efforts in the year that lies ahead I. PRESERVING SOUND FEDERAL FINANCES Sound management of the Government 's fiscal affairs requires the observance of certain fundamental principles. First the budget should provide adequately for the Nation 's security and other urgent needs. Second all governmental operations should be conducted with prudence and economy Third sufficient revenues should be raised to meet the Government 's outlays if not every individual year then surely over a term of very few years Fourth the cost of government should be distributed fairly among taxpayers. Fifth revenues should be raised in ways that interfere as little as possible with incentives to work to venture or to invest. Sixth the public debt should be managed so as to contribute to stable economic growth A brief review of how these principles have recently been applied will help to indicate the fiscal policy that in current circumstances will best serve the Nation 's interests The past three years have been marked by substantial achievements in bringing Federal expenditures and revenues into balance. Budget expenditures were reduced from billion dollars in fiscal year to billion in a drop of billion. A slight further reduction is estimated for fiscal year These economies and a rising national income have made it possible to reduce taxes and yet move decisively toward a balanced budget. In fiscal year the budgetary deficit amounted to billion dollars compared with a deficit of billion in For the present fiscal year a balanced administrative budget is in prospect. The showing of the consolidated cash budget which includes transactions of the various trust funds will be more favorable still. It may be reasonably expected that the cash budget will register a surplus of over billion dollars for the current fiscal year In formulating its fiscal policies the Administration has given careful consideration to the effects of taxation and governmental finances on the general economy. The record is clear and instructive. In the spring of when inflation was still a real danger a Message to the Congress recommended that the excess profits tax which was then in effect be extended six months beyond its expiration date of June The decision to extend this burdensome and unpopular tax was taken because it would have been imprudent to increase the deficit and the public debt under the conditions prevailing at the time. In September when it became clear that the inflationary threat had passed and that government expenditures were being reduced the Administration announced that besides relinquishing the excess profits tax it would not recommend any postponement of the reduction of individual income taxes scheduled for January Early in when a mild economic contraction was under way extensive changes in the tax structure were proposed to promote economic growth. The Congress responded by liberalizing depreciation allowances by extending the period over which business losses could be carried back in computing the income tax by permitting more liberal treatment of research and development as a current expense by reducing the double taxation of dividend income and by lowering excise taxes. In addition several inequities in the personal income tax were corrected in line with recommendations. Taken altogether the tax reductions that were carried CHART Federal Receipts and Expenditures CONVENTIONAL BUDGET FISCAL YEARS I I BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I I I I I I SURPLUS CASH BUDGET-FISCAL YEARS I I I I -1/ ESTIMATED SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET I l I through during amounted to billion dollars on a full-year basis Allowing for the increase in social security contributions which became effective January there was still a saving to individuals and businesses of billion dollars. This huge reduction in taxes was a powerful aid in bolstering consumer purchasing power and investment incentives at a time when output and employment were tending to decline By the end of the business hesitation that had prevailed at the beginning of the year largely disappeared. Output employment and incomes were again rising impressively but the Federal budget remained out of balance. In these circumstances as explained earlier in this Report it was desirable to postpone the reduction in the corporate income tax and in certain excise taxes that was scheduled for April Congress adopted the Administration 's recommendations and the timely application of this fiscal restraint contributed materially not only to the balanced budget that is now in prospect but also to the attainment of prosperity without inflation during the year The Treasury 's management of the public debt has also been carried out with an eye to the needs of the economy. By skillful planning and timing its debt operations have been coordinated with monetary and fiscal policies and have helped to reinforce them. Despite variations in economic and financial conditions the Treasury has made good progress in lengthening its outstanding maturities. Since January the Treasury 's marketable debt running for more than five years has been increased by about billion dollars. Simultaneously the debt maturing or callable within one year has been reduced by billion. As a result of this readjustment of maturities the Treasury 's operations are less exposed to the hazard of market fluctuations. Its needs in turn are less of a disturbing factor in the money market thus giving the Federal Reserve System greater freedom in monetary operations The broad principles that have successfully guided our fiscal policy in recent years should continue to govern our actions. The demands on the Federal budget are very heavy and some of them notably the national security programs are becoming even larger. In addition new programs are needed to assist agriculture to aid school construction to promote development in scattered urban communities that have been experiencing chronic unemployment to establish a flood indemnity program and for other essential purposes. Only a higher level of tax revenues in fiscal year combined with rigid economies in managing governmental operations will permit a modest enlargement of essential Federal expenditures within the framework of a balanced budget Present tax levels are very high and they impose a heavy burden on individuals and business concerns. But in view of existing economic conditions and present budget estimates an early reduction of taxes can not now be justified. To add further to our public debt in order to win for ourselves a reduction in taxes which in the current state of high prosperity might chiefly serve to raise prices would be irresponsible. In times like these we should bend our thoughts to the desirability of debt reduction and not concentrate exclusively on the desirability of tax reduction. Once a budgetary surplus comes definitely into sight and economic conditions continue to be favorable we should begin reducing our huge public debt Such an act of fiscal integrity would signify with unmistakable clarity that our democracy is capable of self-discipline. It would add to the confidence that people need to have in their Government if they are to plan boldly for their own and their children 's economic future Two measures are recommended for early action by the Congress. First the reductions in excises and in the corporate income tax that are now scheduled for April should be postponed again. Second legislation allowing a temporary increase in the statutory debt limit should be continued. This legislation is needed because of the seasonal disparities between expenditures and income the limited cash balances with which Treasury operations are now being conducted and the small gap between the outstanding debt and the temporary statutory limit of billion dollars II. FOSTERING COMPETITIVE ENTERPRISE One of the basic tenets of this Administration is that competitive markets are a more efficient instrument than governmental directives for organizing production and consumption. Another is that a free and competitive economy promotes industrial versatility innovation and investment to a greater degree and with more assurance of continuity than can be attained in an intricately regulated or cartelized economy. These fundamental beliefs are deeply rooted in our Nation 's history and they have been confirmed once again by the experience of the last three years. The relative ease and rapidity with which our economy adjusted to the reduction in military expenditures following the end of the Korean conflict and the vigorous expansion that ensued in reflect the creative powers of an enterprise system subject to a minimum of restraints and operating in an atmosphere of confidence. The fostering of competitive enterprise so heavily stressed in the Employment Act is and must remain one of the leading objectives of policy In considering what government can do to maintain competitive markets it is well to remember that an open economic system is more an expression of the character and will of a people than the result of any specific acts of government. Yet there are ways in which government can usefully contribute to the strengthening of competitive enterprise First and most important is the maintenance of monetary fiscal and housekeeping policies that promote high and rising levels of economic activity. The rate at which new businesses are established is highest when prospects for profit are favorable. Good times also stimulate business growth and this is particularly important for small and medium-sized concerns. The widening of economic opportunities which occurs during prosperity is therefore a powerful and pervasive encouragement to independent competitive endeavor. This is illustrated by the experience of the first six months in when new business formations were percent above the first six months of while business discontinuances were percent below The net increase in the business population was compared with in and in When the economy is contracting the shrinking of markets may temporarily intensify business rivalries but their longer-range effect is to discourage enterprise. The will no less than the capacity to compete is weakened by declining business and its harvest of disappointments. Thus good times do much to strengthen competition ; in turn strong competitive markets are a major force in generating prosperity and distributing its fruits widely Second government can strengthen competitive markets by helping small and medium-sized businesses overcome impediments to their expansion. In our modern economy with its heavy capital requirements high taxes and emphasis on national markets small concerns are subject to serious handicaps in many lines of endeavor. Yet the continuance of small and mediumsized businesses and their ability to prosper and grow are vital to the Nation 's welfare. As stated in last year 's Economic Report " our economy is strong and progressive because it contains in addition to its five million farm enterprises four million independent centers of business decision each potentially free to experiment with new ideas new men new methods and new products. " When the Government helps smaller concerns to overcome some of the hindrances to their growth it is acting in the interests of the whole economy The Government is now aiding small businesses in numerous ways. The Small Business Administration which was established to assist them makes loans whenever possible in participation with private lenders for periods that are usually longer than those commonly available from private lending agencies. It provides counsel on technical processes managerial problems and new product lines and helps to channel government contracts to small enterprises. During significant improvements were made in procurement procedures so that a larger portion of Federal contracts may go to these enterprises. The maximum size of loans by the Small Business Administration was also raised last year Other governmental programs are helpful to small business firms. The Office of Technical Services in the Department of Commerce disseminates information derived from government and government-sponsored research It also publishes lists and abstracts of government-owned patents currently exceeding in number which are available for license on a nonexclusive royalty-free basis. Several other units in the Department of Commerce provide technical managerial marketing and other aids. While these programs are helpful to the business community generally they are of special advantage to small firms which can not hire the services of technical managerial and financial experts as readily as the larger firms The maintenance of healthy competitive markets requires that Federal policies for promoting economic expansion and for aiding small and medium-sized businesses be supplemented by vigorous measures for preventing monopolistic practices and combinations. One of the clearest lessons of business history is that tendencies toward monopoly are always present in some degree and that constant vigilance is needed to assure ascendancy of competitive conditions. Strict enforcement of the antitrust laws is our primary weapon for thwarting any impairment of competition In the summer of the Attorney General appointed a National Committee to Study the Antitrust Laws composed of leading experts on the subject. The Report of this Committee has served most usefully as a basis for study of needed legislative changes. Two of last year 's enactments embody revisions paralleling those suggested by the Committee 's Report One raised maximum penalties under the Sherman Act from $ to $ ; the other gave the Federal Government the right to sue for damages sustained by it as a result of antitrust violations. Further improvements in the antitrust laws are likely to draw heavily on the results of the Committee 's deliberations Meanwhile the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission are vigorously enforcing these laws. In the number of proceedings instituted against corporate mergers was larger than in all previous years since when the antimerger amendment to the Clayton Act was passed During the year numerous legal actions against price-fixing and marketsharing practices were successfully carried out. Various orders were issued prohibiting price discriminations that were unfairly injurious to small competitors. Orders against the practice of exclusive dealing served to open to smaller manufacturers distribution outlets previously closed by dominant competitors. Also numerous suits dissolving group boycotts helped to keep the channels of trade open to independent entry and action Nevertheless mergers have become more numerous of late and an eye at once vigilant and discriminating must be kept on such developments Many mergers have a solid economic justification and serve the general interest by increasing competition ; others have neutral effects ; while still others place obstacles in the path of effective competition. Over the years Americans have wisely viewed excessive business concentration or any other undue concentration of economic power with uneasiness. To serve the basic American desire for an economy in which business opportunities are increasing and in which economic control is widely diffused it is desirable to strengthen our antitrust laws and provide larger appropriations for their enforcement Toward this end the following revisions of antitrust legislation are recommended. First all firms of significant size that are engaging in interstate commerce and plan to merge should be required to give advance notice of the proposed merger to the antitrust agencies and to supply the information needed to assess its probable impact on competition. Second Federal regulation should be extended to all mergers of banking institutions Combined with the requirement for advance notice this extension of the law would give the Government an opportunity to prevent mergers that are likely to result in undue restraint of banking competition. Third Federal approval should be required for the acquisition of banks by holding companies. Fourth the Clayton Act should be amended to make explicit the Federal Government 's authority to take action in merger transactions in which either party is engaged in interstate commerce. Fifth it should also be amended so as to make the cease-and-desist orders of the Federal Trade Commission final when issued unless appealed to the Courts. Sixth when civil rather than criminal proceedings are contemplated the Attorney General should be empowered to issue a civil investigative demand compelling the production of documents before the filing of a complaint and without having to invoke grand jury proceedings Finally the Congress should give serious study to the Report of the Presidential Advisory Committee on Transport Policy and Organization A fundamental premise of that Report is that the railroad industry no longer has the monopoly power that it had toward the end of the nineteenth century when the Interstate Commerce Act was passed but instead largely operates under competitive conditions. The central proposals of the Report therefore seek to diminish the detailed administrative regulations that have grown up over the years and to give common carriers greater freedom to compete. The time is surely ripe for a re-examination of the intricate regulations of the transportation industry with a view to opening up the industry to more freely competitive effort. But in framing any legislation it will be necessary to retain adequate safeguards of the interests of the shipping public and competing carriers III. EXTENDING HOME OWNERSHIP AND IMPROVING NEIGHBORHOODS Additions to the Nation 's stock of housing are required by the growth of population changes in its makeup migration from rural to urban areas and gradual deterioration of older homes and apartments. The mainspring of recent residential construction however has been the desire for home ownership and the demand for better homes and neighborhoods as essential elements in the higher levels of living that people seek to attain Progress in these directions has been significantly aided by the Federal Government as well as the States and localities but it has depended primarily as it should on decisions and actions by individual citizens the building industry and private financial institutions The main objectives of the Administration 's housing policies have been to facilitate home ownership to promote a high and reasonably stable rate of home building and to improve the quality of existing homes and neighborhoods. These objectives have been carried out through many instrumentalities the most important being the program of mortgage loan insurance by the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) the program of mortgage loan guaranty by the Veterans Administration ( VA ) and programs for slum clearance and urban renewal. In developing these Federal activities the fullest cooperation has been sought of private interests and local governments More and better housing is essential to raising the levels of family living. Also the manner in which home construction and improvement is achieved and the rate at which these activities proceed have a vital bearing on the prosperity and stability of the entire economy. The results of recent experience are gratifying. They appear in the high rate at which new homes have been built in the spread of home ownership in the improvement of urban neighborhoods and in the general avoidance of housing surpluses which can only bring trouble to the building industry and the economy at large In the past three years more than 3/2 million nonfarm housing units have been built. They embody high standards of comfort commodiousness and suitability for healthy safe and convenient living. About percent of the new housing units were built under FHA and VA programs. Total expenditures on new home construction even in terms of constant dollars have far exceeded those of any earlier three-year period. This achievement of the home building and financing industries gives dramatic proof of what can be accomplished through private enterprise and with private capital The spread of home ownership has been likewise remarkable. Before World War II the percentage of nonfarm dwelling units occupied by the owner reached in and fell to in After the war the percentage rose to in and is now or higher. This achievement is probably unique among highly urbanized industrial nations. Widespread home ownership yields prized benefits to individual families. It also encourages active interest in civic affairs and pride in community development A nation in which so many millions of families have growing investments in their homes and neighborhoods is likely to be governed by a high sense of responsibility Results are also beginning to be realized from the measures taken to encourage home improvements and to rehabilitate parts of our cities and towns that had been allowed to degenerate into slums or near-slums. The Housing Act of following a recommendation by the President 's Advisory Committee on Housing initiated an urban renewal program under which Federal grants are made to cities and towns for the conservation and rehabilitation of neighborhoods as well as for slum clearance projects provided under earlier laws. The Federal Government also offers grants to small communities and to metropolitan areas and regions for urban planning These moves are bearing fruit. Toward the end of more than urban renewal projects in locations had been approved for final plan- ning or execution. They will ultimately provide new housing for families. City blocks cleared of slums and construction projects on previously blighted sites are visible in an increasing number of places Also important for the future as well as for the recent past are the steps taken in to make Federal programs for the insurance of housing loans more effective. FHA terms for mortgage insurance on existing properties were liberalized to facilitate the movement of families to better accommodations. Insurance of mortgages on properties in urban renewal areas was permitted in order to hasten redevelopment. The maximum insurable mortgage amounts for owner-occupied rental and cooperative housing which had remained unchanged for years were finally brought into adjustment with postwar building costs. Funds for home improvement were made more readily available by permitting FHA to insure supplementary loans under an open-end mortgage. Consumer protection was improved by requiring builders who do their financing with Federally underwritten mortgages to deliver warranties to home purchasers. Malpractices under the FHA home repair and modernization program were brought under control by limiting the eligibility for loan insurance to improvements that add to the basic utility of homes and by requiring lenders to assume percent of any loss on insured loans Of late considerable effort has also been devoted to encouraging the use of private capital where public funds would otherwise be required. A new charter was drawn for the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) which provides for the eventual retirement of its government capital. Steps were taken to restrict the use of FNMA as a primary source of mortgage funds although its authority to assist special housing programs was continued. A Voluntary Home Mortgage Credit Program was established under the auspices of the Housing and Home Finance Agency. Through this program the flow of private mortgage funds into remote areas and to minority groups is being augmented While further progress in promoting extension of home ownership and improvement of urban communities can be expected of existing governmental programs their effectiveness would be enhanced by certain legislative changes. First as proposed earlier in this Report the mortgage insurance program should be amended in the interest of increasing the availability of adequate housing for older persons. Second in order to serve more effectively the objectives of urban renewal any community that seeks Federal assistance for public housing should be required to adopt a workable program for the prevention and elimination of slums. To further the same objectives a public housing program of dwelling units for each of the next two years should be authorized. Third in order to facilitate home improvements the permissible size of insured repair and modernization loans which has remained unchanged on the statute books despite the great rise in building costs during the past fifteen years should be increased This insurance program has proved very useful in promoting home im- 8i provements ; it is now safeguarded against abuse and should be given permanent status. Finally the authorization of home mortgage insurance by FHA should be increased and put on a more permanent basis IV ENLARGING PUBLIC ASSETS All levels of government share a responsibility for providing the public improvements on which the general welfare and the growth of the private economy heavily depend. In projects which clearly involve the national interest and are beyond the economic competence of local bodies the Federal Government must play a key role. But its part in these essential programs must be performed so as to encourage rather than displace the necessary efforts of State and local agencies Public construction has risen sharply since the end of World War II and has been proceeding at a brisk pace in the last few years. When military atomic energy and other industrial components of public construction are excluded and adjustments are made for price changes it appears that the volume of public construction in surpassed any earlier threeyear period. New public construction amounted to about billion dollars in these years with about two-thirds of this total accounted for by State and local governments But a great backlog of necessary public works remains. This is largely the consequence of heavy expenditures for our national security during and since World War II coupled with unexpected population gains. Outlays for public construction during the next few years should be large enough to contribute decisively toward removing this backlog replacing obsolete facilities and providing for normal growth. The stock of public facilities must be increased so that it will be commensurate with the growth of private wealth and the improvement in the level of living of a rapidly increasing population. Deficiencies in essential public works can seriously restrict economic progress. It would be shortsighted to subject our economy to such a hazard Among the deficiencies none is more important for the Nation 's future than the shortage of school classrooms which accumulated partly during the years of depression and war when school construction was severely curtailed and partly in the early postwar period when it failed to keep pace with the growth of the school-age population. In the last few years expenditures on school construction have risen encouragingly and building is currently proceeding at the record rate of schoolrooms per year. However even at this rate of construction it would take many years to remove the backlog which is estimated at over rooms since the greater part of the new construction must provide for growth and replacements The provision of school buildings has been traditionally a State and local function. It is highly desirable that it remain just that. At the same time it has become clear that in the absence of Federal aid the existing shortage of schoolrooms will long continue in many communities to the detriment of the entire Nation. If the critical shortage that now exists is to be largely corrected over the next few years Federal assistance is essential. This conclusion has been reached by many students of school problems and it has recently been endorsed by the White House Conference on Education which reflected the results of serious deliberation in earlier meetings of citizens throughout the land. In view of existing needs and circumstances the Congress is urged to authorize a program of Federal aid for school construction which over a five-year period could be expected to stimulate the States and localities to sufficiently greater efforts to remove the accumulated shortage. Specifically the Congress is requested to authorize Federal matching grants to the States to be used in districts that are themselves unable to provide urgently needed public school facilities Loans should also be made available to facilitate school financing in a manner and under conditions that are set out in the special Message of January At the end of five years when it may be expected that school facilities will again be adequate Federal aid can and should terminate Other shortages of educational plant exist at the present time. In particular there are grave inadequacies in our facilities for medical research and for training the large number of physicians dentists and health scientists required by our rapidly growing population. Since private benefactions can not fully fill the gap it is recommended that the Congress authorize a five-year program of Federal construction grants to assist medical and dental schools to improve their physical facilities for research and teaching. Also the Federal loan program for college housing should be continued but on a basis that will bring forth the large volume of private funds that is necessary to meet growing requirements The construction of hospital and related facilities has been substantially augmented in recent years in part because it has been bolstered by million dollars of Federal grants. These have been made under the Hospital and Medical Facilities Survey and Construction Program which provides matching grants to the States for the construction of hospitals and related health facilities. This program is being administered with close attention to the needs of low-income groups and rural areas. The Congress is requested to extend the program for an additional two years Federal insurance of mortgage loans for the construction or improvement of private health facilities is again recommended The importance of completely modernizing the Interstate Highway System which links together the principal cities by miles of road is so clear and so widely recognized that it requires no elaboration in this Report. The country urgently needs an integrated network of safe controlled-access highways to relieve existing congestion and to provide for the expected growth of motor vehicle traffic. A modernized interstate system would also help to strengthen the Nation 's defenses and to reduce the toll of human life exacted each year in highway accidents. The Congress is again urged to consider and to provide for the full modernization of the Interstate Highway System. It was suggested last year that this vast road program be financed by an independent authority created by the Congress and that interest and amortization on the highway debt be paid out of the excess which may be expected to increase of Federal revenues from present gasoline and lubricating oil taxes over current Federal grants-in-aid for roads. If this financing plan is not satisfactory to the Congress a sound alternative not involving budget deficits should be devised. Since the need for improved highway facilities is becoming more and more pressing the whole interstate system should be authorized as one project to be completed in about ten years By the nature of the projects involved the Federal Government must play a key role in the conservation and development of water resources In over billion dollars of Federal funds were expended for the construction of facilities of this type. Recent legislative and administrative actions have strengthened both public and private activities in the sphere of water resource conservation and development. The St. Lawrence Seaway was authorized in after many years of discussion. In the same year the conservation of soil and water resources was advanced by allowing outlays made by farmers on water projects to be treated as a current expense for tax purposes by expanding the provision of governmental loans for such projects and by establishing a cooperative program with State and local agencies for the construction of small dams and related works. The Report of the President 's Advisory Committee on Water Resources Policy has recently been transmitted to the Congress. This report sets forth a comprehensive policy for the conservation and development of the Nation 's water resources. It stresses the need for greater uniformity in the evaluation of projects their authorization and their cost-sharing provisions as well as close and continuous collaboration with local groups. In due course legislative proposals will be submitted to implement the recommendations of this Committee In the conservation and development of water resources including power the Federal Government should continue to advance the partnership principle as exemplified by projects such as John Day Markham Ferry and Cougar. It should continue to encourage leadership from local sources whether private or public and assume an active role only where it has some particular competence that is where the projects are especially complex or large where interstate conflicts are involved or where there is a clear impact on the national interest. The Upper Colorado River project which is vital to several States and which involves generation of power irrigation municipal water supply flood control and other functions is an outstanding example of the type of project that the Federal Government should undertake. Recommendations concerning this project and other needed developments of water resources are presented in the Budget Message The increasing scarcity of water makes it mandatory that its waste be prevented. Pollution of streams and lakes is a flagrant example of waste Hence the extension and strengthening of the Water Pollution Control Act are again urged Expenditures on atomic energy construction have in recent years accounted for a significant part of total Federal construction expenditures In they amounted to billion dollars. They are now tapering off with the completion of important projects. Private investment while still modest is being accelerated under the stimulus of the Atomic Energy Act of In the spirit of this law the Atomic Energy Commission has given technical and financial assistance to development of private atomic power plants has invited private participation in the supplying of atomic energy materials and services has provided access to technical information and has released its patents without royalty. This cooperation of government and industry is bringing the goal of competitively priced atomic electric power closer to realization The limitation of Federal efforts to their proper sphere in the construction of public assets will require the States and localities to continue assuming heavy responsibilities for public works. There can be little doubt that the great majority of them have both the economic and financial capability of doing so. In some cases however State constitutions or State and local statutes which currently restrict borrowing may need to be revised. Smaller communities seeking to raise capital for public improvements would also be aided by a revision of the Federal tax laws such as was recommended last year to allow a regulated investment company holding the bulk of its assets in the form of tax-exempt securities to pass through to its shareholders the tax-exempt status of the income received on such securities V. IMPROVING SKILLS AND TECHNOLOGY The swift pace of scientific knowledge brings both new opportunities and new responsibilities. What we as a people do or fail to do to improve skills to train specialists in the sciences and in engineering and other applied fields and to add to scientific and technical knowledge will have a vital bearing on our national security and on the level of living of future generations The problem of improving skills and building new knowledge has several aspects. The provision of adequate physical facilities for training and research is one of them. Progress in this direction is being made by the present high rate of construction of facilities and will be hastened by the Federal programs that have been recommended above. Another basic aspect of the problem adding to the supply of trained personnel to staff the physical facilities presents greater difficulties. As pointed out in a special Message to the Congress in February the shortage of teachers while less obvious than the shortage of classrooms is the more serious Shortages of personnel exist also in various branches of scientific research and development and in numerous technical specialties Primary responsibility for meeting the critical shortage of teachers rests with educational institutions the States and local communities. All practicable steps should be taken by them to attract suitably trained individuals to the teaching profession. In this connection special attention should be given to the need for better high school instruction in science and mathematics. The supply of scientific and engineering manpower so vital to our military security and future prosperity depends to a large degree on the availability and quality of such instruction. Physics and chemistry are not taught at all in many high schools and in many others the teaching of these subjects is seriously deficient. The experimental program of supplementary training for teachers in science mathematics and engineering which the National Science Foundation has under way should help to raise the quality of instruction in these subjects. An enlarged appropriation for this purpose is needed Private and public institutions of higher learning are the means through which we must overcome the shortages of personnel in engineering medicine scientific research and other areas. The newly recommended program for adding to the physical facilities for research and training in medicine and dentistry which has already been noted will help to meet certain of these needs. Other activities of the Federal Government to encourage higher education should also be strengthened notably the program of research grants and graduate fellowships administered by the National Science Foundation the program of research and training supported by the Atomic Energy Commission and the various programs of the Department of Health Education and Welfare for training nurses for medical research and for research on air and water pollution These programs important as they are should not obscure the need for balanced expansion of our liberal arts colleges universities and technical institutes. The increased need for advanced training and the prospective growth of student enrollments pose difficult and far-reaching problems which should be thoroughly explored by the Office of Education together with private and public institutions of higher learning. A distinguished group of educators and citizens will soon be appointed to consider through study and conferences the immediate and long-range efforts which must be made to reach appropriate solutions to the problems facing our colleges and universities The future improvement of our level of living no less than our military security is heavily dependent on research in the basic sciences and technology. Our willingness to invest huge sums for this purpose is one of the outstanding reasons for the pre-eminence of American science and industry CHART Number of 18-Year-Olds MILLIONS OF PERSONS MILLIONS OF PERSONS ESTIMATES PROJECTIONS BOYS j " " ^ " " ^ GIRLS Q i I I I I t I i I i I I I I I I I I i I I I I I | i i i i i t i i i | I960 SOURCE ' DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Total public and private expenditures for research and development are now estimated to be running at billion dollars per year if not higher Federal outlays for research and development most of which is conducted in industrial and university laboratories have in recent years been above billion dollars per year and some increase in expenditures for these purposes has been projected for the next fiscal year Most of the Federal funds for research and development are devoted to projects of the Defense Department and the Atomic Energy Commission But as the Economic Report of January emphasized such projects may also be expected to enrich civilian technology. Indeed many recent tendencies in private industrial technology are traceable to pioneering Federal projects with a military accent. Among these tendencies are the drive toward competitively priced atomic power the application of radioisotopes the automatic assembly of radio and television set components the use of transistors and miniature vacuum tubes the adaptation of electronic computers to office work the experimental cold sterilization of food by radiation the formulation and fabrication of titanium and magnesium alloys and the design of turboprop and jet commercial airliners. Still more remarkable prospects for peacetime technology are being opened up by research Such marvels of science and technology sometimes cause concern lest they lead to unemployment. However our history teaches that new products and new techniques instead of reducing the total number of jobs extend employment in new directions increase its amount and add abundantly to its fruits. Although adjustments for some individuals are made necessary by technological changes they can usually be carried out with little difficulty when the oscillations of the business cycle are kept under reasonably good control. The need of a strong system of unemployment insurance to ease personal adjustments is stressed later in this Report VI PROMOTING THE INTERNATIONAL FLOW OF GOODS AND CAPITAL The orderly growth of our economy exerts a strongly favorable influence throughout the world. In turn economic developments abroad are of profound importance to us. Recent experience illustrates this interdependence. By the nations of the Free World had achieved sufficient economic strength to be able to absorb the adverse reactions from the mild contraction that got under way in the United States that year. Not only that but they continued buying from us on a scale that helped to check our economic decline and to speed renewed expansion. In turn the resumed rise of our imports toward the end of reinforced by a heavy outflow of private capital helped to sustain economic expansion in other parts of the Free World and thereby stimulated further expansion in our own exports during the past year It is clear that our long-term interests are well served by expansion of the international flow of goods capital enterprise and technology. Sound policies to promote these ends will powerfully advance our national security and economic welfare and help to build a stronger and more unified community of free nations Current restrictions on the flow of goods and capital hamper enterprise and limit the real income of consumers both here and abroad. Despite the progress in trade liberalization achieved in recent years restrictions are still numerous and widespread. Reduction of these barriers requires both direct action on our part and cooperation with other nations. Our proper and necessary course was outlined in a special Message of March following the report of the Commission on Foreign Economic Policy. The Congress responded with important legislation in and but additional action is urgently needed The Trade Agreements Extension Act of has continued for another three years with certain modifications the authority initially granted in by the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act. The Act grants new powers to the President to lower tariffs on a reciprocal and selective basis Individual tariff rates may be reduced by percent per year for three years and rates that are in excess of percent ad valorem may be reduced by annual stages to that level. Experience has shown that the " escape clause " and " peril point " provisions of the Act which are designed to protect domestic industries against serious injury from duty reductions are broadly CHART Exports and Imports " ^ BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED * EXPORTS V/ IMPORTS o J I I i I ^ EXCLUDES MILITARY SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE consistent with our basic policy of trade liberalization. Experience has also shown that efforts to expand world trade are most effective when tariff reductions are negotiated on a reciprocal multilateral basis. Under the authority of the Trade Agreements Act selective reductions in tariffs on thousands of items have been made during the past twenty years and they have helped materially to enlarge our exports as well as imports. The Act has paved the way for a new series of tariff negotiations which opened at Geneva on January The chief instrument through which the United States has for eight years cooperated with other countries of the Free World in reducing trade barriers is the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) Negotiations under the GATT are more effective than bilateral negotiations. They have won for us tariff concessions on items accounting for about percent of the value of our exports. Moreover through consultations with other GATT members we have secured the abolition of discriminatory restrictions on our exports of such important items as coal apples cigarettes lumber potatoes textiles automobiles tobacco petroleum wool and motion pictures. Several European countries have removed all discriminatory restrictions against dollar trade To correct certain shortcomings in the working rules and administrative machinery of GATT which have been recognized for some time the GATT members completed in March a revision of the basic Agreement and proposed an administrative agency the Organization for Trade Cooperation ( OTG ) Membership in the OTG would enlarge the advantages the United States already enjoys under the GATT. It would also give assurance to the rest of the Free World of our continuing interest in expanding the international flow of goods and capital. Early passage of legislation authorizing our membership in the Organization for Trade Cooperation is of high importance Customs regulations are capable of creating barriers to international trade no less serious than the customs duties themselves. Delays and inconvenience arising from customs regulations have been reduced in the past two years and the Treasury Department is continuing to review its procedures with a view to simplifying them. Congressional action however is needed to facilitate further progress. The basic purpose of the Customs Simplification Bill of which the House passed in the first session of the 84th Congress is to diminish uncertainties and delays by simplifying the present system of customs valuation. Modifications of this bill have been suggested to avoid unintended reductions in individual duties that would result from the proposed change in valuation procedures. Early enactment of such a suitably revised bill will constitute a significant advance in our foreign economic policy The need for simplifying our tariff rate structure which the Commission on Foreign Economic Policy had emphasized was recognized by the Congress in the Customs Simplification Acts of and As directed by the latter Act the Tariff Commission is studying present commodity classifications and rate structures. Legislation will be needed in due course to authorize revisions of our tariff classification schedules. In the meantime other restraints on international commerce those arising under the Buy-American Act of were modified by an Executive Order of December which has resulted in the removal of a great deal of uncertainty for foreign bidders who seek government contracts The field of foreign investment also offers opportunities to encourage economic activity and trade on a world scale. A larger outflow of American capital would benefit both ourselves and other economies. By helping to develop the resources of friendly countries it would enlarge and diversify the supply of materials on which we can draw. At the same time it would enable less developed countries to achieve higher rates of economic growth and to become more active partners in the trade of the Free World To the greatest extent possible the funds for foreign investment should come from private sources. When private capital moves abroad it is often accompanied by the export of technical managerial and financial skills Such benefits can not be realized as effectively through government loans It is highly desirable as stressed in last year 's Economic Report that we " encourage investment in all countries whose desire to speed their economic development has led them to create a hospitable climate for business invest- ment. " The recommendations made in that Report with respect to the taxation of corporate income from foreign sources have not yet been acted on by the Congress. Legislation on these proposals which can have a significant influence on foreign investment is again requested. Also the lending authority of the Export-Import Bank should be extended beyond June This would enable the Bank which has actively encouraged the outflow of private capital by its loan participation credit guarantees and loan supplements to private venture capital to finance projects that call for advances over a period longer than two years The United States has recently taken steps to participate in the International Finance Corporation ( IFC ) which is to be affiliated with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The IFC will begin operations as soon as at least countries out of the member countries of the Bank that have indicated an intention to join have together subscribed million dollars. The IFC will make loans to supplement venture capital going into productive private enterprises abroad particularly in the less developed areas of the world and it will also help to find experienced management where needed. The new institution is expected to expand investment abroad by its own lending and also by helping to create an investment climate in foreign countries that will be more attractive to their own citizens as well as those of other nations The rate of economic progress is bound to play a vital role in the struggle between the principles of freedom and those of regimentation in the poorer and less developed areas of the Free World. Our economic development and technical cooperation programs for raising living standards in these areas are proving helpful and should be moderately expanded with special emphasis on activities that encourage local private enterprise and the inflow of private capital from abroad. The Mutual Security Program of which these economic programs are a part must be continued. High though our expenditures on national security are they would be vastly higher if we did not have strong allies The United States can take pride in the progress that has been achieved in cooperation with other countries in enlarging the mutually advantageous flow of goods capital technology and enterprise within the Free World community. Continuance of this trend will build an international environment that is increasingly favorable to the maintenance of peace and the extension of prosperity ' VII INCREASING THE STABILITY OF OUR EXPANDING ECONOMY Economic improvement whether by our own actions or in cooperation with other nations of the Free World is always subject to the risk of interruption by business fluctuations. The mere fact that they have been kept under good control in recent years is not an adequate basis for concluding that the business cycle has been ironed out or that we need be concerned no longer about the possibility of running into a sizable recession or inflation. The CHART Indicators of Prosperity BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( PRICES ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( PRICES ) WORLD WAR H GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME \ PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES Ll.,.1.1 I I I I I : * I I I I I I t I I DOLLARS ( PRICES ) DOLLARS ( PRICES ) PER CAPITA DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME # # * * PEH CAPITA PERSONAL CONSUMPTION I I I I I I I I I I I I I P I I I I I I f I MILLIONS OF PERSONS U n ^ EMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE iM $ W SCALE ) * ^ ' I J I I I I J I I I i ^ i * i -t i''i i i i i M SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S need for poise and foresight on the part of business labor and government is undiminished. As we build for the Nation 's future prosperity we must strive to promote not only a well-balanced growth of the economy but also a relatively stable rate of growth. Although our defenses against recession and inflation are much stronger than a generation ago we should try to make them still stronger By helping to maintain buying power at a time when payrolls diminish our Federal-State Unemployment Insurance System constitutes a first line of defense against a possible recession. Remarkable advances in this insurance system have been achieved during the past two years. In its coverage was broadened by the Congress to include civilian employees of the Federal Government and the employees of many small firms. Uninterrupted payment of benefits by States whose reserve funds become low was practically assured by the establishment of a special Federal loan fund. Steps were taken to equalize the tax impact of the System on new and old firms thereby removing a barrier to the establishment and early growth of new enterprises. These Federal actions have been supplemented by the States In these two years States besides the District of Columbia raised the amounts that may be paid weekly to unemployed men and women covered by the insurance system. Eight States and the District of Columbia lengthened the duration of the period for which unemployment benefits may be paid and four States extended coverage to firms with fewer employees than the minimum set by Federal law Taken together these changes represent the greatest improvement in the Unemployment Insurance System since its inception. Nevertheless there is need for further progress. The last two Economic Reports have suggested that the States increase benefits so that the great majority of covered workers will be eligible for payments that at least equal half their regular earnings ; that the States which have not yet done so lengthen the term of benefits to weeks for every person who qualifies for any benefit and remains unemployed that long ; that employees of State and local governments be given the protection of unemployment insurance ; and that employees of very small firms which are still excluded from the unemployment insurance system in many States be accorded this protection. Although very encouraging strides have recently been made toward these goals they have not yet been realized. The States are again urged to persevere in the task of improvement so that the stabilizing influence of the Unemployment Insurance System on personal incomes may be enhanced To promote stable economic growth it would also be desirable to increase the influence that the Federal Government can exercise on consumer credit The development of consumer instalment financing has been on the whole highly beneficial to our economy. By its means the homes of many millions of American families have been enriched on a scale that would otherwise have proved impossible. The soundness of this type of credit has been repeatedly tested and found excellent. Nevertheless instalment credit sometimes accentuates swings in the buying of automobiles furniture television sets and other consumer durables thereby exposing the rest of the economy to the hazard of widened fluctuations. In view of the increasing importance of the durable consumer goods industries in our economy and their marked tendency to fluctuate consideration should be given to restoring the Government 's power to regulate the terms of consumer instalment credit The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System regulated the terms of consumer credit during and again in under an Executive Order of the President. The Defense Production Act provided temporary authority to reinstate these controls in but this power was withdrawn by the amendments to that Act approved June Experience during the recent past suggests that the authority to set if and as circumstances may require minimum downpayments and maximum maturities on instalment credit for the purchase of consumer durables would be a useful adjunct to other stabilizing measures. Its availability as a stand-by measure to be used only when the economic situation demands it and under proper administrative safeguards would increase the Government 's ability to fulfill its responsibilities under the Employment Act Although present conditions do not call for the use of such authority to regulate the terms of instalment credit this is a good time for the Congress and the Executive Branch to study the problem The authority of the Federal Government to influence the use of credit in the purchase or improvement of homes is already fairly broad but it would be useful to extend it in two directions. First greater flexibility should be introduced in the terms on which the secondary market facilities of the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) can be used by the home building and home financing industries. At the present time mortgages may be sold to FNMA under its secondary market program only on the condition that the seller acquire the Association 's stock in an amount equal to at least percent of the value of the mortgages sold. The Board of Directors of FNMA should be authorized to set this stock purchase requirement at or above percent on the basis of conditions in the housing market and in the economy generally. By reducing the permissible stock purchase requirement the liquidity provided by FNMA to the home mortgage market could be more effectively increased if the economic situation required it Second the National Housing Act should be amended to allow the Federal Housing Administration to insure home repair and modernization loans with maturities as long as years. The maximum maturity for insured loans of this type is now years having been at this level since the 's. An extension of the maximum limit to years with discretion granted to the Federal Housing Commissioner to vary the maximum maturity in the light of economic conditions would permit a liberalization of terms if and when some stimulation of the construction industry becomes desirable The introduction in of insurance for bank deposits and for share accounts in savings and loan associations has greatly strengthened the capacity of our economy to resist possible cumulative effects of any recessionary development. The extension of insurance to the share accounts of credit unions would be a useful step in the same direction. These cooperative institutions have been growing rapidly. By mid-1955 over million people had about billion dollars invested in credit union shares. The loss of any appreciable part of these savings would work severe hardships on individuals of limited means. As suggested in last year 's Economic Report the Congress should consider the desirability of establishing a selfsupporting Federal program of share-account insurance for credit unions If such a system were established it would be essential to maintain the proper safeguards limitations and supervision that go with an insurance system Finally as has long been recognized the adjustment of public works expenditure can be helpful in achieving a stable rate of economic growth For this reason the Administration began concerning itself with the systematic planning of public works early in For a time this activity was centered in the Council of Economic Advisers. Later to give the planning work added emphasis and to enlarge its scope a unit was established in the White House Office under a Special Assistant to the President to coordinate public works planning. The inventory of the status of Federal plans for public works which was initiated nearly three years ago is now maintained on an annual basis. A survey of the status of State and local plans for public works has been completed and it is expected that similar surveys will be made biennially. Recognizing the need for a reserve of " ready-to-go " projects the Congress last year increased the provision for interest-free loans to States and municipalities for public works planning. Still another forward step would be taken if both the Executive agencies and the Congress became accustomed in connection with every bill on public construction to consider the possible need for flexibility in public works programming VIII T H E CREATIVE POWER OF A FREE ECONOMY The broad purpose of the recommendations in the foregoing sections of this Report has been to develop in the language of the Employment Act " national economic policies to foster and promote free competitive enterprise to avoid economic fluctuations or to diminish the effects thereof " and " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " These recommendations largely concern the activities and policies of the Federal Government. But important as these activities and policies are we must never lose sight of the fundamental truth expressed at the beginning of this chapter namely that the lasting prosperity of our Nation depends far more on what individuals do for themselves than on what the Federal Government does or can do for them When many millions of men and women bring about general economic improvement largely through their own actions they do more than create prosperity in their day. They also strengthen the moral roots of the industry the enterprise and the resourcefulness from which still greater prosperity and well-being will spring in the future. That is the basic reason why a Nation that enjoys a high degree of economic freedom typically generates its own growth why it keeps creating new technologies new products new markets new enterprises new jobs larger incomes and better living. That is why we are still in the midst of a technological revolution in agriculture communications and power of which there was only a glimmer a generation ago. That is why we may look forward with confidence to the continued growth of our economy Foresight has helped our Nation make great strides in recent years toward a balanced and sustained prosperity. We have succeeded in expanding the scope of free enterprise and yet increased the sense of security that people need in a highly industrialized age. Great opportunities for economic progress lie ahead. The recommendations of this Report will prove helpful to the American people in pursuing them Appendix A SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Summary of Recommendations in the Economic Report of [ the President Including Recommendations to the Congress and Suggestions to the States and Local Governments I. PROMOTING AGRICULTURAL READJUSTMENTS a ) Inaugurate a two-part Soil Bank Program designed to improve farm income reduce surpluses of farm products and shift crop acreage to soil-conserving uses : ) An Acreage Reserve Program under which growers of wheat cotton corn and rice will voluntarily reduce planted acreage below allotments in return for certificates convertible into cash or specified quantities of the commodities from Commodity Credit Corporation stocks ; alternatively for corn and rice end production controls and put price supports for these crops on a discretionary basis [ Pages ] ) A Conservation Reserve Program providing financial inducements to farmers to put cropland into soil-conserving uses. [ Page ] b ) Implement the Great Plains Program to promote sounder land use in portions of ten Western States between the Corn Belt and the Rocky Mountains. [ Page ] c ) Take other steps such as to speed surplus disposal broaden outlets for farm products reduce farm production costs improve farm credit facilities and expand agricultural research. [ Page ] See also Recommendation III ( a ) II. HELPING LOCAL COMMUNITIES REDUCE UNEMPLOYMENT a ) Establish an Area Assistance Program for aiding communities experiencing substantial and persistent unemployment and make technical assistance more broadly available to aid urban and rural communities in developing balanced and progressive economies. [ Pages ] b ) Authorize the Housing and Home Finance Agency to give priority to applications for aid in financing needed public facilities from communities experiencing substantial and persistent unemployment. [ Page ] c ) Make benefits under the Urban Renewal Program available for industrial redevelopment of business sections in such communities. [ Page ] III LIFTING INCOMES BY RAISING PRODUCTIVITY a ) Provide the requested Federal support for the Rural Development Program to help low-income farm families improve their earning power. [ Pages ] b ) Expand State programs of vocational rehabilitation on the basis of available Federal financial assistance. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] c ) Proceed as far as is practical to extend coverage of minimum wage [ Pages ] IV IMPROVING THE ECONOMIC STATUS OF OLDER PERSONS a ) Extend the coverage of Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance to self-employed groups and other workers not yet covered including Federal personnel. [ Page ] b ) Require Federal registration and reports by private pension and welfare funds. [ Page ] c ) Give preference to older persons and their immediate families in admission to public housing projects. ( Federal State and local responsibility ) [ Page ] d ) Authorize mortgage insurance on favorable terms for apartments built for occupancy in whole or in part by older persons and permit third parties to guarantee monthly payments in behalf of older persons buying a home under a Federally insured mortgage. [ Pages ] See also Recommendation V ( c ) V. COPING WITH PERSONAL HARDSHIPS a ) Accelerate work on practical flood control projects [ Page ] b ) Provide reinsurance for private carriers offering flood insurance and authorize a joint Federal-State flood indemnity program. [ Page ] c ) Encourage private insurance organizations to extend health plans to cover catastrophic illness and to cover persons not reached by usual group enrollment methods. Permissive legislation for private pooling of risks or Federal reinsurance may be needed. [ Pages ] d ) Strengthen workmen 's compensation [ Page ] laws ( State responsibility ) e ) Increase benefits available under the Longshoremen 's and Harbor Workers ' Compensation Act. [ Page ] f ) Provide nonoccupational temporary disability insurance for workers in the District of Columbia. Consider developing similar programs in the States. ( Federal and State responsibility ) [ Page ] g ) Liberalize terms of Federally underwritten mortgages on housing for persons displaced by urban renewal or other public projects. [ Page ] ioo VI PRESERVING SOUND FEDERAL FINANCES a ) Postpone scheduled reductions in excise and corporate income tax rates [ Page ] b ) Enact legislation continuing a temporary increase in the statutory debt limit. [ Page ] VII FOSTERING COMPETITIVE ENTERPRISE a ) Require advance notice to the antitrust agencies of proposed mergers by all firms of significant size engaging in interstate commerce. [ Pages ] b ) Extend Federal regulation to all mergers of banking institutions and require Federal approval of acquisitions of banks by holding companies [ Page ] c ) Make explicit the application of the Clayton Act to business mergers in which either party is engaged in interstate commerce. [ Page ] d ) Make Federal Trade Commission cease-and-desist orders under the Clayton Act final unless appealed to the Courts. [ Page ] e ) Empower the Attorney General to issue a civil investigative demand compelling the production of documents before filing of complaint without having to invoke grand jury proceedings. [ Page ] f ) Increase appropriation for antitrust law enforcement g ) Re-examine regulations of the transportation industry [ Page ] [ Page ] VIII. EXTENDING HOME OWNERSHIP AND IMPROVING NEIGHBORHOODS a ) Make Federal assistance to a community for public housing contingent on its adoption of a workable program of slum prevention and elimination. [ Page ] b ) Authorize units of public housing in each of the next two years [ Page ] c ) Increase the permissible size of and extend from three to five years the maximum permissible maturity on home repair and modernization loans insurable under the Federal Housing Administration. [ Pages ] d ) Increase the Federal Housing Administration mortgage insurance authorization and put this on a more permanent basis. [ Page ] See also Recommendations IV ( c ) ( d ) V ( g ) and XII ( c ) IX ENLARGING PUBLIC ASSETS a ) Authorize Federal matching grants and loans for public school construction over a five-year period. [ Page ] b ) Authorize Federal construction grants to medical and dental schools for teaching and research facilities. [ Pages ] c ) Continue the Federal loan program for college housing in such manner as to attract the investment of private funds. [ Page ] IOI d ) Extend the Hospital and Medical Facilities Survey and Construction Program for an additional two years and provide Federal insurance of mortgage loans for the construction or improvement of private health facilities. [ Page ] e ) Enact a comprehensive and soundly financed program for modernizing the Interstate Highway System. [ Pages ] f ) Authorize the construction of the Upper Colorado River project and other needed water resource developments. [ Pages ] g ) Extend and strengthen the Water Pollution Control Act. [ Page ] h ) Review State and local debt limits that currently restrict borrowing for necessary public works. ( State and local responsibility ) [ Page ] i ) Allow regulated investment companies which hold the bulk of their assets in State and local securities to pass through to their shareholders the tax-exempt status of income received on such securities. [ Page ] X. IMPROVING SKILLS AND TECHNOLOGY a ) Take all practicable steps to attract suitably trained persons to the teaching profession. ( State and local responsibility ) [ Page ] b ) Enlarge the appropriation for the experimental program of the National Science Foundation for supplementary training of teachers of science mathematics and engineering. [ Page ] c ) Strengthen existing Federal programs to encourage higher education [ Page ] See also Recommendations III ( a ) ( b ) XI PROMOTING THE INTERNATIONAL FLOW OF GOODS AND CAPITAL a ) Authorize membership of the United States in the Organization for Trade Cooperation. [ Page ] b ) Enact legislation to simplify the present system of customs valuation [ Page ] c ) Enact legislation to stimulate foreign investment by modifications of the taxation of corporate income from foreign sources. [ Pages ] d ) Extend the lending authority of the Export-Import Bank beyond June [ Page ] XII INCREASING THE STABILITY OF OUR EXPANDING ECONOMY a ) Strengthen provisions for unemployment insurance. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] b ) Study the problem of restoring the Government 's power to regulate the terms of consumer instalment credit. [ Pages ] c ) Authorize the Federal National Mortgage Association to vary within wider limits its stock purchase requirement. [ Page ] d ) Consider establishment of a Federal program of credit union shareaccount insurance. [ Page ] See also Recommendation VIII ( c ) Appendix B SOME LEADING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS DURING I II III IV V VI VII The Nation 's Total Output and Income Employment and Earnings Prices and Inventories Agricultural Developments Financial Developments Government Finances Economic Relations With Foreign Countries Some Leading Economic Developments During The primary purpose of this Appendix is to present the important facts on certain economic developments in These facts help to document the analytical account given in Chapter and to provide a background for the discussions in the other chapters of the Report I. The Nation 's Total Output and Income According to preliminary estimates the gross national product in was more than billion dollars an increase of about billion or nearly } percent over and a new high figure ( Chart B-l and Table B l ) After allowance for the small average price increase the total product was percent larger than the year before. The volume of goods and services produced exceeded the previous peak by percent in current prices and by 3J/s> percent after allowance for price change The rate of increase for private expenditures about percent between and was faster than the rate for total expenditures which were affected by a decline in government purchases of goods and services. This decline was due to a reduction of billion dollars in Federal outlays ; State and local expenditures increased by billion Within the private sector there was a vigorous expansion of business investment accompanying further rapid gains in consumer spending. Business investment in a reversal of the decline increased percent from billion dollars to billion ; although the larger part of this increase was in inventory investment the rise in business fixed investment was about percent. Personal consumption expenditures and residential construction rose from billion dollars to billion or about 7j/s> percent ( Table B l ) Shifts in the degree to which various sectors contributed to the increase in final purchases that is expenditures other than those for investment in business inventories are shown in Table B-2. Increases in personal consumption expenditures between the first and final quarters of accounted for percent of the gain in final purchases against about percent in the preceding phase of recovery. Residential construction which had made substantial contributions to the gain in final purchases during and the first few months of ceased to do so by midsummer and declined in the latter part of the year. On the other hand investment in nonresidential construction and producers ' durable equipment taken together which had added nothing to the increase in final purchases through the first quarter of accounted for an appreciable part of the gain in final purchases during the rest of the year CHART B-l Gross National Product Current and Constant Prices INDEX * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS i IN PRICES ( LEFT SCALE ) V ^ * " " IN CURRENT PRICES ( LEFT SCALE ) " \ / u ^ ^ ^ -o * ^ " ^ n ^ ^ * ^ IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR ( RIGHT SCALE ) n i l SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ANO COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS TABLE B-l. Gross national product and its major components [ Billions of dollars ] Change * Component Second quarter to to first I quarter First Second quarter qiuarter to " to second i third quarter qu ; arter Third quarter to fourth c quarter ? Change in business inventories- Final purchases : Total Gross national product : Total Personal consumption expenditures. Durable goods Nondurable goods _ _ Services Gross private fixed investment New construction _ Residential nonfarm __ Other Producers ' durable equipment-._ Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services Federal * _ National security Other State and local _ * Preliminary ; fourth quarter estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Quarterly changes are at seasonally adjusted annual rates ' Less Government sales NOTE.- Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-2. Contributions to growth in final purchases * Second quarter First quarter to first to fourth quarter quarter * Item Billions of dollars * Total change in final purchases Percent Percent of growth accounted for by : Consumer expenditures Durable goods Nondurable goods. Services Residential construction Fixed business investment * _ _ _ * Gross national product less change in business inventories Preliminary ; fourth quarter estimates by Council of Economic Advisers * Seasonally adjusted annual rates Producers ' durable equipment and construction other than residential NOTE. Percents will not necessarily add to since the percent contributions of net foreign investment and government purchases of goods and services are not shown Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) PERSONAL INCOME AND CONSUMPTION Personal income in totaled billion dollars or billion more than the year before. Disposable personal income rose nearly as much as personal income by billion to billion dollars ( Table B-3 ) TABLE B-3. Distribution of disposable personal income and Percent of disposable personal income Year Disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) ; Personal consumption expenditures * Nondurable goods Durable goods Furniture Total Autoand mobiles houseand hold parts equipment Services Personal saving Food ( exclud- Clothing ing alcoOther and holic shoes beverages ) Other Housing Other ^ i Total personal income less personal taxes. See Table D-12 See Table D-6 for data in billions of dollars * Preliminary estimates b y Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) despite higher Federal tax payments associated with rising earnings and despite somewhat larger payments for State and local taxes. The income gains from to raised the per capita disposable income in constant prices by more than percent ( Table D-13 ) By far the greatest dollar additions to personal income in were in labor income which rose by billion dollars after a decline of billion in ( Table D l l ) This increase reflected gains in employment longer average hours of work in manufacturing and other activities and substantially higher basic rates of pay in major industries and for government employees. Transfer payments which in had helped to cushion the decline in total employee compensation rose further by million dollars Investment income ( rent dividends and interest ) increased by billion dollars during Proprietors ' income gained million reflecting largely compensating changes in business and professional income which rose billion and in farm income which declined million The distribution of personal income disbursements which exceed personal income by the amount of personal contributions to social insurance shifted in toward a larger share of labor income and transfer payments ( percent ) The share of investment income which had increased in was unchanged at percent during the past year. The share of proprietors ' income however continued to fall as it had in earlier years. The decline from percent in to percent in was accounted for solely by the drop in farm income ; the income share of nonfarm proprietors and professional persons remained unchanged ( Table ) Personal consumption expenditures which had increased billion dollars in rose another billion in As average consumer prices were fairly stable consumption in real terms increased almost ^ percent. This gain was larger than in any postwar year since ( Table D-2 ) In as in the increase in personal consumption expenditures was greater than the rise in disposable income ; therefore for two years in succession the volume of personal saving has shown a decline from billion dollars in to billion in and billion in the year just ended. Personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income dropped from in to in and in ( Table B-3 ) The sharp rise of consumer expenditures and the reduction of personal saving during the past year were associated with large increases in purchases of automobiles and other durable goods. Expenditures on durable goods rose percent compared with gains of and percent in expenditures on nondurable goods and services respectively. As a percentage of disposable income purchases of durable goods increased from percent to percent those of nondurable goods dropped from percent to percent while the share of consumer services remained unchanged at almost percent ( Table B-3 ) The dollar increases in expenditures for nondurable goods and services however were quite substantial. Together theSe categories accounted for about billion of the billion dollar increase in total consumer spending The rise in expenditures relative to income was facilitated by a record expansion of consumer credit enabling consumers to finance additional purchases of durable goods while at the same time increasing their outlays on other goods and services. Although consumer and home mortgage debt increased rapidly individuals ' holdings of liquid assets ( currency and bank deposits savings and loan shares and securities ) also rose substantially In the year ended September these asset holdings increased about as much as debt ( Table D-14 ) BUSINESS INCOME AND INVESTMENT Fixed business investment in totaled billion dollars against billion the year before ; in the fourth quarter of it reached a new high annual rate of billion. Investment in plant and equipment was stimulated by the rapid growth of business sales. As sales increased capacity utilization in most industries improved rapidly. The introduction of new products or models especially in highly competitive consumer markets stimulated investment outlays for both expansion and modernization. In some of the durable goods industries declining military purchases and rising civilian demand required investments for reconversion Investment was also encouraged by favorable earnings in both and While corporate profits before tax declined by billion dollars between and the expiration of the excess profits tax in January and the automatic decline in corporate tax liabilities accompanying lower profits completely absorbed the impact of reduced earnings. As a result corporate earnings after tax remained unchanged. In profits rose by about billion dollars before and billion dollars after taxes ( Table D-52 ) Gains for unincorporated business firms are reflected in the rise in business and professional income from billion dollars to billion The more liberal depreciation allowances provided in the Internal Revenue Code also stimulated investment in Corporate undistributed profits and depreciation allowances in totaled about billion dollars more than in the previous year despite an increase of billion dollars in dividend payments Finally there was a marked improvement in the financial position of business. In the months ended September cash United States Government securities and receivables held by nonfinancial corporations gained almost billion dollars and inventories and other current assets billion dollars while net current liabilities rose only billion. Thus net corporate working capital increased almost billion ; for the first time it surpassed billion dollars ( Table D-56 ) Because of rising profits and larger retained earnings the increased requirements of business corporations for investment capital could be met for the most part from internal funds ( Table D-55 ) In contrast to when industrial investment declined while commercial investment made modest gains practically all major sectors participated in the expansion of capital outlays during ( Table D-29 ) Plant and equipment expenditures of commercial construction and communication firms rose from billion dollars to billion and reached an annual rate of billion toward the end of the year. By far the major portion of this rise was due to investment of commercial firms in warehouses stores office buildings delivery trucks and the like. The strength of investment in this sector is partly attributable to the backlog of undertakings deferred because of restrictions during the Korean conflict. But it reflects also the continuous demand for shopping and other commercial facilities in the rapidly growing suburbs of our cities. Moreover the construction of large office buildings until recently limited to New York and a few other cities is spreading to an increasing number of localities where little or no new office space had been provided since the early thirties Industrial outlays on plant and equipment which had dropped percent between the third quarter of and the first quarter of recovered rapidly as the year progressed. Between the first and final quarters of manufacturing investment rose percent railroad investment percent and public utility outlays percent. Total industrial investment between these periods gained billion dollars and by the end of the year it was slightly above the previous high point registered in the third quarter of Capital outlays of durable goods industries in totaled billion dollars percent above ; in the final quarter of the year they reached a record annual rate of billion. Primary metals industries spent large sums for further expansion and modernization. Investment by transportation equipment firms particularly automobile producers which had increased substantially in reached an even higher level by the end of In fact capital outlays in every major durable goods industry increased markedly throughout the year T H E RECORD OF PRODUCTION The rise in investment and consumption during brought new production records in industry and related activities. Agricultural output also attained a new high level. Total industrial output in May surpassed the peak and by the end of was percent above it. The first groups to exceed their peaks were minerals and nondurable manufactures in February and March respectively. Output of durable manufactures as a whole did not equal the high point before August Although sales of consumer durable goods had begun to increase early in purchases of producers ' durable equipment recovered only in no the spring of Moreover the major impact of the decline in military procurement after mid-1953 was on the durable goods industries Likewise the rate of industrial expansion from to varied from group to group ( Table B-4 ) Durable goods manufactures increased by percent. In this group the production of primary metals rose by percent. Steel production was very high through most of the year and with the exception of the usual slack during summer vacations was close to theoretical capacity after March. The output of transportation equipment ( mainly motor vehicles ) increased percent. Nondurable goods manufactures as a group having declined less than durables during the contraction also expanded at a slower rate percent. Within this group the output of rubber and leather products stimulated by automobile demand rose percent but foods beverages and tobacco gained only percent. The production of minerals increased percent with a sharp expansion in coal mining ( percent ) and metal mining ( percent ) TABLE B-4. Changes in industrial production Percentage change Industry group Industrial production : Total to August to January January to June June to December Manufactures : Total Durable manufactures : TotalPrimary metals Metal fabricating : Total Fabricated metal products Electrical machinery.- Nonelectrical machinery Transportation equipment Instruments and related products Clay glass and lumber products Furniture and miscellaneous manufactures- Nondurable manufactures : Total _ Textiles and apparel Rubber and leather products Paper and printing Chemicals and petroleum productsFoods beverages and tobacco Minerals : Total16 Coal Crude oil and natural gas Metal mining Stone and earth minerals. Percentage changes for monthly data are based on seasonally adjusted indexes Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The Federal Reserve index of consumer durable goods output advanced more than percent partly reflecting a spectacular increase in automobile production. In a record number of nearly million passenger cars came off the assembly line against } million the year before. Large III gains were again scored by many of the consumer goods which had shown strong growth trends in recent years ( Table B-5 ) TABLE B-5. Output of some rapidly growing consumer commodities and Commodity Air-conditioning units room Antibiotics _ Blankets electric Dryers clothes Freezers farm and home Frozen foods Furnaces warm air oil and g a s Oil burners residential._ Shavers electric Synthetic detergents. _ _ Synthetic fibers other than rayonTelevision sets Waste food disposals Water heaters electric and gas Unit Thousands Thousand pounds. Thousands Thousands Thousands Million pounds Thousands Thousands Thousands Million pounds Million pounds Thousands Thousands Thousands ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) a ! Preliminary Production was relatively small Source : Department of Commerce based on data from various private and Government sources While the recovery in industrial output during the second half of was heavily concentrated in industries associated with automobile production and construction particularly housing the expansion of broadened to other industries especially machinery. In the second half of almost three-fifths of the increase in total production was attributable to five major industry groups primary metals transportation equipment stone clay and glass products lumber and rubber products. Each of these was substantially affected by the strength of automobile and housing demand. The remaining nondurable goods industries taken together contributed about one-fifth of the increase and the remaining durable goods industries percent. In contrast this last group a large part of which supplies the wherewithal for new and modernized industrial equipment contributed about one-fourth of the rise in total output during The five industries which had accounted for the major share of the production gains in late contributed percent and nondurable goods percent The rate of growth in production has slowed down in recent months Total industrial output increased percent from July-August to January percent from January to June and percent from June to December. The deceleration was particularly marked in some of the industry groups which had shown the greatest rate of increase during the early phase of the expansion : metal mining primary metals transportation equipment rubber and leather products and industries associated with construction such as clay glass and lumber products ( Table B-4 ) In other areas of activity electric power production in continued the spectacular growth shown throughout the postwar period. Power production of electric utilities rose percent. Its rate of increase since has been almost four times that of gross national product in constant dollars and three times that of industrial production. Ton miles of railway freight carried in increased more than percent N E W CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY Total construction expenditures in increased billion to a new high of billion dollars. Their share in the gross national product almost percent established also a postwar record. Private outlays accounted for practically the entire gain over Public construction increased only million dollars as substantial gains in educational building highway construction sewer and water installations and military facilities were largely offset by continued declines in expenditures for conservation and development and in public industrial construction. The latter reflected primarily the completion of defense plants started or planned during the period of Korean hostilities and of atomic energy installations In the private sector commercial building exceeded the volume by about million dollars and showed by far the highest rate of increase ( percent ) Industrial construction rose to a new high of billion dollars reversing the decline in the two preceding years. Among institutional construction types the building of churches and similar edifices continued to show a substantial rise ( Chart B-2 and Tables D-30 and D-31 ) CHART B-2 Changes in New Construction PERCENTAGE INCREASE,1954 TO TOTAL TOTAL PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL PUBLIC UTILITY AND OTHER TOTAL PUBLIC NOTE : BASED ON ESTIMATES OF VALUE PUT IN PLACE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ANO DEPARTMENT OF LABOR Residential construction expenditures in reached a new high of billion dollars an increase of billion or percent from the preceding year. More than million privately financed nonfarm housing units were started in a record exceeded only in ; this volume of starts followed the absorption of million units in and of about million in each of the three preceding years ( Table D-32 ) The number of private housing units started last year totaled substantially more than in in spite of a decline in the seasonally adjusted rate of starts during most of the year. The rate of starts in hovered around million units during the first five months but increased later to a rate of almost million in December. In the annual rate averaged nearly million during the first half of the year but declined gradually to about million units at the year-end II. Employment and Earnings Total employment rose by over million and unemployment declined by l/i million between the last three months of and the corresponding months of as the civilian labor force increased by over ^ million. The average workweek also increased and there was considerable overtime work particularly during the latter part of The longer hours combined with a continued rise in average hourly earnings brought weekly earnings to record levels in most industries. Time lost in industrial disputes continued at the low levels of the two previous years. Some of the major collective bargaining agreements negotiated during the year included plans for private supplementation of State unemployment benefits. As the year ended the country 's two major labor federations merged after some years of existence as separate organizations NONAGRIGULTURAL EMPLOYMENT The number of people employed in nonagricultural industries rose during the current expansion to a level well above that in any previous period The rate of increase was greatest during the spring and early summer months. Thereafter the expansion continued at a more moderate pace as production capacity became more fully utilized and as fewer people were seeking work. This broad pattern of expansion is evident in the estimates of nonagricultural employment made by the Bureau of Census as well as in those made by the Bureau of Labor Statistics except that the latter series did not rise so rapidly during the spring and early summer ( Tables D-17andD-22 ) Census figures show that the over-the-year rise in nonagricultural employment was about equally divided among men and women and was reflected in almost all age groups. The percentage rise was substantially greater for women than for men however and an especially sharp gain of about percent was recorded for women years of age and older as the gradual rise in labor force participation by this group was accelerated in Employment of men in the and older age group changed only slightly while for those in their sixties the rate of labor force participation continued to decline. For men years of age who had experienced the greatest employment decline during the downturn there were sharp gains during the spring and summer of ; for this age group employment in December was almost percent higher than a year earlier. Among youths of high-school age employment mostly in part-time jobs rose by to percent The Bureau of Labor Statistics figures seasonally adjusted show that the rise in nonagricultural employment during the year occurred principally in manufacturing where the increase came to about one million ( Table B-6 ) Manufacturing employment rose rapidly in the first half of the year and after a pause on a summer plateau again moved upward in the fourth quarter though without reaching its peak ( Chart B-3 ) The level CHART B-3 Employees in Nonagricultural Establishments MILLIONS OF PERSONS MILLIONS OF PERSONS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED NONMANUFACTURING .../ r-'-vv/- ' i n ) I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR of production in manufacturing was well above that reached in however reflecting substantial gains in output per man-hour over this two-year period. Estimates made by the Bureau of Labor Statistics suggest that between and the average annual rate of increase in manufacturing output per man-hour was considerably higher than in the postwar period as a whole. The steady growth of employment in trade finance service and State and local government that has been characteristic of the entire period since World War II continued with an increase of over y % million during Employment in mining hardly changed during the year TABLE B-6. Changes in nonagricultural employment by industry [ Thousands of persons seasonally adjusted data ] Changes during 1955l Industry January to June Nonagricultural employment : Total June September to September December IO Manufacturing : Total Durable goods industries : Total Primary metal industries..Fabricated metal products ( except ordnance machinery and transportation equipment ) Machinery ( except electrical ) _>_ Electrical machinery Transportation equipment Instruments Ordnance and accessories Stone clay and glass products Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) __ Furniture and fixtures.Miscellaneous manufacturing Nondurable goods industries : Total Textile-mill products Apparel and otherfinishedtextile products Rubber products Leather and leather products Paper and allied products Printing publishing and allied products Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade : Total Wholesale Retail Finance insurance and real estate ___ Service and miscellaneous Government : Total Federal State and local * See Table D-22 for monthly estimates incorporating preliminary revisions in the seasonal indexes for employment in contract construction and Federal Government Based on preliminary revisions for December Source : Department of Labor though the decline of previous years was halted and the average workweek in this industry increased sharply over levels The dominant development within manufacturing during the last quarter of and the first quarter of was the increase of employment in the automobile industry with attendant effect on supplying industry groups as well as on transportation equipment directly. By the spring of the year seasonally adjusted employment was rising in virtually every area of manufacturing. The employment gains in primary metals and in the metalworking groups were particularly noteworthy. The only substantial decline during the year occurred in ordnance reflecting a drop in production of military goods. Employment in textiles has remained about the same for the past two years following a period of decline that dates back with the exception of a period immediately after the outbreak of the Korean conflict to UNEMPLOYMENT The decline in unemployment over the past twelve months took place while the labor force was increasing sharply. At the end of with about J/2 million people in the civilian labor force unemployment had fallen to a little under million. During the spring and summer of the expansion of job opportunities drew many people into the labor market and the civilian labor force rose by about million. Meanwhile after a seasonal rise early in the year unemployment declined to a little over million by the end of the summer. At the year end after declining somewhat less than seasonally since summer the civilian labor force totaled about 66/ million people and there were about million people unemployed ( Table D-17 and Chart ) The Bureau of Employment Security statistics on unemployment which are a by-product of State and other unemployment insurance programs show a decline in insured unemployment of almost or percent over the past twelve months ( Table D-21 ) The rate of decline in insured unemployment has been more rapid than that for total unemployment as reported by the Bureau of Census. The difference in movement between the two series may reflect the fact that many recent entrants to the labor force had not yet acquired eligibility for unemployment compensation The composition of unemployment changed substantially during On the average roughly half of those unemployed in any given month were no longer in that status in the following month. About two-thirds of those no longer unemployed had found jobs and the remainder had left the labor force in most instances to return to school or to full-time household duties. Unemployment declined the most among those unemployed the longest. The number unemployed for weeks or under was not much different in the fourth quarter of than in the fourth quarter of ; the number in the to weeks group fell by about percent ; and the number unemployed for weeks or more fell by about percent ( Table D-20 ) This decline in the number of long-term unemployed was paralleled by a drop in the number of people exhausting their benefit rights under State unemployment insurance programs which toward the end of was averaging less than half the number in the corresponding months of ( Table D-21 ) The rate of unemployment among married men living with their families declined sharply from about percent at the end of to about percent at the end of The number unemployed remained about the same among women and teen-age youth where substantial employment gains were matched by the entry of large numbers into the labor force during the year. Among men years of age and older the number unemployed fell by about percent ( Table D-18 ) The rise in employment which was experienced by most segments of the population and of industry also spread throughout virtually all sections of the country. According to statistics compiled by the Bureau of Employment Security between and the ratio of State-insured unemployment to covered employment declined in States and fell from percent to percent for the Nation as a whole ( Table B-7 ) The national perTABLE B State-insured unemployment as a percent of covered employment Change In unemployment rate Unemployment rate ( percent ) State United States : TotalAlabama Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut,.Delaware District of ColumbiaFlorida Georgia Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas _ Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina. North D a k o t a Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina. South Dakota Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington-_ West Virginia. Wisconsin Wyoming ! Fourth quarter Fourth quarter to _ Fourth quarter to fourth quarter * Average weekly State insured unemployment for ( calendar year and fourth quarter ) and for ( calendar year and fourth quarter ) as a percent of average monthly covered employment for the months ended June and June respectively Source : Department of Labor n8 centage was over percent in the first four months of but averaged under percent in the second half of the year. As unemployment declined it became less uneven geographically. While in insured unemployment amounted to percent or more of covered employment in nine States and was percent or less in seven States in only one State had a ratio over percent and twenty States had ratios of percent or less At the same time the severity of unemployment diminished in virtually all of the country 's major labor market areas and many of them were reclassified by the Bureau of Employment Security during the year in reflection of their tightening labor supply. Among the major labor market areas in the United States the number with a " substantial labor surplus " fell from at the end of to at the end of In some of these communities unemployment is a problem of long duration and has arisen because of the decline of a dominant industry such as coal mining or textile manufacturing HOURS OF WORK AND EARNINGS The increase in the average workweek of production workers in manufacturing which began in April continued in bringing with it an expansion in the number of overtime hours worked. The average workweek rose more than seasonally in the spring of from hours in January to hours in May. Thereafter its movement was chiefly seasonal as it declined in the summer and rose again to hours at the end of the year ( Table B-8 and Chart ) Among nonmanufacturing industries the average workweek in metal mining and bituminous coal mining increased sharply during the expansion following a marked decline in the preceding downturn. In most other segments of the economy changes in the length of the average workweek were smaller ( Table D-23 ) T A B L E B-8. Hours and earnings of production workers in manufacturing Month : April December. : April December. : April December l_ Average workweek ( hours ) Average hourly earnings $ Average weekly earnings $ i Preliminary Source : Department of Labor As hours of work were increasing so too were average hourly earnings ( Table D-24 ) For production workers in manufacturing as a whole average hourly earnings rose from $ at the end of to $ at the end of ; and in durable goods manufacturing they moved above $ an hour in mid-1955 for the first time. These increases were attributable partly to higher wage rates partly to a rise in the number of premium hours worked and during the early phase of the expansion to a relatively great increase in employment in higher wage industries such as automobiles and steel. Outside of manufacturing hourly earnings also rose during the year With the rise in hours of work including premium hours and in rates of pay weekly earnings improved sharply during Among production workers in manufacturing the increase over was a larger dollar gain in real earnings than for any other year since World War I I ( Chart B-4 ) It amounted to about $ per week after allowance for the small price changes that occurred during the year. Among nonmanufacturing workers as well earnings were generally at record levels at the end of the year. In mining the large rise in hours of work contributed heavily to a sharp increase in weekly earnings ( Table D-25 ) CHART B-4 Weekly Earnings in Manufacturing DOLLARS FOR PRODUCTION WORKERS IN PRICES-k IN CURRENT PRICES of ^ EARNINGS IN CURRENT PRICES DIVIDED BY CONSUMER PRICE INDEX ON BASE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The Federal Government also raised the pay of its employees during the year. An increase of percent was authorized for classified Federal civilian workers and an average of percent for postal employees affecting a total of about V/2 million people. These were the first increases since for the groups affected COLLECTIVE BARGAINING DEVELOPMENTS In a period of expansion with major labor contracts open for negotiation in most industries and with the demand for supplementary unemploy- ment benefits bringing a relatively new element for major collective agreements to the bargaining table the tide of industrial disputes might have been expected to run high. It did not do so. Although there were a few lengthy strikes and many shorter ones the number of man days lost through industrial disputes averaged about one-fourth of percent of estimated working time a level only slightly greater than the postwar low point reached in Measures to supplement the benefits paid under State unemployment insurance programs received relatively great emphasis in collective bargaining particularly in the automobile farm equipment can flat glass and maritime industries. The resulting plans are generally designed to bring unemployment insurance benefits plus the supplement to a total of to percent of take-home pay. The plans vary in detail however particularly as to an individual 's rights to money paid into the private funds In most cases the risks of unemployment are pooled by establishment of a general fund from which payments are made to workers covered by the plan when they become unemployed and are found eligible for State unemployment benefits. In others a special account is established in the name of each worker from which benefits are payable in the event of his unemployment because of illness or economic reasons ; in addition the worker receives any balance in his account if his employment is permanently terminated. In general the plans are financed by employer payments of about cents for each hour worked The wage changes made through collective bargaining in were higher than in and became larger during the year as the expansion gained pace and as major agreements were made. There was wide dispersion in the amounts of settlements though almost all of them amounted to at least cents an hour and some to as much as cents or more an hour Unions and managements worked out agreements reflecting the widely varying situations to which their agreements would apply. In many cases as was true in and some earlier years skilled workers received larger than average increases as unions and managements sought to maintain at least the existing differentials among skill groups. Long-term contracts were agreed to in important sectors of the economy and deferred wage increases covering at least % million workers were scheduled for various dates in and beyond. Attention was also given to the vesting of pension rights under established private pension plans by providing permanent entitlement to benefits after a specified age and length of service In December the two major labor federations merged to form the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations The merger brings together in one group an estimated million workers in the United States. Collective bargaining will be carried on by the constitutent unions as it has been in the past III. Prices and Inventories Industrial and agricultural prices showed diverse movements during The index of wholesale prices of industrial commodities was roughly stable until mid-year and rose thereafter ; for the year as a whole it averaged percent higher than in Prices of farm products in central markets declined by percent and wholesale prices of processed foods dropped correspondingly though by a smaller amount ( Table B-9 ) Since these divergent movements were largely offsetting the over-all index of wholesale prices changed very little increasing only percent from to ( Chart and Table B-9 ) TABLE B-9. Changes in wholesale and consumer prices Percentage change Component to * to Pecond quarter to second quarter Second quarter to fourth quarter Wholesale prices farm and industrial : All commodities Farm products _ Processed foods All commodities other than farm products and foods ( industrial ) Wholesale prices materials and goods : Crude materials Intermediate materials. Finished goods Consumer prices : All items Commodities Services excluding rent. Rent Changes in wholesale prices and consumer prices for all items and for rent are based on averages of monthly indexes ; consumer prices for commodities and for services excluding rent on indexes for month ending the quarter. Base period for all indexes is Preliminary Source : Department of Labor The reduction in farm prices was a prolongation of the downward movement that began in and which has carried farm prices substantially below their levels ; industrial prices have risen moderately during the same interval. When compared with the immediate prewar level however the increase in industrial prices has not been so great as that in farm prices ( Chart B-5 ) Price changes in were small for most major categories of finished goods. Average prices of finished producer goods showed the largest increase percent from Wholesale prices of consumer durable goods advanced only percent while the rise in prices of consumer nondurable goods other than foods was even smaller about percent Reductions in food prices however outweighed these modest increases for industrial consumer goods with the result that the index of wholesale prices of finished consumer goods declined percent ( Table B-10 ) T A B L E B-10. Changes in wholesale prices of crude and intermediate materials and finished goods Percentage change * Component to a to Second quarter to fourth quarter coo Crude materials : Total... _ _ Fuel _ Nonfoods excluding fuel Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Intermediate materials supplies and components : Totals Materials and components for manufacturing Materials for durable manufacturing Materials for nondurable manufacturing excluding foods __ ___ Materials for food manufacturing Components for manufacturing _ Materials and components for construction Finished goods : Total Producer goods _ Consumer goods Durable goods Nondurable goods excluding foods Foods Second quarter to second quarter Based on averages of monthly indexes ( = ) Preliminary Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Source : Department of Labor Among retail prices reductions covered a wide range of commodities as average prices of food apparel and house furnishings all dropped or percent. Prices of services however increased and therefore the decline in the over-all average of consumer prices was only percent smaller than the decrease for commodities alone WHOLESALE PRICES Price advances during were concentrated largely in the durable goods sector of the economy ( Table B-10 ) Prices of building materials steel nonferrous metals and natural rubber responded to the sharply increased demand that accompanied the expansion of construction activity and of durable goods production. In addition high foreign demand strengthened world prices of many of these materials and in some instances production was temporarily interrupted by strikes at home or abroad Prices of finished durable goods tended upward along with prices of materials but the margin between the two narrowed especially in consumer durable goods Average prices of materials used in nondurable goods manufacturing and of nondurable goods other than foods rose very little while those of foods CHART B-5 Wholesale Prices on a Prewar Base INDEX INDEX FARM PRODUCTS ^ / PROCESSED FOODS / / X ' * y ALL COMMODITIES OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND PROCESSED FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL ) too t i i i i i J ! SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OP LABOR CHART B-6 Wholesale Prices Economic Sectors INDEX s INDEX MOO INTERMEDIATE MATERIALS SUPPLIES AND COMPONENTS ^ FINISHED GOODS CRUDE MATERIALS ' ! SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR JJ declined. Large agricultural supplies restrained or depressed prices of materials used in the manufacture of processed foods and a number of other nondurable commodities and ample capacity was generally available to meet the increased demand for these products The movements of the over-all indexes for crude and intermediate materials and for finished goods were largely dominated by changes in prices of foods and durables since prices of nondurables other than foods were comparatively stable. The index of prices of crude materials actually declined because of the fall in prices of crude feedstuffs and foodstuffs which more than offset substantial increases for durable materials ( Chart B-6 ) Similarly the advances of the over-all indexes of intermediate materials and finished goods were retarded by reductions for foods and slow advances for other nondurables CONSUMER PRICES Retail prices of consumer commodities declined percent between and ( Chart B-7 and Table B-9 ) Retail food prices averaged percent lower than in while apparel prices dropped percent and prices of house furnishings fell percent. Service prices increased however with rents up percent and average prices of other services percent In general prices of consumer commodities have drifted gradually and irregularly downward since the end of although small increases occurred during the second half of At the same time rents and prices of other services ( including public utility and transportation services ) have increased steadily. These largely offsetting movements gave a slight upward tilt to the consumer price index during and most of ; the index then declined fractionally to a low in the spring of and rose slightly in the following months. In December it was compared with the high of in October The decline in retail food prices during was a reflection of the drop in farm prices although a substantial part of the latter decline was offset by increased processing and marketing charges. For many household durable goods however retail prices declined relative to wholesale prices as department stores and other retailers moved to meet the competition of discount houses. Average retail prices of new automobiles rose during the last few months of when factory prices increased and dealers discontinued or reduced price concessions with the arrival of the new models ; concessions increased during the winter and spring of however and by September new car prices were lower than a year earlier. The experience of the preceding year was then repeated when the models were introduced late last year and new car prices again increased Prices of a wide variety of consumer services rose during with increases reported for rents streetcar and bus fares medical care television and automobile repairs and other items. In general service prices have moved upward gradually but steadily since Compared with prewar levels however they have risen less than commodity prices ( Chart B-8 ) CHART B-7 Consumer Prices on a Postwar Base INDEX,I947-49 = IOO INDEX SERVICES EXCLUDING RENT120 I on ' I ' ' n ii g NOTE : ALL DATA ARE PLOTTED FOR THE LAST MONTH OF THE QUARTER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART B-8 Consumer Prices on a Prewar Base INDEX 1939'100 INDEX * r COMMODITIES v ^ ^ * ALL ITEMS ^ ^ SERVICES ^ ^ ^ EXCLUDING ~ RENT y ym * RENT I I t i ! i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR * INVENTORIES Although inventory change in the business sector has been substantial accounting for about percent of the rise in gross national product between the second quarter of and the fourth quarter of the increase in inventories has not been out of line with the growth of sales ( Charts and ) After falling sharply as sales spurted late in the ratios of wholesale and retail inventories to sales held steady throughout Within manufacturing the bulk of the inventory accumulation has taken the form of goods locked up in the productive process. There were also accumulations of purchased materials and finished goods but these occurred in response to higher levels of economic activity and were small ; indeed these stocks fell relative to production and sales. Retail stocks of new cars rose late in Apart from the automobile industry which is now bringing its production into better adjustment with market demand there is little evidence in the business world of excess or speculative inventory holdings IV. Agricultural Developments OUTPUT AND STOCKS Total farm output set a new record in about percent more than in and percent more than in For most major categories of farm commodities previous records were approached or exceeded ( Chart B-9 ) Output of all livestock and livestock products rose by nearly percent during the year largely as a result of the percent increase over previous high figures for meat animals while production of poultry and dairy products continued at record levels. Sharply increased pork production and unprecedented beef production furnished meat supplies of pounds per capita the highest since Output of all crops in closely approached the all-time high of despite instances of severe weather damage in several areas and acreage restrictions on the six " basic " crops. Feed grain output was nearly percent higher than in and second only to Hay and forage production rose more than percent and was close to the record set in Output of oil-bearing crops was percent above the previous record level of Though planted acreage in cotton was percent less than in the previous year total output increased by percent because of record-breaking yields. Production of food grains was reduced from that in the previous year by smaller acreage allotments on wheat and rice but the acreage reduction was partially offset by higher yields The crops were produced on about the same total acreage of cropland used in The index of crop production per acre reached a new high percent above and percent above The man-hours of labor used for farm work continued the more or less steady decline that CHART B-9 Farm Output INOEX * INDEX ALL LIVESTOCK AND PRODUCTS ^ ^ _ ^ ^ ^ ~ ~ TOTAL FARM OUTPUT ALL CROPS i i t i l l MAJOR LIVESTOCK PRODUCTS POULTRY AND EGGS " " " MEAT " jar ^ ^ ANIMALS <p ^ * * * DAIRY PRODUCTS i i I MAJOR CROPS / OIL CROPS / \ / \ \ \ FEED GRAINS \ / / / V \ / / FOOD GRAINS I i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE I " " " " I had begun in The figure was about the same as in and percent below the peak. Output per man-hour continued the rise that has been so pronounced since the beginning of World War I I ; the index reached percent of the average in an increase of percent since and percent since These summary figures reflect the rapid changes in our commercial agriculture during the last two decades. Increased use of machinery to replace human labor and horses increased use of fertilizer widespread adoption of many new production techniques and increasing farm size which facilitates adoption of these more efficient methods have all contributed to the rapid rise in output ( Chart B-10 ) At the beginning of the crop year stocks of most major farm commodities were unusually high and the bulk of the carry-over of most price-supported commodities was held by the CCC ( Chart B-l ) Production in again exceeded market demand at current prices and CCC inventories and commitments for loans outstanding reached the record level of billion dollars on November World supplies of many agricultural products are at all-time highs and surpluses of cotton and wheat are particularly large FARM PRICE MOVEMENTS Average prices received by farmers for all products remained fairly stable in the first half of the year slightly above the level of the last months of In mid-1955 the impact of the near-record harvest began to be felt and the index of prices received by farmers declined in almost every month from June through December. On December the index of prices received was percent below that of a year earlier ( Chart B-l2 ) The decline in the average conceals many divergent price movements The December index of prices received for poultry and eggs was percent higher than in December and prices received for dairy products tobacco and commercial vegetables were all slightly higher than a year earlier. The largest price declines were in products marked by high current output ; and for some of these products carry-over stocks were already abnormally heavy. The December index of feed grain prices was percent lower than the index in December Because of the record output prices of oil-bearing crops decreased by percent between December and December ; and the larger crop of potatoes resulted in sharply lower prices to potato producers. The index of prices received for meat animals was percent lower on December than a year earlier largely because the average price of hogs had dropped by percent The prices paid by farmers for commodities used in family living remained relatively stable during the year. Prices paid for items used in production declined slightly primarily as a result of lower feed prices. In the last few months these declines were partially offset by increases in the prices paid for motor vehicles and farm machinery. The expansion of nonfarm CHART B-10 Fertilizer and Machines Used on Farms INDEX " INDEX FERTILIZER USE " O N FARMS _ ^ JS -TRACTORS ON FARMS MILLIONS MILLIONS GRAIN COMBINES FARMS _ N MILLIONS FARMS WITH MILKING MACHINES I * I I J SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE I CHART B l l Carry-over of Selected Crops Total and Amount Held by CCC MILLIONS OF BUSHELS MILLIONS OP BUSHELS WHEAT CORN MILLIONS OF BALES MILLIONS OF TONS -COTTON FEED GRAINS ( INCLUDES CORN ) MILLIONS OF POUNDS MILLIONS OF CWT TOBACCO RICE Hi BEGINNING OF CROP SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE CHART B-12 Prices Received and Paid by Farmers INOEX INDEX = ~ ( PRICES PAIO INTEREST TAXES ANO WAGE RATES ) ~ < I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I PARITY RATIO " I I I I I I T ^ ^ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I t I I ^ PERCENTAGE RATIO OF INDEX OF PRICES RECEIVED TO PARITY INDEX SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE employment opportunities contributed to a rise in farm wage rates which at the end of the year were percent higher than a year earlier and more than times the average in the base period. The index of farm real-estate taxes rose by nearly percent during and that for interest charges by percent. The index of prices paid by farmers interest rates taxes and wage rates are combined to form the " parity index " which was at the same level at the end of as a year earlier Since the parity index remained unchanged while the index of prices received decreased during the parity ratio declined ( Chart B-12 ) The average for the year was which was percent below the average. On December the parity ratio was or percent less than the figure for a year earlier FARM INCOME The increased sales of farm products during the year were not enough to offset the fall in farm prices and net farm income declined. Realized net farm income of farm operators in is now estimated at billion dollars a decrease of percent from The number of farms continued to decline as existing farms were enlarged to improve efficiency but net income per farm dropped by about percent. As the economy expanded and nonfarm demands for labor increased farm people earned more from nonfarm sources but preliminary indications point to a percent decline in per capita income of farm people from all sources ( Chart B-13 ) Nevertheless many farmers received higher incomes in than in Estimates of the Department of Agriculture made for four types of commercial farms indicate that for some farms was a much better year than Cotton farmers in the Southern Piedmont region with unusually high yields for this price-supported crop found their net incomes increased substantially. For dairy farms in the Central Northeast the higher milk output when prices were stable and feed costs somewhat lower resulted in slightly higher incomes. After very low yields in wheatsmall grain-livestock farms in the Northern Plains generally experienced improved yields in which raised their income. On the other hand hog-dairy producers in the Corn Belt found their incomes sharply reduced by lower hog prices which were only partially offset by larger marketings In the Western Corn Belt many producers suffered from a combination of severe drought and low hog prices CHART B-13 Farm Income DOLLARS DOLLARS INCOME PER FARM / h v__ ^ ' i i i i i ; i i i I i i i i i I i PER CAPITA INCOME ^ " ~ ( ENLARGED SCALE ) o INCOME OF FARM PEOPLE FROM ALL SOURCES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE There were also important regional differences in the changes in farm income in ( Table B l l ) Realized net income in New England the Middle Atlantic States and the Pacific States averaged approximately the same as in ; in the South Atlantic and East South Central regions it was higher in than in ; and in the West South Central the East North Central the West North Central and the Mountain regions it declined the decline in the last three regions amounting to percent or more. Variations in weather yields and individual commodity prices account for most of these variations between regions. Such variations are not unusual in agriculture and statistics showing total United States farm income often obscure important regional divergences TABLE B-ll. Realized net income of farm operators by regions Eegion Percentage change to Millions of dollars United States : Total _ New England Middle Atlantic East North Central West North Central South Atlantic East South Central West South Central Mountain Pacific * Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture AGRICULTURAL FINANCES Farm prices and incomes generally declined during the year and both farm mortgage debt and nonmortgage debt rose. Yet total farm asset values and owners5 equities in these assets increased chiefly because the value of farm real estate continued to rise Average values of farm real estate on November were percent higher than a year earlier and above the peak that had been reached in There were new record values in nearly half of the States. This strength of farm real estate prices is unusual in the light of the trend in farm prices and incomes and of past relationships. The demand for farm real estate arises in part from the desire of farm operators to enlarge existing farms in order to utilize labor and machines more efficiently. Sales to farm operators accounted for an increasing proportion of farm sales in Farm real-estate debt increased by an estimated percent during It was to be expected that as land prices moved upward and increasing numbers of younger operators entered farming farm mortgage debt would rise from its very low level at the end of World War II. However in historical perspective the present ratio of mortgage debt to real-estate value is low ( Table B-12 ) The rate of farm foreclosures increased slightly during the vear ended March : but it was still below that in anv year prior to onlv one-ninth of the average for and onefourteenth of the average. Preliminary indications suggest little change in this rate in TABLE B-12. Value of farm real estate and real estate debt Value of farm real estate a E n d of y e a r Real estate debt Real estate Foreclosure debt as per- rate per farms cent of value Billions of dollars L.I L.2 L.4 L.5 " ' _ _ _ _. _ _ Foreclosures are for year ended March * Figures for will be revised upward in line with the Census ] of Agriculture Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture Farmers ' financial assets changed very little during the year. Non-realestate debt rose about percent but the rise in real-estate values was more than enough to offset total debt increases. Owners ' equities rose about percent V. Financial Developments Credit demands were high in practically all sectors of the economy during The rise in borrowing by home owners and automobile purchasers and in bank borrowing by businessmen exceeded increases in any previous year. Commercial banks sold a large volume of United States Government securities and added record amounts to their loan portfolios The value of security offerings by State and local governments declined while those of corporations increased moderately. The rate of growth in the money supply slowed down. Interest rates rose BANK CREDIT AND BANK RESERVES Total loans and investments of commercial banks increased by billion dollars in ( Chart and Table B-13 ) While loans increased by billion dollars holdings of United States Government securities fell by billion. Investments in other securities increased by only billion dollars The rise in commercial bank lending the largest dollar increase in any single year since the end of World War II was concentrated in business consumer and real estate loans. Business loans accounted for billion of the expansion in total loans. Increased borrowing was widespread in industry and trade particularly among public utilities and petroleum chemical trade and textile companies but the largest business borrowers were sales finance companies. Loans to consumers which had declined by billion dollars in increased in by billion. Real estate loans rose by billion dollars billion more than in TABLE B-13. Changes in commercial bank holdings of loans and investments and [ Billions of dollars ] Net change during Loan or investment i TX. S. Government securities Other securities Investments : Total Business Real estate Consumer. Security Agricultural _ All other Loans ( excluding interbank ) : Total Loans ( excluding interbank ) and investments : Total.. i Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Keserve System ( except as noted ) Excess reserves of member banks which averaged slightly more than million dollars during the summer of declined gradually and irregularly until they reached an average of about million dollars in November ( Chart and Table D-44 ) Member bank borrowings at the Federal Reserve Banks on the other hand increased from an average of less than million dollars to over billion during the same period Thus " free " reserves of member banks ( excess reserves less borrowings from the Reserve Banks ) declined from over million dollars in the summer of to minus million in November In December " free " reserves gained about million dollars as member bank borrowings declined and excess reserves increased The change in the distribution of the publicly held Federal debt during is shown in Table B-14. The total debt held by the public decreased by billion dollars during Sales or redemptions of government securities by commercial banks and the Federal Reserve Banks amounted to billion. The difference of billion was absorbed mainly by nonfinancial corporations State and local governments individuals pension funds savings and loan associations and foreign investors ; Federal security holdings of insurance companies and mutual savings banks decreased slightly About one-third of the funds required to purchase this large volume of securities came from individuals either directly or through State and local and private retirement funds. Nonfinancial corporations which had sold billion dollars of Federal securities during purchased billion in TABLE B-14. Changes in ownership of publicly held Federal debt [ Par values billions of dollars ] Ownership distribution ( end of year ) Net change during Investor group Debt held by the public : Total Commercial banks Federal Reserve Banks _ Insurance companies Mutual savings banks Other corporations _ _ State and local governments Individuals Miscellaneous investors * _ _ __ __ i Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Differs slightly from estimate in table B-13 because figures in this table are based on par rather than book values and include holdings of banks in Territories and possessions ' See table D-49 footnote NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) T H E GROWTH OF PRIVATE DEBT Net private debt rose by almost billion dollars an increase exceeded only in and almost three times the rise in ( Chart and Table D-47 ) Borrowings to finance purchases of homes and of consumer durable goods contributed about one-half of the total increase. At the end of the year net private debt outstanding amounted to an estimated billion dollars about percent higher than the total at the end of World War II Private obligations accounted for almost three-fifths of the total outstanding at the end of ; a decade earlier they had represented only one-third of the total. Despite the rise during recent years net private debt amounted to about IJ/5 of a year 's expenditures by consumers and businessmen in compared with ratios of iys in and tt/5 in Mortgage Debt Nonfarm mortgage debt which had risen by billion dollars in increased by another billion in to an all-time high of billion More than four-fifths of this increase was due to a rise in mortgages on to 4-family nonfarm houses. The increase in outstanding Federally underwritten mortgages amounted to percent of the total rise in outstanding debt on to 4-family dwellings the largest proportion since ( Table D-42 ) Consumer Credit Consumer credit outstanding increased by billion dollars in compared with million in and an average of billion in earlier postwar years. Instalment credit accounted for billion dollars of the total increase ( Chart and Tables B-15 and D-40 ) In turn billion of the increase in instalment loans reflected net extensions of credit to purchase automobiles. Other consumer goods paper and personal loans each rose by a little more than billion dollars while outstanding repair and modernization loans remained practically unchanged for the second consecutive year TABLE B-15. Changes in short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding Millions oi dollars Net changes in consumer credit outstanding Period : First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarterFourth quarter : First quarter..Second quarter. Third quarterFourth quarter : First quarter. Second quarter. Third quarterFourth quarter * Total consumer credit outstanding ( end of period ) Instalment credit All types of consumer credit Total Other Repair and Auto- con- mod- Permobile sumer erniza- sonal loans paper goods tion paper loans Noninstalment credit Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data are not adjusted for seasonal variation Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) The rapid growth in outstanding instalment credit was the result of a sharp rise in extensions of new credit while repayments increased moderately ( Chart and Table D-41 ) The tendency for repayments to rise more slowly than extensions was reinforced during by the lengthening of maturities on new contracts which reduced average monthly payments relative to credit extensions. Extensions of all types of instalment credit increased from a seasonally adjusted monthly rate of billion dollars in the summer of to a high of billion in the third quarter of The rate declined to billion per month in the last quarter but at that rate it was still well above prior-year levels. Repayments increased from a monthly rate of billion dollars in mid-1954 to billion in the last three months of so that by the end of the gap between extensions and repayments was narrowing The sharp increase in extensions of automobile credit began after the models were introduced late in From a seasonally adjusted monthly rate of billion dollars in the third quarter of extensions of automobile credit rose to a record monthly rate of over billion in May ; they continued at about that level through the third quarter of the year and then declined slightly in the last quarter. Automobile credit extensions totaled billion dollars in billion or percent more than in the previous year ( Table D-41 ) Instalment credit expansion also played an important role during in markets for consumer durable goods other than automobiles. Extensions of other consumer goods paper increased by about billion dollars between and an increase which contributed to the growth in consumer purchases of furniture and major household appliances CAPITAL MARKETS The value of securities offered by State and local governments amounted to almost billion dollars in billion less than in the previous year ( Table B-16 ) This decline was attributable mainly to a reduction in tollroad issues. Borrowing for most other purposes was at or near the levels. New issues for the construction of school buildings accounted for more than percent of the capital raised in by State and local governments through long-term borrowing The total volume of corporate security offerings amounted to billion dollars in percent higher than a year earlier. The new capital obtained by corporations from these issues ( net proceeds less amounts applied to retirement of securities ) increased by percent between and from billion dollars to billion. Most of this increase was accounted for by the larger offerings of sales and personal finance companies. Flotations by corporations to raise working capital rose by more than percent. Offerings to finance plant and equipment expanded by only percent While the total volume of new corporate security issues increased moderately common stock flotations rose by more than percent between and ( Table B-16 ) Greater use was also made of bond issues which are convertible into stock. The increased attractiveness of equity financing was the result of the rise in stock prices which had begun in September and continued through most of September with few minor interruptions. In late September and early October there was a brief but sharp decline ; the subsequent recovery brought stock prices back to about the previous peak reached in September. According to the Securities and Exchange Commission index stock prices increased by percent in the % years ended December ( Chart and Table D-58 ) TABLE &-16.- Security offerings [ Millions of dollars ] Security State and municipal securities ( principal amount ) Corporate securities ( gross proceeds ) : Total Bonds Preferred stock Common stock New capital from corporate security offerings : Total 3_ New money Other purposes Plant and equipment- Working capital Preliminary New capital is net proceeds less amounts applied to retirement of securities NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and The Bond Buyer Credit extended for the purpose of carrying securities including customers ' debit balances and direct bank loans of weekly reporting member banks to persons other than brokers or dealers rose by more than percent in After margin requirements were raised in January and April the rate of increase in stock market credit dropped sharply. The rise as measured by customers ' debit balances and bank loans to persons other than brokers or dealers amounted to about million dollars in the last nine months of compared with billion in the preceding nine-month period. Customers ' debit balances represented less than V/2 percent of the value of shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange at the end of compared with about percent in and ( using brokers loans as the most nearly comparable series ) In the latter part of and throughout the Treasury refrained from issuing long-term securities. In on the other hand the Treasury issued a new 3-percent 40-year bond in exchange for maturing securities in February and made an additional cash offering of the same bond in July. Together these offerings moved ? billion dollars of Federal debt into long-term securities. Apart from seasonal borrowing other cash and refunding needs in were met by the issue of notes and certificates and beginning in July by an increase of million dollars in each of the regular weekly offerings of Treasury bills MONEY SUPPLY AND INTEREST RATES The money supply defined as the total of adjusted demand deposits and currency rose rapidly during the second half of but its growth was sharply reduced in the following year. On a seasonally adjusted basis the money supply increased at an average annual rate of percent in the second half of ; during its growth averaged percent ( Chart and Tables B-17 and D-45 ) Time deposits which are not included in the conventional definition of the money supply rose by percent during and percent during TABLE B-17. Changes in deposits and currency Net change during Item Billions of dollars Demand deposits adjusted and currency : Total. J Percent Time deposits Demand deposits adjusted Currency outside banks i Based on data for the end of the year * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers See Table D-45 footnote Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) The average annual rate of turnover of demand deposits ( other than interbank and United States Government deposits ) increased by almost percent between and in cities outside major financial centers Interest rates generally reached their low points in before the business recovery got under way ( Chart and Table D-46 ) Yields on Federal securities rose in the second half of while commercial paper rates and yields on private and municipal securities were largely unchanged After the turn of the year most interest rates exhibited a rising trend but the most pronounced changes were in the rates on short-term funds. Offering rates on Treasury bills which averaged percent in June rose to an average of almost percent in December Rates on prime commercial paper with months maturity remained at about * / $ percent throughout the second half of but then advanced sharply ; by the end of they were percent. Commercial banks increased the rate charged on loans to prime customers from percent to % percent in August and then to 3J4 percent in October. Between July and November rates on bank loans to security dealers and brokers were raised from percent to ^ ^ percent. The increases during brought short-term rates to levels which exceeded the peaks For most long-term interest rates the decline terminated in the spring of several months before the upturn in business activity began Corporate bond yields changed little during the remainder of and those on Federal State and local bonds increased slightly in the latter half of the year. Thereafter yields on all types of long-term securities increased until the late summer of ; they declined slightly in the early fall and then recovered to about the summer levels by the end of the year. In December most bond yields were at about the levels prevailing early in but were still below their mid-1953 highs VI. Government Finances FEDERAL FINANCES Federal expenditures have been reduced sharply since For fiscal year net budget expenditures were billion dollars billion less than in and billion less than in The estimated expenditures for fiscal years and are billion and billion dollars respectively ( Table B-18 ) The reduction in expenditures was primarily in the national security programs the net budget expenditures for Department of Defense military functions and total Mutual Security programs declining from billion dollars in fiscal year to billion in fiscal year and billion in fiscal year For fiscal years and the estimates are billion and billion dollars respectively TABLE B-18. Federal receipts and expenditures : Conventional budget and consolidated cash statement ^ [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipts or expenditures Conventional budget : Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Consolidated cash statement : * Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) ( estimated ) ( estimated ) Unlike the conventional budget the consolidated cash statement excludes intragovernmental transactions and includes the transactions of the trust funds which are accumulating reserves at a substantial rate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget Federal receipts also were reduced reflecting primarily a cut in taxes of about * /2 billion dollars since Such receipts for fiscal year were billion dollars billion less than in and billion less than in The estimated receipts for fiscal year are billion ; and for fiscal they are billion dollars Despite the large tax reductions since the budget is being brought into balance. The deficit in the conventional budget has been greatly reduced. In fiscal year the deficit amounted to billion dollars compared with a deficit of billion in and billion in For fiscal year a surplus of million dollars is estimated ; and for fiscal a surplus of million ( Chart ) On a consolidated cash basis ( Table B-18 ) payments to the public in fiscal year exceeded receipts from the public by billion dollars This compares with cash deficits of million dollars for fiscal year and billion dollars for fiscal For each of the fiscal years and the cash surplus is estimated at billion dollars STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCES The combined cash deficits of State and local governments in fiscal year amounted to billion dollars the highest in the past five fiscal years Both receipts and payments were substantially greater than in fiscal but payments rose the more rapidly ( Table B-19 ) TABLE B-19. Consolidated cash statements of Federal and State and local governments { Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipts or payments Total government : Cash receipts Cash payments. State and local cash surplus or deficit ( ) _ Federal cash surplus or deficit ( ) State and local governments : l Cash receipts Cash payments Total cash surplus or deficit ( ) Federal Government : Cash receipts Cash payments Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers on the basis of incomplete data NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) The increase in payments by State and local governments in which continued the upward trend evident since the end of the war was due principally to outlays for capital improvements ( for which needs had accumulated during the war ) the rapid increase in population ( especially in the metropolitan areas and in the school and retired age groups ) and the public demand for more adequate governmental services to match the rise in the standard of living. Among the States ' pressing needs are public roads and institutions for the mentally and physically handicapped The States are also providing increased financial assistance to their local governments either directly by participating in such programs as public education or indirectly through grants to local governments. At the local level public education continues to be a major problem. The postwar increase in the number of births is having its impact on the need for additional classrooms instructional materials and teachers. The local governments are also confronted with urgent needs for sanitary and recreational facilities streets and roads and enlarged provision for public welfare and protection of life and property The increase in receipts reflects the high level of economic activity and the consequent widespread increase in payments of State and local taxes of all types particularly corporate and personal income taxes automotive taxes cigarette taxes sales taxes and property taxes. The States are making an effort to finance their expenditures from their own resources and to help their political subdivisions. They are also renewing their assistance in improving local property tax procedures. Collections from the property tax have doubled since Local governments are also being granted increasing authority to use nonproperty taxes to supplement their revenues from the property tax The gross debt of State and local governments rose from billion dollars on June to billion on June Of the billion dollar increase billion was in State debt and billion in local debt Highways and school construction account for about percent of the increase in total State and local debt. The most rapid expansion was in debt repayable from the proceeds of revenue-producing projects such as toll highways water systems and sewage plants rather than in debt serviced from tax revenues. State and local debt as of June amounted to percent of the gross national product compared with percent a year earlier and a little over percent at the beginning of the decade ( Table B-20 ) The percentage figures in prewar years were substantially higher TABLE B Gross State and local government debt : Total and as percent of gross national product and Gross debt ( billions of dollars current prices ) Year * Total State Local Total gross debt as percent of gross national product Fiscal year ending June for debt ; calendar year for gross national product Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS : NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS On the basis of the national income accounts it is estimated that the receipts of the Federal Government exceeded expenditures in calendar year for the first time since ( Table B-21 ) The excess T A B L E B-21 Government receipts and expenditures as shown in national income accounts l { Calendar years billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure Total government : Receipts Expenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) Federal Government : Receipts : Personal tax and non18.2 tax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals. Contributions for social insurance Total receipts Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services _ _ _ Transfer payments Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Total expenditures Excess of receipts or of expendi9.2 tures ( ) State and local governments : Receipts : Personal tax and non2.7 tax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals _ Contributions for so1.0 cial insurance Federal grants-in-aid.. Total receipts Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Net interest paid Less : Current surplus of g o v e r n m e n t enterprises Total expenditures. Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) * First SecFirst SecFirst SecTotal half a ond Total half * ond Total half ond3 half half half a [ These accounts like the cash budget include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike both the conventional budget and the cash statement they exclude certain capital and lending transactions. In general they do not use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services ; and CCO guaranteed price-support crop loans financed by the banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when COO redeems them Seasonally adjusted annual rates Preliminary ; fourth quarter estimates by Council of Economic Advisers * Less than million dollars NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) '45 amounted to billion dollars ; in each of the two preceding years there had been a deficit of billion dollars and in a deficit oi billion Both the receipts and expenditures of State and local governments in contrast increased persistently throughout the period In and again in expenditures of State and local governments on goods and services increased relative to such expenditures of the Federal Government VII. Economic Relations With Foreign Countries ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL PROGRESS ABROAD During economic expansion continued at an accelerated pace in the developed countries of the Free World. Industrial output rose to new peaks in most countries that in Canada and Japan reaching new highs after mild recessions during The rapid rise in European output which began early in has taken place without a substantial rise in consumer prices in most countries. Except in Italy unemployment in most of Western Europe has been reduced to low levels and in some countries is virtually negligible. Moderate rates of growth have been achieved in many of the less developed countries in Latin America and Asia. Some however have failed to participate in the economic growth and prosperity of the industrial nations. This is particularly true of certain countries that are heavily dependent upon exports of agricultural commodities the prices of which have declined over the past year The expansion of world production has been accompanied by a rise in the volume of international trade above the postwar record achieved in and by a strengthening of the financial positions of many countries During gold and dollar holdings of foreign countries increased by an estimated billion dollars chiefly in Continental Western Europe ( Table D-65 ) The gold and dollar holdings of international institutions including the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development increased by about million dollars. The most adverse movement in the international financial picture was the decline in British gold and dollar reserves by about million dollars. In the early part of the year balance of payments difficulties arose in Scandinavia and a number of the less developed countries also experienced difficulties during The international economic position of Western Europe as a whole remained strong ; its exports in the first three quarters of were considerably above those in the corresponding period of There was also a striking improvement in the foreign trade balance of Japan which still meets a part of its foreign expenditures with dollars obtained from the sale of goods and services to United States military forces There has been a general relaxation of trade and exchange restrictions during and which has benefited exports from the United States. In January the members of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation raised from percent to percent their target for the liberalization of intra-European trade from quota restrictions. Eleven members have already achieved the new goal and four others have achieved or exceeded the percent goal. In addition over half of the private dollar imports of the OEEG countries have been freed from quota and licensing restrictions compared with less than onethird at the beginning of In the same vein there has been a notable relaxation in the administration of the remaining quantitative restrictions against exports from the dollar area. Several European countries including Belgium-Luxembourg the Netherlands Greece and Switzerland now have virtually no import restrictions discriminatory against United States commodities and free international commodity markets for a number of commodities have been restored in Britain and the Netherlands. The improved financial position abroad has also promoted an expansion of longterm private international investment during the past two years WORLD COMMODITY DEVELOPMENTS The industrial boom in Western Europe together with our stockpile purchases tended to offset the slackening of United States industrial demand for nonagricultural materials in the first three quarters of Since that time the continued economic expansion in Europe and the resurgence of industrial activity in this country have led to sharp advances in world prices of industrial raw materials particularly scrap metals copper zinc and rubber. Europe 's accelerated industrial growth has also raised the demand for coal and steel well beyond European production. Consequently a strong element in the expansion of our exports between the third quarter of and the first quarter of was the rise in sales of coal steel scrap and steel and these exports have continued to be large High rates of industrial activity here and abroad have raised prices of industrial materials and semifinished goods. On the other hand prices of coffee and cocoa dropped sharply in late and the first half of and world prices for agricultural commodities partly because of the huge supplies in the United States were generally weak during the past year. Moreover increased freedom of trade and advances in productivity have helped to hold down prices of manufactured products World agricultural production outside the United States exceeded the high levels of in such important commodities as wheat rice cotton tobacco peanuts and soybeans. Foreign wheat production in is estimated at some million bushels higher than in and stocks of wheat are at record levels in the principal exporting countries. Foreign production of cotton increased by about million bales in and foreign countries as a group are producing within million bales of the quantity which they have been consuming. These developments partially explain the shrinkage of our cotton exports from million bales for the crop year to about half as much in the current crop year Favorable growing weather in many parts of the world contributed to expanded production during However of particular significance has been the trend toward higher production arising from technological progress and numerous government-sponsored programs to increase farm output. In the years immediately following World War II output remained low in many areas because the disruptions caused by the war could not be quickly overcome. By the results of intensive efforts to enlarge agricultural yields and output were clearly evident TOTAL EXPORTS AND IMPORTS In the twelve months ended September our exports of goods and services excluding military aid transfers totaled billion dollars billion above such exports in the corresponding period ended September and billion above those in the calendar year ( Table B-22 ) These exports constituted about percent of our gross national product compared with about percent for nonfarm residential construction and percent for the output of producer durable goods two significant determinants of business activity. Military aid transfers declined from billion dollars in and billion in to billion for the twelve months ended September TABLE B-22. Balance of payments [ Billions of dollars ] Purchase acquisition or payment quar- Fourth quarterly First ter aver- quar- Second Third Fourth quar- quar- quarage ter ter ter ter Foreign purchases and acquisition " of assets in United States : United States exports of goods and services excluding mili4.24 tary aid transfers Merchandise exports excluding ( ) military Foreign gold and dollar assets acquired in transactions with United States Errors and omissions Total Payments from United States : Nonmilitary imports of goods and services Merchandise imports excluding military ( ) Military expenditures abroad.- U. S. Government grants and private remittances excluding direct military aid net Private capital investment and U. S. Government loans abroad net Total First Second Third quar- quar- quarter ter ter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Source : Department of Commerce NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding The relatively high level of exports in occurred in the face of a moderate decline in nonmilitary imports of goods and services. This was made possible in considerable measure by a heavy outflow of private capital and increased military expenditures abroad which helped to provide the dollars to support the expanding foreign demand for our goods. In fact total payments to foreigners arising from nonmilitary imports of goods and services military expenditures abroad foreign investments and nonmilitary grants were slightly higher in than in and were significantly higher in the first three quarters of than in the corresponding periods of and ( Table B-22 ) During the first three quarters of nonmilitary imports of goods and services rose to an average quarterly rate of billion dollars compared with billion in the corresponding period in and billion in the calendar year Nonmilitary commodity imports rose steadily after the third quarter of and in the third quarter of were percent above such imports in the third quarter of The rise in foreign travel and the increase in transportation and other service expenditures helped to push total nonmilitary imports of goods and services during the year ended September to the highest level in our history Total payments to foreign countries on account of imports of goods and services foreign investments and grants to foreign countries ( excluCHART B-14 U. S. Balance of Payments on Current Account BILLIONS OF DOLLARS GOODS AND SERVICES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TOTAL EXPORTS ^ V V. EXPORTS EXCLUDING MILITARY -_ GRANTS-IN-AID / ^ 's ~ ~ * T SURPLUS ON ' CURRENT ACCOUNT ^ < \ t> ^ TOTAL IMPORTS ^ ^ ^ \ IMPORTS EXCLUDING U.S. MILITARY EXPENDITURES ABROAD | I I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS sive of military aid shipments ) reached billion dollars during the year ended September ( Table B-22 ) This amount exceeded foreign purchases of United States goods and services during the same period. Foreigners therefore accumulated billion dollars in gold and dollar assets in their transactions with the United States only a little less than in the corresponding period ended September This level of foreign accumulation was maintained in spite of an increase of over a billion dollars in the United States current account surplus ( excluding military exports and imports ) as our military expenditures abroad nonmilitary grants and foreign investments rose Merchandise Trade During the first three quarters of nonmilitary merchandise exports were maintained at approximately the same high levels as in In the fourth quarter of exports rose sharply in response to the accelerated expansion in world demand especially in Western Europe and the sterling area. This rise in exports gave an additional stimulus to our business expansion in the fall and winter of and the high level of world demand during helped to sustain the prices of internationally traded commodities. Exports continued to rise during In the year ended September exports reached billion dollars the largest total since the year ( Table B-22 ) During the first ten months of nonmilitary merchandise exports from this country were about percent higher than in the corresponding months of and about percent above the corresponding period of The rise in agricultural exports over was percent : exports of wheat coarse grains tobacco meats and dairy products rose while exports of cotton and rice fell ( Table D-64 ) On a fiscal-year basis agricultural exports increased from billion dollars in to billion in In agricultural exports under special programs including grants loans sales for foreign currencies and barter represented nearly percent of the total and an additional percent were subsidized ( Table B-23 ) The principal increases in nonagricultural exports were in steel products motor vehicles and parts chemicals coal and paper. The rise in exports of steel steel scrap and coal represented about percent of the total increase in nonagricultural exports from the first ten months of to the first ten months of Total export sales to Canada Western Europe and the sterling area increased while those to Latin America and Japan declined ( Table B-24 ) Commodity imports during the first ten months of were nearly percent above the corresponding period of and percent above the corresponding period in ( Table D-64 ) Economic expansion in this country in led to increased imports of raw materials including rubber lumber iron ore and petroleum but imports of some industrial raw materials were held down by supply shortages abroad. Imports of TABLE B-23. Agricultural exports under specified governmental programs [ Fiscal years millions of dollars ] Program Exports : Total Special programs : TotaL Grants l __ Loans * Foreign currency sales Barters ___ Exports for " free " dollars : Total Subsidized exports ) < * ) Public Law section Other Nonsubsidized exports. ( * ) FOA regular and special program Army civilian supply program Department of Agriculture dona tions under Agricultural Act of section and program under Public Law title II Loans by the Export-Import Bank and Department of AgricultureJ ; o Pakistan Afghanistan Spain and India * Deliveries to contractors * Not available Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-24. Distribution of nonmilitary merchandise exports { including reexports ) and general imports by areas January October and [ Millions of dollars ] Exports Area JanuaryOctober JanuaryOctober JanuaryOctober Total Continental Western Europe United Kingdom i__ Canada Latin America .._ Sterling area exclusive of the United Kingdom Japan i__ _ Other Imports JanuaryOctober i Excludes special category exports NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce agricultural commodities declined in value largely as a result of the fall in prices of coffee and cocoa and lower demand induced by expectations of further price declines. A significant development was the increase in imports of finished manufactures a percent rise in the first ten months of over the corresponding period in The increased demand and rising prices for raw materials resulted in higher imports from Canada and South East Asia while Western Europe and Japan shared in our growing markets for manufactures. Reduced values of imports of coffee and other agricultural commodities were responsible for the lower purchases from Latin America especially from Brazil and Colombia CHART B-15 Industrial Production Western Europe INDEX ! 950tl00 INDEX * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED COMPOSITE INDEX FOR WESTERN EUROPE * ^ A f V i I i i i I t I 1/ O E E C COUNTRIES SOURCE : ORGANIZATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COOPERATION CAPITAL MOVEMENTS AND GOVERNMENT LOANS The value of United States private investments abroad has risen steadily throughout the postwar period ; at the end of it was billion dollars including long-term investments of billion. The outflow of American private capital in was greater than in the previous year mainly because of a sharp increase in short-term lending abroad. Direct investments slightly exceeded the level and the net movement of portfolio capital changed from an inflow of million dollars in to an outflow of million in In large redemptions and repayments and a smaller volume of Canadian and International Bank borrowings reduced the net outflow of long-term portfolio capital to million dollars in the first three quarters of the year ; direct investments were somewhat higher than in the corresponding period of ( Table D-60 ) There has been a modest revival during the last two years of American private investment in foreign equity securities outside of Canada. During and the first three quarters of net purchases of outstanding equity securities of foreign corporations totaled million dollars about two-thirds of which represented British and Continental European securities. Medium- and long-term bank loans abroad totaled million dollars during the same period ; a large part of these were made to Latin America and some of them represented a conversion of short-term loans made in Outstanding foreign loans of the United States Government declined by million dollars to billion dollars in reflecting repayments in excess of new credits. Repayments which have been running at about a half billion dollars annually in recent years are in large part to reduce government loans made during the early postwar years. Total net capital outflow on government account in the first three quarters of was million dollars of which million was short-term ( Table D-60 ) Earnings on our foreign investments amounted to billion dollars for the twelve-month period ended September ( excluding reinvested earnings of foreign subsidiaries ) This is a major item in our receipts from foreign countries. Over million dollars of these receipts represent interest payments on government loans abroad. The bulk of the earnings comes from direct private foreign investments Appendix C REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report for calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ARTHUR F. BURNS Chairman JOSEPH S. DAVIS RAYMOND J. SAULNIER Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Employment Act of declares it to be the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power by all means consistent with its other obligations and in a manner calculated to foster free competitive enterprise and the general welfare. The Council of Economic Advisers was established under this Act On August the Council was reconstituted under the President 's Reorganization Plan No. of This reorganization strengthened the internal administration of the Council and clarified its relationships with the President Changes in Council Membership Neil H. Jacoby who served as a member of the Council from September to February while on leave from his university duties returned on the latter date to the deanship of the School of Business Administration at the University of California Los Angeles. Walter W. Stewart Professor Emeritus at the Institute for Advanced Study Princeton New Jersey who served as a member of the Council from December resigned April but he has continued to serve the Council in a consultant capacity Raymond J. Saulnier Professor of Economics at Barnard College and Director of the Financial Research Program of the National Bureau of Economic Research both of New York City was nominated for membership on the Council on March Joseph S. Davis Director Emeritus of the Food Research Institute Stanford University was nominated at the same time. Both nominations were confirmed on April Mr Saulnier took office on April and Mr. Davis on May Major Activities During the Year During the year the Council kept economic developments under close and continuous scrutiny and reported regularly to the President through its Chairman on current economic conditions and prospects. In a year marked by rapid economic expansion not only in our own country but throughout the Free World the central object of the Council was to advise the President on policies that would promote the extension of prosperity and at the same time restrain excesses that could eventually lead to economic recession. The Council gave special attention to monetary finan- rial and agricultural problems and to ways of extending prosperity to lagging areas As in previous years the Council worked closely with the departments and agencies of the Government whose activities bear significantly on economic developments. The Chairman attended Cabinet meetings regularly and presented the Council 's views on economic conditions and on policies that would contribute to continuing prosperity. The Council kept in close touch with other policy-making and advisory groups in the Executive Branch including the National Security Council the Defense Mobilization Board the National Advisory Council on International Financial and Monetary Problems and the Council on Foreign Economic Policy The Council assisted in the preparation of the Economic Report of the President transmitted to the Congress on January This Report dealt with economic developments and policies during It also presented the President 's recommendations to the Congress and his suggestions to State local and private groups for actions that would promote stable economic growth Hearings on the Economic Report of the President were held by the Joint Committee on the Economic Report in January and February The Chairman of the Council accompanied by the other Council Members was the first witness at these hearings appearing in executive session on January He discussed the findings and recommendations of the Report Responding to requests from members of the Committee the Council later submitted additional materials as part of its testimony The review of Economic Indicators which the Council undertook last year with the Joint Committee on the Economic Report was completed A number of improvements suggested by the Council 's study were incorporated in the publication in the course of the year as the technical problems associated with these changes were solved Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability During the year the Department of Health Education and Welfare was added to the agencies represented on the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability. This change brought the membership of the Board to ten. The expectation expressed by the President at the time of the Advisory Board 's establishment namely that it would make the work of the Council more effective at the top policy level of the Executive Branch has been fully realized. The Advisory Board which meets weekly has been immensely helpful in coordinating the economic policies and actions of the various departments and agencies of the Government. The Chairman of the Council serves also as the Chairman of the Advisory Board The present membership of the Board is as follows : Department of State Herbert V. Prochnow Deputy Under Secretary for Economic Affairs Department of the Treasury W. Randolph Burgess Under Secretary for Monetary Affairs Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Walter Williams Under Secretary Department of Labor Arthur Larson Under Secretary Department of Health Education and Welfare Marion B. Folsom Secretary Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Mills Member of the Board Bureau of the Budget Percival F. Brundage Deputy Director The White House Office Gabriel Hauge Administrative Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Arthur F. Burns Chairman Task Forces During the year the Council kept five interagency task forces active each under the chairmanship of a senior member of the Council 's staff They concerned themselves with the following subjects : private pension plans the economic status of low-income families " spot " unemployment financial and credit developments and problems in housing and home financing. The last named of these task forces was especially busy during the year and its work assisted materially in improving information about trends in home building and home financing. The task force on " spot " unemployment made an important contribution to the development of a proposal that will be presented to the Congress early in the coming session Other Activities During the year two Council members participated in meetings of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation and associated countries held in Paris. Mr. Burns attended the May meeting at which experts exchanged views on economic conditions and prospects. Mr. Saulnier attended the September meeting to participate in OEEC 's annual comprehensive review of economic conditions The Council handled a large volume of correspondence on economic questions. Some of the communications were received directly. A considerable number were referred to the Council by other agencies and by the White House Members of the Council 's staff participated in training conferences and seminars held by other government agencies for new employees and visiting foreign experts. Staff members also served on a number of interagency committees organized by other agencies Cooperation Received The Council continued to receive cordial cooperation and willing assistance from other government and private agencies. Special analyses and studies were made for the Council factual materials were compiled for its use and experts from other government agencies participated in its conferences and task forces As provided for in Section ( e ) of the Employment Act the members of the Council met from time to time with representatives of business labor agriculture finance consumer interests and universities Public Works Planning A small unit was established by the Council in to coordinate public works planning. This unit in cooperation with the Bureau of the Budget completed an inventory of Federal public works plans which the Council had initiated early in The inventory showed the location of each project its urgency status of planning and financing the time required for commencing and for completing and so on. Arrangements were made in to maintain this inventory on an annual basis. In addition a survey of the status of State and local public works plans was carried out in late and early in cooperation with the Housing and Home Finance Agency and the Bureau of the Census In view of the experience gained the Council recommended that greater and more systematic attention be given to public works planning. To broaden the scope of this activity and to make it more effective the function of public works planning was transferred from the Council to the White House Office on August when a Special Assistant to the President was appointed to coordinate publics works planning. Close cooperation with the Council is being maintained by the new unit on public works planning Staffing The Council has continued to make staff assignments so that developments in every major field embraced by its responsibilities industrial production agriculture employment and unemployment wages and prices the national income and its distribution public and private finance international trade and finance technology business organization and practices social security etc. are under the scrutiny of a senior staff member who assumes responsibility for enlisting the cooperation of governmental and private agencies in compiling analyzing and evaluating information in his area of specialization The following are members of the senior staff including those serving on a part-time basis : Leo Grebler Dale E. Hathaway Bert G. Hickman Frances M. James Alfred E. Kahn David W. Lusher Raymond F. Mikesell Joseph A. Pechman Charles L. Schultze Louis Shere George P Shultz Irving H. Siegel Walter W. Stewart and Collis Stocking At the end of the year the personnel of the Council numbered counting all ranks Budget for Fiscal Years and For fiscal year the Council had an appropriation from the Congress of $ plus the unexpended balance from the preceding year 's appropriation. Since this balance amounted to $ the sum at the Council 's disposal was $ The amount obligated $ For fiscal year the Congress appropriated activities. The reduced appropriation reflects transfer of the function of coordinating public Council to the White House Office during the year came to $ for the Council 's among other factors the works planning from the Appendix D STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS income or expenditure : Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross private and government product in current and prices D-5. The Nation 's income expenditure and saving D-6. Personal consumption expenditures D-7. Gross private domestic investment D-8. National income by distributive shares D-9. Relation of gross national product and national income D-10. Relation of national income and personal income D l l Sources of personal income D-l2. Disposition of personal income D-l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices D-l Financial saving by individuals D-l5. Sources and uses of gross saving D-16. Income of the farm population Employment and wages : D-l Total population years of age and over and the labor force D-l8. Employment and unemployment by age and by sex for year group D-l Employed persons with a job but not at work by reason for not working D-20. Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment D-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and D Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries D Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries D-26. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries Production and business activity : D-27. Industrial production indexes D-28. Farm production indexes D-29. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and D-30. New construction activity D-31. New public construction activity D-32. New nonfarm housing starts by source of funds and by type of structure National D-l D-2 D-3 D-4 Page Production and business activity Continued D-33. Private nonfarm housing starts and proposed home construction : Government underwritten D-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade D-35. Manufacturers ' new orders sales and inventories Prices : D-36. Wholesale price indexes D-37. Wholesale price indexes by economic sector D-38. Consumer price indexes D-39. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Credit money supply and Federal finance : D-40. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding D-41. Instalment credit extended and repaid D-42. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing D-43. Loans and investments of all commercial banks D-44. Member bank reserves and Reserve Bank credit D-45. Deposits and currency D-46. Bond yields and interest rates D-47. Net public and private debt D-48. U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations D-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations D-50. The farm balance sheet D-51. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public calendar years Corporate profits and finance : D-52. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations D-53. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and D Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and D-55. Sources and uses of corporate funds D-56. Current assets and liabilities of all corporations D State and municipal and corporate securities offered D-58. Common stock prices and stock market credit D-59. Business population and business failures International transactions : D-60. United States balance of payments D-61. United States balance of payments with individual areas and D-62. United States grants of military supplies and services by areas total postwar period and fiscal years D-63. United States grants and credits excluding military supplies and services by areas total postwar period and fiscal years D-64. United States merchandise exports and imports for consumption by leading commodities average and D-65. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE D-l. Gross national product or expenditure ^ [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private domestic investment2 Period PerTotal sonal gross conna- sumptional tion prod- exuct penditures i Government purchases of goods and services New construction Net foreign investment i Federal : First quarter... Second quarterThird quarter. Fourth quarter. : First quarter.. Second quarterThird quarter. Fourth quarter ._ J27.8 Seasonally adjusted annual rates ( ) ( ) See Table D-6 for major components See Table D-7 for more detail and explanation ^ components For " national security " expenditures include the items classified as such in The Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO The items are : military services international security and foreign relations development and control of atomic energy promotion of merchant marine promotion of defense production and economic stabilization and civil defense. These expenditures are not comparable with the " national security " category in the Budget for the Fiscal Year ending June " National defense " expenditures for goods and services correspond more closely to the new Budget definition ; they include items shown under the national security classification in the Budget and in addition defense production and economic stabilization military manpower selection promotion of aviation ( National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics only ) and civil defense. National defense expenditures for goods and services since are as follows : billion dollars ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; and billion Not available separately Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding SOURCE : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) : First quarter. __ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter6 TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-55x [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Total New construction gross Pro- Change national ducers ' in Dur- Non- Servproduct Total able durdurResibusiTotal able able denness goods goods ices Total tial Other equip- invenment [ nontories farm ) Period _ _ _ See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices> 1929-55l Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Government purchases of goods and services Net foreign investment Period Federal Total Total ' National security Other State and local ( ) < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * ( ) ( ) * These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See Table D-3. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on change in business inventories * Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in this table. See Table D-l for Government sales in current prices See Table D-l footnote * Not available separately * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-55l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment Total gross naPro- Change tional in New ducprodDu- Non- Servbusiducon- ers ' uct Total rable rable Total struc- duness goods goods ices rable invention equipment tories Net Gross forprieign vate inprodvestState ment Total Fed- and uct a eral local i See National Income Edition A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business and Survey of Current Business July for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices and for implicit deflators a Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-4. Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] prices * Current prices Year Gross Gross private product J Total Gross private product govern- Total gross ment national national prodNonproduct Total Farm a Nonfarm u c t ' product Total Farm * farm Gross government product ' V JGross national product less compensation of general government employees i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world See Survey of Current Business August pp. for estimates in both current and prices and for the implicit price deflators for Estimates for are based on unpublished data s Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities * See Table D-2 footnote Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-5. The Nation 's income expenditure and saving iBillions of dollars ] Economic group Consumers : Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Personal net saving ( } ) Business : Gross retained earnings _ _ Gross private domestic investmentExcess of investment ( ) _ Excess of receipts Net receipts _ Purchases of goods and services.- Surplus ( -f ) or deficit ( ) on income and product account Gross national product Excess of receipts Total government expenditures Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) Statistical discrepancy _ Excess of receipts ExExExReReReend ceipts pendi- or ex- ceipts pendi- or ex- ceipts ptures ! or extures penditures pendipenditures tures tures International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( or investment ( ) Government ( Federal State and local ) : Tax and nontax receipts or accruals Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-6. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Period Nondurable goods Total personal consumption Toextal penditures Services Total Total : i l l 60.U9.4 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter. _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter : First quarter __ _ Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter * Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers > Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-7. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Period Total Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment and construction gross plant and equipment private doConConmestic invest ' Total Equip- struc- Total * Equip- strue ment t i o n ' ment tion ment Resi dential construction ( nonfarm ) Net change in Other business inventories private construc- Total Non- Farm tion * farm 1929._. i. i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter L.8 L.7 : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter L.6 L.6 L.5 L.5 : First quarter.. Second quarterThird quarter. Fourth quarters : L.5 L.4 ] L.4 ] L.3 i Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment are not comparable with those shown in Table D-29 principally because the latter exclude equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense and also investment by nonprofit organizations and professional persons a Total producers ' durable equipment less farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages < Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private construction After inventory valuation adjustment Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) 17a TABLE D-8. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Period Business and proCorporate profits fessional income and inventory and inventory valuation valuation adjustment adjustment In- RentComTotal pencome al innaof Net In- farm come tional sation InIn- inof ofemven- pro- perin- ployven- terest come Cor- tory come tory prie- sons of porate valuuninTotal corpo- valu- tors ' Total profits ation ation before adrated adtaxes < justenter- justment prises ment ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter : First quarter.._ Second quarter _ Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter : First quarter. _ _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter6 National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table D-9 Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to 4net additions to farm inventories during the period See Table D-52 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-9. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Capital consumption allowances Period Plus : Subsidies Equals less Gross Net current Indirect business nanational tax tional surplus prodDepreprod- of govuct Total ciation Other i uct ernment State charges enter- Total Fed- and eral local prises Business transfer payments Equals : StaNatisti- tional cal income discrepancy Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarterFourth quarter : First q u a r t e r Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) i Accidental damage to fixed capital and capital outlays charged to current account a Less than million dollars ' Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E D Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Period Plus : CorpoExcess rate of profits ContriNational and in- butions wage income acvenfor tory social cruals over valu- insurdisation ance burseadjustments ment Government transfer payments Equals : Net interest paid by government Dividends Business Pertrans- sonal fer pay- income ments Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E D l l S o u r c e s of personal incomey [ Billions of dollars ] Period Labor Proprietors ' income income * ( wage and Per- TransRental Total salary income Divi- sonal fer paypersonal disburseof Bustdends interest ments income ments income and other F a r m ness and persons profeslabor sional income ) i Less : Personal Noncontri- agriculbutions tural for personal social income8 insur * ance &0 * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. -_ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter * The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table D-8 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess of 2wage accruals over wage disbursements Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to inventories during the period Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-12. Disposition of personal income Less : Period Equals : Less : Equals : Personal Dispos- Personal conincome Personal Personal able taxes personal sumption saving expendiincome tures Saving as percent of disposable personal income Billions of dollars 1929_ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarterThird q u a r t e r Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter i Includes also such items asfines,penalties and donations * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE " D-13. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Period Total disposable Per capita dispersonal income posable personal ( billions of income ( dollars ) dollars ) Current prices prices Current Current prices prices * prices prices Total personal Per capita perconsumption sonal consumpexpenditures tion expenditures ( billions of ( dollars ) dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current prices prices 1950._ 1951__ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. __ Fourth quarter. _ : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter. __ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter * Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base. Personal consumption expenditures in this table therefore differ from the data in Table D-2 Population of the continental United States including armed forces overseas. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-14. Financial saving by individuals l [ Billions of dollars ] Period Currency Total and bank deposits * Insurance and Securities Sav- pension reserves ings and loan U S Other asso- Total Pri- Govsav- governciavate ment Total ings erntions bonds ment * LiquiLiqui- dation of dation debt of not Cor- mort- elseporate gage where and debt * classiother fied " Q CO O. : First quarter Second quarterThird quarterFourth quarter : First q u a r t e r Second quarterThird quarterFourth quarter : First q u a r t e r Second quarterThird quarter- i Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust and pension funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified * Includes currency demand deposits and time and savings deposits > Does not include net purchases by brokers and dealers or by other individuals financed by bank loans * Includes armed forces leave bonds and other U. S. Government bonds ( except savings bonds ) and all8 securities issued by State and local governments Mortgage debt to institutions on to 4-family nonfarm dwellings * Largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumers ' goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. The other segments of individuals ' debt have been allocated to the assets to which they pertain viz. saving in insurance and securities NOTE. In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The series with the most complete coverage the personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce is derived as the difference between personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included with SEC saving : Housing net of depreciation and farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment net of depreciation and net of increases in mortgage and other debt to corporations and financial institutions. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see Survey of Current Business July table Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-15. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Period Total Total Personal saving Gross busi- Total ness saving Fed- State and local Gross investment Statistical Gross disprivate Net for- crepTotal domes- eign in- ancy tic in- vestvestment ment ( Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter K ) ) i Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-16. Income of the farm population From agricultural sources Income of farm operators from farming Farm Period Total Produc- Net intion exinCome1 come l of farm resident workers Income from nonagriculPer tural capita From income sources nonTotal agricul- From as perfrom all from cent of all tural sources agricul- sources sources income tural from ( dolall sources lars ) sources ( percent ) Millions of dollars Includes Government payments and the net change in farm inventories. Net income in this table differs from farm proprietors ' income shown in Tables D-8 and D l l because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department of Commerce Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Agriculture ( except as noted ) EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES T A B L E D Total population Period years of age and over and the labor force Total labor Total force Armed popu- ( includ- forces i lation i ing Total armed forces ) i Civilian labor force Total Unemploylabor force as ment as Employment percent Unem- percent of civilian ploy- of total popu- labor Non- ment lation Total Agricul- agriforce tural cultural Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent : January.. FebruaryMarch April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-17. Total population years of age and ever and the labor force Period Con Civilian labor force Total Total Unemlabor labor ploy2 Total force Armed force as ment as Employment percent popu- ( includUnem- percent of civillation i ing forces * ploy- of total ian Total armed popuAgricul- Non- ment lation labor agriforces ) Total tural force cultural Thousands of persons years of age and over : January.. February. March April May June July August September October... November December : January.. February. March April May June July August September October... November December Percent 7,C " Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from the estimates Includes part-time workers and those with jobs but not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary layoff and industrial disputes Labor force data for have been revised by the use of a new estimating procedure to provide greater comparability with the data from the 230-area sample and to improve the reliability of the data themselves. For a description of the revisions see Current Population Reports : Labor Force Series P-57 No. January Data of Tables D-18 D-19 and D-20 are also on the revised basis NOTE. -Civilian labor force data beginning with are based on a 230-area sample. For they were based on a 68-area sample ; for on a smaller sample ; and for on sources other than direct enumeration Beginning July labor force data are for the calendar week containing the 12th of the month ; pre viously for week containing the 8th Annual population data are as of July ; monthly data are as of the 1st of the month For the years estimating procedures made use of Census data ; for subsequent years Census data were used. For the effects of this change on the historical comparability of the data see Annual Report on the Labor Force Series P-50 No. April p. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor ( labor force ) and Council of Economic.Advisers T A B L E D-18. Employment and unemployment by age and by sex for 20-64year group [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed i TLotal civilian labor force Period years Total Unemployed years FeMales males years and over Total years years years and over Males J : emales July August September October November December January February March _ April May __June July August September._,._October _November December January February March April May June : January February March April May June : : July August September October November December i Includes part-time workers and those with jobs but not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary layoff and industrial disputes * Eevised series. See Table D-17 footnote NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age and age/sex groups above See note to Table D-17 for information on change in sample and reporting period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-19. Employed persons with a job but not at work by reasonfor not working [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Period Total employed per- Temporary New job or sons with layoff i business a job but not at work Vacation Illness All other * July August September October.. November December : January.. February _ March April May June July August September October.. November December : January.. February. March April May _ June July August September October.. November December : January_._ February. March April May June Includes persons who had been temporarily laid off from their jobs with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and who were not seeking other work Includes persons who had a new job or business to which they were scheduled to report within the following days Includes persons who were not at work because of bad weather industrial disputes and all other reasons * Kevised series. See Table D-17 footnote NOTE. See note on Table D-17 for information on change in sample and reporting period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-20. Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment Duration of unemployment Total unemployed Period weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over ) W W ( * ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to months ( ) Not available Revised series. See Table D-17 footnote NOTE. See note to Table D-17 for information on change in sample and reporting period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E D-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and Initial claims Period State veteran and State Federal proemployee grams programs Insured unemployment All pro- State programs * grams ( Benefits paid State insured under State prounemgrams Exhaus- ployment tions as perState pro- cent of Total Average covered millions weekly grams employ- of dolcheck ment lars ) ( dollars ) * ( percent ) Weekly average ( thousands ) 8_ : January.. FebruaryMarch April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December. : January- February March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January- February March April May June July August September October November December Indicate in general instances of new unemployment Data on veterans relate to those under the following programs : Servicemen 's Readjustment Act ( which became effective in October and expired for most veterans in July ) and Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of effective October Represents the number of unemployed workers covered by unemployment insurance programs who have completed at least one week of unemployment * State veteran Railroad Retirement and Federal employee programs State unemployment insurance programs during the period shown excluded from coverage agricultural workers Government employees domestic servants workers in nonprofit organizations unpaid family workers the self-employed and ( in most States ) workers in very small firms Represents the number of individuals who received payment for the final week of compensable unemployment in a benefit year. Workers who have exhausted benefit rights do not necessarily remain unemployed some find employment and others withdraw from the labor force For total unemployment only i Preliminary NOTE. The program of Unemployment Compensation for Federal Employees became effective January Source : Department of Labor TABLEJD Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments * [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing Period Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and Fipublic Trades nance utilities Service a Government ( Federal State and local ) ( ' ) ( * ) ] L,398 ] L,333 L,270 ] L,225 L,247 C O C O L,313 L L,347 ] L L,428 L L L ] L,967 * < ) ) ) ) I ( ) Seasonally adjusted5 : January February. _ March April May June July August September October November December. : January February. March April May June July August September October November December _ See footnotes at end of table TABLE D Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ Thousands of employees ] Period Total wage and salaryworkers Manufacturing Total TransCon- portaMin- tract tion con- and Du- Non- ing struc- public Trades rable duration utilible goods goods ties Fi- Government ( FedServeral State and local ) Seasonally adjusted5 : January February. _ March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November4 * December > 9,88ft Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( Table D-17 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary layoffs and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available Preliminary revisions Estimates incorporate preliminary revisions in the seasonal indexes for employment in contract construction and Federal Govvernment NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Retail trade ( except Bitumi- IBuild- Class I Tele- Whole- eating Launnous conrailsale Nonand coal struc- roads * phone trade drink- dries durable mining tion ing goods places ) Manufacturing Period Total Durable goods * _ 8_ ._ : January February March ApriL May .Tuna July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November88_ _ December ___ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) n ! ( " ) ( ) J i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in2basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month The annualfiguresfor for industries other than manufacturing are simple arithmetic averages of the monthlyfiguresshown and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment Source : Department of Labor i go TABLE D-24. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Retail trade Whole- ( except Laun- Agrisale eating dries cul- trade ture and drinking Manufacturing Period BituNon- minous Dura- dura- coal Total ble ble mining goods goods $ $ $ ( ) $ $ ( ) $ $ ( ) $ $ : January February March April May June July. August September October _ November December : " January _ February March April May June July August September October November7 December .._ ( * ) i Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours * Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Composite rate per hour. Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis < Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month The annualfiguresfor for industries other than manufacturing are simple arithmetic'averages of the monthlyfiguresshown and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture TABLE D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I ( except nous ing con- railTele- Whole- eating Launsale and Dura- Noncoal strucphone trade dries drinkble durable mining tion roads ! ing goods goods places ) Manufacturing Period Total $ $ $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) C O i3 ( ) ( ) ( ) | ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ : January February.. March _ April May June $ ( ) ( ) ) ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ $ July August September. October November. December. : January February.. _ March April May June July August September. October November86 December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only a Not available * Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month The annual figures for for industries other than manufacturing are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours ! &Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Kates per employees ] Separation rates Period Total Quit * Layoff Discharge Accession rates military and mis- cellaneous _ _. : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January February.. March April May June. July. August September. October November ' Prior to military and miscellaneous separations are included with quits * Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE D-27. Industrial production indexes [ ] Industrial production Manufactures Durable Period Total NonPri- Fabri- elecTotal cated mary metal trical Total metmaprod- chinals ucts ery FurClay niture Elec- Trans- Instru- glass and ments trical porta- and re- and misceltion lated lum- lanemachin- equip- prod- ber ous ery ment ucts prod- manucts ufactures V : January February March April May _ June July August September October November December. _ Seasonally adjusted January February March April May June July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-27. Industrial production indexes Continued [ = ] Industrial production Output of consumer diirables Manufactures Nondurable Major Other conTotal Autos louse- sumer hold goods durables Total ChemTex- Kub- Paper ical Foods Minber erals tiles and and petro- beverand and ages ap- leather print- leum and toing parel prodprod- bacco ucts ucts * * ; * Period ___ Seasonally adjusted July August September October Novemberl1 December * January February March April May June * July August September October November December : January February March April May June I Preliminary NOTE. Prior to detail not available Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-28. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Farm outputl Year All livestock and products All crops2 Feed used by farm horses and mules Crop production per acre * ._ _ _ Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes production of feed for horses and mules Not included in total farm output * Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-29. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Period Total i Total Transportation Dura- Nonble durable Mining Commercial and other Railroad Other Public utilities Seasonally adjusted a n n u a l rates : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter 53j : First quarter..Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter ' : First quarter * 11.83j ta * ^ [ f6.33 mm L. L. L. ] L. L.57 L.44 L. L. L. L.62 L.60 L.66 L. Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction Annual total is sum of seasonally unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with average of seasonally adjusted figures which include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data * Estimates for fourth quarter and first quarter based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and November NOTE. These figures do not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals and institutions and of certain outlays charged to current account This series is not available for years prior to and for to _-ies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce TABLE D-30. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Period Total new construction Kesi- Nonresidential building and other construction dential Total i building ( nonComIndus- Public Other a Total farm ) mercial trial utility Public construction Seasonally adjusted annual rates : January February March April May June July August September. October November.. December : January February March April May June July. August September.. October _ November.. _ December Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product Table D l Includes farm institutional and all other * Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE D-31. New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Major types of new public construction Total new public construction * Federal Year All public sources Direct Federal aid State and local Highway Sewer Hosand water Educa- pital and and tional institu- misc tional public service Conservation and development Military facilities All other public * For expenditures classified by ownership combine " Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE D-32. New nonfarm housing starts by source ojfunds and by type of structure 1929-55l [ Thousands of units ] Source of funds Period Total nonfarm units Private Public Type of structure 1-family Multi2-family family ____ Private units seasonally adjusted annual rates _ : January February.. March April May.. June July August September. October November. December-_ : January February. _ March April May June July August September. October 5__ November8 December _ These estimates are based on building permit records which have been adjusted for lapsed permits and for lags between permit issuance and start of construction. They are based also on reports of Federal construction contract awards and on field surveys in non-permit-issuing places. All temporary units are excluded Includes units in and 2-family structures with stores Includes units in multifamily structures with stores * The number of starts for the years respectively was as follows : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Preliminary Not available Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-33. Private nonfarm housing starts and proposed home construction : Government underwritten [ Thousands of units ] Proposed home construction Private nonfarm housing starts Period Government underwritten Total Total FHA VAi FHA VA applica- appraisal tions requests _ V ( ) : January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November. December.. : January February.. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December Data since June are based on VA first compliance inspection ; prior data are estimates of units started which resulted in VA-guaranteed first mortgage loans Units in mortgage applications for new-home construction s FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in * Not available Partly estimated Preliminary Sources : Department of Labor Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) 2OI T A B L E D Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in billions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade l Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Period InvenInvenSales tories Ratio * Sales * tories Ratio Sales Inven- Ratio < Sales Inventories tories ' Ratio * Old series L.77 L.51 L.45 L.48 L.66 L.71 L.72 L.57 * Seasonally adjusted New series : January February.. March April May June Q July August September.. October November6 December July. August September. October November. December.. : January February.. March April May June i Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method of estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census. Estimates shown in this table for are on the previously published basis and estimates for are on the new basis. For a description of the retail sales and inventories series see Survey of Current Business September and November and January * Monthly average shown for year and total for month s Seasonally adjusted end of period < Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of average end of current and previous month 's inventories to sales for month Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Preliminary NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-35. Manufacturers * new orders sales and inventories [ Billions of dollars ] New orders * Period Inventoriesa Sales Durable-goods industries Nondurable-goods industries Dura- Non- Dura- Nonble- durable- ble- durableTotal goods goods goods goods Pur- Goods- FinPurindus- indus- indus- indus- chased Qoods- Fin- chased inished ished intries tries tries tries mate- process goods mate- proc- goods rials rials ess Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August September. October November. December.. : January FebruaryMarch April May June July. August September. _ October November Monthly average shown for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. See Table D-34 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers Source : Department of Commerce 2O3 PRICES TABLE D-36. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] All commodities other than farm products and foods Period All commodities Farm products Processed foods Total Textile Chemi- Rubber Lumber cals and prodand and wood ucts allied prodand products apparel products ucts ( ) ( ) : January. __ February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober... November December : January February. March April May June July August September October... November December __ _ See footnotes'at end of table TABLE D-36.- Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( continued ) Hides skins and ! leather products Period Fuel power and lighting materials Pulp paper v and allied products FurniMetals Machin- ture and ery and and other metal motive houseprodprodhold ucts ucts durables Non- Tobacco metal- manufactures Miscellic minerand als bottled laneous ( struc- bevertural ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1953..__ _ * : January February. March April May June July August September October November December. : January February. _ March April May June July August September October November. December This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January These data from January through December represent the revised sample and the weighting pattern. Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index The only official index up to and including December is the former monthly index ( = ) The data from January through January differ from the official series due to a | change in the method of eliminating excise taxes and discounts > Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-37. Wholesale price indexes by economic sector [ ] Intermediate materials supplies and components1 Crude materials Period All commodities Foodstuffs Total and feedstuffs Materials and components for manufacturing MaMa- terials Ma- ComNonterials for terials poTotal for food for non- du- nents maTotal food dur- rable for terials Fuel manu- able manu- manuexcept factur- manu- factur- facturfuel ing factur- ing ing ing Materials and components for construction : January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December. : January February. March April May June July August September. October November. December See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-37. Wholesale price indexes by economic sector Continued [ = ] Finished goods Consumer finished goods Period xTOQUcer Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods finished goods : January February. _ March April _ May June July August September October November December. : January February. March April May June July August September October November December 1948..._ _ _ .._ * Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Preliminary NOTE. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector and their relative importance see Monthly Labor Review December Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-38. Consumer price indexes For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Period All items Housing Ap- parel Total Rent Trans- Medi- Per- Read- Other porta- cal sonal ing and goods tion care care recrea- and tion services P ) P ) ^ " P ) r P ) ) P ) P ) " ^ P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) " " '51.0 P ) Food _ r _ " P ) p ) P ) P ) P ) Y ( P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) > P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) " P ) J ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) ; P ) i : v ) P ) P ) P ) P ) ; ..P ) ..,r P ) P ) r P ) P ) ; P ) ; P ) P ) P ) pr P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) ) P ) ) P ) P ) P ) p> P ) ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) P ) _.._ : January._ February. March April May June July August September October.. November December : January. _ February. March April May June July August September October.. November December 1954__ i Not available Source : Department of Labor TABLE D ~ Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = ] Parity index Prices ( prices received paid interest by Produc- taxes and farmers wage tion rates ) Prices paid b y farmers for items used in Period Family living Parity ratio l 1934.._ __ : J a n u a r y _ February. March April May June July August September October November December : January-_ February. March April May June July August September October... November December Percentage ratio of prices received by farmers to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments paid on beef cattle sheep lambs milk and butterfat between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture CREDIT MONEY SUPPLY AND FEDERAL FINANCE TABLE D Short ' and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Noninstalment credit Instalment credit End of period Total Total Other Repair PerAutoconand mobile sumer modern- sonal paper i goods ization loans paper * loans * ( ) _ : January February._ March April May June July August September October November December- : January February. _ March April May June July August September October November December * ._ _.._ ..-_ Total Charge acOther ' counts ( 1,604s ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) J ( ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ( ) h ) ( ) ) ) ) ) J ) ( ) ) ) ) Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held byfinancialinstitutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " * Single-payment loans and service credit * Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) 2IO TABLE D-41. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Repair and Other consumer modernization goods paper loans Automobile paper Total Period Personal loans ExExExExExtended Repaid tended Repaid tended Repaid tended Repaid tended Repaid i Unadjusted : January February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober NovemberDecember i_ : January February.. March April May June _ July August September October November. December : January February. March April May June July August September October November. December i July August SeptemberOctober November December : January February March April May June Seasonally adjusted * Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail for preliminary estimates will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-42. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties to 4-family houses All properties End of period Government underwritten Total Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Multifamily and comConven- mercial proptional erties Farm properties : First quarterSecond quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ Derived figures which include negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ( except as noted ) TABLE D-43. Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period l Total loans and investments Loans Total Investments Business loans Total U. S. GovOther ernment obligations * securities June June June June June _ June K : January.- February March April May June July August September October November December- : January-. FebruaryMarch April May June Julys August September _ October November 78_ December _ _ ( ) June December and end-of-year figures are for call dates. Other data are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net i. e. after deduction of valuation reserves. Includes commercial and industrial loans agricultural loans loans on securities real-estate loans loans to banks consumer credit and other loans Beginning with data are shown gross of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks Estimates in this table are based on book values and relate only to banks within the continental United States. Therefore they do not agree with figures in Table D-49 which are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary For October certain loan items are available on two bases because of a reclassification resulting from reporting errors. The business loans figure shown above is after reclassification. The figure before reclassification is billion NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-44. Member bank reserves and Reserve Bank credit [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reservo Bank credit outstanding Period Total U.S Member Governbank ment se- borrowcurities ings Member bank reserve balances Member bank " free " reserves All ( excess reother l ReTotal mainly quired i Excess serves less borrowfloat ings ) U,564 ' * : January February March April May June P43 1931.._ July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ Estimates Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System * TABLE D-45. Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] End of period Total deposits and currency Demand deposits adjusted and currency Total U.S GovTime deposits ernCur- D e m a n d ment adrency deposits justed * * de- outside adjusted ' posits banks : January.. February March April May June July August September October November. December. : January.. February March April May June July * August September 7_ October November 7_ December June December and end-of-year figures are for call dates. Other data are for the last Wednesday of the month Includes holdings of State and local governments s Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection * Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Includes U. S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve Banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) ' TABLE D-46. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government securities Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Period 3-month Treas- month Taxable bonds ury bills i issues Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on short- Prime Federal term com- Reserve bank mercial Bank loans paper disto busi- ness- months count rate selected cities 1941_ 1944_ U.00 M.00 OS : January February March April May June July August September October November December ( ) See footnotes at end of table 2l6 ( ) ~ ~ " ~ ~ ~ TABLE D-46. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U. S. Government securities Period Taxable bonds Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & 3-month Treasmonth ury issues bills i years years and over 2.2S : January February March April May June July August September October November December Aaa Baa Poor 's ) Average rate on shortterm bank loans to business selected cities Prime commercial paper months Federal Reserve Bank discount rate Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) First issued in The single series on these bonds ( which continued through March ) included : October 1941-March bonds due or callable after years ; April 1952-March bonds due or callable after years Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less January-March bonds due or callable years and after ; beginning April bonds due or callable from to years Beginning April bonds due or callable years and after NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE D-47. Net public and private debt [ Billions of dollars ] Private E n d of period * Corporate Individual and noncorporate Fed- State and eral Nonfarm Total Gov- local governernComment ment Total merTotal Long- Short- Total FarmJ term term ConMort- cial Total gage and sumer financial Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness vf borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see Survey of Current Business October Data for State and local government are for June of each year Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and Interstate Commerce Commission ( except as noted ) 2l8 TABLE D U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt End of period Gross Marketable public public issues debt and guaranteed issues Short- Treasury issues bonds Nonmarketable public issues United States savings bonds Treasury tax and savings notes Invest- Special issues bonds : January__ February. March April May June July August September October.. November December : January.. February. March April May June July August September October.. November December ( ) ( ) Total include ? non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bond ? and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Includes Series A bonds and beginning in April Series B convertible bonds Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held billion dollars of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Less than million dollars Source : Treasury Department TABLE D-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Par values billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of period Held by others Held by U.S GovMutual ernsavings State MiscelTotal ment Federal Com- banks Other and laneous investlocal Individment Total Reserve mercial and in- corpor-4 govern- uals invesBanks banks surance ations tors accomments counts panies July August September. October November.. December-_ : January February... March April May ._ June July _ August September. October November 8_ December : January February March April May June United States savings bonds series A-D E F and J are included at current redemption values Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation s Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; figuresexclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in table D-43 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the continental United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies,'and of6Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by8 the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE D-50. -The farm balance sheet [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Beginning of year Total Real estate " Other physical Financial Total _ Real estate debt Other debt Owners ' equities Data for are being revised to bring them into line with the Census of Agriculture Revised Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-51. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public calendar years [ Billions of dollars ] Total Calendar year _- __ * Cash receipts Cash payments State and local Federal Excess of receipts Excess Excess of reof reCash Cash ceipts ceipts ( " f " ) repay ( ~ ) or pay- ceipts ments or payments ments Cash receipts Cash payments ( { ) or payments ( ) l Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers on the basis of incomplete data Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Less than million dollars Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE D-52. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability Period _ _ _ _ _ _ __ .__ _ _ _ _ _. _.- I9553 Undistributed profits ___ Dividend payments _ Total ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ' _- * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See Table D-8 for profits before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders9 equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and averYear Industry group First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity ( percent ) All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures Textile-mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied productsPrinting and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products. Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts- _ Instruments photographic and optical goods watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) U5.1 ( ) See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-53. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Con averIndustry group Year First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures Textile-mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products.. Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining ill.O ( ) Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal productsMachinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts. _ Instruments photographic and optical goods watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined Not available separately for this period NOTE. Beginning with the third quarter of these series are based on a new sample. However the averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and Asset size class ( thousands of dollars ) average Year First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity ( percent ) All asset sizes Under _ and over Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes Under and over Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity ( percent ) All asset sizes Under and over Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes. Under and over_ NOTE. Beginning with the third quarter of these series are based on a new sample. However the averages have not been adjusted and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for United States Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-55. Sources and uses of corporate funds l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change8 in customer n e t receivables Cash and IT. S. Government securities Other assets .__ Total uses Sources : Internal : Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation and amortization allowances * ( * ) ( ) External : Change in Federal income tax liability Other liabilities Change in bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues _.. Total internal sources Total sources Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) Total external sources ( ) ( ) i Excludes banks and insurance companies * Preliminary estimates Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately * Less than million dollars Preliminary estimate b y Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE D-56. Current assets and liabilities of all corporations l [ Billions of dollars end of period ] Asset or liability March June September Decem- March June ber September Current assets Cash on hand and in b a n k s U. S. Government securities. Receivables from U. S. Government Other notes and accounts receivable Inventories Other current assets _._ Total current assets Current liabilities Advances and prepayments U. S. Government Other notes and accounts payable Federal income tax liabilities Other current liabilities.. __ Total current ities Net working capital liabil_ All corporations in the United States excluding banks and insurance companies. Data for are based on Statistics of Income covering virtually all corporations in the United States. Data for are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Commission. As more complete data become available estimates are revised Receivables from and payables to U. S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to t h e U. S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U. S. Government advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books Includes marketable securities other than U. S. Government NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered State and Gross proceeds * Proposed uses of net proceeds municipal securities New moneyoffered Retire- Other ( prinCom- Pre- Bonds cipal Total ferred and Total Plant Work ment purof se- poses amounts ) stock stock notes and ing Total equip- capi- curities ment tal Period ir ~ 4,r ~ 5,<_.. _ " " : First quarter Second quarter-_ Third quarter Fourth quarter. " I : First quarter Second quarter- _ Third quarter... Fourth quarter. i r ~ " " : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter... Fourth quarter 4_ lf ~ " " These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Number of units multiplied by offering price Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission The Commercial and Financial Chronicle and The Bond Buyer TABLE D-58. Common stock prices and stock market credit Stock market credit Period Common stock prices index = ( SEC ) Customer credit ( excluding U. S Government securities ) Total Net debit balances * Bank loans to brokers and Bank loans dealers to J " others " Millions of dollars ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) 1943__ 1951_ _ : J a n u a r y February. March April May June ',677 July August September October... November December : J a n u a r y February. March April May June July August September October... November December : Ledger balances of member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Excludes balances secured by U. S. Government obligations. Data are for end of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U. S. Government obligations. However some U. S. Government securities may be included after Series revised beginning July and March Data are for last Wednesday of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities including U. S. Government obligations. Series revised beginning July and January Data are for last Wednesday of period Not available Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and New York Stock Exchange T A B L E D Business population and business failures Operating businesses and business turnover Period DisOperat- New contining busi- ued bus nesses3 businesses3 Business failures by size of liabilities * NewbusiAmount of current Number of failures ness liabilities Busi- incorness poratrans- tions $ U n d e r $ Total " " n d e r and iotal fers $ over Total Thousands of firms Number of firms 1946_ Thousands of dollars " 0s ) : January. _ February March. April Ap May. y_ June. July August SeptemberOctober November. _ December. : January.. February March April May June _ July August September. October November. December.. 0s ) ^ Excludes firms in fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he3 has either an established place of business or at least one employee Annual data are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June ; half-yearly data are for end of period Total for period * Industrial and commercial only ; excludes banks railroads insurance companies etc Not available Revised series no longer carries group of agents and commercial services ( such as real estate and insurance brokers holding and finance companies tourist agencies etc. ) Eevised series has more complete coverage of small firms Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS TABLE D United States balance of payments Excluding transfers under military grant programs [ Millions of dollars ] First quarters Item Exports of goods and services : Total Imports of goods and services : Total Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services excluding military Military expenditures Income on investments : Private Government _ _ Balance on goods and services excluding military transfers __ _ Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services Military transactions Income on investments : Direct investments _ Other private Government _ Government _ Private remittances _ Unilateral transfers excluding military : Total United States capital net : Total Private net ; Total ._ _ _ Foreign capital net Gold sales Foreign capital and gold _._ _ Errors and omissions NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce _ Direct investments net New issues Redemptions Other long-term net Short-term net Government net : Total Long-term capital outflow Repayments Short-term net _ TABLE D United States balance of payments with individual areas and Excluding transfers under military grant programs [ Millions of dollars ] First quarters Area and type of transaction Continental Western Europe and dependencies : United States payments : Total Nqnmilitary imports of goods and services Military expenditures abroad Government grants and capital excluding military aid transfers Private investments net Other payments net Foreign payments to the United States : Total Purchases of goods and services Long-term investments in the United States. Balance United States payments : Total. Nqnmilitary imports of goods and services Military expenditures abroad Government grants and capital excluding military aid transfers Private investments net Other payments net Foreign payments to the United States : Total Purchases of goods and services Long-term investments in the United States. Balance United States payments : Total- Nqnmilitary imports of goods and services.._ Military expenditures abroad Government grants and capital excluding military aid transfers Private investments net Other payments net Foreign payments to the United States : Total Purchases of goods and services Long-term investments in the United States. Balance Sterling area : Canada : Continued on following page T A B L E D United States balance of payments with individual areas and Continued Excluding transfers under military grant programs [ Millions of dollars ] First quarters Area and type of transaction Latin America : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods and services _ Military expenditures abroad.. Government grants and capital excluding military aid transfers Private investments net Other payments net _ Foreign payments to the United States : TotalPurchases of goods and services _ Long-term investments in the United StatesBalance Other countries : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods and services Military expenditures abroad Government grants and capital excluding military aid transfers Private investments net Other payments net Foreign payments to the United States : Total Purchases of goods and services Long-term investments in the United States. Balance International institutions : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods and services Military expenditures abroad Government grants and capital excluding military aid transfers Private investments net Other payments net Foreign payments to the United States : Total Purchases of goods and services Long-term investments in the United States. Balance Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E D United States grants of military supplies and services by areas total postwar period and fiscal years [ Fiscal years millions of dollars ] Total postwar period * Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) * _ Near East ( including Greece Turkey and Africa ) Other Asia and Pacific American Republics Unspecified ( ) Area Gross military grants Less : Reverse grants and returns. Equals : Net military grants Postwar period covers July through June Includes supplies services and contributions to the multilateral-construction program of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Less than $ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D United States grants and credits excluding military supplies and services by areas total postwar period andfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Items European IndoNorthinterchina western1 Southern national Korea Europe Europe institu- and Fortions mosa Total Rest of world Gross grants : Total postwar period Fiscal year _ Fiscal year Net new grants : Total postwar period 6_ Fiscal year Fiscal year New credits excluding prior grants converted into credits : Total postwar period Fiscal year __ Fiscal year Repayments : Total postwar period fl_ Fiscal year 1954_ Fiscal year 1955_ Prior grants converted into credits : Total postwar period __ Fiscal year _ Fiscal year 1955_ Total net grants and credits : Total postwar period fl Fiscal year 1954_ Fiscal year Includes Austria Belgium-Luxembourg Denmark Finland France Germany Iceland Ireland Nether lands Norway Sweden and the United Kingdom. Fiscal years and largely defense or military budget support Includes Greece Italy and Trieste Portugal Spain Turkey and Yugoslavia. For fiscal years and economic aid and defense support Includes European Coal and Steel Community European Payments Union and European Productivity Agency * Defense and military budget support and relief and reconstruction and development assistance includ ing United States contribution to U. N Korean Reconstruction and Relief Administration Includes other international organizations outside Western Europe. Mainly economic development and technical assistance Postwar period covers July through June Excludes United States subscription to International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Monetary Fund NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-64. United States merchandise exports and imports for consumption by leading commodities average and [ Millions of dollars ] Commodity * JanuaryOctober Exports of United States merchandise : Total Nonmilitary exports : Total 2_ Raw cotton excluding linters Vegetable oils fats and oilseeds * Tobacco unmanufactured Wheat including flour Other grains and preparations Other agricultural commodities. _ Agricultural commodities Nonagricultural commodities _ Exports excluding " special category " commodities : Total Agricultural commodities : Total Nonferrous metals and ferroalloys Petroleum and products Paper and paper-base stocks Textile manufactures Machinery and vehicles Sawmill products Chemicals and related products Fish including shellfish Iron and steel-mill products including scrap Other nonagricultural commodities Nonagricultural commodities : Total ___ Coffee -_Cane sugar Cocoa or cacao beans Other foodstuffs Crude rubber Wool unmanufactured Other agricultural commodities. Machinery __ _ Automobiles parts and accessories Chemicals and related products Textile manufactures Iron and steel-mill products including scrap Petroleum and products Coal .__ Nonferrous metals including ferroalloys Other nonagricultural commodities Agricultural commodities : Total Nonagricultural commodities excluding " special category " : Total Imports for consumption : Total-- Commodity data for and have been adjusted to conform as nearly as possible to statistical classifications. The distribution of nonagricultural exports by principal commodities however is based on total exports for and on exports excluding " special category " items thereafter. ( See note ) Data represent total exports minus shipments of military equipment and supplies by the Department of Defense under the Mutual Security Program. Commodity breakdowns of nonmilitary exports are not available " Special category " commodities are those to which security restrictions apply as regards publication of detailed export statistics * Data exclude essential oils Data for and later periods exclude " special category " exports NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E D-65. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign and countries [ End of year billions of dollars ] Area _ Sterling area : Total __ United Kingdom Continental OEEO countries and dependencies _ Other Europe Canada Latin American Republics All other countries All foreign countries i Preliminary NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of U. S. S. R gold reserves. Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements ( both for its own and E P U accounts ) and of the Tripartite Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold are included with the holdings of Continental OEEC countries and dependencies. Figures represent ( ) reported and estimated gold reserves of central banks and governments and ( ) official and private dollar holdings reported by banks in the United States including foreign-held deposits U. S. Government securities maturing within months after date of purchase and certain other short-term liabilities to foreigners. Year-end estimates for all years except ; the figures are estimated on the basis of gold reserves at the end of that year plus dollar holdings reported by certain New York City banks as of May Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System