Economic Report or tne President III TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS ! Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES GOVERtiNliNT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. C Price of single copy cents LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL T H E WHITE HOUSE January To the Congress of the United States : I present herewith my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this Report I have received the assistance and advice of the Council of Economic Advisers. I have also had the advice of the heads of the executive departments and independent agencies of the Government I set forth below in condensed form what I consider to be the major conclusions and recommendations of the Report The Economy in The past year was a prosperous one despite a decline in the closing months. Over million people were employed more than in The Nation 's output of goods and services totaled $ billion and personal income was $ billion. Both were percent larger than in the preceding year. A considerable part of these increases however reflected higher prices In the final quarter of the year gross national product was about J/i percent below the peak reached in the third quarter. Personal income after taxes declined one-half of percent and personal consumption expenditures somewhat less. In December however unemployment amounted to percent of the civilian labor force compared with percent in September This change in economic conditions called for adjustments in economic policies. During much of the year the task of restraining inflationary pressures was paramount and policies were directed to this end. In the closing months of the year and currently the task has been to facilitate readjustments in the economy essential to the resumption of sustainable economic growth but to do so without reviving inflationary pressures The Current Economic Situation and Outlook As we look ahead in there are grounds for expecting that the decline in business activity need not be prolonged and that economic growth can be resumed without extended interruption. The policies of Government will be directed toward helping to assure this result in The demand for goods and services for final use has been well maintained A considerable adjustment in inventories has already taken place and present holdings are generally not heavy. Personal income has fallen very little and purchases by consumers are continuing at a high level. The confidence of business concerns in the economic future is evidenced by their long-range plans for the expansion and improvement of production facilities and the high rate at which they are carrying out these plans. The increasing amount of resources committed to research and development is further evidence of this confidence and assures the continued working of forces that make for expansion Financial conditions are increasingly favorable to resumption of economic growth. Credit is more readily available and its cost is lower. These conditions together with the recent reduction in the cash investment required of prospective home buyers under Federal mortgage insurance programs tend to promote increased home building. More ample and lower-cost credit also favors a continuation of the large and growing volume of capital expenditures by State and local governments and should help moderate the decline in investment outlays by business concerns At the turn of the year the economy was beginning to feel the effects of an acceleration of the placement of defense contract awards prompted by the need to move forward quickly with programs essential to the strengthening of the Nation 's defenses The Longer Perspective At a time like the present when the economy is adjusting to the large additions to productive capacity made in the past few years it is well to view our economic prospects in a longer perspective and to consider some of the sources of our strength There are good reasons for confidence that a vigorous expansion of our economy can be sustained over the years. Our domestic market for goods and services has about doubled every quarter of a century and we should do at least as well in the next years. The needs and wants of our growing population will continue to enlarge markets for output. To keep pace with expanding requirements State and local outlays must continue rising at some such rate as the recent $ billion a year. Research and technological developments are opening up vast new fields for profitable investment World-wide economic development can enlarge foreign markets for our products. The annual personal savings of Americans which are close to $ billion and the strength of our financial institutions will help attain the economic capacity necessary to meet these growing requirements The latest challenge of international communism will require a further increase in the economic claims of national security which are already heavy If we follow suitable private and public policies this challenge can be met IV without distorting our economy or destroying the freedoms that we cherish Whatever our national security requires our economy can provide and we can afford to pay The Challenge to Economic Policies A realistic appraisal of our economic prospects though it warrants confidence also requires that we acknowledge an unfavorable feature of recent economic developments. In our gross national product rose percent but four-fifths of this increase was accounted for by rising prices There are critical questions here for business and labor as well as for Government. Business managements must recognize that price increases that are unwarranted by costs or that attempt to recapture invesment outlays too quickly not only lower the buying power of the dollar but also may be self-defeating by causing a restriction of markets lower output and a narrowing of the return on capital investment. The leadership of labor must recognize that wage increases that go beyond over-all productivity gains are inconsistent with stable prices and that the resumption of economic growth can be slowed by wage increases that involve either higher prices or a further narrowing of the margin between prices and costs. Government for its part must use its powers to help keep our economy stable and to encourage sound economic growth with reasonably stable prices The resumption and maintenance of economic growth promise greater economic capability for meeting the Nation 's needs. If this opportunity is to be fully realized however growth must take the form of increases in real output accompanied by a stable price level. This can be achieved if weight is given to long-run as well as short-run considerations in policies and practices that affect our economic welfare. It can be guaranteed by a public opinion that is alert to the consequences of wrong policies and insists on policies which will yield economic growth without inflation Measures to Help Attain Economic Goals A legislative program is presented in this Report to help solve urgent problems that confront the Nation today foster a resumption of growth and build stronger foundations for economic advances in the years ahead Fiscal policies are recommended to meet within the framework of a budget in which expected revenues are adequate to cover projected expenditures the Nation 's needs for strengthened defenses for the improvement of our position in science and education and for other essential activities. Legislation is proposed to increase the effectiveness of the Federal Government 's credit programs and its programs for the insurance and guaranty of private credits ; to widen and strengthen our economic ties with other nations ; to foster adjustments intended to bring agricultural production into line with commercial demands and reduce the fiscal burden of price-support programs ; to give individuals greater protection against economic hardships promote integrity in labor-management relationships and improve industrial relations ; to enhance the competitive character of our private enterprise system ; and to strengthen the economic position of small businesses Favorable consideration of this program will materially enlarge the Nation 's capacity to meet present challenges and to achieve sustainable economic growth and improvement in the years ahead DWIGHT D VI EISENHOWER CONTENTS Page Economic Goals and Policies in a Free Society Economic Growth Economic Stability Price Stability Free Competitive Enterprise Economic Change and Shifts in the Emphasis of Policy Economic Policies in CHAPTER The American Economy in Shifts in the Major Components of Demand Employment and Incomes Prices Costs Profits and Productivity Financial Developments Agriculture The Extent of the Over-All Decline CHAPTER Foreign Developments and the American Economy.. Changes in Production The Course of World Trade Internationa ] Financial Developments Future Problems and Policies CHAPTER Economic Opportunities and Challenges Ahead Appraisal of the Current Economic Situation The Longer Perspective The Challenge to Economic Policies CHAPTER A Legislative Program to Help Achieve National Economic Goals Government Finances Federal Credit Programs Science and Education Small Business and the Competitive System Personal Welfare Agriculture Foreign Economic Policy Federal Economic Statistics CHAPTER APPENDIXES A. Summary of Recommendations in the Economic Report of the President B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During C. Program for Improving Federal Statistics in Fiscal Year D. The Consumer Price Index E. Productivity Statistics F. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production Page Ill LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS { Chapters and and Appendix E ) Tables Changes in Employment Income and Production Changes in Gross National Product and Its Major Components Changes in Nonagricultural Employment Since December Distribution of Employees Receiving Wage Increases Under Major Labor Agreements Security Offerings Changes in Commercial Bank Holdings of Loans and Investments World Industrial Production Changes in World Trade U. S. Merchandise Exports and Imports E Indexes of Output per Man-Hour for the Private Economy Charts Output of the Economy Shifts in Major Components of Demand Personal Income and Consumption Employment and Income Wholesale Price Changes Consumer Prices The Pattern of Credit Expansion Liquidity of Commercial Banks and Nonfinancial Corporations Member Bank Reserves Interest Rates and Bond Yields Indicators of Agricultural Conditions Federal Agricultural Programs World and U. S. Foreign Trade U. S. Balance of Payments VIII Chapter Economic Goals and Policies in a Free Society D EVELOPMENTS IN illustrate how rapidly changes can occur in the problem of maintaining growth with reasonable stability of prices in a dynamic free enterprise economy. Production employment and income were high but tended to decline somewhat toward the year 's end During much of the year a rise in the consumer price index accompanied a slowing down in the rate of growth of national output. Small increases in the price index continued even after industrial production and employment had turned downward and inflationary pressures had been substantially diminished. In recent months fresh challenges have arisen : to strengthen our defenses ; to improve our position in science and education ; and to unite our efforts more effectively with those of other countries for the achievement of security freedom and improvements in material welfare These changes compressed into a short time span underscore the need for a balanced conception of national economic goals if private and public policies and programs are to serve all our people and advance the long-run as well as the immediate interests of the Nation. We can not say that we have only one goal unless it is to advance the general welfare. Sustainable and balanced growth in our economy is needed to assure our defenses to satisfy our growing wants and to enable us to assist healthy expansion and improvement in other economies of the free world. Also we seek to hold economic fluctuations within narrow limits to maintain a reasonably stable price level and to avoid deflationary as well as inflationary developments. And we insist on striving for these goals within a framework of free competitive institutions To achieve a proper balance among these sometimes conflicting objectives is a difficult task. Success requires an understanding by all of us of our national economic objectives and of private and public responsibilities for helping achieve them. Accordingly this chapter is devoted to a statement of these objectives and a brief review of the steps taken during the year to attain them ECONOMIC GROWTH Confidence that economic growth and improvement within a framework of free institutions are feasible national goals is evidenced by the stress which the Employment Act of places on " maximum production employment and purchasing power. " The record of the years that have elapsed since the Employment Act was passed has abundantly justified this confidence and clearly demonstrated the strength of the forces that make for growth in a free economy. A rising national output has enabled us to make up arrears that accumulated during the War. Most of the heavy requirements arising from the increase in our population and the persistently expanding needs and wants of our people are being met. We are also fulfilling greatly enlarged world responsibilities The aggregate of goods and services produced today is nearly one and a half times what it was when the Employment Act was passed. This is an average rate of economic growth of 3l/2 percent a year. There are million more civilian jobs now than there were in More than $ billion of private funds have been devoted since then to the expansion and modernization of productive facilities. In addition huge investments have been made in housing schools hospitals roads and other private and public improvements The use of these vast resources to increase our productive capacity and our fixed public and private assets has been accompanied by a sustained advance in current consumption. The output of consumer goods and services is percent higher today than it was in The increase over the period has averaged about percent a year In short our economy has exhibited a remarkable capacity for sustained and balanced growth. The American people and the free enterprise system have responded well to the challenges of our increasing requirements These challenges continue. In some important respects they have become greater. Despite our utmost efforts international tensions persist This hard fact emphasizes the need for a sound and growing economy to assure our defenses. The national security burden carried by our economy is a heavy one claiming about percent of our national output. We do not abandon hope for arrangements under which less of our own and of the rest of the world 's resources can with safety be devoted to military preparedness. But pending measurable progress in these efforts Americans will not shrink from the task of defending our freedoms whatever the necessary cost A sound and growing economy is needed also to meet the requirements of our expanding population. There are million more Americans now than at the end of World War II and the number is increasing at the rate of about million a year. Heavy economic requirements are implied by this increase. A huge expansion of educational personnel and physical facilities will be required to train increasing numbers of students for the higher level of technology on which our security and welfare depend. Our larger population will also require increased facilities for the production and distribution of goods and services and for health and recreation Production must expand as fast as population merely to maintain our present consumption standards. Even higher rates will be necessary as these standards rise Apart from our civilian and cjefense requirements economic growth is needed to help meet our expanded international responsibilities. These include the provision of public and private capital to assist economic development abroad as well as military and economic aid to countries associated with us in the common defense effort Although the rate of economic growth that is best suited to the Nation 's capacity and requirements can not be stated precisely the low current rate would clearly be unsatisfactory as a continuing condition. We must always be alert to question the adequacy of the rate of economic growth and to consider whether further encouragement and incentives are needed and if so how best to provide them. Yet we must be continuously on guard against resort to measures that might provide a spurt in activity at the cost of impairing the long-run health of the economy ECONOMIC STABILITY When the Employment Act was being considered in the Congress fears were expressed that the transition from war to peace would entail serious economic dislocation and abnormally high unemployment. Actually the transition was made with relatively little contraction in production employment or income despite the large reductions in national security expenditures. The supporters of the legislation were also mindful of the waste of resources which economic fluctuations had occasioned in the past. The Council of Economic Advisers was accordingly directed by the Employment Act to develop and recommend to the President national economic policies " to avoid economic fluctuations or to diminish the effects thereof. " Economic stability as an aim of national policy clearly means more than fostering the maintenance of production employment and income at constant levels. Extended lapses from normal rates of growth must be resisted and their effects diminished where possible. And every effort should be made to moderate surges that go beyond rates of growth that can be sustained over longer periods. Such surges often involve increases in limited sectors of the economy that can not be sustained and that may lead to serious imbalances. The proper objective of national economic policy to the achievement of which private as well as public actions must contribute is to strive to limit fluctuations in the rate of over-all economic growth to a relatively narrow range around a rising trend Because our economy responds to forces and conditions that are continually changing in intensity and character economic growth will inevitably proceed at a somewhat uneven pace. The high rate of economic growth that occurs when ground lost during a recession is being recovered can not continue indefinitely. When economic resources are close to being fully used even though there may be slack in some sectors of the economy expan- sion normally proceeds at a slower pace. Efforts to accelerate growth under these conditions may succeed only in generating inflationary pressures When readjustments are being made with some sectors of the economy remaining unchanged or contracting while others are expanding over-all economic activity may show no growth for a time or may even recede slightly. The establishment of a new balance which such a readjustment entails is often an essential phase in the operation of a dynamic enterprise system. It is the means by which the economy corrects previous excesses and prepares for resumption of over-all growth. Through its economic policies and programs Government can help achieve this improved balance and speed the resumption of sound economic growth PRICE STABILITY A clear responsibility rests on Government to pursue policies that will help prevent inflation. Although the harmful consequences of inflation spread widely through the economy they fall with unequal severity on different individuals and on different economic sectors. Some persons may obtain an increase in money income that is greater than the increase in living costs while others may fail to do so. Some industries may be in a better position than others to adjust prices promptly to rising costs. As a result the relative economic positions of individuals and of different industries may be altered sometimes in ways that harm the national welfare by lessening incentives to enter certain essential vocations and by impeding the flow of resources into important sectors of industry. Similarly although the investment income of some individuals may rise during an inflationary period that of others and frequently the great majority of those who have only modest savings does not increase at all. Consequently persons in the latter group suffer a decline in the value of the income received and a diminished purchasing power of their savings when repaid. The effect is to reduce the incentive to save which tends to dry up one of the major sources of capital upon which maximum employment and economic growth depend Furthermore price inflation directs activities into speculative channels and distorts private and public obligations and contracts that are expressed in fixed dollar amounts. Finally changes in the value of money disrupt international trade and financial relations. In these and other ways inflation weakens our capacity to achieve and sustain balanced economic growth The task of restraining price inflation is a continuing one for a free society experiencing high production employment and incomes over long periods In such a society pressure on prices may arise from a number of sources One is the rapid increase and concentration of demands on scarce skills and resources and on output which is limited by capacity. Another is the exuberance even imprudence of some individuals and businesses during good times in making commitments that assume continual inflation in prices Still another is the exercise of economic power by individuals and groups favored by temporary conditions or by their place in the Nation 's productive system We must learn to conduct our economic affairs in ways that will harness the expansionary forces of our free economy for the increase of our national strength and well-being and must prevent these forces from finding expression in a depreciation in the value of our money. This task entails heavy responsibilities for private individuals and groups and for Government to pursue policies that will assure that economic expansion provides an increase in real output and does not consist merely of larger money values reflecting higher prices. A strong and growing economy is needed for our national security for meeting the needs of our expanding population and for improving our level of living. Reasonable stability of prices is needed also for reasons of equity and as a condition for sustaining economic growth. Failure to achieve these goals would court the danger of controls incompatible with our way of life which would eventually impede advances in our economic welfare FREE COMPETITIVE ENTERPRISE The productiveness of the American economy derives from its reliance on private enterprise and on the incentives and opportunities which such a system supplies for the development and use of individual talents and energies. Initiative and efficiency are stimulated and rewarded through the market place ; pressures are exerted to remedy inefficiencies ; and economic resources tend to be used in accordance with the preferences of consumers This way of organizing production and consumption both encourages vigorous economic growth and reinforces our freedoms in the political and social spheres. Thus the strengthening of free competitive enterprise not only is a means for promoting economic growth but also is in itself a major objective of policy This view was held by the authors of the Employment Act who made it explicit that Government in seeking to achieve maximum production employment and purchasing power should do so " in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise. " Accordingly in our efforts to achieve economic growth and at the same time to avoid price inflation we place reliance on measures that involve a minimum of direct intervention in the affairs of individuals and private groups. The corollary of this reliance is that the policies and practices of individuals and private groups must contribute to not hinder the achievement of economic growth with reasonably stable prices. With such assistance toward making the joint effort a success pressures for direct Government controls are averted ECONOMIC CHANGE AND SHIFTS IN THE EMPHASIS OF POLICY No one goal alone provides a complete guide to public policy in economic matters. In an economy where changes are as rapid and far-reaching as those which occur in ours the accent of policy shifts according to the logic of events. At times the emphasis may be mainly on the containment and reduction of inflationary pressures which has been the case during much of the period since At other times as at present the accent may properly be placed on encouraging orderly readjustment within the economy and facilitating the resumption of economic growth. At all times policy must be capable of responding to unusual demands such as those that have been felt recently as a result of international developments ECONOMIC POLICIES IN In policy had to cope with important changes in the economy The paramount task during much of the year was to restrain inflationary tendencies. However as the year developed these tendencies diminished in strength. Current demand failed to keep pace with growing industrial capacity in a number of lines. Shortages of goods became fewer and were largely eliminated after the middle of the year. Prices of basic commodities began to decline in the early months and the rise in prices of finished industrial commodities was moderated. The index of consumer prices however which had started to rise in April continued upward with only brief pauses. In the late summer production employment and sales leveled off or declined in a number of lines ; and as the year closed indicators of over-all economic activity moved down in response to the using up of inventories and to somewhat lower domestic and foreign sales This shifting of economic forces called for adjustments in public policies For the first three quarters of the year Federal Reserve operations were designed to limit the expansion of bank credit and to hold down increases in the money supply. A partly seasonal reduction of $ billion in Federal Reserve holdings of Government securities kept the reserve position of member banks under continuous pressure. The pressure on reserves induced member banks despite an increased discount rate to borrow more heavily from the Federal Reserve System. From April through mid-October member bank borrowings fluctuated around $ billion and net free reserves ( the difference between excess reserves and member bank borrowings ) remained negative at close to $ million These restrictive measures had a marked effect on the money supply and jointly with the heavy demand for capital and credit on interest rates Demand deposits the most important component of the money supply were virtually the same at the end of as two years earlier. During the same period the dollar volume of total output increased percent With demands for capital and credit continuing substantial and the supply of funds under increasing pressure interest rates rose sharply in the first half of In August and September the costs of financing for corporations and State and local governments were well above anything experienced for many years. By mid-October the yield on long-term Government securities had reached percent and the cost to the Federal Government of its shortest term borrowing had risen to percent the highest in years Federal fiscal policies were also directed to restraining inflationary tendencies. Beginning early in the year all Federal expenditure programs were closely reviewed to effect economies wherever such action was consistent with essential program objectives. No general reduction of taxes was undertaken and reductions in specific taxes certain excise taxes and the tax rate on corporate income that were scheduled to occur on April were postponed. The Federal budget was balanced during the calendar year and $ billion of debt was retired Treasury financing operations were designed to help sustain economic growth and at the same time to produce a better debt structure. More than $ billion of the Treasury 's new marketable offerings had a maturity in excess of year ; Treasury notes varying in maturity from to years were offered on six different occasions ; and more than $ million of long-term bonds were issued in October and again in December. The effective rates of interest to maturity on Series E and H Savings Bonds were raised to % percent as of February to encourage saving in these forms ; sales of Series J and K Savings Bonds were discontinued on April in view of the high rate of redemption of these fixed-interest securities A number of steps were taken to moderate the impact on specific sectors of the economy of the general measures to restrain inflationary tendencies On March in two moves designed to assist prospective home buyers the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) reduced its minimum downpayment requirements to the limit then permitted by law and the Federal Home Loan Bank System undertook to encourage greater mobility of mortgage funds among different areas of the country by authorizing insured member institutions to buy and sell participating interests of up to percent in home mortgage loans. In May the Veterans Administration ( VA ) began the immediate processing of direct loan applications for veterans living in localities where private lenders had restricted their participation in the VA Home Loan Guaranty Program. On August FHA reduced downpayment requirements by the full amount authorized by the Housing Act of and in order to attract additional funds into home financing raised the maximum interest rate to ^ percent Other actions were taken by FHA to simplify and expedite the processing of home purchase applications in remote areas and the insurance premium on repair and modernization loans was reduced. For the year as a whole about $ billion of home mortgages were purchased by the Federal National Mortgage Association in its secondary market operations in order to relieve particularly acute shortages of available funds Although business needs for credit were generally met well by banks and other private financial institutions financing assistance from the Small Business Administration proved useful in helping to satisfy the special needs of many small concerns. During this agency approved $ million of loans percent above its volume The credit policy of the Federal Reserve authorities continued unchanged until mid-October. By that time mainly because of a fall in the demand for loans member bank borrowings at the Federal Reserve Banks began to decline and the net deficiency of reserves gradually fell. All but one of the Federal Reserve Banks reduced their discount rates from ^ percent to percent between November and November initiating a decline in interest rates and bond yields. A further absorption of the net reserve deficiency occurred in December. In the last week of the year excess reserves were greater than member bank borrowings by $ million. Interest rates and bond yields had returned to approximately the levels reached in late and early Increasing the availability and lowering the cost of credit are measures that help moderate a decline in business investment. They also permit capital outlays by State and local governments that might not otherwise be feasible. Largely through their impact on the yields available on corporate securities and Government obligations they widen the spread between the return on home mortgages and on competing uses of funds. They tend thereby to make financing more readily available for home construction and purchase and to promote a higher level of building activity. Their effectiveness in this connection was strengthened in January by actions taken by Federal housing and home financing agencies. The Federal Housing Administration announced the rescinding of a rule adopted in April as an anti-inflationary measure that prohibited the inclusion of closing costs in the maximum insurable amount of home mortgage loans. FHA also announced certain changes in the permissible discounts on insured mortgage loans calculated to make funds more readily available in areas of the country still experiencing a relative scarcity and to bring the yield on insured mortgage investments more nearly into alignment with market rates in areas having more adequate supplies. At the same time the prices at which the Federal National Mortgage Association buys mortgages were adjusted also to increase the availability of funds for home construction and purchase In steps were taken to expedite activity in certain Federal construction programs involving no direct capital charge on the budget and to accomplish a needed expansion of the military housing program. These moves were made with full realization of the fact that resources of labor and materials in some parts of the economy continued relatively short particularly in construction and that a sharp increase in demand might result in further increases in costs and prices. For this reason they were taken cautiously to avoid reviving inflationary pressures in the face of enlarged national security requirements. At the turn of the year the economy was beginning to feel the effects of an acceleration of the placement of defense contract awards prompted by the need to move forward quickly with programs essential to the strengthening of the Nation 's defenses Events in show how important it is for private and public policies and practices to complement each other as we seek to achieve economic growth with reasonable stability of prices. Decisions which give rise to wage increases generally in excess of improvements in productivity or to price increases that typically go beyond increases in costs make this task more difficult. If fiscal and credit policies are sufficiently stern to keep the price level from rising there are risks of economic dislocation an unnecessarily slow rate of economic growth and extreme and inequitable pressures on some who are not themselves contributors to the inflation of costs and prices. On the other hand if economically unwarranted increases in wage rates or prices are validated by credit and fiscal policies a persistent decline in the value of the dollar results Neither of these is an acceptable alternative and neither is consistent with sustainable expansion of the economy. The conclusion is inescapable that if we are to have orderly and adequately rapid growth in the economy our wage-making and price-making arrangements must produce results consistent with a reasonably stable price level. They must do so within a free competitive economy. Freedom including econornjc freedom requires self-discipline. If important groups ignore this truth the alternatives are either an economy damaged by inflation or controls that are incompatible with our free competitive institutions Chapter The American Economy in T H E YEAR was a prosperous one despite the decline in the * " final quarter. Economic expansion continued though at a lower rate Production employment and income again attained record levels. For the year as a whole gross national product amounted to $ billion and personal income to $ billion both some percent above Civilian employment increased by and the annual average of unemployment showed little change from ( Table ) TABLE Changes in employment income and production Percentage change Item to to Millions of persons EMPLOYMENT Civilian labor force 3__ Employment Nonagricultural Agricultural __ _ TTnP.mploymfint Employees in nonagricultural establishments * M anufactur ing Nonmanufacturing Billions of dollars INCOME Personal income disbursements Disposable personal income Corporate profits and depreciation Corporate profits : Before taxes After taxes _ _ PRODUCTION Gross national product ( prices ) = Industrial production Preliminary Percentage changes based on unrounded data Bureau of the Census data ( new definitions ) See Table F-17 Bureau of Labor Statistics data. See Table F-22 for definition Total personal income plus personal contributions for social insurance Total personal income less personal taxes Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Council of Economic Advisers IO The decline which became apparent in the last quarter of the year in our broadest measures of economic activity followed an unusually long period of expansion. Beginning in business activity was carried upward by large increases in demand first in one part of the economy and then in another. The expansion was launched by rapidly increasing outlays for residential construction and late in there was an upsurge of demand for new automobiles. As the force of these demands began to wane in mid-1955 an enormous increase in business expenditures for new plant and equipment emerged reinforced by a heavy accumulation of inventories In late and early as plant and equipment expenditures began to level off national security expenditures increased and exports rose sharply sustaining the advance. But demands were being somewhat moderated by a reduction in the rate of increase of inventories and the over-all rate of expansion was clearly slowing down. The rise of expenditures and incomes in the latter part of and most of was largely matched by an increase in prices. The physical output of goods and services rose only slightly and throughout industrial output remained below the peak registered in December ( Chart ) CHART Output of the Economy Total output of goods and services decreased in late Industrial production began to decline earlier and fell rather sharply in the closing months of the year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * INDEX SEASONALLY ADJUSTED GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES ( LEFT SCAL X ^ GROSS NATIONAL PROOUCT IN CURRENT PRICES ( LEFT SCALE ) INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ( RIGHT SCALE ) * ANNUAL RATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS By mid-summer the balance of economic forces had shifted though expenditures of State and local governments continued to increase and outlays on residential construction began to move upward. Business expenditures on plant and equipment declined slightly in the final quarter of the year. The sharp advance in national security outlays ended in the second quarter and exports decreased. A curtailment of orders for new equipment and generally cautious business policies had reduced the accumulation of inventories to an annual rate of $ billion in the first three quarters of the year ; in the final quarter inventories were being reduced on balance at an annual rate of $ billion or possibly more as the further decline in sales and the decrease in backlogs of unfilled orders led to curtailed production schedules. With employment and incomes reduced slightly sales at retail leveled off and then declined. Reflecting these movements gross national product was at a rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter of the year about l/i percent below the $ billion reached in the third quarter SHIFTS IN THE MAJOR COMPONENTS OF DEMAND The pattern of economic developments during the year was shaped largely by the shifts in three major components of demand business outlays on plant and equipment exports and government expenditures. Important changes occurred also in construction expenditures and the management of business inventories ( Chart ) These shifts in demand through their impact on production and employment and thus on incomes in turn affected the expenditures of consumers the ultimate demand in our economy Business Outlays on Plant and Equipment The increase in business outlays on plant and equipment from the first quarter of to the third quarter of was of boom proportions amounting to almost percent. The gains in some industries were particularly large. Railroads more than doubled their capital outlays. Expenditures by manufacturers of durable goods increased by nearly percent. New business was placed with producers of capital goods at such a pace that even with production at capacity limits backlogs of unfilled orders became extremely large. The pressure of demand in this sector of the economy was further increased as manufacturers of investment goods and their suppliers expanded their working inventories But in the second half of unfilled orders of producers of investment goods rose more slowly and by the end of the year the major expansive influence of investment spending had subsided. New orders received and the volume of unfilled orders began to fall. Expenditures on capital goods by most industries continued to rise through the first three quarters of but they declined moderately toward the year 's end. For the year as a CHART Shifts in Major Components of Demand Business fixed investment leveled off in and the rate of inventory accumulation declined Federal outlays after rising for a year were reduced in the second half of BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES S FEDERAL OUTLAYS FOR GOODS AND SERVICES ' " " ^ B U S I N E S S FIXED INVESTMENT- ^ STATE AND LOCAL EXPENDITURES FOR GOODS AND SERVICES RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION / PRODUCERS * DURABLE EQUIPMENT AND NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS whole business expenditures for new plant and equipment were more than in any previous year and percent more than in When adjustment is made for higher prices however it appears that there was no increase after the turn of the year in the rate of installation of plant and equipment Exports Exports were a second major force in the expansion of the American economy to mid-1957 and also a contributor to the downward movement in the latter part of the year. Exports of goods and services increased swiftly from early to the first quarter of partly because of special circumstances including the extra demand for United States petroleum generated by the temporary disruption of normal shipments via the Suez Canal Later in the year however these special forces subsided. The demand for exports was also reduced by a slowing down in the rate of economic expansion abroad and by foreign exchange difficulties in a number of countries. As a result exports declined in the autumn. Imports on the other hand showed little change from the high level reached in Exports remained higher than imports but by a reduced margin. By the end of the year net foreign investment which reflects mainly this relation was $ 1J/2 billion lower at an annual rate than at the beginning of the year Government Expenditures A third major force affecting economic developments was a change in purchases of goods and services by Federal State and local governments The total of these outlays rose $ * billion between mid-1956 and mid-1957 with percent of the increase representing higher Federal spending for national security purposes. This increase in Federal expenditures was accompanied by a large rise in employment and inventories in the industries immediately affected notably aircraft. After the middle of the year however military procurement outlays and awards of new contracts were reduced and total Federal purchases declined moderately. A rise of about $ billion in the total of social security outlays other transfer payments and interest on the public debt further increased tptal Government cash outlays to the public in and supplemented consumer incomes State and local governments continued to increase their outlays on construction and on goods and services adding $ billion in to their over-all rate of expenditures. Such outlays on construction including work done with Federal assistance were percent more than in There were substantial increases in the construction of schools highways hospitals and sewerage and water systems. These outlays were continuing upward at the end of the year Construction Expenditures The long upward movement in total construction expenditures continued in Although there was some decline in outlays on residences in the first half of the year continuing a movement which had started early in this trend was later reversed. Fewer dwelling units were started in than in but in the second half of the year home building was going forward at a rate only slightly below that of A considerable part of the upturn in residential building activity was in the construction of apartment dwellings a sector of the industry that had been relatively inactive for a few years The year witnessed a sharp increase in private institutional building for which outlays rose percent. Hospital construction rose more than percent and there were substantial increases in the construction of religious social and recreational buildings Again the rising trend of dollar outlays can be misleading. Actually construction costs rose during the year somewhat more than expenditures so that the physical volume of construction was a little less than in Prices of building materials were virtually unchanged on the average as reductions in prices of materials used principally in home building were roughly offset by increases in prices of other materials. For the industry as a whole higher wage rates accounted for most of the rise in construction costs Inventories In contrast to when business inventories were increased by $ billion no further accumulation took place in ( Table ) and inventory holdings were sharply reduced in the final quarter of the year Retailers and wholesalers with the exception of automobile dealers and wholesalers of certain durable goods lowered their inventories in Reductions were particularly large in the first few months of the year and for a while caused sharply decreased rates of production in a number of consumer goods industries. By the year end stocks in many lines were still low relative to current retail sales Manufacturers ' inventories large parts of which are closely related to current and prospective levels of output continued to rise in the first nine months of though at a much slower rate. Changes were particularly large in the machinery-producing and defense industries where inventories had expanded in response to rising levels of production and to some extent in anticipation of further advances The rate of accumulation in the machinery-producing industries however was reduced in late and especially in early as production declined. After the middle of the year decreases in defense orders produced even larger adjustments in the holdings of the aircraft industry. Declining new orders and falling backlogs of unfilled orders caused first a further decline in the rate of accumulation and later in the final months of the year an actual decrease in the inventory holdings of these industries. Many producers of consumer goods also reduced their inventory investment in the early part of and after some increase in the summer again in the late months of the year TABLE Changes in gross national product and its major components [ Billions of dollars ] Change i Item to Current prices Gross national product or expenditure Change in business inventories Final purchases to i prices Current prices prices Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Personal consumption expenditures Gross private fixed investment Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Other construction Producers ' durable equipment Government purchases of goods and services Exports of goods and services Less : Imports of goods and services Unilateral transfers Net foreign investment Federal ( excluding Government sales ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers National necessarily add to totals because of rounding NOTE. Detail will not security State and of Commerce ( except as noted ) Source : Departmentlocal As manufacturers of finished goods lowered their output and adjusted their stocks of purchased materials sales and new orders of the primary metals industries fell. Production of these metals declined ; producers ' inventories nevertheless rose sharply during most of In the final months of the year however further decreases in output halted this accumulation. Rising inventories in a number of other industries also led to cutbacks in production during the final quarter of the year notably among producers of petroleum products chemicals and apparel. Output in manufacturing industries as a whole declined sufficiently below the level of shipments to result in an over-all reduction of inventories. Total inventory investment which had absorbed $ billion of output in dropped to an annual rate of $ billion in the first three quarters of ; and in the final quarter of the year inventories were being reduced at an annual rate of $ billion or possibly more Consumer Expenditures Increased incomes from production augmented by substantial increases in pension social security and similar payments provided a basis for higher levels of consumer expenditures during most of Consumer demand was supported also by a further moderate increase in consumer credit though there was no significant increase in spending on durable goods. Increases in spending were confined mainly to nondurable goods and services By the end of the summer the expansion of consumer demand ceased Personal income began to decline in September and retail sales receded from the high levels of the summer. Purchases of services continued to rise but total consumer spending declined one-half of percent from the third to the final quarter of the year. For the year as a whole consumer expenditures increased percent about the same as in However the higher expenditures in reflected in large part increases in prices and only a small increase in the volume of goods and services acquired ( Chart ) CHART Personal Income and Consumption Disposable personal income rose during most of but its buying power increased little because of price advances BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME J I I I I I I T PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS EMPLOYMENT AND INCOMES Employment and Earnings After nearly three years of sizable gains nonagricultural employment reached a peak in the summer of ( Chart ) A slowing down in the rate of growth had become apparent after mid-1956 and hours of work in manufacturing had turned downward somewhat earlier. In declines began to appear in employment in manufacturing industries the most pronounced decreases occurring in durable goods especially machinery primary metals and transportation equipment. The declines continued CHART Employment and Income Total nonagricultural employment after rising until September declined in the closing months of the year MILLIONS OF PERSONS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT ( BLS ) MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION WORKERS ' ..f ' V I I I I I 11I I I I 1I I I I I I I I I I 1I I I I I 1I I I I I i i i i i I i i I I Ii Basic wage rates rose moderately throughout the year DOLLARS FOR MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION WORKERS AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS GROSS \ EXCLUDING OVERTIME I I i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART Continued Employment and Income but hours of work were reduced and weekly earnings remained roughly constant DOLLARS HOURS FOR MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION WORKERS AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS ( LEFT SCALE ) AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS- ! / ( RIGHT SCALE ) Personal income reached a new high in the summer and then declined slightly reflecting changes in labor income BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES PERSONAL INCOME WAGE AND SALARY DISBURSEMENTS * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH throughout the year accelerating in the autumn. Until September gains in nonmanufacturing employment especially in trade and services more than offset the reductions in manufacturing ( Table ) But after the summer peak lowered employment in construction trade and transportation combined with sharper declines in manufacturing reduced nonfarm employment by December to a level below that of December TABLE Changes in nonagricultural employment since December [ Thousands of persons seasonally adjusted data ] Change December Industry Employees in nonagricultural establishments December to August August to December December to December Federal State and local- Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Nonmanufacturing Mining Contract construction Transportation Public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estateService and miscellaneous Government Manufacturing Based on preliminary figures for December Source : Department of Labor The decline in employment during was accompanied by a slower growth of the civilian labor force. From to as job opportunities had increased rapidly large numbers of people had entered the labor market and the civilian labor force had expanded by million. The growth was due mainly to substantial increases in the number of teen-age persons and women over desiring employment. By late however and throughout the labor force was increasing more slowly ; between the final quarters of and the increase amounted to about half a million Because the slower growth of employment was generally accompanied by smaller additions to the labor force rates of unemployment remained roughly unchanged until October at the low level prevailing since By December however the unemployment rate had risen on a seasonally adjusted basis to percent from percent in September. For as a whole unemployment averaged percent of the labor force about the same as in Lower employment in manufacturing in was accompanied by reductions in hours of work less overtime and a distinct slowing down in gains in average hourly and weekly earnings. In December the average work- week was hours and average overtime was hours compared with hours and hours respectively in December For as a whole average hourly earnings rose percent and weekly earnings only percent above The rise above in weekly earnings was about equal to the rise in consumer prices. The same general experience with respect to hours of work and earnings was characteristic of industries other than manufacturing Collective Bargaining Wage contract negotiations were relatively few in because of the large number of long-term contracts in existence that had been negotiated in earlier years. Labor disputes were infrequent and idleness resulting from work stoppages was less than in any year since World War IT. Wage increases were provided for in almost all the major contracts open for negotiation except those in the men 's apparel and northern textile industries The number of workers who received wage rate increases under major collective bargaining contracts in was about the same as in the previous year but the increases tended to be somewhat larger than in Of the approximately million workers who received increases under such major agreements about million obtained the adjustments as a result of settlements concluded prior to which specified " deferred " wage adjustments to go into effect in and typically also provided for cost-of-living escalator adjustments. About million workers obtained wage increases under major contracts negotiated during the year TABLE Distribution of employees receiving wage increases under major labor agreements Percent of total workers receiving wage increases Wage increase ( cents per hour ) All wage increases Under cents _ _ _ _ _ cents cents _ cents cents and over Not specified _ _ _ _ _ _.___..__ .__ ? Preliminary Includes cost-of-living deferred and newly negotiated wage increases received under collective bargaining situations affecting or more employees and coming to the attention of the Department of Labor Excludes construction services finance and government NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor In contrast to about percent in about percent of the employees whose rates of pay were raised under the terms of major labor agreements received increases averaging cents or more per hour ( Table ) Three of every four agreements negotiated in specified improvements in the nonwage benefits of employees notably in health and welfare plans improved vacation and holiday schedules and more liberal pensions. Cost- of-living escalator clauses were more widely adopted. By the end of the year about million workers were covered by such clauses compared with million in late Personal Income For the year as a whole total personal income reached $ billion a new high level. But the change in production and employment during the year was evident in the flow of income payments. Personal income payments were at their highest rate in August ; by the end of the year they were percent below this level. Continued increases in employment of nonproduction workers in manufacturing and gains elsewhere in the economy combined with rising average hourly earnings kept total wage and salary payments advancing through the first eight months of the year. As reductions in employment and in hours of work became more pronounced in manufacturing and began to occur also in nonmanufacturing industries total wage and salary payments declined from an annual rate of $ billion in August to $ billion in December The decline in total personal income after August was moderated by an increase in transfer payments about half in unemployment insurance benefits. The extent of this stabilizing influence may be seen in the fact that between September and December when wage and salary disbursements and other labor income declined by $ billion on an annual rate basis transfer payments rose by $ billion also on an annual rate basis. The effect was to offset more than half of the impact on total personal income of lower wage and salary payments PRICES COSTS PROFITS AND PRODUCTIVITY The upward movement of consumer prices continued in though the circumstances which produced the increases were in many cases not closely related to current demand. The record was different in other areas of the economy where prices are more responsive to changes in market conditions. The rapid advance of industrial prices at wholesale was halted and prices of crude materials which are especially sensitive declined Wholesale Prices Wholesale prices particularly the prices of industrial commodities advanced much less in than in ( Chart ) From December to December prices of crude industrial materials which previously had risen sharply fell percent. The prices of almost all major crude materials declined ; certain nonferrous metals copper lead and zinc were especially affected as mounting stocks forced a series of price reductions. On the average prices of construction materials changed little over the year and prices of semifabricated materials and components for manufacturing rose only slightly despite advances in CHART Price Changes Wholesale prices rose much less during than in PERCENTAGE CHANGE tlO ALL COMMODITIES FARM PRODUCTS PROCESSED FOOD INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS ( OTHER THAN FARM AND FOODS ) Among industrial products prices of finished and intermediate goods increased more slowly and those of crude materials declined ' INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS- special groups ' I in PRODUCER FINISHED GOODS [ v-vv CONSUMER FINISHED GOODS [ ffffj INTERMEDIATE MATERIALS SUPPLIES AND COMPONENTS F ^ fcy.y CRUDE MATERIALS WT ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ fr ^ J ^ CHANGES AT ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR steel prices. Prices of producer finished goods continued to rise but much less rapidly than during the previous months. Prices of consumer finished goods also increased very gradually except those for new automobiles on which the increases were significant though smaller than in Reflecting changes in these various categories the average of all industrial prices rose only percent during the year and the increase after February was negligible. Wholesale prices of farm products and of foods also advanced but like prices of industrial goods by a smaller amount than during The small advance in industrial prices reflected the slower rise in demand growing industrial capacity and a somewhat smaller increase than in in manufacturing labor costs per unit of output. Production-worker manhours of employment in manufacturing declined relative to output during most of and the rate of rise in average hourly earnings slowed considerably ; as a result production-worker wage costs per unit of output advanced only slightly and significantly less than in On the other hand the employment of nonproduction workers and salary payments to them rose rapidly throughout the first eight months of The result was that total labor costs per unit including both production and nonproduction workers continued to advance in although the rise was less than in the preceding year Consumer Prices The increase in the consumer price index which had started in April about ten months after the first sharp rise in wholesale industrial prices continued with virtually no interruption through By November the index was percent above the level of early About percent of the rise was due to food and service prices about percent to durable goods and percent to nondurable commodities ( Chart ) Among foods the increases in prices of meat were the most important As supplies of meat products fell below the large amounts available earlier meat prices began to recover and by the end of they were percent above the low point of two years earlier. Other food prices rose mainly because of higher costs of processing and distribution and because the products were in some cases more highly processed or of a better quality Prices of consumer durable goods l ^ ave risen about percent since March but on the average they are still below prices. Increases in prices of automobiles are mainly responsible for the recent changes. Prices of furniture and many other consumer durable goods rose moderately over the past months reflecting increased manufacturers ' prices. Prices of appliances on the other hand fell slightly. Among nondurable goods other than food the major contributors to the over-all price advance were gasoline fuel and drugs ; prices of apparel rose only moderately Prices of services are subject to a wide variety of influences. Some services such as those of the light power and communications industriesare produced on a highly industrialized basis ; others are largely personal Prices of most services in the first group have increased only moderately CHART Consumer Prices After declining for several years prices of commodities began to rise in Prices of services continued their postwar uptrend INDEX = NONDURABLE COMMODITIES EXCLUDING FOOD COMMODITIES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR over the past few years. On the other hand the cost of personal services in many of which the possibilities of gains in productivity are small have increased by almost the full amount of the rise in earnings of service workers and self-employed professional people. Increases in the prices of these services in the past two years have been generally larger than in the preceding two years when consumer prices were broadly stable. Rents have continued to rise of late at a slightly faster rate than in and The advance in consumer prices during was only in part an indication of current inflationary demand in retail markets. Adjustments of prices to cost increases that had occurred earlier and special conditions affecting particular commodities and services also played important roles. The decline in meat supplies is an example of such changes. Increases in prices of petroleum products reflected at least in part the diversion of oil supplies to Europe during the interruption of shipments via the Suez Canal. Service prices that are subject to the approval of public commissions normally adjust only slowly to changes in cost and market conditions. Rent increases particularly those following the release of con- trols often reflect cost and demand conditions originating in earlier periods And month-to-month changes in the consumer price index especially as affected by changes in the prices of food apparel and automobiles may reflect essentially seasonal variations. This factor was important in a number of month-to-month changes in the index during In view of the widespread interest in the movement of consumer prices the nature and construction of the consumer price index are described in Appendix D of this Report Corporate Profits Changes in industrial prices costs and production are the major factors determining the movement of corporate profits and their share in total income. During the expansion of activity that began in profits followed a course different from that of other forms of income. With both sales and margins increasing profits rose rapidly throughout However the increase was not extended into ; on the contrary during that year and in the first half of corporate profits fluctuated around a level somewhat below that reached in the second half of This failure of profits to advance during and early while other incomes were rising reflected a number of factors including the incurrence of additional costs of many kinds and an increased allocation of gross earnings to depreciation accounts. The number of employees was rising wage rates were increasing and overhead expenditures were higher in part as a result of the rapid increase in investment outlays. Although increases in prices covered most of the increases in unit costs of production profit margins were slightly reduced. Output increased only moderately and total profits failed to rise Profits of manufacturing corporations fell early in reflecting declines in production and sales in a number of important industries and a tendency for industrial prices to level off while some elements of cost continued to rise. The decline in profits was accelerated later in the year as production and sales fell further. In most nonmanufacturing sectors of the economy where activity continued to rise profits in general were well maintained during the first part of Present indications are that the profits of these sectors also declined in the latter part of the year. The aggregate volume of corporate profits in which the profits of manufacturing corporations are more important than all other types combined fell slightly in the first half of ; and by the end of the year they had declined significantly below the levels around which they had been moving earlier Productivity Private nonagricultural output rose only slightly from to and man-hours of employment were virtually unchanged. The indicated gain in productivity accordingly was still small though much larger than the gain from to In both instances the increase was smaller than the long-term average annual increase of about percent recorded for the past few decades and the still higher average increase recorded for the whole period following World War II. The small extent of these gains in comparison with increases in wage rates maintained the upward pressure on unit costs and therefore on prices The small improvement in productivity indicated for and provides no basis for expecting the future long-term rate to fall below the average annual gain realized in recent decades. For one thing productivity statistics generally show irregular year-to-year changes. Moreover uncertainties about the concept difficulties of measurement and shortcomings of available information require a cautious interpretation of the yearly changes shown by available data ( see Appendix E ) But more positive reasons may be cited for confidence that the long-term rate of gain in productivity will be higher than the rates for and A major reason for confidence is the huge investment made during recent years in new plant and equipment. Circumstances favorable to the full realization of the productivity potential of these facilities namely large gains in output in the industries concerned have not yet been experienced. And large increases in certain types of expenditures also raise the productivity potential even though they may depress the current level of productivity. Although the starting-up of new productive facilities the expansion of research and development projects and the training of personnel in new techniques tend to raise employment immediately their beneficial effect on the output of goods and services is deferred FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS The major demands for credit in were reflected in the long-term capital markets. State and local governments drew on these markets for $ billion of funds $ billion more than in ( Table ) School construction expenditures accounted for more than percent of the funds borrowed. Added to these demands of State and local governments were TABLE Security offerings [ Millions of dollars ] Security 1957J State and municipal securities ( principal amounts ) Corporate securities ( gross proceeds ) Manufacturing Mining Electric gas and water Railroad Other transportation Communication Financial and real estate ( excluding investment companies ) Commercial and other Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission very heavy security flotations by corporations amounting to $ billion $ billion more than in ( Chart ) The issues of utility companies were especially important reflecting the continued large programs of expansion and improvement in this industry. But manufacturing concerns were also heavy borrowers despite the slowing down in their expansion programs after the strong upsurge of the past several years This heavy reliance of corporations on the securities markets reflected in part the culmination of a reduction in liquid assets which had been in progress since the end of and which had brought corporate liquidity to a new low for the postwar period ( Chart ) It also reflected a decline in the volume of additional funds available to business concerns from the commercial banking system. Bank loans to businesses increased only $ billion in compared with an increase of $ billion in ( Table ) though this difference doubtless reflected in part a decline in the demand for shortterm credit arising from a substantially slower rate of accumulation of business inventories TABLE Changes in commercial bank holdings of loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Net change during Loans or investment Loans ( excluding interbank ) and investments ( ) Investments U. S. Government securities Other securities Loans ( excluding interbank ) Business Real estate.. Consumer... Security Agricultural Allother Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Less than million dollars NOTE. See Table F-41 for data including interbank loans Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) At the same time credit demands from other sectors of the economy were somewhat more moderate than in earlier years. Total mortgage debt rose by only $ billion in compared with $ billion in and $ billion in This slower rate of growth was due in part to the fact that funds for investment in federally insured and guaranteed home mortgages were less readily available since interest rates on these mortgages were less attractive to lenders than the yields available on other types of investments. The total amount of consumer credit out- CHART The Pattern of Credit Expansion State and local governments marketed a near-record volume of securities in and corporate issues were at a new high BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CORPORATE SECURITY ISSUES : NEW MONEY-2/ but growth in other forms of credit was greatly reduced BILLIONS OF DOLLARS INCREASE IN MORTGAGE DEBT3/ ( I to 4-Family Homes ) INCREASE IN CONSUMER CREDIT- ^ / INCREASE IN BUSINESS LOANS BY COMMERCIAL BANKS-2/ I y PRINCIPAL AMOUNTS 1/ NET PROCEEDS 3/CHANGES IN AMOUNTS OUTSTANDING SOURCES : THE BOND BUYER. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS standing increased by only $ billion in compared with $ billion in and $ billion in The amount of instalment credit extended was actually above that in ; but since repayments were high the increase in total instalment credit outstanding was held down Significant changes also took place in the supply of funds during First in most of the year the capacity of the commercial banking system to expand its loans and investments was more limited than in The volume of member bank reserves was held roughly unchanged by the monetary authorities and the already sharp reductions in bank holdings of United States Government securities limited any further shifts out of these securities in order to expand loans ( Chart ) Commercial banks sold $ million of Government securities in compared with $ billion in and $ billion in With the level of bank reserves unchanged and a sharp increase in time deposits there was no expansion in the money supply during Indeed demand deposits and currency actually declined by $ billion whereas the volume of money expenditures increased. The decline in the cash liquidity of businesses and individuals which is represented by this changed relation CHART Liquidity of Commercial Banks and Nonfinancial Corporations Bank liquidity continued low in concerns was further reduced The liquidity of business PERCENT ENO OF QUARTER COMMERCIAL BANKS- ! / NONFINANCIAL CORPORATIONS- ? / * * ' I I I I I I I I i U RATIO OF HOLDINGS OF U.S.GOVERNMENT SECURITIES ( BOOK VALUE ) TO DEMAND DEPOSITS U RATIO OF CASH ASSETS AND HOLDINGS OF U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES ( PAR VALUE ) TO CURRENT LIABILITIES SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART Member Bank Reserves Member bank BILLIONS OF DOLLARS reserves changed little in U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES HELD BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS MEMBER BANK RESERVES : i Free reserves i were negative i for most of i the year f but the deficiency was reduced in the closing months BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( Enlarged scale ) MEMBER BANKS ^ BORROWINGS FROM % / ^ FEDER S FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS FREE RESERVES ( EXCESS RESERVES LESS BORROWINGS ) ~ I.O I i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i i i i i l i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES * CHANGE IN RESERVE REQUIREMENTS SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM between money supply and expenditures was one of the most significant financial developments of the year Second there was a decline in the amount of new funds available from insurance companies savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks resulting from the lower liquidity of these institutions and the smaller flow of new savings through them. Their purchases of State and local securities and corporate issues were somewhat greater than in but this was made possible only by a large reduction in their purchases of mortgages Third despite a slightly smaller volume of total personal saving direct purchases by individuals of corporate State and local and other marketable securities were almost $ billion larger in than in This was due partly to the attractiveness of yields on these securities for individuals. An important source of funds for these greatly enlarged purchases though not a net addition to new savings was a reduction of almost $ billion in individuals ' holdings of United States Savings Bonds primarily by investors sensitive to the higher yields generally available in the market Fourth the Federal budget during the calendar year contributed less than during to making additional funds available to the securities markets through financial institutions and individuals. In a reduction of $ billion in the publicly held United States debt was an important factor in the ability of financial institutions and individuals to add to their loan and security portfolios. They did so by reducing their holdings of United States Government securities. In only $ billion of the publicly held debt was retired ; thus the ability of this group of investors especially financial institutions to provide funds by further reducing their holdings of Government securities was decreased Reflecting the more limited supply of new funds relative to the demands for them in interest rates rose during much of the year ( Chart ) The rise was especially rapid in June and August when money market pressures became unusually heavy. In August the rate on Treasury bills was close to 3J/2 percent major banks raised their prime rate from percent to ^ percent and the Federal Reserve Banks raised the discount rate from percent to * /2 percent After the Federal Reserve Banks announced lower discount rates in November interest rates and bond yields declined significantly in many cases one-half of percent or more. This reflected a reduction in demand for loans that had already been apparent and some easing of pressure on bank reserves. By the end of the year credit in both the long-term and shortterm sectors of the markets had eased appreciably though the impact on certain sectors of the market notably the mortgage market was slow in developing The rise in stock prices to July brought the average yield on common stocks to percent about the same as the yields then available on high-grade bonds CHART Interest Rates and Bond Yields Short-term interest rates rose through most of but declined after mid-November PERCENT PER ANNUM INTEREST RATES SHORT-TERM BUSINESS LOANS BY BANKS * FEDERAL RESERVE BANK DISCOUNT RATE TREASURY BILLS ( NEW ISSUES ) M I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Long-term rates rose sharply in the spring and summer and declined at the year end PERCENT PER ANNUM BOND YIELDS CORPORATE Aaa U.S. GOVERNMENT ( YEARS AND OVER ) HIGH-GRADE MUNICIPAL I I I I I i I I I I I I I i I I i I I I I i i I I I I I I I I i I I II SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND STANDARD a POOR 'S CORPORATION With the large decline in stock prices after July yields on common * stocks were above / percent at the close of the year considerably above the much lower yields then available on high-grade bonds AGRICULTURE There have been a number of favorable developments in agriculture in the past two years though net income from farming has not changed significantly ( Chart ) Despite an over-all decline in crop prices the livestock market strengthened sufficiently to raise average prices received by farmers. Heavy export shipments have made a considerable reduction in surplus stocks. A long drought in the Southwest has ended. Land values and the equities of farm proprietors have climbed to new record levels Realized gross farm income increased both in and in but rising production expenses offset most of the gains. Conditions in the rest of the economy have provided generally favorable opportunities for off-farm earnings and per capita income of the farm population from all sources has been increasing. The revolution in farm technology is a continuing source of agricultural strength though it complicates current problems of agricultural adjustment and public policy Livestock Sector Prices of farm products as well as cash receipts from farm marketings have benefited from recent livestock developments. A peak in the hog cycle coinciding with heavy supplies of fed steers had seriously depressed livestock markets late in With high slaughter rates continuing into the early months of and with forced marketing of cattle from drought areas that fall both production and per capita consumption of red meat reached record levels. During however the number of cattle on farms decreased for the first time since and a percent decline in the calf crop further suggests that cattle numbers have entered a downward cyclical phase. Pig crops in the spring and fall of and in the spring of were reduced below the levels of the preceding year though by successively narrower margins. Prices of meat animals were consequently about one-third higher by late than they had been two years earlier. Since prices of milk and dairy products were firm cash receipts from marketings of livestock and livestock products were about percent higher in than in Exports and Stocks The value of agricultural exports in fiscal reached $ billion an increase of percent over the previous record attained in ; and the volume of exports exceeded by percent the record reached in Shipments financed through special Government programs ( Chart ) mainly sales for foreign currencies under Public Law barter transactions and outright commodity donations comprised fully percent of the total Of the remainder a substantial portion moved under export subsidies in CHART Indicators of Agricultural Conditions Net farm income has reflected little of the improvement in gross farm income since BILLIONS OF DOLLARS REALIZED GROSS FARM INCOME- * / .TOTAL NET FARM INCOME y ^ REALIZEO NET FARM INCOME- ! / NET INCOME FROM NONFARM SOURCES-b/ Farm product prices and the parity index increased in INDEX = PRICES PAID INTERESTi TAXES AND WAGE RATES ( PARITY INDEX ) PRICES RECEIVED ( ALL FARM PRODUCTS ) The value of proprietors ' equities is higher than ever BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FARM PROPRIETORS'EQUITIES ( JANUARY I ) & INCOME OF FARM OPERATORS INCLUDING GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS 2j INCOME OF ALL FARM PEOPLE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE CHART Federal Agricultural Programs CCC price-support investment has been reduced by enlarged commodity disposals particularly under special export programs BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FISCAL YEARS CCC PRICE-SUPPORT INVESTMENT-1 ' TOTAL EXPORTS FOR FOREIGN CURRENCIES Net budget expenditures for agricultural programs remain high and heavy losses are being realized on commodity operations BILLIONS OF DOLLARS NET BUDGET EXPENDITURES ^ ^ \ REALIZED COST OF STABILIZATION PROGRAMS M y/ * DIRECT GOVERNMENT ^ PAYMENTS ! / * * X 1/ LOANS AND INVENTORIES JUNE 2/EXPENDITURES FOR AGRICULTURE AND AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES & PAYMENTS TO FARM OPERATORS AND LANDLORDS CALENDAR YEARS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET various forms. On dollar sales of wheat the subsidy element averaged about cents per bushel. Under the export program for raw cotton initiated early in and continued in the current season sales have been at competitive world prices some percent below the domestic price. Commodities valued in excess of $ million ( CCG cost ) were released to barter contractors during the fiscal year but activity declined sharply after new regulations were issued in May to help prevent displacement of normal dollar sales. Since August exports have been running below the very high monthly levels of the preceding year Under present circumstances variations in the rate of export shipments exert their major influence on the level of commodity stocks not on current crop prices or farm income. Carry-overs of cotton wheat and rice were reduced and investment by the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) in price-support loans and inventories on November was $ billion lower than a year earlier. However a substantial rise in stocks of feed grains continues and the grain surplus is world-wide. Despite a record volume of international trade in wheat during stocks of major coarse and bread grains in the four principal exporting countries as of July reached a new high in for the fifth consecutive year. Tobacco stocks also increased in in part because newer high-yielding varieties found poor favor in domestic and export markets alike. All stocks of CCCowned wool have now been sold Crop Production and Prices Crop adjustments in were expected to reinforce the favorable export experience and further reduce burdensome surpluses. Over million acres were placed in the Soil Bank ; acreage allotments were at the minimum levels permitted by law ; and total harvested acreage of wheat cotton and corn was about percent lower than four years earlier. Soil-Bank withdrawals contributed to significant reductions in the output of wheat cotton rice and tobacco. Excessive rainfall at harvest time adversely affected the quality of several crops and reduced cotton production sharply below early-season estimates. The all-crop production index nevertheless equaled the record-matching ( = ) of as drought was broken on the Great Plains more acreage was diverted to soybeans and minor feed grains and the upward trend in yields per acre continued. Total feed-grain output set a new record Farm prices have reflected these developments. Since September the index of crop prices has been lower than on corresponding dates in Because of improved prices for livestock and livestock products however the general index of prices received by farmers in averaged some percent higher than in the two preceding years. Record supplies of feed concentrates and cheap feed relative to livestock prices are now encouraging expansion of hog production and heavy feeding of beef cattle Financial Position of Farmers Realized gross farm income was percent higher in than in However higher cash receipts from livestock and an increase of nearly half a billion dollars in Soil-Bank payments were not sufficient to counteract reductions in crop marketings and increases in production expenses. Unusual weather conditions in the autumn lowered cash receipts from cotton delayed marketings of hogs to allow feeding of wet corn and thus adversely affected farm income in the fourth quarter. Net realized farm income while higher than in declined from $ billion in to an estimated $ billion in After adjustment for net change in inventories net farm income was the same as in Most of the increase in total expenses was due to higher overhead costs depreciation charges that reflect heavy capital investment in earlier years tax payments and interest. More expensive feeder livestock motor vehicles and farm machinery contributed to a percent rise in the index of prices paid for all items ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) and held the statutory parity ratio at its level The over-all financial position of agriculture continues to show strength The value of farm land per acre on November was percent higher than a year earlier and one-fourth higher than in This was the main factor lifting the value of proprietors ' equities to an estimated $ billion as of January about percent above the previous peak. A further rise in real estate debt also occurred but the ratio of total liabilities to proprietors ' equities declined. Relatively few farms are being offered for sale and foreclosures in were below the relatively low rate in Efforts to enlarge existing holdings in the interest of improved efficiency demands for rural home sites and other nonfarm uses for farm land in some regions all lend strength to farm land values. To some extent these higher land prices also reflect the capitalized value of Government programs to sustain farm income and prices T H E EXTENT OF THE OVER-ALL DECLINE The decline in over-all economic activity that had taken place by the end of was moderate. The Nation 's output of goods and services in the fourth quarter was less than. J/i percent below the total reached in the third quarter. Nonagricultural employment in December adjusted for seasonal changes in the number of jobs was about percent below the summer peak and personal income had declined by less than percent Final purchases of goods and services were in the aggregate virtually unchanged only $ billion less than in the third quarter but inventories which had been accumulating at the rate of $ billion annually in the third quarter of the year were being used up in the fourth quarter at the rate of $ billion or more. Adjustments in inventory holdings therefore accounted for most of the declines in production employment and income which developed toward the year 's end Because of the high level of private investment expenditures and of Government purchases and the strength of consumer demand labor income declined by only percent between the third and the fourth quarters of the year. And since other forms of income notably payments to individuals under various income-maintenance programs increased in the fourth quarter total personal income fell even less than percent. Personal income after taxes fell by $ billion in the fourth quarter and personal consumption expenditures by $ billion Thus the over-all decline has been moderate despite rather sharp reductions in inventories and in industrial production. Purchases of goods and services for final use have been well sustained ; incomes have held up well ; and the continuing high level of retail purchases attests to the confidence of consumers in their economic position Chapter Foreign Developments and the American Economy T HE INTERACTION between economic developments in other countries and in the United States was again evident in In the early part of the year foreign demand exerted a strongly expansive effect on the American economy. United States exports which had already been rising rapidly with the growth in economic activity abroad increased with unusual force as a result of demands arising from the closure of the Suez Canal and other temporary circumstances. These special demands subsided at the same time that the pace of economic expansion abroad slowed down and United States exports declined from the record level of the first half of the year. United States imports varied only slightly in total amount from the level though the demand for raw material imports declined in the latter part of the year as a result of reduced industrial activity When economic activity contracted in United States demand for imports fell for a time. However the outflow of dollars through capital investment and in other ways increased ; this strengthened the foreign exchange positions of other countries and helped promote economic expansion. The continued rise in industrial production in Western Europe supported world trade and commodity prices and contributed to an upturn in economic activity in the United States In the months ahead developments in the United States economy and in its external trade and financial relations will influence and be influenced by economic developments in other countries. It is important that policies pursued here and abroad promote economic growth and counteract strains that would lead to raising and hardening trade barriers among nations CHANGES IN PRODUCTION Industrial production abroad ( excluding output of countries in the Soviet bloc ) averaged about percent higher in than in and close to double the prewar output ( Table ) In most countries the lead in the exceptionally rapid expansion since was taken by the metal and metal-fabricating industries to meet strong home-investment and export demands. In the more developed countries the demand for consumer durable goods also proved to be heavy as incomes and levels of living rose ; during textile manufactures which had previously lagged joined in the rise TABLE World industrial production [ Index = ] Country First Second Third Fourth quarter quarter quarter quarter Not seasonally adjusted World : Including United States Excluding United States U25 * Seasonally adjusted O E E C countries Canada United States * Austria Belgium Denmark France Germany Federal Republic Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway _ Sweden United Kingdom ( ) U46 ( ) ) Not seasonally adjusted India Japan Yugoslavia Argentina Chile Brazil Mexico ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) w i Excluding USSR and other members of the Soviet bloc * Quarterly figures for are : for the world including United States ; for the world excluding United States Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available Reflects July strike Average of quarterly figures for would be Partial data for quarter Sources : United Nations and Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( except as noted ) These gains in industrial production were achieved in Western Europe generally by May and there appears to have been no further over-all increase since then. Production in the Federal Republic of Germany after a pace-setting rise up to mid-1956 and a further vigorous increase in the first quarter of fell in the summer but turned upward again in the autumn. The revival in the United Kingdom 's industrial output starting in the spring did not go much beyond the level reached at the end of In France however the industrial upsurge that began in continued during ; but it was accompanied by inflationary pressures and produced an imbalance in trade and a depletion of foreign exchange reserves Industrial output in Canada leveled off in the early months of and then receded. Japanese production after a long and rapid increase de- clined after July. Industrial activity in India and Yugoslavia continued to expand rapidly but this was not typical of less developed countries as a whole. In Latin America the total volume of mining output expanded appreciably but manufacturing appears to have been only moderately higher than in \ Although the growth of demand slackened in some countries a slower rate of increase in output was inevitable because in a number of cases industrial production had begun to crowd the physical limits set by existing plant capacity or by the supply of labor. Moreover in response to the rise of prices and wages the monetary authorities in most of the developed economies restricted credit thereby restraining investment outlays. In several countries loss of foreign exchange reserves as the result of trade deficits or speculative capital movements compelled policies of restraint T H E COURSE OF WORLD TRADE Total world exports ( excluding those of the Soviet bloc ) reached an annual rate close to $ billion during the first half of In physical terms exports were percent above those in the first half of and nearly percent above the same period of ( Chart ) In recent months there has been little further expansion. Trade among the industrial countries accounted for most of the increase to mid-1957. In relative terms however some of the sharpest increases were in imports of certain of the less developed countries ( Table ) Most of this rise was in their trade with the United States and other industrially developed countries TABLE Changes in world trade Imports Exports Area World i July 1956June ( billions of dollars ) Percentage increase First half First half to to first half first half July 1956June ( billions of dollars ) Percentage increase First half First half to to first half first half To or from other Western European countries To or from other areas Overseas territories of continental Western Europe _ _ Outer sterling area Middle East Far East Other countries Northern North America Latin America Western Europe ( OEEC countries ) Excludes USSR and other members of the Soviet bloc Exports exclude military aid shipments by United States and Canada Excludes countries belonging to the sterling area Sources : Department of Commerce based on data from United Nations and Organization for European Economic Cooperation CHART World and U. S. Foreign Trade J S. exports rose much faster than imports or total world trade rom early to early but declined later in the year BILLI ONS OF DOLLARS PRICES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES WORLD TRADE ( MEASURED BY MERCHANDISE EXPORTS ) ^ _ J * ^ ^ N ^ o i i i i i i i r BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PRICES ( ENLARGED SCALE ) SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES U.S. MERCHANDISE EXPORTS / X r r MERCHANDISE IMPORTS < < I i I MOTE : DATA EXCLUDE U.S. MILITARY SHIPMENTS UNDER AID PROGRAMS AND EXPORTS OF USSR AND OTHER MEMBERS OF THE SOVIET BLOC SOURCES : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Purchases of American goods and services by foreign countries rose with exceptional vigor during the first quarter of to an annual rate of about $ billion percent higher than a year earlier ( Chart ) They maintained this rate during the second quarter and most of the third but declined in the autumn Exports of three commodities petroleum ( and products ) raw cotton and wheat together increased by $ million and accounted for nearly one-half of the increase in total United States merchandise exports between the first half of and the first half of The large rise in petroleum shipments resulted from the temporary disruption of traffic through the Suez Canal. Cotton shipments which had been abnormally low in prior to the reduction in the United States export price to world market levels rose to exceptionally high amounts as foreign stocks were rebuilt Exports of wheat were unusually large primarily because of the poor European harvest in and large special-program shipments to Asian countries In addition to these special circumstances United States exports benefited from reductions achieved in trade barriers abroad and until mid-1957 from the general buoyancy of foreign demand. Sales of both industrial materials and capital equipment rose as industrial activity expanded abroad ( Table ) Exports of many products such as steel scrap and machinery TABLE U. S. merchandise exports and imports [ Millions of dollars ] Commodity group Quarterly average Domestic exports ! First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Producers ' supplies and materials : Cotton tobacco and other agricultural materials Nonagricultural materials Capital equipment Consumer goods : Food Other consumer goods Miscellaneous G eneral imports.. _ Producers ' supplies and materials : Petroleum and products Other materials 2used in production of nondurable goods Materials used in production of durable goods Materials used in agriculture Miscellaneous Consumer goods : Food beverages and drugs Other consumer goods Capital equipment Excludes military aid and motion picture films exported on a royalty basis Includes newsprint and paper base stocks and tobacco Includes agricultural machinery NOTE Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce CHART U. S. Balance of Payments The excess of U. S. receipts from other countries over payments to them led to reductions in foreign gold and dollar holdings in BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED J0T * TOTAL PAYMENTS \ _ \ TOTAL RECEIPTS _ ,_ I I I I I -S RECEIPTS \ EXPORTS OF GOODS AND S ! IRVICES > < OTHER RECEIPTS- * / -I > \ \ m ^ " mV ^ PAYMENTS IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES U.S. PRIVATE CAPITAL ^ GOVERNMENT GRANTS AND PRIVATE REMITTANCES ^ / I / o L cd I955 I956 * / FOREIGN LONG-TERM CAPITAL PLUS ERRORS AND OMISSIONS 2/ INCLUDES RELATED GOVERNMENT CAPITAL EXPORTS & INCLUDES EXPORT-IMPORT BANK LOANS NOTE : DATA EXCLUDE MILITARY GRANT-AID SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I957 were facilitated by the possibility of obtaining delivery more rapidly from the United States than from other sources though this entailed some additional upward pressure on United States prices of such goods. Exports of consumer finished goods on the other hand rose more slowly As the year progressed foreign demand for United States output declined from the very high rate of the early months. Late in the year the volume of exports had fallen to a level slightly below that of months earlier and was at an annual rate markedly lower than in the first six months of The expansion of imports into this country though much smaller than the rise in exports was fairly general and substantial from to Further growth of imports has been limited with increases occurring chiefly in petroleum and products and consumer manufactures including automobiles ( Table ) Imports of industrial materials other than petroleum which had constituted nearly half of total imports in reflected the decline in domestic manufacturing production and showed some effect of reductions in prices INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS Disparities between movements in exports and in imports gave rise to some exceptionally large trade deficits and consequent difficulties in international payments. In India heavy private and public demands generated by the program for economic development caused the trade deficit to increase by an annual rate of more than $ million from the first half of to the first half of Smaller increases occurred in some other less developed countries. Trade deficits also rose in some of the industrially more advanced countries over the same two-year period by an annual rate of $ million in France almost $ million in Japan and $ million in the Netherlands. These changes had their counterpart in increased trade surpluses of a few other countries. That of the United States rose by an annual rate of $ million and that of Western Germany by a rate of $ million The deficits and surpluses arising in international trade in the recent past were to a large extent offset by capital movements. Much of the large increase in the excess of our exports over imports of goods and services in the last few years was made possible by a rapid growth in the outflow of United States private capital. Although private American investment abroad fell sharply in the third quarter of it was still relatively high. United States Government grants and credits remained close to previous levels and continue to contribute significantly to our export surplus ( Chart ) In a number of countries however trade balances were not covered by capital movements ; and in several cases capital outflows particularly of a speculative nature increased rather than alleviated these strains. The United Kingdom achieved a surplus on current account but experienced a still larger outflow of capital. Much of this outflow was due to speculative operations concentrated first during the period of the Suez crisis and again during the summer of The net result of these movements on trade and capital account was a sharp fall in the gold and foreign exchange reserves of a number of countries notably France the United Kingdom India Japan the Netherlands and Belgium. In addition heavy demands were made upon the resources of the International Monetary Fund and further credits were obtained through the European Payments Union. Part of these gold and exchange resources were used in settlements with the United States. The net decline in the gold and dollar balances of foreign countries and of international institutions attributable to transactions with this country amounted to $ million during the year ended September A substantial inflow of foreign private capital played a role in these movements ; some of these assets are potential sources of additions to foreign currency reserves Certain foreign countries however added significantly to their gold and foreign exchange holdings during that period. The increase amounted to $ million in Western Germany. Other major increases were $ million in Venezuela and $ million in Canada influenced in both cases by large capital inflows chiefly from the United States. Australia 's gold and foreign exchange holdings mainly in sterling rose by about $ million In several countries notably the United Kingdom the Netherlands and Japan exchange positions took a turn for the better before the end of Credit policy operating externally on speculation and internally on investments and inventories was the major corrective measure. France however responded to continued losses of exchange reserves by devaluing the franc and tightening trade controls. Within the French economy the pressure of demand remained strong and consumer prices rose further whereas in most European countries retail prices increased much less than in other recent years Western Germany 's strong external position and some easing of domestic demand permitted a reduction in its central bank discount rate while other countries were raising theirs. Western Germany was also able to provide some direct relief to the international payments situation by prepayments on long-term debts and by new loans Demand in the nonindustrial countries has continued strong as shown by the further rise in the imports of this group of countries in the third quarter of Thus United States exports of machinery to Latin America in that period expanded further although machinery exports to Canada and Western Europe declined. In a number of the less developed countries the increases in imports reflected in part inflationary internal conditions and resulted in continued difficulties in international payments The foreign exchange earnings of a number of countries heavily dependent on the export of primary products have been reduced as the result of declines in prices of certain commodities including minerals and metals and some foodstuffs and fibres as enlarged capacity and output encountered some slackening in export demand. The effective buying power of the primary producing countries has been further impaired by the rise in prices paid for imports of manufactured goods FUTURE PROBLEMS AND POLICIES Although world production and trade are for the time being not rising at the rapid rate of recent years the possibilities for further advance remain great. Potential demands abroad for consumer goods for public facilities and for other types of investments continue to be large. Most governments today recognize a responsibility for pursuing policies to promote high levels of economic activity. The industrially less developed countries are eager to push ahead with their economic development. Vigorous growth abroad will help fulfill universal aspirations for economic betterment and can result in a rising level of demand for United States goods and services The actual course of foreign economic developments will be influenced in significant measure by developments in our own economy and in our foreign and domestic policies. Whether potential external demands for our goods and services materialize will depend primarily upon foreign opportunities to earn dollars through exports to the United States or to obtain loans and investments. These opportunities have expanded swiftly ever since the end of the war with only minor interruptions and have played an essential role in world economic growth. If the outflow of dollar payments should cease to grow or should contract the continuation of economic expansion abroad would become more difficult to achieve and measures aimed at restricting purchases from the United States might result because of lack of dollars to pay for them. A continued rise in the outflow of dollar payments on the other hand would make for a mutually reinforcing economic expansion here and abroad The economic policies of the United States both domestic and foreign have an important bearing on these prospects. In the field of domestic economic policy growth and stability are important objectives not only for this country 's welfare but also for their effects on foreign countries through our imports and in other ways. In the field of foreign economic policy our aims are expressed in programs of economic and technical assistance for promoting economic development abroad and in efforts to extend the liberalization of trade In all of this we stand to benefit not only by the rise in foreign demand for our exports but also by the increase in foreign capacity to meet our import needs. The contribution made by imports to our welfare includes the satisfaction of certain essential requirements and a widening of the variety of goods available to our consumers and producers. These results are to the good of the Nation. It would be a grave loss to impede our access to needed imports or to isolate ourselves from the specializations and skills of other countries Chapter Economic Opportunities and Challenges Ahead A S WE ATTEMPT to evaluate the current economic situation and the ^ ^ outlook for the year ahead we must be alert to the limitations of our information concerning many factors that will influence the outcome and above all to the uncertainties that attend any effort to chart beforehand the course that our free economy will take. However it seems likely that in the current year changes in spending by business concerns on new facilities and equipment and by Government on defense procurement will significantly influence the magnitude and duration of the movement of inventories and in conjunction with inventory changes the course of over-all economic activity. Accordingly attention may usefully be directed first to these important components of the demand for goods and services APPRAISAL OF THE CURRENT ECONOMIC SITUATION Although an extension into of the decline in business expenditures on plant and equipment is suggested by data on new orders and contracts and by information on businessmen 's investment intentions the magnitude of the decline and its duration are uncertain. Decisions regarding these expenditures are influenced by a variety of conditions that affect particular industries and firms and are subject to rapid change. The outcome will be especially affected by sales experience and expectations. A decline in investment spending seldom lasts only a few months ; however in some industries reductions began as early as and in many others they have been in progress during much of Also certain conditions that tend to limit the decline may be noted. Pressures to reduce costs and to improve products continue and in some respects have been intensified. Research and development activities which are cumulative in their results continue at a high level and are certain to yield many practical suggestions for undertakings the financial feasibility of which will be enhanced by the greater availability and lower cost of capital and credit For other categories of investment expenditures many evidences of strength are apparent. There are signs that the rise in residential construction outlays will continue possibly at a faster pace. Well-maintained personal incomes greater availability of mortgage credit and recent moves to reduce the cash investment required for home purchase will help achieve this result. Expenditures for the construction of various types of private institutional buildings have been rising for several years. Growing needs for such facilities and the improvement in financing conditions reinforce the evidence provided by contract awards that outlays on this type of construction should continue to rise moderately Foreign demand on the other hand is likely to exert a moderately contractive influence on economic activity for the time being. The reasons for this are discussed in Chapter They include the passing of the special circumstances which accounted for part of the sharp increase in United States exports in and early some slowing down in economic expansion abroad and pressure on the foreign exchange positions of certain nations abroad. While a reduction in some categories of United States import demand is also evident exports seem likely to decline relative to imports. This development in conjunction with other international economic transactions would involve a further though probably modest reduction in net foreign investment and hence in the stimulus provided to production and employment from this quarter In view of the necessary acceleration of certain defense programs and the steps already taken to give effect to this change national security expenditures may be expected to increase during the year ahead. Insofar as business activity is affected by the award of procurement contracts which are being placed at an increased rate it may rise earlier and more strongly than the prospective increase in national security expenditures The growing need for public services and particularly the further increase of highway construction point to a continued high rate of increase in the expenditures of State and local governments. The outlook for more ample and lower-cost financing strengthens this expectation The uncertainties associated with estimating the movement of each of these major elements of demand remain of course when an attempt is made to strike a balance for them taken together. Though the decline in business outlays on new plant and equipment may outweigh the combined rise in other types of investment expenditures this is likely to be offset by the necessarily larger outlays on certain defense procurement items and by the rising expenditures of State and local governments. And the rate of inventory reduction may not be substantially greater than it has been so far if the balance between government expenditures and business capital outlays is favorable and if personal incomes and consumption expenditures are well maintained as seems likely These considerations suggest that the decline in business activity need not be prolonged and that economic growth can be resumed without extended interruption. The policies of Government will be directed toward helping to assure this result T H E LONGER PERSPECTIVE At a time like the present when the economy is adjusting to the large increases in productive capacity created in the past few years it is well to seek a longer perspective on our economic prospects and to consider some of the sources of strength for the years ahead. There are good grounds for confidence not only that economic growth can be resumed without prolonged delay but also that a vigorous expansion of our economy can be sustained over the years. Our domestic market for goods and services has about doubled every quarter of a century. There is every reason to believe that we shall do at least as well in the next years The vigorous postwar growth of population is a basic and powerful force making for expansion in the American economy. Our numbers are increasing by some million a year and there is no reason to doubt a strong uptrend in the next quarter century. In our economy an increase in population continues to mean new and enlarged markets for output. Over the last two decades per capita consumption has increased by more than percent in spite of changes in the age composition of the population which have tended to lower basic needs per capita for consumer goods. After this year or the next the number in the group aged to whose needs and wants are much greater than those of young children will increase substantially for a decade or more The growth and changed age distribution of our population will require greatly expanded private facilities for the production transportation and distribution of goods and for services of many kinds including education The capital assets normally provided by Government must at least keep pace and the expansion of some types of public assets will have to be at a faster rate to reduce backlogs and to supply services that will be required in especially increased amounts. The clearly indicated need for enlargement of the capacity of our public schools colleges and universities is a case in point. Large and growing sums will be spent by State and local governments to provide needed educational and other facilities and services Large public and private outlays will also be required to develop and conserve our water land forest mineral and energy resources. Major undertakings have been launched in many cities with Federal aid looking to the renewal of urban areas and many more are in the planning stages. State and local outlays have been rising at the rate of $ billion a year and something like this rate of increase must continue to keep pace with growing requirements Many activities of the Federal Government exert a growth-promoting influence. Grants to States for extending and modernizing our roads and highways will reach $ billion in the current fiscal year and $ billion in the next fiscal period. The program for providing the navigational aids necessary to jet air travel and otherwise modernizing our airways will grow in magnitude over the next several years. Major improvements will be called for in the great variety of physical facilities utilized by the Federal Government. Like the vast improvements in public assets being undertaken by State and local governments these Federal programs are designed to keep pace with expanding public needs and to facilitate the long-term expansion of our private economy. These additions to the Nation 's assets will have an economic effect many times their direct cost through the new opportunities for profitable private investment which they will inevitably open up A further element of strength consists in the increase of knowledge and the improvement of technology which are being steadily fostered by a huge expansion of our educational system and of research and development Billions of dollars are being spent each year by private industry and institutions on scientific and technical research and additional billions by the Federal Government. These efforts including many federally supported projects related to national defense will lead to new products for civilian use and improved methods of production. Indeed a large proportion of our output in consisted of products not in use a decade or so ago. There is every reason to expect continuation of these trends in the years ahead It can be safely anticipated that the momentum of economic development which has been a notable feature of recent years in most of the advanced countries of the world and in several of the less advanced will be resumed as readjustments now in progress are completed. The extent of international economic cooperation among the free nations of the world exceeds anything heretofore experienced and recent steps toward greater economic integration in Western Europe hold out high promise Almost everywhere horizons have been extended and greatly enlarged economic potentials are recognized. In this perspective the temporary strains now being felt in some countries and the more basic problems of others can be faced with more assurance Important developments in recent years have significantly improved the outlook for greater stability in our economy. Among these are the substantial progress of market and economic research by American businesses and the more orderly and longer-range planning which they now undertake for the expansion and improvement of their productive facilities Businesses can usefully intensify these activities. In large part because of them it is less likely now than in earlier years that unsound projects will be launched in a boom psychology or that projects needed for the long pull will be discontinued in a period of readjustment The stability of our economy is also enhanced by public and private arrangements greatly extended in recent years that help maintain incomes in an economic downturn. The Federal-State unemployment compensation system is functioning with enlarged coverage and somewhat liberalized benefits. The broadened coverage of old age survivors and disability insurance and the increasing volume of payments sustain the purchasing power of many millions of consumers. Benefits are also paid in an increasing volume to many millions of persons under private pension and welfare programs. Under our tax system income tax liabilities vary directly with individual and corporate income so that incomes change less after tax than before tax. Such stabilizers cushion the impact of an economic decline and improve the basis for early resumption of growth The strength of our financial institutions provides a basis for confidence both in immediate economic prospects and in the outlook for economic growth over the longer run. Speculative excesses have been notably rare in our recent experience. Though consumer debt is higher than ever before it is not dangerously burdensome in a growing economy. The prevalence of regularly scheduled debt repayment both on long-term mortgage indebtedness and on shorter-term obligations reduces the risk of defaults. A far greater proportion than ever before of the assets of financial institutions is protected by governmental insurance or guaranty ; and the guaranty of liabilities to depositors covers virtually all of our banks Assured of these continuing sources of economic and financial strength and stability business concerns and consumers can make plans which will enable the Nation to move forward to new economic achievements The latest challenge of international communism will require a further increase in the economic claims of national security which are already heavy If we follow suitable private and public policies this challenge can be met without distorting our economy. or destroying the freedoms that we cherish Whatever our national security requires our economy can provide and we can afford to pay T H E CHALLENGE TO ECONOMIC POLICIES Although a realistic appraisal of the present economic outlook warrants confidence it also requires that we recognize an unfavorable feature of the recent performance of our economy. In the money value of gross national output rose by almost percent but in physical terms the increase was only about percent. There was a good expansion in demand but despite the existence of unused capacity in several important lines of industry it was accompanied by an increase in prices and only a small increase in output. At the same time the margin between business costs and prices narrowed business profits were reduced and at the end of the year production and employment were declining There is no simple explanation of recent economic developments and no easy solution to the problem of maintaining high employment vigorous economic growth and reasonably stable prices. But it is clear that the combination of policies and practices followed in the recent past by the various participants in our economic life has given results that in certain important respects are unfavorable There are critical questions here for the leadership of business and labor as well as for Government. Business concerns must re-examine their policies and practices. Price increases that are unwarranted by costs or that attempt to recapture investment outlays too quickly not only lower the purchasing power of the dollar but may be self-defeating by causing a restriction of markets lower output under-utilization of capacity and a narrowing of the return on capital investment. The leadership of labor must recognize that wage increases that go beyond prospective productivity gains are inconsistent with a stable price level. The problem of inflation can only be aggravated by wage increases that are demanded and obtained on the assumption that living costs are going to rise ; and the resumption of economic growth can only be slowed by wage demands that imply either an increase in prices or a further narrowing of the margin between prices and costs. Government 's role is to follow policies that will help keep our economy stable and promote sound economic growth with reasonably stable prices The resumption and maintenance of economic growth which can be achieved through suitable private and public policies assure expanding economic strength with which to meet the Nation 's needs accomplished through an enterprise system that preserves individual freedoms. However if this opportunity is to be fully realized economic growth must take the form of increases in real output accompanied by a stable price level This can be achieved if weight is given to long-run as well as short-run considerations in policies and practices that affect our economic welfare It can be guaranteed by a public opinion that is alert to the consequences of wrong policies and insists on those that will yield real economic growth without inflation Chapter A Legislative Program To Help Achieve National Economic Goals T HE LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM for the coming year which is presented here is designed to help discharge the responsibilities of the Federal Government under the Employment Act of It takes account of present and foreseeable economic conditions and seeks to reach an appropriate balance among our national economic goals. The proposed measures would strengthen the foundations on which sustainable economic growth and national security are based help moderate fluctuations in our economy aid in countering a resurgence of inflationary pressures and assist in the sound development of the free world economy First the program recognizes the economic impact of the fiscal policies of Government. It takes particular note of the far-reaching effects of the activities under which the Federal Government makes loans directly to individuals business concerns local governments and other groups or insures or guarantees loans made to them by private lenders. Second it proposes steps to improve our store of technical knowledge and productive skills the better to meet the problems of our time. Third it suggests measures to enhance the competitive character of our system of private enterprise with emphasis on strengthening the economic position of small business concerns. Fourth it suggests ways of giving to individuals greater protection against economic hardships of promoting integrity in labor-management relationships and of improving industrial relations. Fifth it proposes the extension of certain agricultural laws and the revision of others to facilitate long-needed adjustments. Sixth it proposes means for widening and strengthening our economic ties with other nations. And finally it suggests measures for improving the economic information needed by private and public groups to follow and analyze economic developments and to provide a sounder basis for policy decisions GOVERNMENT FINANCES The Federal Government 's fiscal operations are of such size and character that the policies followed in these matters can not fail to exert a powerful influence on economic conditions. Fiscal policies can contribute significantly to the attainment of national economic objectives or can impede their accomplishment. It is crucial therefore that they be attuned to the times and so designed as to promote the long-run as well as the immediate economic welfare of the Nation The budget provides an integrated view of the planned fiscal operations of Government. It also provides a basis for considering the impact of fiscal operations on the economy. In determining budget policy four objectives are uppermost : to make adequate provision for needed services ; to provide these services efficiently ; to promote suitable relationships among Federal State and local governments ; and to make the maximum contribution to economic growth and stability Because the provision of services by Government requires that income be claimed that would otherwise be used privately the first of these objectives means in a broad sense that the amount of income which is taken in taxes the sources from which taxes are drawn and the way tax receipts are spent should be such as to maximize Government 's contribution to national welfare. Constant vigilance is needed to get the work of Government done at the lowest cost consistent with the desired level of performance which is the essence of the second stated objective but vigilance is needed also to assure that the income which Government takes in taxes makes a greater contribution to well-being when spent publicly than it would if used privately. Efficiency in this broad economic and social sense requires wise judgment in selecting the activities on which the revenues of Government are to be spent and in allocating the burden of taxation The third objective a suitable relationship among the various levels of Government has been affected by the increasing scope and complexity of our economic life a desire to conduct various programs on a uniform basis a succession of national emergencies and the existence of a highly productive Federal revenue system. These circumstances have tended to direct more functions to the Federal Government with the consequence that a continuing re-evaluation of the distribution of governmental functions and of the revenues for financing them is necessary During the past year a Committee of ten Governors and seven Federal officials including three Cabinet members has been developing recommendations and plans under which certain functions now performed at the Federal level may be undertaken by the States with an appropriate transfer of revenue sources presently used by the Federal Government. The first results of this constructive work are described in Progress Report No. of the Joint Federal-State Action Committee issued December Where necessary legislative proposals to carry out these recommendations will be transmitted to the Congress The continuing work of the Committee is expected to yield additional suggestions. Its efforts will also help establish clearer definitions of responsibility for emerging problems The balance between Federal budget expenditures and receipts in the calendar year was broadly favorable to the attainment of the fourth goal of fiscal policy namely to help create conditions conducive to economic growth and stability. Although Federal expenditures were somewhat higher than in the preceding year some surplus of receipts over outlays helped moderate inflationary pressures The need to accelerate important portions of our defense program requires that the Congress make certain supplemental appropriations early in the calendar year and authorize the Executive Branch to make certain transfers of funds under existing appropriations. The acceleration of our defense program which these steps will facilitate will result in some increase of Federal outlays in the fiscal year And readjustments currently taking place in the economy suggest that receipts will be somewhat lower than was estimated earlier. Present indications point therefore to a small excess of outlays over receipts for the fiscal year as a whole Budget estimates reflect the interaction between economic developments and the Federal Government 's receipts. With the anticipated resumption of economic growth receipts in the fiscal year are expected to be enough higher than in fiscal to provide a small surplus over the somewhat increased level of projected expenditures. The prospective surplus is a narrow one however and insufficient to permit the reductions in the corporate income tax rate and in the excise taxes on automobiles and parts cigarettes distilled spirits wines and beer scheduled to take effect on July It is recommended therefore that these tax rates be extended by legislative action for an additional year The statutory limit on the public debt returned to $ billion at the beginning of the fiscal year At that time the debt subject to this restriction was slightly over $ billion. The usual excess of cash payments over receipts in the first half of the fiscal year resulted in an increase in the public debt outstanding and at the end of December the debt subject to limit was less than one-half billion dollars under the ceiling It has been possible to conduct the Federal Government 's fiscal operations within this statutory restriction only by the most careful economy and by drawing down Treasury cash balances to uncomfortably low levels. This extremely narrow margin has imposed serious problems of fiscal administration on the Federal Government not the least of which is the lack of flexibility needed for efficient management of the public debt. Financial demands upon the Treasury will be severe also during the second half of the calendar year The higher rate of expenditures dictated by our national security requirements the seasonal pattern of Treasury receipts and the need for greater operating flexibility requires a less restrictive debt limit. Legislation providing an appropriate temporary increase will be requested of the Congress FEDERAL CREDIT PROGRAMS Increasing attention has been directed recently to the numerous programs under which the Federal Government lends money directly to individuals local governments business concerns and other groups or underwrites either by insurance or by guarantee credit extended to them by private lenders. These Federal programs fall into four broad categories : programs under which direct loans and loan insurance are provided for housing ; direct loan and loan insurance programs for farm people ; programs of financial aid for business concerns ; and programs under which loans are extended to foreign firms or governments and international agencies. Some programs were designed originally to fill gaps in private credit markets ; others were created to achieve certain social objectives ; and still others were designed to meet specific defense needs or to support the foreign policy of the United States All of these programs involve the credit of the Federal Government in one way or another. They also tend to swell Government expenditures though they are by no means fully reflected in Federal budget totals. Insured and guaranteed loans do not appear in budget expenditures at all except for the relatively minor administrative costs and the losses which have been associated with them ; and in most cases direct loan programs result in net expenditures only to the extent that disbursements under new credits exceed repayments of loans previously made and by the amount of the administrative costs involved. But whether reflected in the budget or not Federal credit programs both individually and in the aggregate have a significant and widely diffused impact on the economy. They influence the volume of credit extended the uses for which it is available and the interest rate and other terms on which it can be obtained. It is important therefore that the programs be administered in such a way that the burden which they place on the Federal budget is minimized consistent with program objectives ; that they supplement rather than compete with private credit agencies ; and that they make their maximum contribution to the stability of the economy and to its capacity for sustainable growth Federal credit programs could fulfill their statutory objectives and promote the stability and growth of the economy more effectively if the heads of the various agencies had wider discretionary authority to set the terms on which funds are available to qualified borrowers under Federal insurance or guarantee of private loans. Congress should give favorable consideration to legislation that will accomplish this result. Existing statutory limitations are sometimes so restrictive as virtually to nullify program objectives. A prime example is the VA Home Loan Guaranty Program. Because of the currently uneconomic level of its statutory maximum interest rate this program has been drastically curtailed before its scheduled expiration date so far as new guaranty commitments are concerned. Home mortgage loans are not currently available from private sources at the statutory maximum of 4J/2 percent in view of the higher yields that can be earned on other investments of comparable quality. Other programs that have been seriously retarded in obtaining necessary financing from private investors include the armed services housing rental housing and management-type cooperative housing loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration. The National Housing Act should be amended to adjust the interest rate limitations in Sections and which have become impediments to the intended operation of these programs Wider discretionary authority would make it possible to administer programs so as to encourage the use of private funds under loan insurance or guaranty arrangements rather than to employ direct public funds. This would substantially reduce the burden of credit programs on the Federal budget and eliminate a type of subsidized public competition with private financial facilities. Also the use of Federal insurance or guaranty programs rather than those under which loans are extended directly should be encouraged by the Congress through legislation making it explicit that Federal credit is available directly only when financing can not be secured from private sources at reasonable rates Proposals will be made for the adjustment of the statutory maximum interest rates on certain direct loan programs. These adjustments are needed to reduce the burden which the programs involved place on the budget and to bring the charges available to qualified borrowers under the programs into reasonable alignment with rates that must be paid in private markets Much can be done to harmonize the policies of Federal credit programs with the general economic and credit policies of Government through exchanges of views among Federal credit agencies and other divisions of the Executive Branch. The Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability provides the nucleus of a group to facilitate interagency consultation on program policies and practices A number of specific proposals relating to housing and home financing should be enacted by the Congress. These proposals would increase the availability of funds to prospective home owners and would facilitate the construction of dwelling units both for sale and for rent. Thus they would increase the effectiveness of Governmental programs in improving the Nation 's housing resources The requirement that charges fees and discounts on federally insured or guaranteed home loans must be regulated by Government has proved to be a serious impediment to the free flow of funds into mortgage loan investments. This provision of the Housing Act of has served in practice to handicap the families it was designed to protect. It should be repealed The Congress should also eliminate the requirement that mortgages acquired by the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) under its special assistance programs be purchased at par. This requirement coupled with statutory maximum interest rates on insured and guaranteed loans that are lower than market rates on comparable investments has forced FNMA to buy mortgages at unreasonably low yields and in amounts larger than would otherwise be necessary with a corresponding burden on the Federal budget. The par purchase requirement tends strongly to discourage private financing at present interest rates In view of the increased costs of homes a proposal will be made to increase to $ the maximum size of loan that may be insured by the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) under Sections and of the National Housing Act. Favorable action on this proposal will make the already very useful FHA program even more effective in promoting wider home ownership and improved housing The increasing scale of activities of FHA in the home mortgage insurance programs will require a higher statutory limit on the amount of outstanding insured loans. This action should be taken well in advance of the exhaustion of FHA 's insuring authority in order to assure the continuity of this important aid to home financing Finally recommendations will be made to realign Federal State and local relations in the Urban Renewal Program in the light of experience gained during recent years SCIENCE AND EDUCATION The security and well-being of our people depend upon timely and adequate investment not only in physical structures equipment and weapons but also in knowledge and skills. Indeed without satisfactory provision for the intangible capital accumulated through research and education it would be impossible to design to construct or to use effectively the implements essential to our survival and progress Most of the scientific and educational needs of our dynamic economy are met routinely. However new and stern challenges to the security of the free world both immediate and long-run call for greater efforts to strengthen the technical base of our military preparedness and to improve the quality of our school system. If we allow a gap to develop and persist in favor of the communist bloc our influence in the struggle for peace may be seriously diminished. Our economy must be able to meet threats that are subtle and emerging as well as those that are obvious and imminent. There is no cause for complacency in the fact that a rival power making impressive contributions to science and technology at the same time denies its people the common freedoms adequate housing and other basic amenities of life. On the contrary the ability of a dictatorial regime consistently to subordinate the freedom and welfare of its population to the pursuit of military might and foreign economic penetration is a circumstance that requires vigilant attention Impatience to meet the Soviet challenge in its new dimensions of science and education should not blind us to the true nature of the threat or induce us to take inappropriate countermeasures. Our aim is to assure the continuing superiority of the free world 's military and economic defenses and to retain the confidence of uncommitted peoples. This aim can be achieved not by distorting the Nation 's scientific programs and educational system but by promoting their rapid growth and improvement in needed 6o directions without sacrificing either the balance necessary for the rounded life in a free society or the capacity to meet new contingencies that may arise Above all it would be unwise and unrealistic to assume that the expanding Soviet challenge can be successfully met merely by enlarging Federal appropriations. Some additional funds are needed and are being requested But it will be even more necessary to enlist the interest and to marshal the energies of individuals and private groups throughout the Nation. In a free society an enlightened public attitude toward science and learning is essential if the quality and capacity of schools colleges and universities are to be improved. Broad remedial action must be taken by citizens community organizations schools foundations business firms labor groups professional societies the press and State and local governments Two Committees appointed by the President have been at work since April on problems of technical manpower and higher education. Their reports deserve the widest possible study One report issued by the President 's Committee on Scientists and Engineers in October emphasizes contributions that can be made by community and other essentially non-Federal programs. It indicates how the present corps of scientists and engineers may be utilized more effectively and how young people may be encouraged to prepare for scientific and engineering careers. It notes the importance of providing adequate technical and clerical assistance to professional workers raising the quality of education in science and mathematics and encouraging talented students to continue their studies. It also proposes measures for elevating the economic status of teachers upgrading teacher qualifications revising school curricula providing better guidance and counseling services improving college facilities enlarging the contributions of junior colleges and intermediate technical institutes and stimulating public interest in education The other report issued by the President 's Committee on Education Beyond the High School in July makes similar recommendations and certain additional ones. It stresses the need for making teaching careers more attractive proposes assistance to capable students through scholarships and counseling points to the importance of planning for the expansion and diversification of educational facilities at the college level suggests modes of financing higher education and sketches a role it deems appropriate for the Federal Government in the achievement of these objectives Science and education already receive considerable support from the Federal Government. Huge sums are devoted annually to research and development undertakings in many fields including national defense atomic energy health agriculture and mineral resources. These funds allocated to basic as well as applied research benefit thousands of business firms private and public institutions of higher learning and other non-Federal organizations. As conventionally reckoned they amounted to $ bil- 6i lion in the fiscal year and will exceed this total by a substantial amount in the current fiscal year. Moreover when fuller account is taken of certain research-connected military expenditures these sums are more than doubled. Thus the funds programmed by the Department of Defense for the fiscal year for research and development according to the usual definition amounted to $ billion ; but this figure is raised to well over $ billion when the definition is broadened to include supplementary items Federal encouragement of basic or general-purpose research is exemplified by the activities of the National Science Foundation for which substantially enlarged appropriations are being requested for the fiscal year This agency makes grants to universities and other institutions for the conduct of fundamental investigations in mathematical physical medical biological engineering and other sciences. It aids the training of scientific manpower through graduate fellowships and science-teacher institutes. It also finances experimentation to improve science teaching The Federal Government assists science and education in many other ways. It sponsors numerous activities to help establish a civilian atomic energy industry on a commercial basis. It trains groups to man private domestic projects and to aid the nuclear programs of friendly nations. The Defense Department conducts education and training programs that raise the technical qualifications of in-service personnel. Like research contracts military procurement contracts make a large contribution toward raising the level of skills in the civilian labor force and increasing their variety In recent years the Administration has sought legislation to help State and local agencies construct elementary and high schools. Although its proposals were not enacted the effort underscored the national interest in providing an increasing number of classrooms. First reports for the school year indicate that the rate of construction of school buildings continued at a high level and that the classroom shortage was reduced. It is not too early for our people to begin thinking of ways to accommodate the large numbers of students who will be entering the colleges and universities in the next few years Several legislative steps are needed to help improve the Nation 's resources of knowledge and skills. The Congress is being asked to authorize funds that would be made available on a temporary basis to the States for the improvement of instruction in science and mathematics for the identification and encouragement of able high school students through testing and improved counseling and guidance services and for college scholarships Other provisions of this temporary program include the strengthening of State departments of education in the fields of science and mathematics broader support of graduate education improvement and expansion of the teaching of foreign languages in colleges and universities and improvement of State statistics on education The Congress is requested as in last year 's Economic Report to authorize a temporary assistance program for the expansion and modernization of medical and dental teaching facilities. These would complement the research facilities for which legislative provision has already been made In the health field it is not practicable to separate training from research SMALL BUSINESS AND THE COMPETITIVE SYSTEM The variety of ways in which the Federal Government assists small business concerns is described in a report " Federal Policies and Programs that Benefit Small Business " published on September This report was prepared by the Cabinet Committee on Small Business established by the President in The Committee 's task is to follow the fortunes of small business concerns and to recommend legislative and administrative actions that would aid them In its First Progress Report dated August the Committee made recommendations in respect of taxation financing competition procurement technical assistance and Government reports. These recommendations were described in last year 's Economic Report. Those that could be given effect by the Executive Branch within the framework of present law such as the elimination of certain administrative impediments to Government procurement from small business concerns have been acted upon. Other proposals require changes in the law. Such changes were enumerated and recommended by the President in a letter to the Chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives dated July In the field of taxation it was recommended that Congress extend accelerated depreciation formulas to purchases of used property up to $ in any one year ; grant closely held corporations the option to elect the tax status of partnerships ; grant taxpayers the option of paying estate taxes over periods of up to years where an estate consists largely of investments in closely held businesses ; and allow an ordinary loss deduction up to some maximum amount instead of a capital loss deduction on original investments in the stock of small companies. A broad reduction of the tax burden carried by small concerns whether incorporated or not can not be achieved until budgetary conditions warrant cutting taxes generally. Although such a cut can not be proposed at present the changes in our tax laws outlined above promise to remedy with a minimum loss of revenue to the Government important specific handicaps under which small business firms now operate and the Congress is requested to act favorably on them The difficulties which small business concerns face in obtaining adequate financing on satisfactory terms would be lessened by favorable Congressional consideration of the proposal to increase from $ to $ the maximum amount of a corporate security issue that is exempt from the full registration requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Because of the Commission 's power to limit or condition by appropriate rules the privileges of Regulation A filings which would be extended by this proposal this change could benefit small concerns without weakening the protections for the investor which our securities laws are designed to provide and which must continue unimpaired Legislation should be enacted to remove the limitation on the life of the Small Business Administration ( SBA ) and to increase suitably its authorization for making business loans and disaster loans. Business loans approved by the SBA totaled about $ million in the fiscal year In addition SBA helps small concerns obtain procurement awards and it offers important management counseling services. This work can be done most effectively by an agency having assured continuity of functions The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is currently engaged in a study which should help assess the adequacy of existing private facilities for financing small business A further means by which Government can promote the proper interests of small business concerns and of the community in general is by eliminating barriers to open and fair competition. This requires vigorous enforcement of the antitrust laws. Certain improvements in these laws should be made The recommendation has been made in previous Economic Reports that notice to the antitrust agencies should be required when businesses of significant size that are engaged in interstate commerce propose to merge Such a law would facilitate antitrust enforcement by providing an automatic notification to the responsible agencies of merger plans Other measures also are needed to strengthen the administration and enforcement of the antitrust laws and to foster a competitive environment : Federal regulation should be extended to bank mergers accomplished through the acquisition of assets ; in antitrust cases the Attorney General should be empowered to issue civil investigative demands for the production of necessary documents without the need of grand jury proceedings ; cease and-desist orders issued by the Federal Trade Commission for violations of the Clayton Act should be macie final unless appealed to the courts ; and the Federal Trade Commission should be authorized in merger cases where it believes violation is likely to seek a preliminary injunction Proposals for certain changes in our laws regarding labor-management relations are made in a later section of this chapter. These proposals would tend to eliminate practices that are inimical not only to the proper interests of the community generally but also to the long-run interests of employees Favorable action on these proposals by the Congress would yield significant benefits to small business concerns PERSONAL WELFARE The primary means by which Government can help improve the welfare and security of the family and the individual is by following policies that foster stable economic growth. General prosperity has made it easier in recent years for our people to acquire homes and other property and to protect themselves against the hazards of life through savings and insurance The capacity of the economy to provide opportunities for steady employment at good wages is promoted by Federal programs that strengthen labor standards and help maintain the incomes of older people of families bereft of breadwinners and of persons experiencing unemployment or other severe personal misfortune. The improvement of these programs along lines set out in previous Economic Reports is desirable as a means of promoting general economic stability as well as personal welfare The Federal-State programs of unemployment compensation provide a major defense against- personal hardship and an important means for helping sustain personal income and thus consumption expenditures during periods of economic readjustment. As pointed out in an earlier section of this Report payments to individuals under unemployment insurance systems have helped significantly to cushion the impact on total personal income of the decline of wage and salary payments in the closing months of The past four Economic Reports have recommended changes designed to strengthen unemployment insurance systems and some progress has been made. More than million people or percent of all nonagricultural wage and salary workers are now covered by unemployment compensation compared with only million in In many States weekly benefits have been increased and their duration extended ; yet coverage size of benefits and duration still fall short of recommended standards. It is again suggested that the States increase maximum benefits so that the great majority of the covered workers will be eligible for payments equal to at least half their regular earnings and that States which have not already done so lengthen the maximum term of benefits to weeks for every person who qualifies for any benefit and who remains unemployed that long Recommendations made in last year 's Economic Report are already pending before the Congress for legislation extending the coverage of unemployment insurance to employees of firms employing under workers and to employees in Puerto Rico. This important means for sustaining personal incomes would be strengthened further if the States which have not yet done so would provide coverage for approximately million State and local government employees who still lack protection under the system Unemployment insurance in the District of Columbia should measure up to the standards that are recommended for all States and have been adopted in several. Enactment of legislation to this end is requested Workmen 's compensation systems which are mainly the responsibility of the States are a second means for safeguarding personal welfare. Occupational accidents result in about million injuries and deaths a year bringing tragedy and hardship to individuals and families and needlessly impairing the Nation 's manpower resources. Efforts to develop and enforce adequate safety standards and to encourage safe practices should be intensified by State and local governments and by employers and the States where necessary should improve workmen 's compensation systems with respect to benefits administration and provision for rehabilitation. A special responsibility of the Federal Government in this area of personal welfare could be discharged more fully if legislation were enacted enabling the Secretary of Labor to prescribe and enforce safety standards for longshoremen. Enactment of such a law is recommended Temporary disabilities not related to the work of employees often result in unusual expenses at the very time that income is cut off. Four States have insurance programs to deal with this problem and health and welfare plans of employers have become increasingly numerous Nevertheless protection against this form of personal hardship is still inadequate. It is hoped that the remaining State and Territorial jurisdictions will establish programs to provide nonoccupational temporary disability insurance Another major safeguard of personal welfare is provided by the old age survivors and disability insurance programs which now cover more than percent of all employed persons in the Nation. The and amendments to the Social Security Act extended coverage under these programs to about additional persons liberalized the provissions governing the eligibility of older women for benefits and provided benefits for totally and permanently disabled workers aged or over. These changes coupled with the increase in the number of persons eligible for benefits account for the increase in payments to an annual rate of $ billion in from $ billion in Benefits because of permanent disability of persons to years of age are now being paid to persons at an annual rate of more than $ million. More than women aged to are drawing benefits amounting to about $ million a month at recent rates Recommendations in last year 's Economic Report are already pending before the Congress for legislation extending the Fair Labor Standards Act to additional groups of workers needing its protection and to enact the principle of equal pay for equal work without discrimination on account of sex. Favorable consideration by the Congress is requested for legislation to strengthen the Federal 8-hour laws for the benefit of workers subject to Federal wage standards on Federal and federally assisted construction and other public works Earlier Economic Reports recommended a Federal program to stimulate sound economic development in areas of persistent unemployment. Legislation previously recommended to provide an Area Assistance Administration in the Department of Commerce to extend loans research grants and technical assistance to such areas should be enacted Labor-management relations and the trade unions through which workers bargain collectively with employers must be kept free of Government domination. Nonetheless Government has a responsibility to maintain a framework of laws to protect the basic rights of the individual promote integrity in labor-management relationships and make for better industrial relations. In keeping with this responsibility a program of legislation is being proposed to the Congress. This program will require among other things periodic public reports on private employee welfare and pension funds on financial dealings between employers and employee representatives and their agents on general union finances and on union organization and structure. It also calls for modifications of the law governing secondary boycotts and picketing and provides that the States have jurisdiction in labor-management disputes in which the National Labor Relations Board declines to exercise authority AGRICULTURE American agriculture is basically strong. The transformation in farm technology has been raising output per man-hour more rapidly in agriculture than in manufacturing. Family farms remain the dominant form of agricultural operation and the proportion of farms that are owner-operated has never been higher. Although the average size of farm is rising a key feature of modern technology is that it permits a larger enterprise to be successfully managed by a farm family. Electricity the tractor the automobile and the truck have helped to lighten the burden of farm work and to relieve the isolation of rural living. Recent declines in the number of farms have been heaviest among those too small to provide an adequate level of living from agriculture alone. Greater mobility and the movement of industry into the countryside have widened the range of economic opportunities open to rural people. Farm families have notably improved their levels of living during the last decade and a half and this improvement continued even when income from farming alone was declining Many of the Federal programs undertaken on behalf of farm people have made important contributions to this long-term progress. Gains in agricultural productivity owe much to research and extension services. The Rural Electrification Administration has played a major role in raising the proportion of farms having central station electricity service from percent in to percent today. A variety of credit facilities have been developed for farm operators ; farmers own more than half the capital of the Farm Credit System and participate extensively in its management. In farm operators became eligible to receive benefits under old age survivors and disability insurance. The regulation of markets and dissemination of current market news serve the interests of producer and consumer alike However in three areas especially farm programs are in need of reconsideration : the disposal of accumulated surpluses the operation of agricultural price supports and direct measures of production adjustment The high cost of carrying commodity stocks and the persistent tendency for current production to outrun commercial demands continue to require emphasis on programs for disposal of surplus stocks. During the past several years an impressive volume of commodities has been successfully moved into consumption in this country and abroad. Although constructive ends have been incidentally served surplus disposal on a large scale gives rise to serious dangers. When disposal is made overseas damage to other exporting countries is an ever-present risk The Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of has financed a large volume of agricultural exports. It has also furthered our foreign policy objectives. Title II of the Act has facilitated emergency food assistance to foreign countries. Sales for foreign currencies under Title I of the Act have contributed to mutual security and to economic development programs in underdeveloped countries. Titles I and II should be extended for one year beyond the current expiration date of June and the present limit on permissible expenses and losses of the Commodity Credit Corporation under Title I should be raised by $ billion. Operations under this temporary legislation require frequent review. Carry-overs of certain commodities are already being reduced to levels that raise mandatory price supports through statutory escalator formulas even while supplies remain seriously out of balance with commercial requirements. Past and prospective shipments under various surplus disposal measures must not be allowed to stimulate the production of continuing surpluses Measures designed to direct our surpluses into domestic consumption outside commercial channels have also been helpful. Distributions to schools institutions and needy persons together with direct financial grants for the school lunch and special milk programs now amount to about $ million a year. The advantages of sustaining milk consumption among children of school age especially in low-income communities are of sufficient importance to warrant the extension of the special milk program beyond the present expiration date of June Government expenditures on agriculture and agricultural resources in fiscal are estimated at about $ billion about one-quarter of the total for all purposes other than national security and interest on the public debt. The figure has doubled since largely because of mandatory price-support operations under existing legislation. Through June direct price support had been extended by the Commodity Credit Corporation on $ billion worth of crops. This was percent below the previous year 's rate but still involved one-half the rice produced onethird of the upland cotton and one-fourth of all wheat. In the past several years and despite some reduction in support levels new price-support acquisitions have been running about percent as large as total farm marketings of all price-supported commodities. Losses realized in disposing of commodities during the fiscal years totaled $ billion chiefly from operations in wheat dairy products cotton and corn In a statement to the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry on May the Secretary of Agriculture made three key points : production controls have been ineffective in reducing over-all agricultural output ; abundant agricultural products can not successfully be priced as if they were scarce ; and present legal formulas governing price supports and acreage allotments are proving obsolete. In view of agriculture 's advancing productivity and the importance of enlarging commercial markets changes are required in the method of determining price supports on basic crops and dairy products. The rigid escalator formulas governing price supports at levels between and percent of parity should be eliminated. Price supports for wheat corn cotton rice tobacco peanuts and dairy products should be determined administratively within a range of from to percent of parity in accordance with guidelines already established by law for almost all other agricultural commodities. It is also recommended that the National Wool Act be extended beyond March The achievement of statutory price objectives has been premised on appropriate adjustments of output by growers. Yet there is little support among farmers or in the Congress for controls that would be severe enough to implement current price objectives except possibly for tobacco. Acreage allotments for corn have become largely inoperative and should be eliminated. Within the limits of general statutory principles the Secretary should be given discretionary authority to increase allotments of other basic crops now governed by legal formulas The Acreage Reserve Program has temporarily contributed to a reduction of output of certain crops by voluntary means without loss of net income to growers but at a high cost to the Treasury. This Program should be permitted to expire at the end of the crop season. Longer-term contracts under the Conservation Reserve Program promise to be more useful in promoting agricultural adjustments and the conservation of natural resources If we are to avoid moving toward tighter restraints on production it is imperative that the stimulus to current output should be less than that now supplied by various Government programs. At the same time that the Conservation Reserve Program is strengthened consideration should be given to further consolidation of the Federal Government 's widespread activities in soil and water conservation The Commodity Credit Corporation Advisory Board should be enlarged ; its members should require confirmation by the Senate ; and its powers should extend to advising the Secretary of Agriculture in the exercise of the wider discretionary authority requested for determining both acreage allotments and price support levels as well as related matters The Commission on Increased Industrial Use of Agricultural Products appointed pursuant to Public Law of the 84th Congress made a number of useful suggestions for widening the markets for existing farm products and for developing new crops. While unrealizable hopes must be guarded against more funds can usefully be diverted to research and promotion in this area within the limits of present statutory authority and without the creation of a new administrative agency in the Executive Branch The Federal Government assumes certain responsibilities in assisting farm people who are hit hard by natural disaster and those who are handicapped by chronically low incomes. Although drought in the Great Plains is no longer a matter of immediate concern important recommendations conveyed in the Presidential Drought Message of March should be implemented at an early date. In particular the distribution formula under Title I of the Bankhead-Jones Act should be revised so as to permit allocation of a larger amount of loan funds to areas in acute need ; and States should be required to contribute at least percent of disaster-relief costs in certain emergency programs The Rural Development Program is a long-range program. It enlists private and public cooperation to raise levels of living in low-income rural areas Among these efforts are improved vocational education more effective employment and public health services and the encouragement of local industrialization as well as better farming. The soundness of this approach is widely accepted and the results being attained warrant continued support of this program by the Congres but it requires no new legislation at this time FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY Now more than ever the United States must ensure that its foreign economic policy is soundly conceived in the interest of the Nation as a whole and is adequate to the changing needs of the times. Gratifying gains have already been achieved in the scope and freedom of international trade and financial transactions. Important legislative steps remain to be taken in the field of foreign economic policy if we are to deal successfully with the problems confronting us The keystone of our foreign trade policy is the Trade Agreements Act shortly up for renewal. Under that Act as extended from time to time by the Congress trade barriers against United States goods have been reduced on a wide front. The most important results are embodied in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to which countries accounting for more than percent of world trade are now signatories. Through the General Agreement we have secured conditions conducive to the increase of our exports. We have succeeded not only in reducing tariffs against our goods but also owing in large part to the multilateral obligations provided by the General Agreement in greatly reducing the quantitative controls abroad which were so prevalent before and for a time after the war While the national interest demands a growing two-way flow of trade certain recognized safeguards have been established. These include " escape clause " relief for industries which have experienced or are threatened with serious injury as a result of tariff concessions on imports. To assist him in the consideration of Tariff Commission investigations in such cases and to advise on the administration of the trade agreements program generally the President has established the Trade Policy Committee at the Cabinet level with the Secretary of Commerce as Chairman The preservation and extension of the benefits obtained from widening the channels of world trade will depend heavily on the direction taken by American trade policy in the next year. The decisions made will have a significant bearing on the economic fortunes and policies of our trading partners and particularly on the success of the steps being taken toward closer integration in Western Europe through the Common Market now starting among six countries and through the Free Trade Area under negotiation for the region as a whole. It is basic to our interests and to those of the larger community of nations that these ne,w groups pursue policies favoring the expansion of international trade and that they contribute effectively to the economic growth and unity of the free world To meet these needs three major elements are required in our trade agreements program. First the Trade Agreements Act should be extended for five years from the date of its expiration on June This action would confirm our continued adherence to the principles which the Act embodies and would enable the United States to carry on necessary negotiations in behalf of our export trade during the crucial formative period which lies ahead in Western Europe Second additional authority is needed to make tariff concessions to enable us to conduct trade negotiations successfully. Congress will be requested to authorize the reduction of any duty existing on July by percent per year over a 5-year period or by an equivalent total amount in not less than three stages with a maximum of percent in any one year. The President would also be authorized alternatively to reduce any rate of duty by percentage points ad valorem without any yearly reduction exceeding percentage point or to reduce any rate to percent ad valorem if the existing duty is in excess of that amount without any yearly reduction exceeding one-third of that difference. The negotiation of tariff reductions would remain subject to the safeguards now in the Act and additional safeguards would be provided to permit prompter and more effective relief to domestic industries through escape clause proceedings Third we need a formally constituted center to serve as the administrative organ for the General Agreement. Such a center would provide a more effective means for reviewing developments affecting trade and for considering disputes arising out of undertakings among signatories to the General Agreement. The Congress is requested to help constitute this center by enacting legislation authorizing United States membership in the Organization for Trade Cooperation In addition to the trade agreements program the Congress will have before it certain other measures relating to our foreign trade. These include the extension of the Export Control Act which expires on June of this year ; bills amending certain provisions concerning customs administration in the Tariff Act of ; and amendments to the Antidumping Act of designed to improve the administration of the Act which have been approved by the House of Representatives and are awaiting action by the Senate. Favorable action is needed on all of these measures The various measures of United States assistance to and cooperation with other countries have played a significant role in strengthening national economies abroad. Direct United States Government loans and grants and the investment guaranty program have assisted economic recovery and development abroad since the war. United States expenditures overseas for military and other purposes have increased the foreign exchange resources of many countries. Technical assistance to foreign countries has been provided by the United States both through our own bilateral programs and through the United Nations. Some of the largest agreements under Public Law have benefited industrially less-developed countries Much assistance has also been obtained from private sources and international agencies. Private capital has been invested abroad in increasing volume carrying with it the benefit of American managerial and technical experience. Public and private funds have been channeled through the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and its affiliate the International Finance Corporation. The International Monetary Fund has played a key role in helping countries take actions to strengthen their currencies and in assisting them to overcome temporary foreign exchange difficulties Our Mutual Security Program is designed to strengthen the nations whose independence and welfare are essential to our own. This calls not only for military assistance but for economic support also since some countries can not without such support make the military effort needed in the common interest. Further it would be illusory to aim only at strengthening military security in a narrow sense. A large part of the world 's population the most rapidly growing part has so far experienced little improvement in material welfare. Many of these peoples are now emerging into political independence and we should not lose the opportunity through appropriate programs of assistance to strengthen their confidence in the possibilities of economic growth under free institutions. Some other highly developed countries are able to participate in this endeavor. An additional reason for welcoming the new moves toward greater economic integration in Western Europe is that they should increase the foreign resources available for this purpose For the fiscal year an additional appropriation will be required for the Development Loan Fund which was authorized in to facilitate financing economic development projects in underdeveloped countries. The amount that will be requested is needed to permit effective operation of the Fund. Appropriations requested for technical assistance will include an increase in our contribution to the United Nations program in this field An increase is being requested in the lending authority of the Export-Import Bank. The Bank 's activities in financing exports are directly helpful in promoting production and employment in the United States economy as well as in assisting the economic development of foreign countries. The Bank has the widespread support of our banking and foreign trade communities and its funds are often loaned jointly with private capital thus reducing the demand for public funds FEDERAL ECONOMIC STATISTICS A well-coordinated system of Federal statistics is essential for recording the Nation 's economic activity correctly appraising its economic performance and formulating appropriate public and private policies. Such a statistical system must provide timely and reasonably complete information on economic trends and interrelations. It must have continuity and be sufficiently flexible to take account of the changes that characterize a dynamic economy Taken as a whole Federal economic statistics are good ; but in view of the public and private needs for more and better information numerous deficiencies in them should be remedied. Accordingly the Congress will be asked to provide funds for the fiscal year for the first step of a program intended to make our economic information more nearly adequate to our growing and changing requirements. This first step is described in Appendix C to this Report. In designing it use was made of the special studies prepared over a number of years by university business labor Government and other experts. The work of the Subcommittee on Economic Statistics of the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress has been especially helpful. The additional funds requested are small in comparison with the total cost of present statistical programs. Yet with these funds a significant contribution can be made toward improving existing statistics and filling gaps in our knowledge of the workings of our economy Appendix A SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Summary of Recommendations in the Economic Report of the President Including Recommendations to the Congress and Suggestions to the States and Local Governments I. GOVERNMENT FINANCES a ) Extend the present tax rate on the income of corporations and the present excise rates on automobiles and parts cigarettes distilled spirits wines and beer for one year beyond July [ Page ] b ) Enact legislation temporarily increasing the statutory debt limit [ Page ] See also Recommendation IV ( a ) II FEDERAL CREDIT PROGRAMS a ) Grant wider discretionary authority to heads of Executive agencies and departments to set terms on private loans insured or guaranteed by the Federal Government. [ Page ] b ) Adjust interest rate limitations on certain FHA loan insurance programs ( National Housing Act Sections and ) and on the VA Home Loan Guaranty Program. [ Pages ] c ) Repeal the provisions of the Housing Act of requiring regulation of charges fees and discounts on federally insured or guaranteed home loans and the purchase of mortgages at par by the Federal National Mortgage Association under its special assistance programs. [ Pages ] d ) Increase to $ the maximum size of home mortgage loan that may be insured by the Federal Housing Administration under Sections and of the National Housing Act. [ Page ] e ) Increase the limit on outstanding insured loans of the Federal Housing Administration. [ Page ] III SCIENCE AND EDUCATION a ) Provide funds on a temporary basis for grants to States to improve instruction and to strengthen State departments of education in the fields of science and mathematics to identify and encourage able high school students to provide college scholarships and to improve State statistics on education ; and funds for broader support of graduate education and the improvement and expansion of foreign language teaching in colleges and universities. [ Page ] b ) Authorize a temporary program of assistance for the expansion and modernization of medical and dental teaching facilities. [ Pages ] IV SMALL BUSINESS AND THE COMPETITIVE SYSTEM a ) Amend the tax laws to extend accelerated depreciation formulas to purchases of used property up to $ in any one year ; to permit closely held corporations the option of electing the tax status of partnerships ; to grant taxpayers the option of paying estate taxes over periods of up to years where estates largely consist of investments in closely held businesses ; and to allow losses on original investments in the stock of small companies to be treated as ordinary loss deductions rather than capital loss deductions. [ Page ] b ) Permit the Securities and Exchange Commission to apply its simplified notification procedure to security issues in amounts up to $ [ Page ] c ) Remove the limitation on the life of the Small Business Administration and suitably increase its authorization for making business and disaster loans. [ Page ] d ) Require notification to the antitrust agencies of proposed mergers by businesses of significant size engaged in interstate commerce. [ Page ] e ) Extend Federal regulation to bank mergers accomplished through the acquisition of assets. [ Page ] f ) Empower the Attorney General in antitrust cases to issue civil investigative demands for the production of necessary documents without the need of grand jury proceedings. [ Page ] g ) Make Federal Trade Commission cease-and-desist orders issued for violations of the Clayton Act final unless appealed to the courts [ Page ] h ) Authorize the Federal Trade Commission to seek preliminary injunctions in merger cases where a violation may be likely. [ Page ] V. PERSONAL WELFARE a ) Amount and duration of unemployment insurance benefits ; coverage of firms with one to three persons on their payrolls ; coverage of employees in Puerto Rico ; coverage of State and local government employees. ( State and Federal responsibility ) [ Page ] b ) Bring the unemployment insurance provisions applicable to workers in the District of Columbia up to the standards recommended for the States [ Page ] c ) Intensify efforts to develop and enforce adequate occupational safety standards and to encourage safe practices. ( State and local responsibility ) [ Page ] d ) Improve workmen 's compensation laws with respect to benefits administration and provisions for rehabilitation. ( State responsibility ) [ Page ] e ) Authorize the Secretary of Labor to prescribe and enforce safety standards for longshoremen. [ Pages ] f ) Provide nonoccupational temporary disability insurance for employees in States and Territorial jurisdictions where programs have not been established. ( State and Federal responsibility ) [ Page ] g ) Minimum wage legislation covering certain additional groups of workers ; equal pay for equal work without discrimination on account of sex [ Page ] h ) Improve the 8-hour laws applicable to Federal and federally assisted construction projects. [ Page ] i ) Establish an Area Assistance Administration in the Department of Commerce to extend loans research grants and technical assistance in areas of persistent unemployment. [ Page ] j ) Require periodic public reports on the status of private employee welfare and pension funds on financial dealings between employers and employee representatives or their agents on general union finances and on union organization and structure. [ Pages ] k ) Modify the law governing secondary boycotts and picketing and provide that the States have jurisdiction in labor-management disputes in which the National Labor Relations Board declines to exercise authority [ Page ] VI AGRICULTURE a ) Extend Titles I and II of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of for one year beyond June and raise the present limit on permissible expenses and losses of the Commodity Credit Corporation under Title I by $ billion. [ Page ] b ) Continue the special milk program beyond June [ Page ] c ) Eliminate the escalator clauses governing price supports on basic commodities under the Agricultural Act of [ Pages ] d ) Authorize price supports for wheat corn cotton rice tobacco peanuts and dairy products to be determined administratively within a range of from to percent of parity in accordance with guidelines already established by law for almost all other agricultural commodities [ Page ] e ) Extend the National Wool Act beyond March [ Page ] f ) Eliminate acreage allotments for corn and provide discretionary authority to increase allotments of other crops. [ Page ] g ) Permit the Acreage Reserve Program to expire at the end of the crop season ; strengthen the Conservation Reserve Program ; and consider further consolidation of Federal activities in soil and water conservation [ Page ] h ) Enlarge the Commodity Credit Corporation Advisory Board and assign it the role of advising the Secretary of Agriculture in the exercise of the wider discretionary authority requested in VI ( d ) and VI ( f ) [ Page ] i ) Revise the distribution formula under Title I of the Bankhead-Jones Act to permit the allocation of a larger amount of loan funds to areas of acute need and require States to contribute at least percent of disaster-relief costs in certain emergency programs. [ Page ] VII FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY a ) Extend the Trade Agreements Act for years beyond June ; permit the reduction of any duty existing on July by percent per year over a 5-year period or by an equivalent total amount in not less than three stages with a maximum of percent in any one year ; also permit alternatively the reduction of any rate of duty by three percentage points ad valorem without any yearly reduction exceeding one percentage point or the reduction of any rate to percent ad valorem if the existing duty is higher than that amount without any yearly reduction exceeding one-third of that difference ; and authorize United States membership in the Organization for Trade Cooperation. [ Page ] b ) Extend the Export Control Act beyond its expiration on June ; amend certain customs administration provisions in the Tariff Act of ; and approve amendments to the Antidumping Act of to improve its administration. [ Page ] c ) Provide funds for the Development Loan Fund to finance economic development projects in underdeveloped countries and for technical assistance under the United Nations program. [ Page ] d ) Increase the lending authority of the Export-Import Bank. [ Page ] VIII FEDERAL ECONOMIC STATISTICS a ) Provide funds for the improvement of Federal economic statistics programs. [ Page ] 8o Appendix B REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report for calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully RAYMOND J. SAULNIER ^ Chairman JOSEPH S. DAVIS PAUL W. MCCRACKEN Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The past year has been marked by important economic developments in both the United States and the rest of the world. The rise in the consumer price index which had begun early in was perhaps the center of interest. But with inflationary pressures substantially reduced by the middle of the year attention shifted to the completion of adjustments within the economy on the basis of which growth with reasonably stable prices might be extended into the future. The progress of these developments and their implications for Government policy have been under continuous review by the Council Council Activities The principal responsibility of the Council of Economic Advisers is to review and analyze developments in the United States economy and elsewhere in the world and to evaluate their policy implications. Reports on these matters are made frequently to the President by the Chairman of the Council. The Chairman performs a similar function for the Cabinet A second responsibility of the Council is to review legislative proposals and suggestions for administrative actions for their possible effect on the stability of our economy and its capacity for balanced and sustainable growth. During the year a large number of such proposals were reviewed by the Council Numerous other activities of the Council grow out of its membership in continuing or ad hoc committees. Among these are the Council on Foreign Economic Policy ; the Defense Mobilization Board and the Emergency Resources Board ; the Cabinet Committee on Small Business of which the Chairman of the Council serves as Chairman ; the ad hoc committee established in September by the Secretary of the Treasury for consideration of credit and related policies ; and the Committee for Rural Development Program. Members of the staff have represented the Council on several technical interagency committees including groups concerned with productivity measurements health surveys population and housing censuses rural development and employment statistics The Council cooperates with the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( OEEC ) in its economic surveys and with the International Cooperation Administration ( ICA ) in its training programs for foreign specialists. During the year the Council prepared a Survey of Economic Developments in the United States for the annual review of the OEEC and materials for response to the United Nations ' annual questionnaire. A Council Member assisted by a member of the staff participated in the annual review of economic conditions conducted by the OEEC in Paris in September The Chairman attended a meeting of OEEC economic experts in October. Throughout the year two staff members met frequently with ICA study teams The Council conferred frequently during the year with groups outside the Government. These groups included experts from universities and representatives of labor agricultural business and financial organizations The Council assists the President each year in the preparation of the Economic Report which he transmits to the Congress. The Report reviews economic developments assesses the outlook and makes recommendations to the Congress and suggestions to States communities and private groups for actions and policies designed to achieve the goals set forth in the Employment Act. The Report is widely used as an authoritative review of developments in the United States economy ; copies of the January Report were published The Council also prepares Economic Indicators & monthly compendium of current economic statistics published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. Copies of Economic Indicators are distributed to members of the Congress and to depository libraries ; in addition copies are sent monthly to paying subscribers Council Membership The Council has three members appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. Raymond J. Saulnier has served as a member of the Council since April and as Chairman since December Joseph S. Davis has served as a member since May and Paul W McCracken since December Council Staff The Council is assisted by a staff of persons of whom are senior economists selected for their skill and judgment in the objective analysis of economic problems. Each senior staff member is assigned an area for special attention and is responsible for eliciting the cooperation of Government agencies and business labor and other private groups in analyzing and evaluating economic developments. Most senior staff members are permanent employees of the Council ; some are on leave of absence from university posts ; others serve the Council on a consulting basis. Present members of the senior staff including consultants are Henry W. Briefs Samuel L. Brown Robert C. Colwell Frances M. James Marshall A Kaplan Hal B. Lary David W. Lusher Charles L. Schultze Irving H Siegel Collis Stocking Boris C. Swerling and Philip E. Taylor Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability Continuous assistance is received by the Council from the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability established by the President in The Board consists of policy-making officials of departments and agencies that have responsibility for important economic programs. The Chairman of the Council serves as Chairman of the Advisory Board. The present members of the Board are as follows : Department of State Thomas C. Mann Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Department of the Treasury Julian B. Baird Under Secretary Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Walter Williams Under Secretary Department of Labor James T. O'Connell Under Secretary Department of Health Education and Welfare John A. Perkins Under Secretary Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Milk Member of the Board Bureau of the Budget Percival F. Brundage Director The White House Office Gabriel Hauge Special Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Raymond J. Saulnier Chairman Budget for Fiscal Years and For the fiscal year the Congress appropriated $ for the Council 's activities. Contributions to the Government Retirement Fund not previously required of Federal agencies accounted for the increase from the $ appropriated for the fiscal year Appendix C PROGRAM FOR IMPROVING FEDERAL STATISTICS IN FISCAL YEAR Program for Improving Federal Statistics in Fiscal Year Proposals for a significant step toward a more balanced and better integrated Federal statistics program are made in the budget for the fiscal year These proposals take account of the findings of special studies made in the past several years by university business labor and other experts together with Government technicians and of extensive studies by the Subcommittee on Economic Statistics of the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. Further steps should be taken in the fiscal year and thereafter to carry into effect long-range plans for improving the scope and usefulness of Federal statistics IMPROVING SYSTEMS OF NATIONAL ACCOUNTS Some of the requested funds would be devoted to bolstering the best known of the integrated national accounts the system of statistics relating to national income and national product. Attention would also be directed toward improving other sets of national accounts that are valuable for the study of economic interrelations Statistics on National Income and Product National income and product statistics are the most highly developed widely used and current of our economic accounts. Four projects are contemplated for the fiscal year : ( ) Preparation and publication of quarterly estimates of gross national product and its major components adjusted for price changes. The price data needed for this work would also be improved ( ) Initiation of the measurement in constant dollars of net output for several major industry groups and for selected components of manufacturing. This will require the improvement of industry input data and of product price and quantity information ( ) Initiation of work on an accounting of interindustry flows for ( see below ) for the major economic sectors identified in national income and product accounts ( ) Establishment of a small research staff for work on problems of concept and estimation which can not be adequately pursued by statisticians fully occupied with the preparation of current statistics and for exploration of the interrelationships among the several types of economic accounts International Balance of Payments Accounts These accounts which assemble all transactions involving payments between the United States and foreign countries enter national product estimates through the " net foreign investment " component. The program includes provision for beginning a comprehensive survey of United States direct private investments abroad Statistics on Savings Plans for improving the data needed to estimate national savings are well under way and definitive quarterly statistics on savings should become available by late Methods are already being developed for dovetailing savings and flow-of funds accounts ( see below ) with other types of national accounts Flow-of-Funds Accounts Accounts showing the flow of funds corresponding to transactions between sectors of the economy are valuable for current analysis of financial flows. In addition to transactions that originate income they include transactions in existing assets. Major improvements in the quality of the basic data are needed Sector Balance Sheet Accounts Balance sheets should be developed to permit the study of the allocation of resources to the various industrial sectors and of intersector claims The flow-of-funds accounts which show outstanding financial assets and liabilities for each sector provide only partial balance sheets. Although no provision is made in the budget for the development of sector balance sheet accounts they should eventually be included among and integrated with other types of national accounts Interindustry Accounts Interindustry accounts are designed to show for a given period through so-called input-output tables the flow of goods and services between industries and to households. When constructed in detail they are especially valuable for economic and technological analyses market and investment planning by business firms and mobilization planning by Government. The budget proposes initiation of an accounting of flows between major industry groups in Broad Productivity Estimates The development of estimates of real product originating in broad industry groups proposed in the budget would make it possible to derive consistent estimates of labor productivity for the economy as a whole and for the major industrial divisions. These estimates would be made in addition to measures for narrowly defined industries based on other available production data. On the input side the chief immediate need is for improvement of data on employment and average hours worked in the various divisions. Improvements in this direction too are contemplated in the budget proposal IMPROVING DATA FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS Economic censuses provide comprehensive benchmark data that are essential for the analysis of industrial and regional developments and for the interpretation and adjustment of current statistics derived from interim surveys that are less complete than census reports. Several censuses covering are scheduled for Many improvements are planned in the scope of census data and in the variety and quality of statistics derived from other sources Census of Business Margin and value-added data. Data on retail margins are essential for establishing benchmarks in the national income accounts for expenditures on personal consumption and for investment in producers ' durable goods They are also necessary for constructing interindustry accounts. Collection and tabulation procedures for the Census of Business are expected to yield measures of " value added " in distribution which would provide a basis for better estimates of trade margins Plant and equipment expenditures data. On the basis of data to be provided by the Census of Business estimates would be made of plant and equipment expenditures by retail trade wholesale trade and service trade establishments Annual surveys. The budget program would also provide for developmental and preparatory work for later annual surveys of wholesale trade and selected services. Procedures would be devised for the future compilation of detailed sales or purchase data of commodities at wholesale comparable with sales or shipments data obtained in the Census of Manufactures Census of Manufactures Use of materials products and durable equipment. Data showing the consumption of materials by individual industries are desirable for studying commodity flows throughout the economy and for mobilization planning The Census of Manufactures will provide statistics on industrial purchases of producers ' durable equipment Distribution of manufacturers3 sales. Information on the distribution of manufacturers ' shipments by class of customer including shipments to the Government would also contribute to better estimates of commodity flow Plans for the Census of Manufactures call for the collection of sales data by class of customer Census of Mineral Industries The Census of Mineral Industries will have essentially the same scope as the Census. The inauguration of annual surveys of mineral industries analogous to those for manufactures is planned ; the first survey would refer to operations Employment and Hours Statistics Estimates of man-hour productivity would be improved by changes contemplated in reports by establishments on hours of work. The program calls for the collection of information on hours worked as well as on hours paid for in manufacturing industries and for the collection of data relating to so-called " nonproduction workers " in these industries. It also calls for the collection of data on hours for selected nonmanufacturing industries not now covered Price Statistics Prices paid by the Government. A major limitation of price statistics from the standpoint of national accounting is the lack of data on prices paid for goods especially defense items by the Government. Systematic efforts toward the preparation of appropriate price indexes in this field will be made Wholesale and retail prices. Many durable goods and various services are not covered by existing price indexes. Plans for include the expansion of data on prices in primary markets and at retail. This expansion would improve current business indicators and lead to better estimates of real output productivity and inventories in constant prices Construction Statistics The development of a sound comprehensive program of construction statistics will require several years. The budget proposed for includes surveys designed to improve estimates of construction activity including " additions and alterations " and " repairs and maintenance. " Plant and Equipment Expenditures Two recommendations for improvement of data on plant and equipment expenditures are included in the program. First in the Census of Business data would be obtained from wholesale trade retail trade and service trade establishments. Second the collecting agencies for the current Plant and Equipment Expenditures Survey would renew efforts to obtain separate information for plant and for equipment Producers ' Durable Equipment Efforts would be made under the proposal to remedy the chief deficiencies in statistics on equipment. In the Census of Manufactures as already noted data on manufacturers ' sales of producers ' durable equipment will be compiled by class of customer and type of equipment purchased. The collection of more detailed sales data by industry in the Monthly Industry Survey would permit improvement of the quarterly estimates of investment in producers ' durable equipment Inventories Separate stage-of-fabrication estimates are to be developed for all major industry groups in manufacturing and for significant subgroups. For selected subgroups the estimates of inventories of finished goods would be subdivided into producers ' equipment and consumer goods. Information is still needed on the proportion of manufacturers ' inventories that is related to defense production. Improvements are planned in the monthly estimates of retail trade inventories by major " kind of business. " Estimates would be provided for a limited number of commodities at both retail and wholesale levels Manufacturers ' Sales Inventories and New Orders Refinement of company data supplied in the Monthly Industry Survey and revision and enlargement of the sample would lead to better current economic indicators on manufacturers ' sales inventories and new orders Provision is made in the budget for these improvements Service Trade Receipts Statistics on monthly receipts of service trades such as hotels barber and beauty shops and auto-repair shops are not available. A project to improve the estimates for selected service trades is included in the budget proposal Consumer Credit The budget proposal includes the collection of monthly information on accounts receivable from a sample of retail trade establishments. This information would strengthen present estimates of consumer credit outstanding Corporate Profits and Income of Unincorporated Enterprises Corporate profits. The Business Indicators Series has been initiated to provide preliminary estimates derived for selected items from income tax returns within a year after the returns are filed. The budget proposes that this work be continued on a regular basis. Among other improvements that are essential is a regular Audit Control Study preferably made once every five years to provide factors for adjusting profits in the unaudited tax returns used in benchmark tabulations Current financial data on nonmanufacturing firms by size are not now available. The budget proposal calls for extension of the present Quarterly Financial Report program to include both small and large corporations in trade and mining industries Nonfarm unincorporated enterprises. Selected income and balance-sheet items for sole proprietorships and partnerships the dominant forms of " small business " would be tabulated annually as part of the Business Indicators Series. Data on sole proprietorships and partnerships should also be included in plans for the Audit Control Study referred to above Attention is being directed to the need for accurate measures of monthly and quarterly changes in profits of unincorporated business. Consideration will also be given to the feasibility of regularly constructing financial reports from accessible operating information Survey of Farm Operators After the Census of Agriculture for is completed an annual sample survey of farm operators should be initiated to provide data on farm income off-farm income and farm production expenditures. The sample should make possible estimates for at least three categories large commercial farms small commercial farms and all other farms State and Local Governments The budget proposal includes the preparation of a quarterly report on State and local government finances including revenues capital outlays and current expenditures indebtedness and financial assets Appendix D THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX The Consumer Price Index Considerable public interest has been focused on the consumer price index as an indicator of price trends in the consumer sector of the economy and because of its extensive use in wage adjustments. To afford a better understanding of the index this Appendix briefly describes its essential features some of the problems connected with its computation and its limitations and uses CONSTRUCTING THE INDEX The consumer price index in roughly its present form was first published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) in and covered the period extending back to The last major revision was in The present index is designed to measure changes in the prices of goods and services commonly purchased by wage-earner and clerical-worker families living in the towns cities and suburbs of the United States that had a population of or more in In general the only families included are those whose major sources of income are earnings of craftsmen factory workers laborers clerks and sales and service workers. This group of families comprises about percent of the urban and percent of the total population An over-all consumer price index is published and also various subgroup indexes. The most familiar groupings are those in which commodities and services are classified by their end use e. g. food apparel housing reading and recreation etc. More recently the BLS has been publishing monthly what might be termed an " economic " classification : all commodities ; all commodities other than food ; durable goods ; nondurable goods ; and services. It also publishes indexes for three major groups : ( ) food ( ) commodities other than food and ( ) services. As of December each of these three categories was of roughly equal relative importance in the index and percent respectively In essence the consumer price index measures changes in the price of a fixed " market basket " of goods and services chosen to represent the customary spending pattern of wage-earner and clerical-worker families. In the computation of the index prices of individual items or groups of items are assigned specific weights based on their relative importance in the average family budget for a survey year. The price changes from the base period ( ) for all of the items appropriately weighted are then combined into the consumer price index which expresses the change in the price of the total market basket since the base period. There are thus two major elements in constructing the index : the prices of the specific goods and services included and the weights assigned to them Prices The prices used in computing the index are obtained at urban sampling points selected as representative of the entire urban portion of the country. Most of the prices are obtained at regular intervals from a sample of stores and service establishments. In each city a selection is made of establishments most frequently patronized by wage-earner and clericalworker families and which represent the important types of retail outlets such as chain and independent stores and department and specialty stores Samples of rental units are chosen from block listings representative of the total rental housing market The price data in general are collected in personal visits by trained BLS field agents. In order to eliminate as far as possible the effect of significant changes in the quality of products specifications are drawn up for use by the field agents in comparing prices. These specifications provide a detailed description of the article including quality factors associated with price and physical characteristics essential for identifying an item from store to store and from time to time. Product descriptions and other data are checked and wherever possible prices posted for goods on display are recorded. If discounts or over allowances on trade-ins are known to be common the agents obtain from the store manager the information needed for computing a realistic net price Prices obtained for each city are combined by means of expenditure weights described below. Prices for all cities are then combined by means of population weights to form the national index. Separate indexes are published monthly for the largest cities and quarterly for the next largest of the cities Weights The weights currently used were derived in the main from a comprehensive family expenditure survey made in This survey included data for nearly families in cities of various characteristics : size climate population density income level and in the case of small cities distance to market. Six additional cities surveyed earlier were also used In the revision of the index the development of weights involved two principal steps : ( ) averaging the different spending patterns reported by individual families and ( ) adjusting the survey data for price and income changes which had occurred between and January the first month of the revised index During and while the major study of consumer expenditures was under way the BLS collected and studied prices for several hundred commodities and services. The individual items were classified into " price families " i. e. groups of commodities with similar characteristics as regards ioo physical properties use and price movements. Items of major importance were chosen from each " price family " to represent price changes for all items in the group. In the computation of the index a specific item or set of items was assigned the total expenditure weight of the group which it was chosen to represent MAINTAINING THE INDEX Periodically the goods and services priced for the consumer price index are varied to take account of changes in patterns of family spending. But this is done infrequently because spending patterns change slowly. The revision in incorporated the results of the expenditure survey When a revision is made it is done in a way that will preserve the character of the index as a measure of price change. Prices for comparable items are matched for each pair of successive months in the " linking-in " period. If for example the new index is to be introduced in January both old and new indexes are computed for December. Percentage changes between November and December are based on the old index ; and those between December and January are based on the new index. Thus monthto-month changes in the index continue to represent price change not the difference between the price of one market basket and that of another The basic character of the index is determined by the requirement that the same market basket ( in terms of quantity and quality of goods and services ) be priced in the periods being compared. To achieve this comparability the BLS has established statistical procedures for the collection of prices according to fixed specifications. But new items come onto the market and become popular and others decline in favor or disappear. In addition there are frequent changes in established products. Such changes cumulate and eventually produce shifts in buying habits that are so far reaching as to require revision of the fixed basket of goods. However account is taken of many minor changes in the interval between major revisions When the characteristics of an item priced for the index have changed the specifications reported call attention to the points of noncomparability and provide information for eliminating the measurable price effect of such changes. When these changes are definite improvements or recognizable additions to the old item or the reverse statistical adjustments can be made to reduce the prices to a comparable basis. However when improvements in quality can not be eliminated the index reflects an upward bias in consumer prices ; and the reverse is true when quality deterioration occurs The problem of adjustment for quality changes is particularly important in the pricing of appliances household equipment and automobiles although variants of this problem appear in almost all components of the index including the pricing of foods services and housing. When prices for exactly comparable items can not be collected the BLS procedures just IOI described are applied whenever possible. Thus when a new automobile model or a new appliance model contains specific features which can be isolated as improvements or additions the price comparison is adjusted to eliminate that part of the price change which can be ascribed to the change in model. Nevertheless there are types of changes which it is not possible to take into account even though there may be general agreement that these changes constitute improvements. For example a change in the shape of the springs in an automobile may make for better riding perhaps at no increase in cost ; or a slight change in the composition of an automobile tire may make it safer and lengthen its life Other practices in pricing the fixed basket of goods may cause a downward bias in the index. For example when items drop out of the market completely or because of reduced sales fail to qualify for continued inclusion as a " volume seller " they are replaced where possible by similar items of different specifications often of a higher quality and price. The new prices are linked in without showing the price difference between the old and the new items. For consumers who would prefer to buy the original lower-priced item the change in market availability represents a real price increase For short periods of or years the amount of bias arising from quality changes that have not been eliminated is probably too small to affect the index very much. For periods of a decade or more however there is undoubtedly a significant effect upon the index values for some items although the net effect on the total index can not be determined In preparing a monthly index of prices with fixed weights the Bureau of Labor Statistics must cope with items which are available on the market in volume only in particular seasons. Such items are represented in the market basket in accordance with their relative importance in annual consumption. Consequently in off-season months the relative importance of such items is too great in the price comparisons. In the months when these items disappear from the market their price movements must in effect be estimated by the price movements of other products in the same class of commodities. When such items reappear on the market erratic jumps in the index may occur as seasonal prices are reintroduced. For year-to-year comparisons this measurement of price changes is correct ; but it may tend to exaggerate the magnitude of some month-to-month changes LIMITATIONS Since the index represents changes in the prices of a fixed set of goods and services typically bought by a designated class of consumers it does not measure changes in consumption levels or in total living costs. These are responsive to factors other than the changes in prices of the set of goods and services included in the index. Thus a family 's living costs will shift as the family grows as its income rises or falls as its tastes change or for reasons not related to price changes alone. The effects of such factors are ignored by the consumer price index Because the index is an average it does not necessarily apply to any one family or to any small group of families. A careful housewife by judicious shopping may purchase many items at prices lower than the averages embodied in the index. A family which takes great care in budgeting its expenditures a family faced with abnormal expenses for one reason or another or a family in a position to make its purchases under particularly advantageous circumstances would find that the index does not represent the movement of prices that it is called upon to pay. And strictly speaking the index is not an appropriate measure of prices paid by very low or very high income groups or by single workers elderly couples or other groups whose living and manner of spending are different from those of wage-earner and clericalworker families. On the other hand when the index is applied to all city families or to the total urban population the limitations are not considered to be serious since the wage-earner and clerical-worker group constitutes nearly two-thirds of the population Although separate consumer price indexes are published for individual cities they do not measure absolute differences in price levels. The fact that the index for city A is higher than the index for city B does not necessarily mean that prices are higher in city A ; it means only that since the base period prices have risen more in city A. Indeed the particular level of the consumer price index for the Nation as a whole for an individual city or for some specific group of consumer goods represents only the magnitude of the change in prices since the base period and has no meaning except with reference to that period SOME U S E S OF THE INDEX Government has long recognized the importance of prices in the formulation of policies affecting wage rates. As early as an index based on four commodities was calculated by the State of Massachusetts to provide a basis for adjusting soldiers ' pay. Although first published in the present index of consumer prices in the United States was developed by the Department of Labor in to serve as a guide for the adjustment of wage scales in the shipyards and other war production centers during Word War I In World War II and during the Korean conflict the index was the basis of a number of strategic wage decisions The index has been the focus of Nation-wide attention in recent years as wage contracts have been signed calling for periodic adjustments in wages if the consumer price index should move up or down beyond specified limits the so-called " escalator clauses. " This form of wage contract spread rapidly throughout the automobile industry and was extended to farm equipment aircraft and electrical manufacturing industries and to the railroads. Most of the agreements are for a long term or years without reopening clauses on wages. By more than workers were employed under contracts containing escalator clauses. After some decline in the use of escalator clauses they have recently become more widespread. It is estimated that at least workers are now employed under labor-management contracts by which wages are adjusted according to changes in the consumer price index. As a rule these clauses provide for wage adjustments of about two cents per hour for each change of one index point. At hours a week for weeks in the year an increase of one point in the index raises the annual wage bill for these workers by about $ million The index has an indirect impact on wage rates even where formal escalator agreements are not in effect. Pay adjustments made under escalator contracts influence wage payments elsewhere and the index is often explicitly considered by management and labor in formulating wage policies Appendix E PRODUCTIVITY STATISTICS Productivity Statistics The terms " productivity " and " labor productivity " are commonly used to designate measures of output per unit of labor input. Productivity index numbers showing changes in output per employee or per man-hour are used in the discussion and study of various economic topics e. g. wagecost-price relationships the rise of living standards technological progress and the outlook for production and employment PRODUCTIVITY ESTIMATES FOR THE PRIVATE ECONOMY Table E-l shows two sets of productivity index numbers ( = ) computed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics from available Government data. These productivity measures relating to the private economy ( i. e. ^ excluding Government ) and its main components are based on a common set of output estimates and two different sets of man-hour estimates covering both employers and employees. In one index the man-hours refer to hours for which pay is received ( plus the hours of unpaid family workers ) In the other the man-hours refer to hours worked. In other words the first man-hour concept includes and the second excludes paid holidays vacations and sick leave. The output estimates which are subject to further revision for much of the period refer to portions of the gross national product adjusted to prices For the decade both productivity measures for the private economy as a whole show average annual rates of increase that exceed the long-term trend rates. According to one mode of computation used throughout this Appendix the average annual increase in output per manhour paid was percent during the postwar decade and the average for output per man-hour worked was percent. These rates are much larger than the long-term rates of percent or slightly more per year shown by various studies for periods covering several decades. Smaller excesses over long-term rates are indicated if the postwar interval is lengthened to or shortened to Productivity advanced more rapidly in agriculture than in the rest of the private economy during The two average annual rates for agriculture derived from an output series fitting into the national product accounts were about percent. For nonagricultural industries on the other hand output per man-hour paid increased at percent per year ( percent in the manufacturing sector and percent in nonmanufactur- TABLE E-l. Indexes of output per man-hour for the private economy [ = ] Based on man-hours paid Year Based on man-hours worked Nonagricultural industries Total Agriculture Manufacturing * Total Nonmanufacturing Total Agriculture Nonagricultural industries " Man-hours paid " were derived from Bureau of Labor Statistics figures for the nonagricultural component and Bureau of the Census information for the agricultural component. They include the hours of unpaid family workers in addition to wage and salaried workers and the self-employed. They cover paid holidays vacations and sick leave " Man-hours worked " were derived from data of the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce Like " man-hours paid " they include the hours of all persons whether employees or employers. They incorporate adjustments designed to eliminate holidays vacations and sick leave Differs in concept from Department of Agriculture 's productivity series based on requirements of equivalent adult man-hours * Derived from a Bureau of Labor Statistics index of net output for extended with the aid of Office of 5Business Economics data Preliminary subject to revision NOTE. The indexes in this table were computed by Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics from estimates of real product and man-hours. The real product estimates referring to prices are based primarily on national product statistics of the Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics Source : Department of Labor ( see note above ) ing ) In the case of output per man-hour worked the average nonagricultural productivity rise was percent per year Both sets of productivity measures show uneven percentage changes from year to year. Although agriculture recorded an exceptionally high rate of gain for the decade as a whole it experienced setbacks between and and between and Unusually small rises occurred in the private economy as a whole and in the nonagricultural sector between and For the private economy output per man-hour paid advanced percent between and as output increased sharply and productivity in terms of man-hours worked advanced nearly percent. Between and on the other hand the two productivity indicators for the private sector rose only about percent and the two measures for the nonagricultural industries changed even less. For the same year each agricultural measure showed a gain of percent PRODUCTIVITY CHANGES IN Preliminary estimates indicate a generally better productivity performance in than in According to either man-hour concept the productivity advance for the private economy apparently matched the long-term trend rate of about percent. The two measures for agriculture approached percent. Some improvement over the preceding year is suggested for the nonagricultural sector and its manufacturing and nonmanufacturing divisions but the gains were still comparatively small. Thus the nonagricultural productivity increases for over were percent for manhours paid and percent for man-hours worked. The advances for the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing divisions both referring to man-hours paid were percent and percent respectively PROBLEMS OF MEASUREMENT AND MEANING The application and interpretation of available productivity index numbers must take account of many theoretical and practical difficulties of measurement. In principle various acceptable productivity indicators can be constructed each of which would be especially appropriate to a particular context or use. But limitations of data and other factors commonly make it impracticable to construct measures consistent with the desired concepts The details of actual measurement affect the meaning and applicability of the results. Two or more productivity index numbers computed for a given industry occasionally differ significantly in direction as well as in magnitude. Furthermore tolerable agreement during a period of observation gives no assurance of similarity thereafter The problems of concept technique and data that are important for application and interpretation pertain not only to the productivity ratio proper but also to the production numerator and the labor denominator Production measures often employ gross output concepts rather than preferred net concepts ; incorporated weights may refer to a year other than the one desired ; basic product data are commonly reported in crude units or broad classes vary greatly in quality between census and other years and lack continuity because of technological and other changes. For many industries ( e. g. finance ) and activities ( e. g. research ) that do not have uniform or directly measurable products indirect and rough techniques of estimation have to be used ( e. g. the adjustment of dollar values for price changes by means of price measures that may not be altogether pertinent ) and these techniques yield results that are conceptually obscure. In labor input measures employees and hours of different skill are typically treated as equivalent ; statistics for hours remunerated often have to be used in lieu of hours actually worked ; and the scope of the data frequently fails to coincide exactly with the scope of the production measure. Finally productivity index numbers for specific industries may be combined in various ways with results that sometimes differ significantly from ratios of composite production and labor input measures computed for the same group of industries Certain common misunderstandings of productivity measures should also be noted. Short-term changes provide no clear guide to the long-term productivity trend or to an alteration of this trend. Furthermore short-term changes are influenced by but do not closely reflect the course of tech- nological progress. The confinement of the denominator to labor input does not imply that labor is the sole contributor to the value of product or the sole input to be economized in the process of production Continual efforts are being made to improve productivity indicators and to extend measurement to additional sectors and industries. These efforts are reflected in the budget proposals described in Appendix C and in the establishment in January of an Interagency Committee on Productivity Estimates under the auspices of the Bureau of the Budget. This Committee has been making a systematic review of productivity concepts methods and data needs and of opportunities to fill the major statistical gaps no Appendix F STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION I I I CONTENTS income or expenditure : Page Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross private and government product in current and prices F-4 Gross national product or expenditure in prices F-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product F-6. The Nation 's income expenditure and saving F-7. Personal consumption expenditures F ~ Gross private domestic investment F-9. National income by distributive shares F-10. Relation of gross national product and national income F l l Relation of national income and personal income F-12. Sources of personal income F-l3. Disposition of personal income F-l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices F-l5. Financial saving by individuals F-l6. Sources and uses of gross saving Employment and wages : F-l Noninstitutional population and the labor force F-18. Employment and unemployment by age and sex F-l9. Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons F-20. Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment F-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and F-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments F-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries F-24. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries F-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries F-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries F-27. Average weekly earnings gross and net spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices F-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries Production and business activity : F-29. Industrial production indexes F--30. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and F-31. New construction activity F-32. New public construction activity F-33. Housing starts and applications for financing F-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade F-35. Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders National F-l F-2 F JI Prices : Page F-36. Wholesale price indexes F-37. Wholesale price indexes by economic sector F-38. Consumer price indexes F-39. Consumer price indexes by selected major groups Money supply credit and finance : F-40. Deposits and currency F-41. Loans and investments of all commercial banks F-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves F-43. Bond yields and interest rates F-44. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding F-45. Instalment credit extended and repaid F-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing F-47. Net public and private debt Government finance : F-48. U. S. Government debt by kind of obligation F-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligation F-50. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt F-51. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years F-52. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public F-53. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts F-54. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts with receipts and expenditures as reported in the consolidated cash statement and the conventional budget fiscal years F-55. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Corporate profits and finance : F-56. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations F Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and F Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and F-59. Sources and uses of corporate funds F-60. Current assets and liabilities of U. S. corporations F-61. State and municipal and corporate securities offered F-62. Common stock prices and stock market credit F-63. Business population and business failures Agriculture : F-64. Income of the farm population F-65. Farm population employment and productivity F-66. Farm production indexes F-67. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio F-68. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture F Level-of-living indicators for farm-operator families selected years F-70. Selected indicators of farming conditions International transactions : F-71. United States balance of payments F-72. United States balance of payments with individual areas F-73. United States merchandise exports and imports for consumption by leading commodities average and F U. S. Government grants and credits excluding military supplies and services by areas total postwar period and fiscal years F-75. U. S. Government grants of military supplies and services by areas total postwar period and fiscal years F Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and Page " NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE F Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment ^ otal sross national product Period Personal consumption expenditures New construction e S S Net foreign investment ( ) ( * ) ) ( ) -l'.C Federal S Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter See table F-7 for major components See Table F-8 for more detail and explanation of components For national security expenditures include the items classified as such in the Budget of the United States Government for tjie Fiscal Year ending June They are not comparable with the major national security category in the Budget for the fiscal year ending June which corresponds more closely to national defense expenditures for goods and services. National defense expenditures since are as follows : billion dollars ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; billion ; and billion N o t available separately Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter b y Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE F Gross national product or expenditure in prices * [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Total gross national product Total Gross private domestic investment New construction Dura- Nonble durable Services Total goods goods Total Residential ( nonfarm ) Producers ' durable Other equipment Change in business inventories ( ) See footnotes at end of table u8 TABLE F-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-57l -Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Government purchases of goods and services Net foreign investment Period Federal State Total Total National security Other ( ) and local L.2 L.4 LO L.6 ? _ _ ( ) ( } ) ( ) These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See Table F-4. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on change in business inventories Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in this table. See Table F-l for Government sales in current prices See Table F-l footnote Not available separately Less than million dollars Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE F Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] Current prices Total gross national product Year prices * Gross private productl Total Farm Nonfarm Gross government product3 Total gross national product Gross private product * Gross Total Farm Nonfarm government product _ Gross national product less compensation of general government employees i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world See Survey of Current Business August and June for description of series and estimates in current and constant prices and implicit deflators for Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities * See Table F-2 footnote Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers I2O TABLE F Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Total gross national Duproduct Total rable goods Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services Net Gross forpriPro- Change eign vate inNew ducNonin ers ' vestState p r o d con- dudu- ServbusiFeduct rable ices Total struc- rable ness ment Total e r a l and local tion equip- invengoods ment tories ! * See National Income Edition A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices. See Table F-5 for implicit deflators Net of Government sales Gross national product less compensation of general government employees * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessary add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E F Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product i Year Gross private domestic investment1 Government purchases of goods and services Gross Gross gov- priProernducment pvatero Dur- Non- Servers ' State prod- uct d3 durResidur- Total Fed- and uct Total able able ices deneral local goods goods able Total tial Other equipnonment farm New construction | ! Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net foreign investment. For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see National Income Edition A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business For definition see footnote Table F-3 Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E F The Nation 's income expenditure and saving [ Billions of dollars ] Economic group Consumers : Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Personal net saving. _ Business : Gross retained earnings Gross private domestic investment Excess of investment ( ) Net receipts Purchases of goods and services Surplus or deficit ( ) on income and product account GROSS N A T I O N A L P R O D U C T Total government expenditures _ Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) Statistical discrepancy Excess Excess Excess of reof reof reEx- ceipts ReEx- ceipts Ex- ceipts Re- pendReor ex- ceipts pend- or ex- ceipts pend- or exceipts itures itures penditures pendpenditures itures itures <- ) ( ) ( ) International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts or investment ( ) Government ( Federal State and local ) : Tax and nontax receipts or accruals Less : Transfers interest and subsidies ( net ) i Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE F-7. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Period Nondurable goods Total personal consumption Toextal penditures Services Total 18J L L7 i O i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter _ _ Fourth quarter ' : First quarter._ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) i I ' TABLE F-8. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Period Farm equipment Total Nonfarm producers ' and construction plant and equipment private domestic ConConinvest- Total Equip- struc- Total Equip- strucment tions ment tion ment Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Net change in Other business inventories private construcNontions Total farm Farm ( ) ( ) * ( ( Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter.8 Fourth quarter ; CO Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment are not comparable with those shown in Table F-28 principally because the latter exclude equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense and also investment by nonprofit organizations and professional persons Total producers ' durable equipment less farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restuarants and garages * Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) s Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private construction After inventory valuation adjustment Less than million dollars s Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE F-9. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Business and proCorporate profits fessional income and inventory and inventoryvaluation valuation adjustment adjustment In- RentComcome al inTotal penna- sation of Net In- farm come tional of emInIninof in- ploycome ven- pro- perCor- ven- terest come ees tory prietory of sons porate valuunin- valuTotal corpo- ation tors Total profits ation before adrated adtaxes< justenter- justment prises ment Period ( ) _ LS4.3 _ ._ _ ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter : First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter ( ) ! o ( ) ( ) ( ) National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table F-10 Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve : and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to farm inventories during the period See Table F-56 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail wUl not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E F-10. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Period Plus : Less : Capital conLess : Subsumption allowances Gross Equals : sidies less naNet tional na- iurrent Indirect business Busiprodtional surplus Depretax ness uct Total ciation Other prod- of govtransuct charges ernfer ment State payenter- Total Fed- and ments prises eral local Equals : Sta- Natisti- tional cal ncome discrepancy S Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second q u a r t e r Third quarter.F o u r t h quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First q u a r t e r Second q u a r t e r T h i r d quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First q u a r t e r _ Second quarter _ Third quarter F o u r t h quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Accidental damage tofixedcapital and capital outlays charged to current account Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E F Relation of national income and personal income ^ [ Billions of dollars ] Less : CorpoExcess rate of profits ContriNational and in- butions wage income acfor ventory social cruals over valu- insurdisation ance burseadjustments ment Period Equals : Plus : Government transfer payments Net interest paid by government Dividends Business transfer payments Personal L929 j ! j Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter._ Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter-. Fourth quarter i ( ) Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE F-12. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Period Labor Proprietors ' Less : income income Perwage and Nonsonal Rental Per- Trans- contri- agriculsalary Total income Divi- sonal fer pay- butions tural personal disbursedends interest ments Busiof income ments personal for income and other F a r m ness and persons social ncome profeslabor insursional income ) ance ^ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarterSecond quarterThird quarter.Fourth quarter : First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter ! The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from condensation of employees in Table F-9 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess of 2wage accruals over wage disbursements Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to3net additions to inventories during the period Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE F-13. Disposition of personal income Period Personal income Less : Personal taxes Less : Equals : Personal DisposEquals : conable Personal personal sumption saving expendiincome tures Saving as percent of disposable personal income ( percent ) Billions of dollars Seasonally adjusted annual rates ; First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter Includes also such items as fines penalties and donations Annual percentages are based on data in millions of dollars and may therefore differ slightly from percentages computed on the basis of figures shown in this table Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) I3O TABLE F-14. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Period Total disposable Per capita dispersonal income posable personal ( billions of income ( dollars ) dollars ) Total personal consumption expenditures ( billions of dollars ) Current ] Current Current prices prices prices prices ' prices prices Per capita personal consumption expenditures ( dollars ) ] Population ( thousands ) Current ] prices prices Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter._ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter ] ] L,703 L,735 : i Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base. Personal consumption expenditures in this table therefore differ from the data in Table F-2 Population of the continental United States including armed forces overseas. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Annual figures for total income and expenditures in prices and for per capita income and expenditures in current prices are computed from data in millions of dollars Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE F-15. Financial saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ] Period Currency and Total bank deposits Private in- GovSecurities surance and ernSavpension ment ings reserves insurand ance loan and assoU. S. Other Corpenciasav [ nsur- Pen- sion tions Totals ings govern- and ance sion rebonds ment other serves Old series Less : Increase in debt Mort- Congage sumer debt debt J ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) New series ! i : First quarter._ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust and pension funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified. Prior to separate data on corporate pension fund investments are not available and are reflected in the various components of individuals ' saving Includes currency demand deposits and time and savings deposits Does not include net purchases by brokers and dealers or by other individualsfinancedby bank loans Includes armed forces leave bonds and other U. S. Government bonds ( except savings bonds ) and all5 securities issued by State and local governments Mortgage debt to institutions on to 4-family nonfarm dwellings Largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumer goods although including some debt arising from purchases of other consumption goods. The other segments of individuals ' debt have been allocated to the assets to which they pertain viz. saving in insurance and securities Not available separately. See footnote NOTE. In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The series with the most complete coverage the personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce is derived as the difference between personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included in Securities and Exchange Commission saving : Housing net of depreciation and farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment net of depreciation and net of increases in mortgage and other debt to corporations and financial institutions. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see Survey of Current Business July Revisions for in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into these estimates Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE F Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Period Total Total Per- Gross sonal busi- Total ness saving saving 1929._ Gross investment Federal State and local Gross private Net fordomes- eign inTotal tic in- vestment vestment Statistical discrepancy ( ! i ) i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter- : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter _ Fourth quarter- ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) A ( ) Less than million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE F-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force UnemployTotal ment as labor force as percent of civilian Employment percent of non- labor force Unem- instituployAgri- Non- ment tional agripopu- Unad- SeasonTotal culcullation justed ally adtural tural justed Civilian labor force Period Total Nonin- labor force stituArmed tional ( includ- forces J popu-l ing Total lation armed forces ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions Percent New definitions ( ) C ) ( ) o20 I ! " 63r Oil Old definitions : January February._March April May June : S.7 S.7 S.8 S.7 July August September. October November- December.. S.6 S.4 S.5 S.8 See footnotes at end of table TABLE F-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued UnemployTotal ment as labor force as percent of civilian Employment percent of non- labor force Unem- instituployAgri- Non- ment tional agripopu- Unad- SeasonTotal culcullation justed ally adtural tural justed Civilian labor force Period Sloninstitutional popu-l ation Total labor force Armed ( includ- forces * ing Total armed forces ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions t : January February._ March April May June. Percent S.6 S.6 S.6 S.9 July August September October November December. New definitions : January February March April May June " ' f8.5 S.8 S.9 July August September October November December. S.9 S.9 4.S : January February March April May June ' S.9 S.9 G ' ^ July August September October.. November December 4.S Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from the estimates See Note Not available NOTE. Civilian labor force data beginning with May are based on a 330-area sample. For January 1954-April thev are based on a 230-area sample ; for on a 68-area sample ; for on a smaller sample ; and for on sources other than direct enumeration Effective January persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and persons waiting to start new wage and salary jobs within the following days are classified as unemployed. Such persons had previously been classified as employed ( with a job but not at work ) The combined total of the groups changing classification has averaged about to a month in recent years. The small number of persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs are classified as not in the labor force instead of employed as formerly. Persons waiting to open new businesi-es or start new farms within days will continue to be classified as employed. ( New definitions series for periods prior to January are Census Bureau estimates under the old definitions adjusted by Council of Economic Advisers to the new definitions. ) Beginning July labor force data are for the calendar week containing the 12th of the month ; previously for week containing the 8th Annual population data are as of July ; monthly data are as of the 1st of the month For the years estimating procedures made use of Census data ; for subsequent years Census data were used. For the effects of this change on the historical comparability of the data see Annual Report on the Labor Force Series P-50 No. April p Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor ( labor force ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE F Employment and unemployment by age and sex [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Unemployed Employed Total civil45 years years andyears years ian over Total and over labor Total emunem- years force ployed years FeFe- ployed FeFeMale male Male male Male male Male male Period Old definitions * 39f _ _ _ '_ \ ; C409 i New definitions i Old definitions i : January.. February March April May June i ' ' ',421 ' r ) ' 27'617 ',407 July August September October November December. July August September October November December New definitions : January February March April May June ' ' See Note Table F-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age/sex groups above See Note Table F-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce I36 TABLE F Employed persons not at work by reason for unemployed persons not working and special groups of l [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed persons not at work Special groups of unemployed persons by reason for not working Period Bad weather Industrial dispute Vacation Illness All other reasons Tempo- New wage rary and salary job layoff ) : January February.. March April. _ May June July August September. October November._ December _ : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December. D a t a prior to are Census Bureau estimates adjusted b y Council of Economic Advisers to the new definitions of employment and unemployment Includes persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days Under the old definitions of employment and unemployment these groups were included in the " employed b u t not at work " category Persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of the layoff Persons scheduled to start new wage and salary jobs within days. Under the old definitions t h e " new job or business " group included these persons as well as persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days ( see " all other " category in this table ) and persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs ( these are now classified as " not in the labor force " ) s Not available NOTE. See Note Table F-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E F Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment Duration of Vinemployment Period Total unemployed weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : ( ) : First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter N e w definitions : i Old definitions : New definitions : : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter See Note Table F-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to I months ( ) Not available NOTE. See Note Table F-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and Initial claims Period Insured unemployment * State i veteran and State All pro- State proFederal proemployee grams grams grams pro- grams State Benefits paid insured under State unemprograms ployExhaus- ment tions as perState cent of proTotal Average covered grams employ- millions weekly of dol check ment lars ) s [ dollars ) ' ( percent ) < Weekly average ( thousands ) _ : January. _ February March April May June Ai July August September October NovemberDecember. : January. February March April May June July August September.. October November. __ December Most of these are instances of new unemployment Data on veterans relate to those under the following programs : Servicemen 's Readjustment Act which became effective in October and expired for most veterans in July and Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of effective October Beginning data include State programs and the program for Federal employees ; all prior years are for State programs only. Beginning data also include workers added by the extension of coverage to smaller firms Represents the number of unemployed workers covered by unemployment insurance programs who have completed at least one week of unemployment. Excludes territories State veteran Railroad Retirement and Federal employee programs State unemployment insurance programs during the period shown excluded from coverage agricultural workers domestic servants workers in nonprofit organizations unpaid family workers the self-employed and ( in most States ) workers in very small firms Represents the number of individuals who received payment for the final week of compensable unemployment in a benefit year. Workers who have exhausted benefit rights do not necessarily remain unemployed ; some find employment and others withdraw from the labor force Monthly totals are gross amounts ; annual figures are adjusted for voided benefit checks For total unemployment only Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE F-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagr { cultural establishments * [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing and salary workers Total Mining Transportation and public utilities Government ( Federal State and local ) Contract construction Total FiTrade2 nance Service Durable goods Nondurable goods ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I Period ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted : January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December J a n u a r y February. March April May June 7P4 July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table 14O T A B L E F-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagi ( cultural establishments Continued [ Thousands of employees ] Period Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining TransCon- portatract tion Ficonand Trade nance struc- public tion utilities Government Serv- ( Fedice eral State and local ) Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August September. October November44December _ Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( Table F-17 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE F-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total __._ : January February March April May June July August September.. October November.. December. _ : January February March April May June .-.July... August September.. October November December Durable goods Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I ing Whole- ( except nous Tele-2 eating Nonconrailsale coal and dustruc- roads i phone trade drinkrable mining tion ing goods places ) Laundries ( ) ( ) ( ) <37.3 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available < Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods s Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment Source : Department of Labor TABLE F-24. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period BituNonDura- dura- minous coal ble Total ble goods goods mining $ Retail Buildtrade ing JlassI Tele- Whole- ( except Agriconraileating Laun- cul-3 sale dries ture struc- roads phone trade and tion drinking places ) $ $ ( ) ( ) $ $ ( ) $ i : January._ February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November 7__ December $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ $ $ ( ) " " '. " Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per-hour basis Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture TABLE F-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ing con- railTelecoal Dura- Nonstruc- roads l phone ble durable mining tion goods goods $ $ Retail trade ( except Whole- eating sale and trade drinking places ) Laundries $ $ $ 1936_ 1937-_ 1939_ $ $ 1942_ 1944_ _ : January July August September.. October November.. December. __ : January February March April May June July August September.. October November December February March April May June ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ) ( ) $ Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executive ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods * Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor T A B L E F-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries All manufacturing Durable goods manufacturing industries industries Period Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings ExExExExExcludcludcludcludcludGross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing overoveroveroveroveiovertime time time time time time Exclud- : January February. March April May June ) $ ) ( ) $ ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ( L.310 ) ) L. ) L. ) ) ( ( < I. L.88 L.90 L. July August September October November December. L93 L.94 L. : January February.. March April May June July August September October November December ) $ ) ) ) $ ) ) ( ( ( ' ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) L.98 L. ) $ ) ) ) $ ) ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( * ) ( ) Not available Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Preliminary Not available NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment ( in the case of hours ) and man-hours ( in the case of earnings ) Source : Department of Labor TABLE F Average weekly earnings gross and net spendable m manufacturing industries in current and prices Average net spendable weekly earnings i Average gross weekly earnings Period Current prices prices Worker with no dependents Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices $ $ $ $ $ $ : January -_ February March April May June _ _ _ July August September October November December * January February March April May June July August September October November33_December __ _ _ ( * ) ( ) ( * ) Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base Preliminary Not available NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annualfiguresfor are simple arithmetic averages of the monthlyfiguresshown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE F-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Rates per employees ] Separation rates Period Total Layoff Quit i Discharge military and miscellaneous l Accession rates : January.. FebruaryMarch April May June July August September. October November December. : January.. February March April May June July August September. October November Prior to military and miscellaneous separations are included with quits Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE F-29. Industrial production indexes [ = ] Industrial production Manufactures Durable Period Total Total Total NonPri- Fabri- elecmary cated trical met- metal maprod- chinals ucts ery InstruElec- Trans- ments trical porta- and re-1 mation lated chin- equip- prodery ment ucts FurClay niture glass and and miscellum- laneous ber prod- manufacucts tures H3 Seasonally adjusted : January. February March April May June July August September October November December : January... FebruaryMarch April May June July August September October November December i See footnotes at end of table I48 TABLE F-29. Industrial production indexes Continued [ = ] Industrial production Output of consumer durables Manufactures Nondurable Other consumer durables Total ChemTex- Rub- Paper ical Foods Minber tiles and bever- erals and and and leather print- petro- ages apleum and toparel prod- ing prod- bacco ucts ucts J : January February March April May June Period _ Major Total Autos lousehold goods Seasonally adjusted July August September October November December : January February March April Mav June July August September October Novemberl December Preliminary Not available NOTE. Detail not available prior to Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE F-30. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Period Total i Total Transportation Dura- Nonble durable goods goods Mining Railroad Com- Public mercial utiliand ties Other other Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter * Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service,finance,communications and construction Annual total is the sum of unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjustedfigures,which include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data * Estimates for fourth quarter and first quarter based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and November NOTE. Thesefiguresdo not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals and institutions and of certain outlays charged to current account This series is not available for years prior to and for to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce I5O TABLE F-31. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Period Total new construction Private construction Resi- Nonresidential building and other construction dential Total i building ( nonComIndus- Public Total farm ) mercial trial utility Other Public construction * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : January February.. March April May June July August September October November. December- : January February. _ March April May June July August September October November December Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product ( Table F l ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Includes farm institutional and all other Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE F-32. New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Total new public construction i Major types of new public construction Federal Year All public sources Direct Federal aid State and local Highway Sewer Conand Hoswater servapital tion and Educa- and and tional institu- misceldetional laneous veloppublic ment service Military facilities All other public a For expenditures classified by ownership combine " Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Includes nonresidential building other than educational and hospital and institutional ( industrial commercial public administration social and recreational and miscellaneous ) public residential buildings and publicly owned parks and playgrounds memorials etc Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE F-33. Housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Proposed home construction New nonfarm housing starts Privately financed Period Total Publicly financed Government programs Total Total i F H A i VA Private seasonFHA ally ad- applica- VA appraisal justed requests annual tions rates * : January February March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January __ February March April May June July August September. _ October November. December 7_ ) ( ) ( ) k ( ) Excludes armed forces housing in ( units ) and ( units ) Units in mortgage applications for new-home construction The number of starts for the years respectively was as follows : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and * FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in Not available Partly estimated Preliminary Sources : Department of Labor Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) TABLE F-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in billions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade l Manufacturing Wholesale trade l Retail trade Period InvenInvenInvenSales tories Ratio Sales tories Ratio Sales tories Ratio * Inventories Ratio * * Seasonally adjusted : January February. _. March April M a y June ] July August September October November. December.. L. L. L. L. : January February. _ March April May June L. L. L. L.59 L. July August September October November66 December L. L60 L.64 L.66 L45 The series beginning in are not comparable with the previous years because of changes in definition for the wholesale series. Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method of estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census Monthly average shown for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; forfi monthly data ratio of average end of current and previous month 's inventories to sales for month Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Preliminary NOTE. For a description of the series and their comparability see Survey of Current. Business September and November January and June for retail and August for manufacturing and wholesale The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F-35. Manufacturers * sales inventories and orders [ Billions of dollars ] Inventories Period New orders * UnDurable-goods Nondurable-goods filled industries industries Dura- NonDura- Non- orders ble- durable ( unble- durablegoods goods PurTotal goods goods adjustPurindus- indus- ed ) indus- indus- chased Goods- Fin- chased Goods- Fintries tries mate- j inished matein- ished tries tries rials process goods rials process goods * * Seasonally adjusted : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November December. : January February. March April May June July August September October November Monthly average shown for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period End of period * Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. See Table F-34 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE F-36. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods All commodities Period Farm products Processed foods Total Textile Chemi- Rubber Lumber cals and and prodand rubber wood ucts prodallied prodand ucts ucts apparel products ? ( ) _ __ * : J a n u a r y February March April May June July August September October November December _ __ : January February. March. _ _ April May June July August September October November December _ See footnotes at end of table i56 w ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) TABLE F-36. Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( continued ) Period Hides Fuel skins power leather a n d and lighting leather prodmateucts rials Pulp paper and allied products Furniture Metals Machin- and and ery and other metal motive houseprodprodhold ucts ucts durables Non- Tobacco metal- manufactures Miscellic laneous and minerbottled products als ( struc- bevertural ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February. March April May June July August September October NovemberDecember : January February March April May June July August September October November December * This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January These data from January through December represent the revised sample and the weighting pattern. Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index The data from January through January differ from the official series due to a change in the method of eliminating excise taxes and discounts Not available * Preliminary Source : Department of Labor '57 T A B L E F Wholesale price indexes by economic sector [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components * Crude materials Period All commodities Materials and components for manufacturing Food- Nonstuffs food maTotal and terials Fuel faoA ieeu- except stuffs fuel Total Materials for Total food manufacturing Materials for nondurable manufacturing Materials for durable manufacturing Components for manufacturing Materials and components for construction * : January February. March April May June 9a July August September October NovemberDecember. : January February. March April May June July August September October November December * See footnotes at end of table TABLE F-37. Wholesale price indexes by economic sector Continued [ = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Period Total Total Other DunonFoods durable rable goods goods Producer finished goods InterConmediate sumer Crude materials finished mate- supplies goods exrials and com- cluding ponents foods : January February.. March April May June July August September October November December : January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober NovemberDecember Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds * Preliminary NOTE. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector and their relative importance see Monthly Labor Review December Source : Department of Labor TABLE F-38. Consumer price indexes For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Period All items Housing Food Total Rent Read- Other Ap- Trans- Medi- Per- ing and goods cal parel porta- care sonal recrea- and tion care tion services ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ( ' ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) 5P. 8S.4 : January February March April May June P July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November Not available January-November average Source : Department of Labor TABLE F Consumer price indexes by selected major groups [ = ] Services Commodities Period All items All items less food All items less All shel- comter modities Commodities less food Food All NonDura- durables bles All services Rent All services less rent 1943_ : January. _ February March April May June July August September October November December : January._ February March April May June July August September October November January-November average Source : Department of Labor MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE F-40. Deposits and currency [ Billions of dollars ] Total excluding U. S. Government deposits J End of period > Total deposits and currency Demand deposits and currency Total Total : January February. March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January February. March April May June July * August September Octobers.. November December CurDemand rency deposits adjusted outside banks u. s GovernTime ment deposits < deposits * I. End-of-year June and December and December figures are for call dates. Other data ( including those for June ) are for the last Wednesday of the month Includes holdings of State and local governments Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection * Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Includes U. S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve Banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) l62 TABLE F Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period Junes _ Junes June * 1932-June * June * _ June * : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December.. : January February. March April May June July ? August September I October 7_.. November December Total loans and investments Loans Total Investments Business loans Total U. S. GovOther ernment obligations < securities End-of-year June and December and December 1957figuresare for call dates. Other data ( includ ing those for June ) are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net i. e. after deduction of valuation reserves. Includes commercial and industrial agricultural security real estate bank consumer and other loans Beginning with data are shown gross of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks < Figures in this table are based on book values and relate only to banks within the continental United States. Therefore they do not agree with ngures in Table F-49 which are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE F-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Period Total U. S Government securities Member bank borrowings Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) i i i i : January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober NovemberDecember. : J a n u a r y February. _ March April _ May June July August September October NovemberDecember Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE F-43. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government securities Period Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) 3-month Treas- month Taxable ury bonds bills i issues High- Common stock yields stocks Baa ( Moody 's ) grade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on Prime Fedshorteral comterm Remerbank serve cial loans Bank to busi- paper disnesscount selected months rate cities ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March April May June July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table TABLE F-43. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government securities Period 3-month Treas- month Taxable ury bonds Aaa bills i Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on Prime Federal shortcomReterm merserve bank cial loans paper Bank disto busi4-6 count nessselected months rate cities ._ July.-August September October November December July.August. September October November December Common stock yields stocks Baa ( Moody 's ) : January February March April May June : January February March April May June Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) First issued in Series includes : October 1941-March bonds due or callable after years ; April 1952-March bonds due or callable after years ; April to date bonds due or callable years and after * Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in * Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation T A B L E F Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding ^ [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of period Total Total Automobile paper i Other Repair conand sumer moderngoods ization paper l loans Noninstalment credit Personal loans Total Charge acOthers counts ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : J a n u a r y February__ March April May June July August September October November December. L,768 L,890 : January February. March April May June L,886 July August September October November December L L ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit * Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE F-45. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Total Repair and Other consumer modernization goods paper loans Automobile paper Personal loans Period Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Unadjusted Extended Repaid Extended Repaid 91S : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December * > __ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December L _ Seasonally adjusted Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE F-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties to 4-family houses All properties E n d of period Government underwritten Total Total Total FHA VA inguarsured anteed Multifamily Farm and propcomerties Con- mercial ven- prop- tional erties ! : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.-- : First quarter _ _.. Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter.- : First quarter Second quarter Third q u a r t e r s Fourth quarter Derived figures Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied b y various Government and private organizations ( except as noted ) TABLE F-47. Net public and private debt l [ Billions of dollars ] Private Corporate End of period Fed- State and eral local Total Govgovernernment ment2 Total Individual and noncorporate Nonfarm LongTotal term Short- Total Farm Total Mortgage Commercial Conand sumer financial * 1930_ 1931-1932._ i.5 Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see Survey of Current Business October Data for State and local government debt are for June of each year Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for for consumer debt ( and related subtotals and totals ) have been adjusted by the Council of Economic Advisers to reflect revisions for in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. No attempt has been made to reconcile other debt items with the adjustments in consumer debt Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and Interstate Commerce Commission ( except as noted ) GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE F U. S. Government debt by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt End of period Gross public debt and guaranteed issues J Marketable public issues Nonmarketable public issues Shortterm issues2 Treasury bonds United States savings bonds Treasury tax and savings notes Investment bonds Special issues : January.. February March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December. Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Includes Series A bonds and beginning in April Series B convertible bonds Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held billion dollars of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Less than million dollars The last series of treasury savings notes matured in April Of this amount $ billion was subject to the statutory debt limitation of $ billion Source : Treasury Department TABLE F-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Par values billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of period Held by others Held by U.S GovMutual ernsavings State MiscelTotal ment and Federal Com banks Other investlaneous Total Reservee mercial and in- corpor- local Individ- invesment Banks banks3 surance ations * governactors ? comments counts panies 19501951_ s : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October Novembers8__ December --_ United States savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table F-41 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the continental United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of6Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE F-50. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt [ Millions of dollars ] N e t budget Budget ex- Surplus or receipts penditures deficit ( ) Year Public debt at end of year Fiscal year : 1956_ * * Calendar year : Gross receipts less refunds of receipts and transfers of tax receipts to the Federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund the Federal disability insurance trust fund the railroad retirement account and the highway trust fund Excludes guaranteed obligations. The change in the public debt from year to year reflects not only the budget surplus or deficit but also changes in the Treasury 's cash balances the effect of certain trust fund transactions and direct borrowing from the public by certain Government enterprises Preliminary * Estimate Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from data through January May therefore differ fromfiguresin Treasury Department monthly statement of receipts and expenditures to be released about January NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) T A B L E F Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Budget receipts by source Budget expenditures by function Indi- Corpovidual ration Excise All income income taxes other taxes taxes receipts i Veter- AgriMajor ans ' culAll naserv- ture Inter- other Total tional ices and est expendsecurity and agriitures bene- cultufits ral resources Budget surplus or deficit ( ) Fiscal year Total -4,0L7 1958<-.1959'-.- Includes employment taxes estate and gift taxes customs revenues and miscellaneous receipts Includes expenditures for international affairs and finance ( excluding military assistance and defense support under the mutual security program ) labor and welfare natural resources commerce and housing and general government ; also includes adjustment to daily Treasury statement ( for actuals ) and allowance for proposed legislation and contingencies ( for estimates ) Preliminary < Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget T A B L E F-52. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Total Federal State and local * Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments Cash receipts Cash payments Calendar year : Period * Fiscal year : * * Z. Excess Excess of reof receipts Cash Cash ceipts or re- pay- or of pay- ceipts ments of payments ments Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Less than million dollars * Preliminary Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) TABLE F Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts ! [ Calendar years billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure First SecFirst SecFirst SecFirst SecYear half ond Year half ond Year half ond Year half a ond half half half > half * Total government Receipts E xpenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) J07.6 2.G Federal Government Receipts Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Expenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Orants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises I Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) State and local govern_____ i -i.e Receipts Personal tax and non3.8 tax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals. Contributions for so1.6 cial insurance Federal grants-in-aid E xpenditures Purchases of goods and services. Transfer payments. _ Net interest paid Less : Current surplus of Government enterprises Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) These accounts like the cash budget include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike both the conventional budget and the cash statement they exclude certain capital and lending transactions. In genera ] they do not use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services ; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans financed by banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them Seasonally adjusted annual rates Prelimininary ; fourth quarter estimates b y Council of Economic Adviseis NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) I76 T A B L E F Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts with receipts and expenditures as reported in the consolidated cash statement and the conventional budget ^ fiscal years [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipts or expenditures National income accounts Receipts Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) Expenditures Reconciliation of receipts Receipts as shown in the national income accounts Less : Excess of taxes included in national income accounts over cash collections : Personal Corporate profits Other Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds Veterans life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Plus : Realization upon loans and investments Interest dividends and other earnings Proceeds from sale of Government property Recoveries and refunds District of Columbia revenues Miscellaneous adjustments Receipts from exercise of monetary authority Plus : Intragovernmental transactions Less : Trust fund receipts Equals : Federal receipts from the public ( consolidated cash receipts ) Equals : Conventional budget receipts Reconciliation of expenditures Expenditures as shown in the national income accounts Less : Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds Veterans life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Accrued interest on savings bonds and Treasury bills Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed nonrecourse loans ( net change ) Miscellaneous adjustments Plus : Loans and other adjustments government enterprises Federal National Mortgage Association secondary market operations. __ Other Interest received and proceeds of government sales netted out of national income expenditures District of Columbia expenditures Purchase of land and existing assets Trust and deposit fund expenditures not included in national income expenditures Miscellaneous adjustments Decrease in clearing account Issuance of International Monetary Fund notes Other Equals : Federal payments to the public ( consolidated cash expenditures ) Less : Trust fund expenditures Government-sponsored enterprise expenditures ( net ) Plus : Intragovernmental transactions r Accrued interest and other noncash expenditures ( net ) Equals : Conventional budget expenditures NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department TABLE F State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Revenues by source Fiscal year Total Expenditures by function Revenue Sales All and Indi- Corpo- from Prop- gross vidual ration Fed- other net erty re- income income eral reve3 taxes ceipts taxes taxes Gov- nue erntaxes ment EduTotal cation High- Public All wel- o t h e r ways fare Fiscal years not the same for all governments Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between governments in these categories are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and community redevelopment local recreation general control interest on general debt and other and unallocable expenditures NOTE. Data are not available for intervening years See Table F-47 for net debt of State and local governments Detail will not necessarily add to total because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE F-56. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability Period Total Dividend Undistributed payments profits Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter3 Third quarter Fourth quarter : Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes * million dollars Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers < Not available NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) See Table F-9 for profits TABLE F Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders' ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class average and Asset size class ( thousands of dollars ) average First quarter Second quarter Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio oi profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity ( percent ) All asset sizes Under and over 21A Ratio olr profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholder s ' equity ( percent ) All asset sizes Under and over Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes Under and over Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All asset sizes Under and over S NOTE. The sample for these series was changed beginning with the third quarter of and again beginning with However the averages have not been adjusted to either of these samples and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U. S. Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE F-58. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders'1 equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Industry group aver- First i Second Third Fourth First Second i Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity ( percent ) All private manufacturing corporations Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) Furniture and fixtures Stone clay and glass products Primary iron and steel industries Primary nonferrous metal industries Instruments and related products. _ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products Leather and leather products ( ) Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery equipment and supplies Motor vehicles and equipment Other transportation equipment See footnotes at end of table TABLE F-58. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations ^ by industry group average and Continued Industry group average First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All private manufacturing corporations _. Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) Furniture and fixtures Stone clay and glass products Primary iron and steel industries Primary nonferrous metal industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery equipment and supplies _ Motor vehicles and equipment Other transportation equipment Instruments and related products.. Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures _ Textile mill products Apparel and related products. _ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Products of petroleum and coal ( except petroleum refining ) Rubber products Leather and leather products ( ) Petroleum refining and products of petroleum and coal combined Not available separately for this period NOTE. The sample for these series was changed beginning with the third quarter of and again beginning with However the averages have not been adjusted to either of these samples and therefore are not strictly comparable with data for later periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U. S. Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE F-59. Sources and uses of corporate funds l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Total uses Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change in customer net receivables Cash and U. S. Government securities O ther assets ( ) ( ) Total sources Internal sources. Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation and amortization allowances External sources Change in Federal income tax liability Other liabilities Change in bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) ( ) ( ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Preliminary estimates Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately * Less than million dollars ^ Preliminary estimate by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE F-60. Current assets and liabilities of U. S. corporations * [ Billions of dollars end of period ] Asset or liability Total current assets Cash on hand and in banks U. S. Government securities Receivables from U. S Government Other notes and accounts receivable Inventories Other current assets Total current liabilities Advances and prepayments U. S. Government Other notes and accounts payable Federal income tax liabilities Other current liabilities Net working capital First * Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter All corporations in the United States excluding banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies. Data for are based on Statistics of Income covering virtually all corporat'ons in the United States. Statistics of Income data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for comp lation purposes. Data for are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Commission. As more complete data become available estimates are revised Receivables from and payables to U. S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U. S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U. S. Government advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books Includes marketable securities other than U. S. Government NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission T A B L E F S t a t e and municipal and corporate securities offered ' * [ Millions of dollars ] Period Corporate securities offered for cash State and Gross proceeds Proposed uses of net proceeds * municipal securities New money offered for cash Retire- Other Com- Pre- Bonds ( prinTotal mon ferred and Total Plant Work- ment purcipal of sestock stock notes and ing amounts ) Total equip- capi- curities poses tal ment ! ! | ! l,69oj " 145J ) | 1,182i ] : ! 42l | 868j 313i ; ! ! j ! " ~ " : First quarter._ Second quarter Third quarter._ Fourth quarter : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter- Fourth quarter : These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues sold through continuous offerings such as securities of open-end investment companies and employee-purchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission The Commercial and Financial Chronicle and The Bond Buyer TABLE F-62. Common stock prices and stock market credit Stock market credit Period Common stock prices index = ( SEC ) Customer credit ( excluding U. S Government securities ) Total Net debit balances J Bank loans to brokers and Bank loans dealers * to " others " Millions of dollars ( ) ) : January.-.February. March April May June July August September October. November December _ : J a n u a r y February. March April May June July August September October--- November December ( ) ( * ) ) ( ) ( ) As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U. S. Government obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U. S. Government obligations. However some U. S. Government securities may be included after Series revised beginning July and March Data are for last Wednesday of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities including U S Government obligations. Series revised beginning July and January Data are for last Wednesday of period * Not available Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and New York Stock Exchange TABLE F-63. Business population and business failures Operating businesses and business turnover ( thousands of firms ) i Period Business failures by size of liability New business Number of failures DisincorOperat- New con- Busi- poratining Liability size busi- ued ness tions busi ^ nesses3 busi- trans- ( numclass nesses ber ) ness- fers Total Under es and $ C5 ) ( ) : January February March April May June July August September. __ October November December : January February March. __ April May June July August September.. _ October November,._ December ^ _ ( ) ' ' Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total Under $ and over $ B e '13,619 ' ( ) M6.8 i * Excludes firms in the fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he has either an established plane of business or at least one paid employee Annual data through are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June Beginning annual data are for January Total for period * Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Not available Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE F-64. Income of the farm population Income from agricultural sources Farm operators ' income Realized gross farm income Cash reFarm ceipts from promarketings Gov- ducernment tion pay- exTotal i Livements penses stock and Crops products Period Income from all Net farm Income sources Per income Total from ( incapita Wages ( innonclud- income nf Real- Total farm agnfrom ing ing ized culnet all resi ( innet ( extural change sources dent clud- clud- work- change sources in ( dollars ) ing in net ers invennet tories ) tories ) change change in m inven3 tories ) tories ) Billions of dollars ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) J946 _ -_ ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter ' Third quarter * Fourth quarter ^ ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Also includes nonmoney income furnished by farms ( value of farm products consumed in farm households and gross rental value of farm dwellings ) not shown separately Realized gross farm income less farm production expenses Data prior to differ from farm proprietors ' income shown in Tables F-9 and F-12 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department of Commerce Not available Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE F-65. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population Period Number ( thousands ) ( April ) Farm employment Average Net mi ( thousands ) * gross gration hourly Manto and earnhours As per- from ings of of cent of farms hired farm total ( thoufarm work Family Hired popula sands ) Total workers workers workers t i s ( dol lars ) Crop production Farm output per manhour Per manhour Per acre Index = $ F a r m population as defined b y the D e p a r t m e n t of Agriculture a n d D e p a r t m e n t of Commerce i. e civilian population living on farms both urban a n d rural regardless of occupation Total population as of July including armed forces overseas N e t change for year beginning in April estimated b y Department of Agriculture. For and subsequent years includes inductions and enlistments into the armed forces and persons returning from t h e armed forces. For all years includes persons who have n o t moved b u t who are in a n d out of the farm population because agricultural operations have begun or have ceased on the place where they are living * Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published b y the Department of Agriculture Agricultural Marketing Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the D e p a r t m e n t of Commerce Bureau of the Census ( see Table F-17 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected. For further explanation see monthly reports on Farm Labor b y the D e p a r t m e n t of Agriculture Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per-hour basis Preliminary N o t available Sources : D e p a r t m e n t of Agriculture and Department of Commerce TABLE F-66. Farm production indexes [ = ] Livestock and products Year Crops Farm Hay Poulouteat To- Oilput Total Mani- Dairy try Total Feed and Food Vege- Fruits Cot- bac- bearprod- and grains for- grains tables and ton co ing mals ucts eggs nuts age crops * Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes certain items not shown separately Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain other items not shown separately Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E F Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = ] Prices received by farmers Crops Prices paidLby farmers Livestock and products CO rodi TJ CJ a g 'I ft C3 s Dai I I fei M o5 * -< tock luct : bl f xn Tot All g Oil- bear CO All ft o All farm products i Cot ton Period All items interest Famtaxes i y l and livwage ing rates items ( parity index ) Parity Pro- raduc- tio tion items SS : January.. February March April May.. June July August September October November December : January February.. March April. May June July August September October November. December Includes items not shown separately Percentage ratio of index of prices received by farmers for all farm products to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments Source : Department of Agriculture 1944._ _ TABLE F-68. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year HouseMahold DeposReal chinTotal estate furery its U. S Live- and Crops i nish- and savings stock motor ings cur- bonds and vehiequip- rency cles ment2 1954._ Financial assets ( ) o n ( ) ( ) ( ) ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' ment debt debt equiin coties operatives ( ) ( * ) ) Includes all crops held on farms for whatever purpose and crops held off farms as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled billion dollars Estimated valuation for plus purchases minus depreciation since then Preliminary * Not available NOTE : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE F-69.- Level-oj-living indicators for farm-operator families selected years Level-of-living index ' ( U. S. average in = ) Year Percentage of all families reporting : United North- North South West Elec- Tele- Auto- Running tricity phones mobiles water States east Central Mechan- Tele- Home ical refrig- vision freezers erators Indexes based on percent of farms with electricity telephones and automobiles and the average value of products sold or traded in the year preceding the appropriate Census of Agriculture Differs in minor respects from series shown in Table F-70 Gas or electric lights Based on Special Cooperative Survey of Farmers ' Expenditures Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E F Selected indicators of farming conditions Period Total investAverage ment in farm plant and Number value of of farms production equipment ( millions of ( thou- assets per dollars ) farm sands ) ( dollars ) i Gross Net a Real estate Foredebt as closure percent of rate per value of real estate farms ( percent ) ' Operators ' Farm innet income come per per farm worker ( dollars ) ( dollars ) Percent of all farms with central station electrical service ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) L [ L L : ] L ] L,920 ' Farm real estate less value of dwellings crops held for feed livestock machinery and equipment less percent of the value of automobiles and demand deposits used for production Gross investment less depreciation and other capital consumption Data are for January Data are for year ended March Including Government payments and excluding the net change in inventories Net income of farm operators including Government payments and excluding the net change in inventories plus farm wages of resident workers and other hired workers Data are for June except for the Census of Agriculture years : ( January ) ( April ) ( January ) and ( April ) s Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS TABLE F-71. United States balance of payments Excluding transfers of goods and services under military grant programs [ Millions of dollars ] First quarters Item United States payments : Total Imports of goods and services : Total Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services excluding military Military expenditures Income on investments : Private Government Unilateral transfers net excluding military : Total Government grants Remittances and other transfers. _ United States capital net : Total Private net : Total Direct investments net New issues Redemptions Other long-term net Short-term net Government net : Total Long-term capital outflow Repayments Short-term net United States receipts : Total Exports of goods and services : Total. Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services Military transactions Income on investments : Direct investments Other private Government Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) : Total Increase in liquid dollar holdings by foreign countries and international institutions United States gold sales [ purchases ( ) ] Errors and omissions Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F United States balance of payments with individual areas Excluding transfers of goods and services under military grant programs [ Millions of dollars ] First quarters Area and type of transaction Continental Western Europe and dependencies : United States payments : Total-. Nonmilitary imports of goods Nonmilitary imports of services.._ Military expenditures Remittance and other transfers.. Government grants and capital.._ Private capital net outflow United States receipts : Total _ Exports of goods _ _ Income on investments abroad Exports of other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) Sterling area : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods Nonmilitary imports of services.. Military expenditures Remittances and other transfers.._ Government grants and capital Private capital net outflow United States receipts : Total Exports of goods Income on investments abroad Exports of other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) Canada : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods Nonmilitary imports of services.._ Militarv expenditures Remittances and other transfers. _ Government grants and capital.. Private capital net outflow United States receipts : Total Exports of goods Income on investments abroad Exports of other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) _ Q TABLE F United States balance of payments with individual areas Continued Excluding transfers of goods and services under military grant programs [ Millions of dollars ] First quarters Area and type of transaction Latin America : United States payments : TotaL Nonmilitary imports of goods Nqnmilitary imports of services Military expenditures Remittances and other transfers Government grants and capital _ Private capital net outflow _ United States receipts : Total Exports of goods Income on investments abroad.. _ Exports of other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) " " " " " " Other countries : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods.- Nqnmilitary imports of services _ Military expenditures Remittances and other transfers Government grants and capital _ Private capital net outflow United States receipts : Total Exports of goods Income on investments abroad. Exports of other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) International institutions : United States payments : Total Nonmilitary imports of goods.,.. _ Nqnmilitary imports of services. Military expenditures Remittances and other transfers. Government grants and capital _ _ Private capital net outflow United States receipts : Total Exports of goods Income on investments abroad..- Exports of other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States Balance ( net United States receipts ) Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F United States merchandise exports and imports for consumption by leading commodities average and [ In millions of dollars ] average Commodity JanuarySeptember Exports of U. S. merchandise : Total Nonmilitary exports : Total Exports excluding " special category " commodities : Total Agricultural commodities : Total Raw cotton excluding linters Vegetable oils fats and oilseeds Tobacco unmanufactured Wheat including flour Other grains and preparations Other agricultural commodities- Nonagricultural commodities : Total Machinery s Automobiles parts and accessories Chemicals and related products Textile manufactures Iron and steel-mill products including scrap Petroleum and products Coal Nonferrous metals including ferroalloys Other nonagricultural commodities Agricultural commodities : Total- Imports for consumption : Total Nonagricultural commodities : Total. Nonferrous metals and ferroalloys Petroleum and products Paper and paper-base stocks Textile manufactures Machinery Automobiles parts and accessories Sawmill products Chemicals and related products Fish including shellfish Iron ore Iron and steel-mill products excluding scrap_ Other nonagricultural commodities Coffee Cane sugar Cocoa or cacoa beans Other foodstuffs Crude rubber Wool unmanufactured Other agricultural commodities Commodity data for and have been adjusted to conform as nearly as possible to statistical classifications. The distributions of nonagricultural exports by principal commodities however are based on total exports in and on exports excluding " special category " items in and later periods. ( See footnote ) Data represent total exports minus shipments of military equipment and supplies by the Department of Defense under the Mutual Security Program. Commodity breakdowns of nonmilitary exports are not available " Special category " commodities are those to which security restrictions applied in as regards publication of detailed export statistics * Data exclude essential oils s Data for and later periods exclude " special category " exports. ( See footnote ) NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F U. S. Government grants and credits excluding military supplies and services by areas total postwar period andfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Item Gross new grants : Total postwar period Western Europe ( includ- Easting ern Total Greece Europe and Turkey ) Near East Africa and South Asia Vietnam Laos Other CamAsia bodia and China and Pacific Korea Latin America * Other international institutions and unspecified Reverse grants and returns on grants : Total postwar period 5__ Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Net new grants : Total postwar period 5_ Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year New credits : Total postwar period 5__ Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Repayments : Total postwar period Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Net new credits : Total postwar period _ Fiscalyear Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Total net grants and credits : Total postwar period 5__ Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal year Fiscal Fiscal Fiscal Fiscal Fiscal year year year year year ' ) Includes European Coal and Steel Community European Payments Union European Productivity Agency and Organization for European Economic Cooperation Includes United States contribution to United Nations for Palestine Relief Includes United States contribution to United Nations Korean Reconstruction and Relief Administration * Includes United States contribution to Organization of American States Postwar period covers July through June Excludes United States subscriptions to International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Monetary Fund Does not include $ million prior grants converted into credits in the postwar period ( Western Europe $ million Eastern Europe $ million Near East and Africa $ million China $ million and Latin America $ million ) Western Europe $ million in fiscal year and Latin America $ million in fiscal year Less than $ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F U. S. Government grants of military supplies and services by areas total postwar period andfiscalyears [ Fiscal years millions of dollars ] Total postwar Area Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) Near East ( including Greece Turkey and Africa ) Other Asia and Pacific American Republics Unspecified period1 Gross military grants Less : Reverse grants and returns Equals : Net military grants Postwar period covers July through June Includes cash contributions to the multilateral-construction program of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE F Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions and [ Billions of dollars ] Sterling area End of year Total Total United Kingdom Continental OEEC All Latin Other countries European Canada American other Republics countries and countries dependencies International institutions As of September NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of U. S. S. R gold reserves and of international institutions ( International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund United Nations and others ) Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements ( both for its own and E P U accounts ) and of the Tripartite Commission for Restitution cf Monetary Gold are included with the holdings of continental OEEC countries and dependencies. Figures represent ( ) reported and estimated gold reserves of central banks and governments ( ) official and private short-term dollar holdings reported by banks in the United States including foreign-held deposits U. S. Government securities and certain other short-term liabilities to foreigners and ( ) estimated holdings of U. S. Government bonds and notes with original maturities of more than one year. Figures for are not strictly comparable with those for subsequent years owing to exclusion of long-term U. S. Government bonds and notes Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System