Economic Report or the President Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES -GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. C Price of single copy cents LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE January To the Congress of the United States : I present herewith my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this Report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers. I have also had the advice of the heads of executive departments and independent agencies of the Government. I set forth below largely in the language of the Report itself what I consider to be its salient conclusions and recommendations Economic Recovery in When the Economic Report was submitted to the Congress in January a contraction in production and employment that had started some six months earlier was still under way. The decline proved to be sharper than the recession but it did not last as long. A recovery began in May and by the end of the year most of the ground lost had been regained. Gross national product our broadest measure of the Nation 's output of goods and services was at an annual rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter of the year. In dollars of constant purchasing power this was almost equal to the highest output attained in the pre-recession period Nearly a million more people were at work in December than in July after allowance for seasonal changes. Although the number of persons unemployed was above million in December it was million below the highest unemployment figure reached during the recession. Wage and salary income and consumer spending were at an all-time high and the index of consumer prices had been virtually stable for six months although about percent higher than a year earlier Economic Policies in The events of the last months show again the considerable capacity of our economy to resist contractive influences and to hold a downturn within fairly narrow limits Many factors contribute to this capacity. Chief among them are the industry and resourcefulness of our people the strength and resiliency of our free competitive institutions and the continuing operation in the American economy of powerful forces making for long-term growth Also of importance are features of our economic system that moderate the impact of contractive influences on personal income and thus help to in maintain demand. Increasingly our people work in industries and occupations that are not readily affected by moderate economic declines. And such reductions in income as do result from lower production and employment are offset to a considerable extent by supplementary payments notably by those made under the Federal-State system of unemployment insurance Governmental actions also played an important role in moderating the recession and helping to bring about a prompt and sound recovery. Monetary and credit policies were employed vigorously to assure ample supplies of credit. Legislation was enacted to lengthen temporarily the period of entitlement to unemployment benefits. Numerous actions were taken to spur building activity. Steps were taken to accelerate Federal construction projects already under way and to speed up projects supported by Federal financial assistance. Activities under a number of Federal credit programs in addition to those in the housing field helped counter the recession. And the acceleration of defense procurement which was being undertaken in line with national security policy exerted an expansive effect The recession shows that the major emphasis of Federal policies to counteract an economic downturn should be placed on measures that will act promptly to help shift the balance of economic forces from contraction to recovery and growth. Though an effective contribution can be made by the acceleration of public construction projects already under way little reliance can be placed on large undertakings which however useful they may be in the longer term can be put into operation only after an extended interval The experience is also a reminder that there is no simple prescription for corrective action which can be applied with only minor variations in every business downturn. It emphasizes the importance in a situation in which powerful corrective forces are at work of avoiding hasty and disproportionate actions such as tax reductions that needlessly endanger the prospects of future fiscal balance and prejudice the orderly revision of the tax structure As production employment and income moved upward in the economic policies of Government became increasingly concerned with keeping the recovery on a sound basis and promoting a sustainable long-term expansion. Monetary and credit policy was shifted with a view to limiting the expansion of bank credit to a sustainable pace. The large financing operations of the United States Treasury are being conducted with a view to enhancing the basic stability of our financial system and promoting sound economic growth. And the fiscal operations of Government are moving in the direction of restoring a balance between outlays and incomes and thereby countering potential inflationary tendencies The Economic Outlook As opens there is reason for confidence that the improvement in business activity which began in the second quarter of last year will rv be extended into the months ahead. Factors that influence decisions on business capital outlays have become more favorable and an upturn in these expenditures may already be under way. Residential construction outlays should contribute further to economic expansion especially if favorable action is taken by the Congress on recommendations made in the Report to provide a steadier and more assured flow of private funds into mortgages. Sales of United States products in foreign markets may increase as the pace of business activity abroad quickens and the trade position of primafy producing countries is improved. The combined outlays of Federal State and local government units will continue to rise. Under the impact of these developments the liquidation of inventories should soon come to an end ; indeed the gap between current sales and stepped-up production schedules may already have been closed. The effect of these favorable factors on employment and income can be expected to enlarge the markets for consumer goods and thereby to reinforce the conditions making for over-all economic expansion A Program for Economic Growth with Stable Prices Our objective must be to establish a firm foundation for extending economic growth with stable prices into the months and years ahead. This will not come about automatically. To attain our goal we must safeguard and improve the institutions of our free competitive economy. These are basic to America 's unassailable economic strength. We must wage a relentless battle against impediments to the fullest and most effective use of our human and technological resources. We must provide incentives for the enlargement and improvement of the facilities that supplement human effort and make it increasingly productive. Finally an indispensable condition for achieving vigorous and continuing economic growth is firm confidence that the value of the dollar will be reasonably stable in the years ahead Action to meet these challenges is required on many fronts by all groups in our society and by all units of government The individual consumer can play an important part by shopping carefully for price and quality. In this way the American housekeeper can be a powerful force in holding down the cost of living and strengthening the principle that good values and good prices make good business Businessmen must redouble their efforts. They must wage a ceaseless war against costs. Production must be on the most economical basis possible. The importance of wide and growing markets must be borne in mind in setting prices. Expanding markets in themselves promise economies that help keep costs and prices in check Leaders of labor unions have a particularly critical role to play in view of the great power lodged in their hands. Their economic actions must reflect awareness that the only road to greater material well-being for the Nation lies in the fullest realization of our productivity potential and that stability of prices is an essential condition of sustainable economic growth The terms of agreements reached between labor and management in wage and related matters will have a critical bearing on our success in attaining a high level of economic growth with stable prices. It is not the function of Government in our society to establish the terms of these contracts but it must be recognized that the public has a vital interest in them. Increases in money wages and other compensation not justified by the productivity performance of the economy are inevitably inflationary They impose severe hardships on those whose incomes are not enlarged They jeopardize the capacity of the economy to create jobs for the expanding labor force. They endanger present jobs by limiting markets at home and impairing our capacity to compete in markets abroad. In short they are in the end self-defeating Self-discipline and restraint are essential if reasonable stability of prices is to be reached within the framework of the free competitive institutions on which we rely heavily for the improvement of our material welfare. If the desired results can not be achieved under our arrangements for determining wages and prices the alternatives are either inflation which would damage our economy and work hardships on millions of Americans or controls which are alien to our traditional way of life and which would be an obstacle to the Nation 's economic growth and improvement The chief way for Government to discharge its responsibility in helping to achieve economic growth with price stability is through the prudent conduct of its own financial affairs. The budget submitted to the Congress for the fiscal year which balances expenditures with receipts at a level of $ billion seeks to fulfill this responsibility. If Government spending is held within the limits set in the proposed budget the growth of our economy at the rate that may be expected would make it possible in the reasonably foreseeable future to provide through a significant further step in tax reform and reduction added incentives and means for vigorous economic growth and improvement Governmental actions in other areas can also help to maintain price stability as our economy expands. The Congress will be requested to amend the Employment Act of to make reasonable price stability an explicit goal of Federal economic policy coordinate with the goals of maximum production employment and purchasing power now specified in that Act Steps will be taken within the Executive Branch to assure that governmental programs and activities are administered in line with the objective of reasonable price stability and programs for the enlargement and improvement of public information on prices wages and related costs and productivity will be accelerated The many continuing programs of Government that promote the expansion and improvement of our economy will be administered vigorously Also new legislation will be requested to strengthen competitive forces to enhance personal welfare to promote integrity in labor-management relationships and to foster better industrial relations to assist local areas VI experiencing heavy and persistent unemployment to make more effective use of the large Federal expenditures relating to agricultural price support to promote conditions favorable to trade among nations and to assist in the economic growth and development of the Free World Favorable consideration of these legislative proposals by the Congress will materially help to achieve the goals of vigorous orderly and sustainable economic progress within a framework of reasonable price stability All of our people in view of their broad common interest in promoting the Nation 's economic strength can fully support this program DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER VII CONTENTS Page CHAPTER The Lessons of Recession and Recovery in The Economy 's Capacity To Resist Recession Policy Implications of Differences Among Economic Cycles... Achieving Vigorous and Sustainable Economic Growth CHAPTER Economic Developments in and Outlook for Extent of the Decline Major Factors in the Decline Resistance to Contraction Prices and Costs Resumption of Economic Expansion Developments in World Production and Trade Outlook for CHAPTER Economic Policies in Policies During the Contraction Money and Credit Housing and Home Financing Unemployment Insurance Benefits Defense Procurement Civil Procurement and Construction Acceleration of Grants-in-Aid and Tax Refunds Federal-Aid Highway Program Federal Credit Programs Federal Fiscal Operations Policies After the Upturn CHAPTER A Program for Economic Growth With Price Stability A Balanced Budget Other Governmental Financial Policies Additional Governmental Actions To Maintain Price Stability Additional Measures for Economic Growth Competition Small Business Personal Welfare Area Assistance Agriculture Foreign Economic Policy IX CHAPTER Continued Continuing Programs for Economic Growth and Improvement Education Personal Security and Health Construction and Transportation Water Projects and Mineral Exploration Research and Development Page APPENDIXES A. Summary of Recommendations in the Economic Report of the President B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During C. Some Major Economic Developments in I. Employment and Earnings II. Prices III. Agriculture IV. Financial Developments V. Government Finances VI. United States Foreign Trade and Payments D. Statistical Tables LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS ( Chapters and and Appendix C ) Tables Duration and Extent of Declines in Selected Economic Indicators Changes in Income ahd Consumption in Recessions Obligations and Payments on Federal-Aid Highway Programs '..... " Federal Budget Receipts and Expenditures Fiscal Years C-l. Changes in Nonagricultural Employment Since December C-2. Civilian Employment by Major Occupational Group and C-3. Insured Unemployment Under State and Federal Employee Programs April and April C Index of Average Hourly Earnings Adjusted for Overtime and Inter-Industry Employment Shifts Selected Periods C-5. Distribution of Employees Receiving Wage Increases Under Major Labor Agreements C Changes in Wholesale Price Indexes Since June Tables C-7 G-8 C-9 C-10 C-ll C-12 C-13 C C-15 C-l C-l C-l8 C-l C-20 C-21 C-22 C-23 C-24 C-25 C-26 Page Changes in Consumer Price Indexes Since July Price Changes in the United States and Selected Other Industrial Nations to Number of Farms and Average Income of Farm Families and Meat and Poultry : Prices Receipts Production and Consumption Net Budget Expenditures for Agricultural Programs Fiscal Years Wheat : Production Utilization and Carryover Feed Grains : Production Utilization and Carryover Changes in Short- and Intermediate-Term Consumer Credit Outstanding Net Changes in Commercial Bank Holdings of Loans and Investments Net Changes in Ownership of the Publicly Held Federal Debt During Flow of Funds for Selected Nonbank Financial Institutions Federal Budget Expenditures Relation Between the Federal Budget Surplus or Deficit Receipts from and Payments to the Public and Change in the Public Debt Consolidated Cash Statements of Federal and State and Local Governments Government Receipts and Expenditures as Shown in the National Income Accounts United States Balance of Payments Selected Periods Exports of the United States and Other Countries Change in United States Exports to Change in United States Imports to Use of Gold and Dollars for International Settlements Selected Periods Ill Charts Changes in Major Sectors of the Nation 's Output Third Quarter to First Quarter Changes in Major Sectors of the Nation 's Output First Quarter to Fourth Quarter Manufacturing Capacity Production and Prices Consumer Prices on a Prewar Base Consumer Prices on a Recent Base Wholesale Commodity Prices XI Charts Page Employment in Nonagricultural Establishments Employment Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing Employment Production and Income Foreign Industrial Production World Trade Interest Rates and Bond Yields Member Bank Reserves Money Supply Housing Starts and Requests for Federal Underwriting Federal Government Receipts and Expenditures National Income Accounts Stock Prices and Credit XII Chapter The Lessons of Recession and Recovery in TTTTHEN THE ECONOMIC REPORT was submitted to the Congress * * in January the American economy was in a recession that had started about six months earlier. The decline was still moderate but it was gaining momentum and spreading to additional areas of the economy The Economic Report gave an account of the recession as it had developed to the turn of the year and expressed the view that the underlying strength and regenerative powers of our free competitive system supported by appropriate private and public policies might be expected to bring the decline to an end soon and to restore the economy to an upward path. The recession did in fact halt in April By May a recovery was under way ; and before many months had passed most of the ground lost during the decline had been regained. As ended we were moving toward new high levels of production and employment The present Economic Report therefore reviews the greater part of a full economic cycle. Chapter describes the extent of the contraction and how it started what helped to keep it within narrow limits how recovery began and developed and what the economic situation was at the end of the year. Chapter summarizes the Government actions that helped to shorten the decline to reduce the severity of its impact and to promote a sound recovery. And Chapter proposes a program for promoting economic growth on a sustainable inflation-free basis These major divisions of the Report are-presented in fulfillment of the explicit requirements of the Employment Act of But it is useful also to consider what broad lessons may be learned from the events of the past year and a half as guides for the future. What do these events tell us about how our economy responds to contractive influences about the role that Government can usefully play in seeking to moderate economic fluctuations and about the problems that Americans must face in the years ahead in striving to achieve high and sustainable rates of economic growth unmarred by inflation ? These questions are treated in the present chapter THE ECONOMY 'S CAPACITY TO RESIST RECESSION In many respects the most important lesson taught by the recent recession is that a competitive economic system has remarkable power to resist contractive pressures and without an extended interruption of growth to stage a good recovery. The inherent features of our economy that make this possible its strength and resiliency are due mainly to our free competitive institutions to the stability of our institutions of saving banking and finance and to the character of our people notably their industry and resourcefulness and their capacity to take a confident and balanced view of the Nation 's economic prospects. Other sources of strength are due to certain long-term structural changes in our economy which have resulted in growing percentages of American workers being employed in industries and occupations not readily affected by an economic downturn and to certain changes in business practices notably long-term planning for the enlargement of operations Our economy is also aided in resisting recession by features that tend to moderate the impact of a decline in economic activity on the flow of income to individuals and thus on the volume of spending for consumption. The most important of these is the Federal-State unemployment insurance system under which payments are made to individuals out of work. In addition our system of graduated personal income taxes cushions the impact of an over-all decline in income on the amounts available for spending on consumer goods and for savings These features of our economy which were clearly evident in the recession have certain implications for public policy that are worthy of special note. First the capacity of our economy to withstand contractive influences provides time for regenerative processes to make the adjustments needed for sound recovery and for the counteractive measures taken by Government jointly with factors making for long-term growth to make their effects felt. Where necessary efforts should be made to strengthen these features of our economic system Second the major emphasis of Federal countercyclical policy should be placed on measures that will result in prompt action to help promote a shift in the balance of economic forces from contraction to recovery and growth Though a useful contribution can be made by the acceleration of public works projects that are already under way or are ready to be started little reliance can be placed on large undertakings which however useful they may be in the longer term can be put into operation only after an extended interval of planning. By the time they are fully under way they may exert excessive demand on an economy that has already recovered Third in contrast to large-scale public works monetary and credit policy used vigorously can produce prompt and significantly helpful results Although the easing of credit does not affect all parts of the economy to the same degree it works broadly is promptly reversible and makes its impact felt without entailing direct governmental intervention in the affairs of business concerns and individuals Finally the capacity to resist short-term fluctuations can be increased by Government actions to strengthen the factors that make for long-term economic growth vigorously competitive markets research and develop- ment activity and heightened incentives for all Americans to work save and invest. It is on these factors that we depend most heavily for the thrust that lifts the economy from recession to recovery and for the stimulus to continuing economic expansion and improvement POLICY IMPLICATIONS OF DIFFERENCES AMONG ECONOMIC CYCLES Although all economic cycles have certain common characteristics each is unique in character and follows a course that varies in significant respects from its predecessors. These distinctive characteristics must be taken into account when governmental policies intended to help reverse a recessionary trend are formulated The need to do this was especially evident in the recession. It had been preceded by a major expansion in productive capacity without a corresponding increase in utilization so that when the downturn began there was ample if not temporarily excess capacity in a number of important industries. In contrast the expansion of capacity prior to the downturn had been matched by a roughly equivalent increase in production Similarly the American consumers ' requirements for a broad range of goods were more nearly satisfied when business activity turned down in than they had been when activity began to recede in Sales of automobiles reached an exceptionally high level in aided by a sharp easing of instalment credit terms. In production of Western European nations was expanding rapidly world commodity prices were relatively stable and international trade was continuing to rise. In on the other hand industrial activity in Western Europe tended to level off commodity prices weakened and international trade turned downward for the time being These differences naturally affected the character and extent of the recent decline. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment which had fallen only percent in dropped percent in Total consumer expenditures were virtually stable in both periods ; but in the nine months following the peak automobile production fell percent compared with an percent decline following the economic downturn in Merchandise exports which had increased percent in fell by about that amount in the recession But from the viewpoint of public policy the most significant difference between the two periods was in Federal fiscal operations. In the three quarters following the peak of activity Federal purchases of goods and services increased $ billion measured on an annual rate basis ; in the comparable period of they fell $ billion largely as a result of the termination of the Korean conflict. This critical difference was accentuated by the fact that although State and local government purchases of goods and services were rising in both recessions they rose more in than in It was clear in January that even without a general tax reduction the fiscal operations of the Federal Government would have a significantly more expansive effect on the economy than they had had during the recession notwithstanding the tax cut of $ billion in early As it turned out the economy received an even larger stimulus from Federal fiscal operations in the fiscal year than had been expected at first. And this effect has been intensified in the fiscal year These facts are a reminder that there is no single prescription for corrective action which can be applied with only minor variations in every cyclical episode. They emphasize the importance in a situation in which powerful corrective forces are already at work of avoiding hasty and disproportionate actions such as tax reductions that needlessly endanger the prospects of future fiscal balance and prejudice the orderly revision of the tax structure Clearly the distinctive features of a downturn are pertinent not only to an appraisal of the probable course of business activity as contraction develops but also to the design of measures to help stem the downturn and promote recovery ACHIEVING VIGOROUS AND SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH We may justifiably take satisfaction in the increases already achieved in employment production and incomes and in the. fact that the price level has been reasonably steady of late Our objective now must be to establish a firm foundation for extending this economic advance and price stability into the months and years ahead But this will not come about automatically. On that point history is clear Action is required on many fronts by all groups in our society and by all units of government First we must zealously safeguard and improve the institutions of our free and competitive economy. America 's unassailable economic strength derives in no small measure from the fact that over the years there have been incentives and freedom to do new things and to challenge old and established ways. Our strength comes in large part from the pressures which this competition entails pleasures to shelter groups from these pressures and from the need to make the readjustments that they compel come at the cost of limiting our capacity to grow Second a high rate of growth in our economy requires that we wage a relentless battle against impediments to the full and most effective use of our human and technological resources. Such impediments curb the productivity of our work force and increase production costs. They raise the prices of the things we buy and limit the success of our efforts to lift levels of living Third if we are to achieve a rapid rate of economic growth and improvement in the years ahead we must continue to enlarge and improve the plant and equipment that supplement human effort and make it increasingly productive. There must be strong incentives for businesses to commit ever larger sums for expanding their operations and reducing their costs. And there must also be incentives for the thrift essential to the financing of these critically important outlays. Policies that weaken these incentives will cause us to fall short of achieving our full potential for expansion Finally an indispensable condition for achieving vigorous and continuing economic growth is firm confidence that the value of the dollar will be reasonably stable in the years ahead. In recent months prices generally have moved within a narrow range and some of the price increases early in the year were the result of temporary conditions such as the effect of adverse weather on food supplies. But these facts provide no basis for complacency regarding the long-term problem of maintaining reasonably stable prices. Despite recession during the first part of the year wage rates continued to move upward. The rate of increase was nearly as great as in periods of economic expansion and higher than the rate at which gains in productivity have been achieved in our economy over extended periods of time. Obviously if we have only limited success in restraining increases in unit costs during recession much remains to be done to achieve a basis for holding prices reasonably steady when productive capacity is more fully utilized. To this challenge everyone must respond The individual consumer can play an important part by shopping carefully for price and quality. In this way the American housekeeper can be a powerful force for holding down the cost of living and strengthening the principle that good values and good prices make good business Businessmen must redouble their efforts. They must wage a ceaseless war against costs. Production must be on the most economical basis possible. The importance of wide and growing markets must be borne in mind in setting prices. Expanded markets in themselves promise economies that help keep costs and prices in check Leaders of labor unions in view of the great power lodged in their hands have a particularly critical role to play. Their economic actions must reflect awareness that stability of prices is an essential condition of sustainable economic growth and that the only road to greater material well-being for the Nation lies in the fullest possible realization of our productivity potential This requires not only that our resources be fully employed but that arbitrary restraints on their most effective utilization be removed. We can realize more from our economy only to the extent that we produce more It is not the function of Government in our society to establish the terms of contracts between labor and management ; yet it must be recognized that the public has a vital interest in these agreements. Increases in money wages and other compensation not justified by the productivity performance of the economy are inevitably inflationary. They impose severe hardships on those whose incomes are not enlarged. They jeopardize the capacity of the economy to create jobs for the expanding labor force. They endanger present jobs by limiting markets at home and impairing our capacity to compete in markets abroad. In short they are in the end self-defeating Self-discipline and restraint are essential if agreements consistent with a reasonable stability of prices are to be reached within the framework of the O free competitive institutions on which we rely heavily for the improvement of our material welfare. If the desired results can not be achieved under our arrangements for determining wages and prices the alternatives are either inflation which would damage our economy and work hardships on millions of Americans or controls which are alien to our traditional way of life and which would be an obstacle to the Nation 's economic growth and improvement Government also has a vitally important part to play in helping to prevent inflationary developments. First through the management of its fiscal affairs it can help to create an environment favorable to the achievement and maintenance of price stability. Second to the extent consistent with other national objectives it must strive to operate those Government programs that directly affect costs and prices in a way that will contribute to over-all price stability. Third it must lose no opportunity through revisions of its tax structure or by other means to promote improvements in productivity and to provide greater incentives for economic expansion Numerous elements in the program recommended to the Congress in Chapter of this Report are concerned explicitly with establishing a more secure basis for the price stability essential for orderly economic expansion Other parts of the program though immediately directed to other goals will also further this objective. All of our people in view of their broad common interest in economic growth can fully support this program Chapter Economic Developments in and Outlook for SHARP but brief contraction the third quarter of A ^ TER Aeconomic activity being reversed startingtoinappear early of turned upward in the second quarter Signs that the recession was began in May and once started the recovery spread rapidly through the economy. By the end of the year most of the ground lost during the contraction had been regained. The index of industrial production was percent of the average compared with the peak of in ; total employment had increased by about million from its recession low ; unemployment had been reduced by approximately the same amount ; and the income and expenditures of individuals were at new high levels. Gross national product our broadest measure of the Nation 's output of goods and services had risen to an annual rate of $ billion. Expressed in dollars of constant purchasing power this represented an output of goods and services about equal to the peak reached in EXTENT OF THE DECLINE Measured by the duration and extent of declines in employment production and income the recession may be regarded as a moderate one by the standards of earlier experience ( Table ) The Nation 's total output TABLE Duration and extent of declines in selected economic indicators Percentage change l Duration ( months ) Period Nonagricultural employment Total ( Census ) ( ) ( ) Wage and salary workers ( BLS ) Industrial production Personal income Percentage change from cyclical peak to cyclical trough ( 3-month centered averages ) based on seasonally adjusted data In nonagricultural establishments. See Table D-22 footnote for explanation of differences between this series and the Bureau of the Census series Xot available Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Department of Commerce Department of Labor National Bureau of Economic Research and Council of Economic Advisers CHART Changes in Major Sectors of the Nations Output Third Quarter to First Quarter State and local spending and consumer outlays on nondurables and services helped offset declines in business investment exports and consumer spending on durables BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES TOTAL G N P CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT-I/ CONSUMER EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS NET EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES FEDERAL PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION CONSUMER EXPENDITURES FOR NONDURABLE GOODS AND SERVICES STATE AND LOCAL PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES I U PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT AND NONRESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION SOURCE * DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART Changes in Major Sectors of the Nation 's Output First Quarter to Fourth Quarter Changes in inventory investment and purchases by consumers and by government were major factors in the GNP increase BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES TOTAL GNP CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT- ! / CONSUMER EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS NET EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES FEDERAL PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION CONSUMER EXPENDITURES FOR NONDURABLE GOODS AND SERVICES STATE AND LOCAL PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES I -V PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT CONSTRUCTION AND NONRESIDENTIAL SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS of goods and services adjusted for changes in prices fell about * /2 percent between the third quarter of and the first quarter of Industrial output decreased more sharply which is typical of economic contractions ; over a period of eight months it decreased percent. Employment in manufacturing industries began to decline in January slowly for six or seven months and then more rapidly. By May one month after what is commonly regarded as the low point in general business activity a decline of percent had been recorded. Reductions in nonfarm employment outside of manufacturing were smaller. Unemployment began to rise in the third quarter of and fluctuated around million in the spring and summer of Lower employment naturally meant a reduction in the incomes received by individuals. Total wage and salary payments fell 3/2 percent between July and April The drop in total personal income on the other hand was only percent These broad measures tend to obscure the fact that economic fluctuations characteristically affect some parts of the economy more severely than others. The recent recession was no exception in this respect. Production of nondurable goods declined very little and the output of the service industries actually increased. On the other hand production of consumer durable goods fell percent from July to April ; the output of steel and of machinery fell percent and percent respectively ; and the production of automobiles in April was about percent below what it had been in the same month of The pace of the decline was also uneven. The downturn was preceded by a slowing in the rate of growth of the economy and for the first few months the rate of contraction was relatively moderate. However it tended to accelerate in the early months of with the result that a large proportion of the total decline was compressed into a period covering less than half of its full duration By the end of March the decline was abating and by May indications of a general improvement began to appear. The signs of recovery which multiplied quickly were confirmed before long by a sustained upturn and the recession may now be regarded as having ended in April MAJOR FACTORS IN THE DECLINE Early in changes in several economic sectors developing at the same time mainly by coincidence tended to sap the vigor of the expansion then in progress. Each exerted a growing downward pressure on production and employment and ultimately their joint effect was to tip the balance around midyear toward a general reduction in economic activity ( Chart ) The major developments were the decrease in the volume of incoming business of the capital goods industries and reduced appropriations by manufacturing businesses for their investment expenditure programs. By the end of these early signs were confirmed by lower expenditures of business concerns on machinery equipment and new facilities. Throughout CHART Manufacturing Capacity Production and Prices Manufacturing capacity rose in relative to production INDEX = MANUFACTURING CAPACITY- ! / V and prices of capital goods rose relative to the prices of other products INDEX = Q Q I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I | I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I II ! / END OF Y E A R & SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : Me G R A W HILL PUBLISHING COMPANY BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND E. H. BOECKH AND ASSOCIATES II most of financing for expansion programs was becoming more costly Corporate liquidity was low and instances of capital issues being postponed because of unfavorable financing conditions increased. Clearly financial considerations were exerting a progressively greater influence on businesses to restrict their commitments for further expansion of their facilities A more basic factor affecting the capital expansion programs of businesses was the widening gap between the supply and use of industrial capacity. In manufacturing alone spending on new plant and equipment between and had increased capacity by about one-fourth but production had increased by only percent. At the same time the cost of new capacity as reflected in the prices of industrial equipment rose substantially more than the prices of industrial output ( Chart ) Pressure to curtail the capital improvement and expansion programs of businesses mounted rapidly. By the second quarter of outlays for these purposes had dropped $ billion on an annual rate basis from the peak reached three quarters earlier. This sharp decline was a major factor in initiating the general economic contraction A similar though lesser impact on business activity resulted from a reduction in merchandise exports. These had risen at a particularly rapid rate in and early and in the first quarter of the latter year they were percent higher than in The decline that began in the second quarter of persisted through the first quarter of when the volume of exports stabilized some percent below the level a year earlier. Initially the decline occurred largely in wheat cotton and petroleum but it soon spread to exports of metals machinery and manufactured goods generally The rising volume of exports in and early had helped to maintain an upward trend in our economy at a time when domestic investment demands were beginning to level off. The disappearance of the special factors accounting for this surge in foreign sales coincided with the decline in investment outlays of business concerns and reinforced this downward pressure on economic activity. The Suez crisis that had led earlier to unusually heavy petroleum shipments subsided. Shipments of cotton and other agricultural products which had been exceptionally large during the second half of and the first half of declined. Economic activity in certain industrialized countries of Western Europe and in Japan ceased to increase following a prolonged period of expansion ; and in view of their large stocks of imported materials these countries reduced their demands on the productive capacity of the United States. Industrial contraction in Canada resulted in smaller United States exports to that important market and some of the less developed countries of the world curtailed imports because of a weakening in their terms of trade and foreign exchange positions The drop in our shipments abroad occurring at a time when our imports were declining very little meant a decrease in net exports of goods and services of about $ billion on an annual rate basis from the first half of to the first half of Obligations by the Department of Defense for major procurement and production items which had risen in the second and third quarters of to an annual rate of about $ billion were being made at a $ billion rate in the same period of but actual expenditures changed much less and only after some time lag. The annual rate of purchases of goods and services for national defense declined from $ billion in the second and third quarters of to $ billion in the fourth quarter ; but since Federal expenditures for nondefense programs increased total expenditures in the fourth quarter declined only $ million. Additional nondefense expenditures caused a rise in the total for the first quarter of Subsequently however both defense and nondefense spending increased and total expenditures in the fourth quarter reached $ billion. Meanwhile the rise in expenditures of State and local government units continued. As a result total expenditures for goods and services by all units of government Federal State and local increased throughout the recession. In the first quarter of they were percent higher than they had been six months earlier Finally although the aggregate of consumer spending changed very little large and important shifts occurred in the amounts spent on different groups of goods. Purchases of consumer durable goods moved irregularly in the first three quarters of then dropped sharply in the next six months In the first half of they were percent less than in the third quarter of and approximately four-fifths of the decline was accounted for by reduced purchases of automobiles. Sharp cuts in consumer purchases of durable goods are by no means unprecedented in recession but the decline was unusually large in view of the small reduction about percent in the amount of income available to consumers after payment of taxes These largely independent changes in demand lower rates of spending by businesses on new plant and equipment smaller exports briefly and slightly reduced purchases by the Federal Government a lower rate of contract placement and reduced expenditures by consumers for durable goods led to a change in the inventory policies of business concerns. This change was a major factor in the decline From to mid-1957 business inventories were increased substantially To a considerable extent this represented the rebuilding and enlargement of stocks of materials work in process and finished products that are a normal part of any expansion period. The rate of inventory accumulation slackened noticeably in the first three quarters of however as uncertainties about future sales and prices emerged and as the financing of inventories became more costly and difficult. But the major change did not come until the final quarter of the year. Business concerns then curtailed their production schedules sharply below the rate at which they were making sales and by the first quarter of inventories were being reduced at the rate of $ billion per year. Thus a rather common feature of economic fluctuations in an enterprise economy was repeated : a moderate decline in the pace of actual sales produced a much larger effect on production and employment by provoking a sharp swing from inventory accumulation to inventory liquidation The inventory declines were closely related to the specific reductions in demand already noted. Indeed reductions in inventory holdings by manufacturers of machinery aircraft and automobiles accounted for over one-half of the decline in total business inventories. Producers supplying these industries in turn were faced with substantial declines in incoming business and they attempted to pare down their holdings. As a consequence particularly large reductions occurred in the output of the supplying industries Certain additional developments also influenced inventory policies. Special problems of excess capacity and unfavorable relationships between current sales and inventory holdings affected the petroleum chemical and paper industries. The inventories of manufacturers of consumer household durable goods were high when the downturn began ; although sales declined only moderately production was cut sharply in order to complete the indicated adjustment. And distributors of all types of consumer goods apart from automobile dealers whose inventories were rising sharply cut their purchases from manufacturers and drew down their inventories even though consumer purchases were well maintained. The major part of this liquidation of trade inventories came in the first quarter of when recessionary pressures were greatest The impact of these inventory adjustments was considerable. The swing from accumulation at an annual rate of $ billion per year in the third quarter of to liquidation at the annual rate of $ billion during the first quarter of reduced gross national product by $ billion about percent of its entire decline during this period RESISTANCE TO CONTRACTION Measures taken in specifically to counteract economic recession and other measures taken for reasons independent of economic conditions played an important part in limiting the contraction in production and employment to a moderate over-all decline and to a brief span of time. But these limiting features were in part also the result of the considerable and growing capacity of our economic system to resist deflationary forces A major element in the economy 's resistance to recession in was the maintenance of over-all consumer demand a result that may be attributed to consumer confidence and to the maintenance of personal income Although gross national product was $ billion lower on an annual-rate basis in the first quarter of than in the third quarter of the decline in personal disposable ( after tax ) income was less than $ billion and aggregate consumer expenditures fell only $ billion In contrast during the recessions prior to World War II large declines in investment activity commonly resulted in large contractions in personal income and reduced incomes naturally led to lower consumer purchases But in recessions since the war the relative stability of consumer incomes and purchases has provided a check on this potentially cumulative process As a result declines in production have been contained within a narrower segment of the economy A number of factors help to account for the maintenance of consumer income during the recession. First the decline in personal income earned in production was small relative to the contraction in the value of output. For every decline of $ billion in private output personal income earned fell only $ million ; in it fell $ million for each $ billion decline in output. This relatively more moderate decline in earned income resulted in part from the fact that a larger proportion of our labor force is now employed in industries and occupations not quickly affected by moderate changes in business conditions ; and even in the industries that are more sensitive to business fluctuations a larger proportion of employees hold positions not usually affected by production cutbacks of short duration. Moreover wage rates continued to press upward during the period increasing the pay of employed persons and moderating the income reductions of those working a shorter week. But this is a factor that works two ways. It may sustain income for the employed ; but to the extent that it leads to higher costs and prices it may induce reductions in the working force and be an obstacle to re-employment Some of the factors that have made personal income earned in production more resistant to recession have on the other hand made corporate income more sensitive. Total corporate profits and consequently the revenues received by Government from corporate income taxes fell sharply during the recession. Because corporate dividends were maintained at a high level helping to sustain personal income corporate retentions of income were sharply reduced. For every $ billion decline in gross national product corporate income taxes and retained earnings ( adjusted for inventory valuation ) together fell $ million from the third quarter of to the first quarter of compared with a drop of $ million from to Another development accounting for the small decline in personal income earned in production was the rise in farm income during the recession Net farm income rose in the first quarter of to an annual rate that was percent higher than in increased another percent in the second quarter and then remained roughly unchanged for the rest of the year. To some extent however the beneficial results for the economy of the larger income of farmers were offset by the effect of higher farm prices which reduced nonfarm real income and purchases Second certain supplements to earnings helped to maintain aggregate consumer income. Unemployment compensation payments increased sharply as employment and earnings fell and the extension of these benefits for additional periods in provided a further offset to lost pay for those who had exhausted their rights. Actually the extended benefits did not begin to be paid until after the recovery had started ; nevertheless they assisted those who felt the recession 's effect for the longest time and they also strengthened the recovery movement. In addition supplemental unemployment compensation payments under private plans helped to maintain personal incomes and consumption expenditures. Another major income supplement was the steady increase in payments under social security pension and other benefit arrangements. The increase in such payments during the recession resulted from the growth in the number of persons eligible to receive them and from benefit increases under certain public social security programs which had been legislated earlier The increase in these so-called " transfer " payments was very large : $ billion on an annual rate basis between the third quarter of and the first quarter of and another $ billion by the third quarter. In this way not only was the personal income earned in production relatively well maintained during the recession but the declines that did occur were appreciably moderated in their effect on total personal income Finally part of the fall in personal income was offset by a decline in tax obligations so that the income available to consumers after taxes and thus their purchasing power declined less than the flow of personal income The combination of these three stabilizing factors the small decline in earned personal income relative to the decline in production the growth in transfer payments and the reduction in personal tax payments greatly moderated the fall in consumer income available for spending. And consumers in turn reduced their purchases of goods and services by less than the fall in their income If purchases by consumers in had fallen as much in proportion to the decline in all other demands for output as from to they TABLE Changes in income and consumption in recessions Percentage change Period Gross national product Personal income earned in production Ratio of change in consumpPersonal tion to Disposable consump- change in personal tion exgross income penditures national product l ( percent ) ( ) ( ) Ratio based on change in dollar amounts Not computed because consumption rose while gross national product declined NOTE. Changes from to and from to are based on annual data. Other changes are based on seasonally adjusted data for the peak and trough quarters of gross national product Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers would have dropped by at least $ billion. Actually they fell only $ billion. While gross national product fell 4/2 percent personal disposable income fell only about percent and consumption expenditures only percent ( Table ) The moderate extent and relatively short duration of the recession were also due in part to the absence of adverse financial developments which in the past have tended to aggravate business contractions and to the increase of asset values notably farm land and real estate. These circumstances reflect the fact that the recession was brief and moderate but they helped to keep it brief and moderate PRICES AND COSTS Public attention was attracted during the recession to the apparent paradox of prices continuing to rise while production and employment were declining. Attention was naturally focused mainly on consumer prices As measured by the consumer price index this group of prices rose on the average by about percent though there was considerable diversity of movement among different items. A major part of the increase was due to higher food prices and the continuing upward drift in the costs of various services used by consumers ( Charts and ) On the other hand prices of manufactured products with the major exception of new and used automobiles were reasonably stable CHART Consumer Prices on a Prewar Base Between and commodity prices increased rapidly service prices slowly Since then prices of services have risen steadily relative to prices of commodities INDEX = > * ALL ITEMS / DURABLE /COMMODITIES NONDURABLE COMMODITIES ^ * EXCLUDING FOOD ' ^ I I I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR J I I I I I I I Prices in wholesale markets rose somewhat less than prices at retail and have been roughly stable since early in Again however the average of wholesale prices fails to disclose the considerable differences of movement among commodity groups. Prices of farm products and foods rose sharply during the recession and then declined after mid-1958. Prices of raw materials which are always sensitive to changes in domestic and world market conditions declined sharply during the recession but recovered rapidly after the upturn. Prices of manufactured products continued to rise during the early months of the contraction but fluctuated within a narrow range throughout ( Chart ) While it is important to beware of overly simple explanations for the rise in prices during the last few years and in particular for the continuance of some increases during the recession three factors of major importance may be identified as having contributed to these results. First during the early part of the upward price movement which started about three years ago some increases were caused by heavy and rapidly mounting demands. These higher prices often became higher costs for other industries thus diffusing their effects throughout much of the economy Second a substantial part of the rise during the recession reflected forces not closely related to the immediate business situation. Prices of services on which consumers spend over one-third of their total outlays were making a delayed adjustment to earlier increases in prices and costs. This paralleled CHART Consumer Prices on a Recent Base Between and mid-1957 all major price indexes rose ; during the next year increases were confined mainly to food and service prices ; in recent months the over-all index has been stable INDEX = SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART Wholesale Commodity Prices The wholesale price index was roughly stable in recession and recovery Offsetting changes occurred in prices of the various components INDEX = FINISHED INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS * " " PRODUCERS ' EQUIPMEI * <T V / ./ " " no CONSUMER GOODS ' II ll ! m II ll M SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR mnlnm lllllllllll the experience in the other two postwar recessions. Prices of food which account for roughly one-quarter of the expenditures of consumers rose mainly because of supply conditions. Lower marketings of livestock resulted in higher meat prices ; and unfavorable weather conditions reduced the supplies and led to higher prices of fresh fruits and vegetables Third substantial increases in costs in recent years have influenced prices Large additions to productive capacity and the replacement in this period of facilities originally acquired when costs and prices were lower have caused capital costs to mount sharply. A rapidly enlarging complement of professional and technical personnel has also added to costs though inevitably the full beneficial effects of these larger staffs will be realized only over an extended period of time. Since commensurate gains in output have not occurred these increases in costs have resulted in higher expenses per unit of output produced Finally wages salaries and employee fringe benefits have increased at rates above those consistent with the long-run productivity performance of the economy. As a result employee compensation per unit of output which had been fairly stable between and rose about percent in the next two years This persistent advance in costs of all types naturally exerted an upward pressure on prices. The increase in prices that did occur was less than the rise in costs however with the result that profits per unit of output were lower in and than in Clearly severe reductions in the price level during a brief and moderate recession are not to be expected and would not be a proper objective of national economic policy. Indeed such reductions might impede early recovery of the economy. Rather the problem is how to achieve a reasonable stability of prices when economic activity is advancing and output and employment are high. The limited downward flexibility of prices in a moderate recession and the upward movement even then of certain key prices and costs highlight and emphasize the need for public and private policies that will produce the desired price stability at all times RESUMPTION OF ECONOMIC EXPANSION Even during periods of general economic contraction some industries and some regions of the Nation continue to forge ahead and others experience only a temporary cessation or slowing down of their rate of growth This continuing strength helps to moderate cutbacks of production elsewhere ; and when demands begin to rise again in areas where there had been actual declines over-all gains in output and employment follow quickly A pattern of this type prevailed in the recession. While production and employment were declining rather sharply in some sectors notably in the heavy industries and in those producing consumer durable goods output and sales of consumer nondurable goods fell only slightly the service industries expanded and purchases by State and local governments con- CHART Employment in Nonagricultural Establishments Manufacturing mining and transportation accounted for fourfifths of the decline in employment and for half of the increase since April MILLIONS OF PERSONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR O tinued to rise. Then as areas of the economy that had suffered declines resumed expansion and as sales began to be met increasingly out of current production rather than out of inventories a rise in general economic activity started ( Chart ) In the early part of shifts of this kind developed quickly. In February employment was declining in all major sectors of the private economy ; only in government was it increasing. By April and May increases in private employment were reported ( Charts and ) The demand for goods and services ceased declining in a number of industries and in some cases began to rise. The decline of exports virtually ended by the second quarter of eliminating an important contractive force As indicated earlier Federal outlays on goods and services fell only in the fourth quarter of and then by a relatively small amount $ million on an annual rate basis. A rise in such outlays began in the next quarter Purchases of nondefense goods and services by the Federal Government rose at an annual rate of $ billion from the first to the fourth quarter of largely on account of increased payments under agricultural price support programs and higher Government pay scales. And defense outlays significantly influenced by the effect of pay increases rose at an annual rate of $ million between the first and second quarters of and by another $ million in the next two quarters. At the same time there was a sharp increase in the placement of contracts for the purchase of military goods New orders for major items of defense goods which in the second half of were being placed at an annual rate of $ billion increased to an annual rate of $ billion in the first half of The most immediate effect of this rise was to slow and eventually halt the liquidation of inventories by defense contractors Most of the decline in business expenditures for plant and equipment had occurred by the second quarter of However indications that the decline would not be of long duration began to appear early in the year ; new orders for machinery and equipment after falling sharply in the late months of stabilized after the turn of the year and moved upward shortly thereafter. Surveys of the plans of businesses for capital outlays reported in September and again in December indicated that the decline in these expenditures had ended and that some increase was in prospect. Although industrial capacity was generally ample the need for more or for improved facilities was already being felt in some industries Throughout the economy increased competitive pressures and rising costs intensified the search for more efficient production techniques Indications that home building would help promote an upturn were apparent early. Applications for FHA commitments after declining more than seasonally in the final quarter of moved moderately upward through March and then increased strongly for the next six months The number of new private dwelling units being started increased steadily after February. As was to be expected time was required for these changes CHART Employment Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing The average length of the workweek turned up in March HOURS * AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS ( PRODUCTION WORKERS ) II I i I i I I i I I i i I i I I I I i I i i i I i I i i i I i i I I i i i I I i I I i ii and employment of production workers in June MILLIONS OF PERSONS * EMPLOYMENT II NONPRODUCTION ( SALARIED ) WORKERS * S t ' r l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ^ Hourly earnings continued to advance throughout the year DOLLARS AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS ( PRODUCTION WORKERS ) 1111111111i * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART Employment Production and Income Employment changes have been broadly similar to previous postwar experience PEAK MONTH = * NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT ( BLS ) V L-L-J L MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL PEAK MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL LOW PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE * * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CHART Continued Employment Production and Income Changes in production and income also have been similar to previous experience PEAK QUARTER = f TOTAL OUTPUT ( GNP IN CONSTANT PRICES ) QUARTERS AFTER CYCLICAL PEAK PEAK MONTH = IOO f PERSONAL INCOME I i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL PEAK t SEASONALLY ADJUSTED * INCLUDES SPECIAL LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS i to be translated into actual construction activity but the volume of expenditures for residential construction turned upward after May and quickly pushed well above the levels of and The rise in home building activity and the stability of consumer demand in general began early in to exert a favorable influence on the inventory policies of producers and distributors of building materials and consumer goods. In the first quarter of the year these industries were cutting back their inventories sharply. Except for automobiles however sales were not falling by a significant amount and in many cases were rising. As retail and wholesale firms placed larger orders with manufacturers the latter increased their production both to meet the increased sales and to replenish their own inventories. In preparation for a new model year the automobile industry also began expanding production and adding to inventories The change in the rate of inventory investment by wholesalers and retailers and by the automobile industry accounted for a rise of about $ billion in national product between the first and fourth quarters of about oneseventh of the total increase recorded for that period Although inventories of manufacturers not closely associated with consumer developments continued to decline throughout the summer at a fairly rapid rate they eventually began to feel the effects of the increase in demand elsewhere. Inventory reductions were slowed considerably as production expanded faster than sales ; but in some industries particularly those producing capital goods liquidation continued in the final quarter of For the economy as a whole however the rate of production in the fourth quarter was equal to sales whereas in the first quarter it had been $ billion less than sales. This rise of $ billion accounted for more than one-third of the increase in gross national product during the period As a result of increases in sales and production and a continued rise in transfer payments personal income began to rise in March. Apart from the effects of retroactive salary payments to Federal employees in July and the pattern of dividend payments in December the increase continued through the year providing the basis for higher consumption expenditures. Although the decline in consumer spending on durable goods continued through the second quarter total consumption expenditures began to increase in that quarter and by the end of the year retail sales were above sales a year earlier After September purchases of durable goods increased substantially Responding to the increase in output and sales corporate profits recovered sharply in the second half of By the fourth quarter of the year they were apparently equal to the highest quarterly figure in and only slightly below the peak attained in Supplementing the increasing allowances for depreciation these higher earnings were providing substantially larger amounts of internal funds to business concerns by the end of the year Had it not been for extensive work stoppages in the final quarter the recovery in output employment and income and in spending by consumers would have been more rapid. As it was changes in employment followed fairly closely the patterns of change in previous postwar cycles. The rate of unemployment which had risen above the rate in previous recessions since the war also fell rapidly. In the final two months of the year the unemployment rate was close to what it had been in the corresponding period in the recession and recovery though still above what it had been in the corresponding period in ( Chart ) DEVELOPMENTS IN WORLD PRODUCTION AND TRADE The recession was not limited to the United States in its origins or in its effects. Production ceased to expand in most other industrial countries of the Free World and in some countries it declined in ( Chart ) However the general level of industrial output abroad in the closing months of was moderately higher than it had been a year earlier and many indications pointed toward a renewal of expansion in countries with which the American economy is closely related. World commodity prices crucial to the incomes of the primary producing countries stabilized in the first half of the year and some of them tended to strengthen in the second half World trade after its first significant setback since the Korean conflict also appeared to reflect a strengthening of demand The period of expansion which preceded the recession produced certain maladjustments abroad the correction of which entailed at least some slowing down in production and trade before growth could be resumed on a firmer footing. As in the United States the expansion of industrial capacity in certain countries was greater than the increase in industrial output. In the United Kingdom the increase in capacity resulting from large investment outlays after was not matched by a corresponding increase in industrial production or in output per worker. As wage rates continued to rise rapidly labor costs per unit of output increased. Together with rising capital costs they exerted an upward pressure on prices. In most other industrial countries the investment boom was translated into a rapid growth in output and in productivity. Some of these countries especially the Federal Republic of Germany Italy and Austria successfully combined these high growth rates with only moderate price increases. Others however including particularly Japan France and the Netherlands developed strong inflationary pressures at home and unsustainably heavy external deficits as their demands for capital goods and industrial materials rose. To these maladjustments were added the strains in international payments produced by the Suez crisis and the short-term capital movements that started in late Readjustments thus had to be made in a number of countries at about the same time. The timing of these shifts was partly coincidental but their effects were closely intertwined. A contraction of demand arising out of them had immediate effects on inventory policies not only in the countries immediately concerned but in other countries as well as world prices of primary commodities weakened. Some commodities were already vulnerable to such changes. This was especially true with respect to nonferrous metals for which production capacity in the United States and abroad had CHART Foreign Industrial Production Production abroad rose rapidly from to mid-1957 and since then has shown little further change INDEX = * WESTERN EUROPE CANADA AND JAPAN V I I I I I I I I I I UNITED KINGDOM \ * SEASONALLY SOURCES : ADJUSTED DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND ORGANIZATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COOPERATION CHART World Trade The chief decline was in exports of the U. S. and the primary producing countries and in imports of other industrial countries BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * WORLD EXPORTS .f INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES WESTERN EUROPE CANADA AND JAPAN IMPORTS PRIMARY PRODUCING COUNTRIES- ^ EXPORTS * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J/EXCLUDES PETROLEUM-EXPORTING COUNTRIES ( BUT LATTER ARE INCLUDED IN WORLD TOTAL ) NOTE : DATA EXCLUDE TRADE OF USSR AND SOVIET- BLOC COUNTRIES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND been rapidly expanded in response to the extraordinary demands generated by the Korean conflict and its aftermath and by the investment boom Burdensome surpluses of coffee had also been generated by excessive increases in capacity The decline of commodity prices in turn reduced the buying power of countries producing primary products in many of which the demand for imports had already grown beyond export earnings or other means of financing For these reasons international trade receded from the high level reached in the first half of and declined into the early part of ( Chart ) The decline was especially marked in United States exports for reasons related to their commodity composition and country distribution. In the second half of however United States exports were at about the same rate as in the first half of the year and there appeared to be some strengthening in world trade OUTLOOK FOR An examination of changes in demand that have been occurring recently in the major sectors of our economy provides a useful basis for estimating further changes during the months ahead. In the private sector the industries that supply capital goods and facilities have so far contributed only modestly to the recovery. New orders for such goods have improved and demands for them have begun to rise but output in the industries producing these goods has not increased markedly and the increase in employment has been even more restricted. In the months ahead however these industries and others more or less closely related to them should make a larger contribution to rising production employment and income. Factors that have a considerable influence on capital outlay decisions have become more favorable. Business earnings have improved. The rate of utilization of existing industrial capacity though still not exerting pressure on businesses generally to enlarge their facilities has increased sufficiently to bring the need for additional capacity within sight for some industries and firms. Moreover the need for controlling costs provides incentives to replace obsolete and high-cost facilities even though they remain operational. Present evidence indicates that business concerns contemplate no further curtailment of their expenditures for new and better facilities and an upturn in such expenditures may already be under way. In the past improving economic conditions have typically led business concerns to revise upward their plans for capital outlays and it is reasonable to believe that some such revision may take place as the year progresses. There is not as yet a sufficient basis for judging how large the eventual increase in demand from this sector of the economy may be but it seems reasonable to expect that it will make an increasing contribution to a rise in over-all economic activity Although residential construction has already risen by about one-fourth since mid-1958 it is continuing to be a major factor in economic recovery Financing commitments already in hand and uncompleted starts should entail some further increase in construction outlays in the next few months Subsequently however the level of building activity will depend increasingly on the capacity of the industry to compete for funds in the capital markets. Favorable action by the Congress on recommendations made elsewhere in this Report to correct those features of our housing laws that tend currently to impede the flow of private funds into home financing would significantly improve the outlook for a sustained high level of residential construction For the time being exports are still affected by some of the factors that contributed to their decline in : a leveling of industrial activity abroad ; apparently large inventories of some commodities that are important in United States shipments ; and continued trade deficits and strains on foreign exchange reserves in some of the primary producing countries. These conditions not only moderate foreign demands for United States output but also produce keener export competition. A decisive upturn in United States exports can scarcely be expected until a renewed rise in industrial activity abroad sets in and perhaps then only with some delay where inventories or idle capacity are large. However there are encouraging indications of such a rise in some countries abroad and policies favorable to economic expansion have been undertaken generally. Increased demand arising from renewed expansion in the industrial countries may be expected to benefit the trade position of primary producing countries. Meanwhile United States imports appear to be strengthening further as domestic economic activity rises and this should help to increase foreign buying power both directly through larger earnings from the United States and more widely through some continued firming of raw material prices. Accordingly the prospect is that in the course of this year foreign economic activity and possibly with some delay the foreign demand for United States exports should begin to rise again in a mutually reinforcing relationship with our own economy Farm production may be expected to remain an element of strength and stability in Even with growing conditions less favorable than in which was an exceptional year the aggregate output of crops promises to remain high. It is expected that the total supply of milk eggs and meat will be increased the last especially by a substantial amount of pork Large production and stocks of many crops are likely to keep farm prices under some pressure but prices of many products are protected from severe decline by governmental supports. Livestock prices may recede somewhat owing to larger supplies of hogs and poultry though beef cattle prices may remain relatively unchanged. Farmers ' cash receipts from marketings may be well maintained but total expenses on account of farm production will probably continue to rise somewhat reflecting higher payments for wages taxes interest and machinery. Lower or unchanged costs are expected for other items. In these conditions income from farming may be slightly below that in but still high and farmers ' expenditures for production and consumption may be expected to remain at levels favorable to an expansion of business activity. Also the high productivity of agriculture and large stocks of food and feed should help restrain increases in the general price level in the year ahead In the public sector of the economy a rise in Government outlays Federal State and local combined may be expected in the present year though probably a smaller increase than in Outlays by State and local governments have been rising steadily and they may be expected to continue expanding at the same rate as in the past year if not at a somewhat higher rate. The Federal Government 's outlays for goods and services and for transfer payments in connection with social security programs will increase in though by a lesser amount than in the past year If increases in the demand for output continue to develop along these lines the liquidation of inventories should soon come to an end if it has not already done so and some stepping up in production schedules above sales can reasonably be expected. A building up of stocks of materials and work in process is typical of a period of economic expansion. Moreover inventories of some businesses in appear to have fallen below the amounts appropriate for even the reduced pace of sales at that time. The improved liquidity position of business concerns and financial institutions should make it possible to finance needed increases in inventories with reasonable ease When account is taken of the currently favorable appraisal of economic conditions which consumers appear to hold their improved credit position and the higher incomes likely to be generated in sectors of the economy not directly connected with the production of consumer goods it seems reasonable to expect an enlarging market for these goods in the coming year. In turn higher employment in these industries may be expected to contribute further to the increase in economic activity generally. On the other hand the extent to which increases in income can lead to higher consumption of goods and services and thus to higher levels of production and employment in the consumption goods industries depends on whether increases in wage and other costs are held within limits consistent with reasonable stability of consumer prices With due allowance for the limitations that surround all efforts to forecast the probable course of activity in a free economy there is a reasonable basis for confidence that the recent improvement in activity will be extended into the months ahead. However it must be recognized that the actions of all individuals and groups in the Nation consumers business concerns labor organizations and Government will have a decisive bearing on the outcome. All must play their parts appropriately if the high levels of employment production and purchasing power envisaged by the Employment Act are to be attained. A significant contribution by Government to the accomplishment of this purpose and particularly to the achievement of the price stability essential for sustainable economic growth would be assured by the economic program outlined in Chapter That program is recommended to the favorable attention of the Congress Chapter Economic Policies in ARIOUS MEASURES undertaken by Government helped overcome the contractive forces in our economy in Some of these measures were initiated specifically to help reverse the decline and to promote a higher level of business activity. Others were designed to mitigate the special hardships experienced by individuals and families through loss of employment. Still others were called for by considerations entirely independent of economic conditions but they nevertheless had the effect of stimulating economic activity. After the recovery started policies were directed to helping achieve a high and sustainable rate of economic growth with stable prices A review of these actions and an appraisal of how they influenced the year 's economic developments are important as guides for Government and for private individuals and groups in meeting future problems of economic stabilization with balanced and constructive policies POLICIES DURING THE CONTRACTION Money and Credit During the past months monetary and credit policy was directed successively to moderating the rate of credit expansion helping to reverse economic contraction and encouraging a steady and balanced recovery and growth Demands for capital and credit were heavy in the months preceding the downturn. Plant and equipment expenditures were at an all-time high and expanding inventories required financing. Because the cash and liquidity position of businesses was relatively strained funds to help finance investment programs and working capital needs were necessarily sought in large volume from outside sources. But because the Federal Reserve System confined the reserves supplied to member banks at its own initiative to amounts consistent only with seasonal swings in activity bank credit was less readily available than in Businesses did obtain additional credit from commercial banks but the increase was much smaller than in and more reliance for funds had to be placed on the capital markets Securities offered by corporations increased to a new high volume and the offerings of State and local governments approached record amounts Meanwhile the flow of funds into life insurance companies savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks slackened. Although larger CHART Interest Rates and Bond Yields Short-term interest rates continued to decline until mid-1958 then rose sharply until October PERCENT PER ANNUM Long-term interest rates declined slightly early in the year but rose rapidly from midyear until October PERCENT PER ANNUM ii i i i i Ii i ii i I i ii i i Ii iii i I i i ii t Ii iii i Iii i i i I ii i ii SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND TREASURY DEPARTMENT CHART Member Bank Reserves In the rise in Federal Reserve holdings of U. S. Government securities offset the effect of gold outflow on bank reserves BILLIONS OF DOLLARS T CURRENCY IN CIRCULATION ^ ^ ^ __ X | f ' U.S. GOVERNMEN r SECURITIES HELD BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS v......,x : GOLD STOCK ^ y MEMBER BANK / RESERVrE BALANCES * ^ ^ * ^ ^ " ^ " ^ ^ ^ ^ * * Free reserves increased sharply early in and declined after midyear BILLIONS OF DOLLARS1 " ( ENLARGED SCALE ) FREE RESERVES ( E X C E S S RESERVES LESS BORROWINGS ) I955 I956 I957 I958 t AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES * CHANGE IN RESERVE REQUIREMENTS SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM amounts of savings were supplied from other sources notably from the increasing volume of time deposits in commercial banks the rising tide of financial demands in the capital markets helped bring about progressively higher interest rates and bond yields. The peak of credit and capital costs came in the fall of when interest rates generally reached the highest levels since the early 's ( Chart ) By the end of September there were indications that the demand by business concerns for bank credit was slackening ; and the flow of funds into home financing fell as the ceiling interest rates on federally underwritten mortgages became increasingly out of line with yields available on investments not subject to such controls. In the second half of October the Federal Reserve authorities began to ease slightly the reserve position of member banks through open market operations in United States Government securities. This was followed in mid-November by a reduction in the discount rate from 3/2 percent to percent signaling a decisive change in policy. Subsequently the Federal Reserve authorities eased reserve positions still more by open market purchases of Government securities and released some $ billion of bank reserves by lowering reserve requirements. In a series of steps over five months beginning in mid-November the discount rate was reduced to % percent By March the reserve position of banks had eased markedly. Member bank borrowings from the Federal Reserve Banks were nearly $ billion below those of September and net free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) had increased to $ million. This reserve position of member banks remained virtually unchanged until July ( Chart ) Monetary policy was moreover sufficiently expansionary to offset the impact on bank reserves of a gold outflow of $ billion which took place in the first six months of the year These steps produced emphatic reactions in financial markets. The improved reserve position of commercial banks enabled them to add nearly $ billion in loans and investments to their assets in the first half of This took the form largely of additions to their holdings of United States Government securities which increased $ billion by midyear but their holdings of State and local securities also increased significantly. The demand for bank credit from most other borrowers was not heavy and other forms of credit increased only a little or declined. As a result the ratio of United States Government securities to loans in bank portfolios increased Because the major part of this increase in bank assets was reflected in an expansion of $ billion of time deposits the volume of demand deposits and currency which is the economy 's active money supply increased by only $ billion on a seasonally adjusted basis ( Chart ) Without posing potentially inflationary threats this timely expansion of the money supply helped to improve the liquidity position of the economy generally CHART Money Supply The money supply increased in mainly in the first months of the year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS END OF MONTH SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Borrowing costs and investment yields in capital and credit markets reacted quickly to these developments. Short-term interest rates fell sharply The rate on 91-day Treasury bills dropped significantly below percent by May and the rate on prime commercial paper was reduced to as low as / % percent in June. In the market for longer-term funds the yield on outstanding long-term United States Government issues fell to a low of percent in April a decline of percent from the October high. By the time the economy was turning from recession to recovery the yield on high-grade corporate bonds had fallen percent below its high and the yield on high-grade municipal securities almost percent. Prices of FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed home mortgages in secondary markets had risen significantly by midyear and there was a rapid improvement in the availability of mortgage investment funds throughout the country Housing and Home Financing Nowhere in the economy was the stimulative effect of the easing of credit conditions more clearly visible than in residential building. Evidences of underlying strength in this area in which activity had been declining more or less steadily for two years were apparent as early as mid-195 Low vacancy rates a somewhat quickened tempo of sales and a reduction in O the number of unsold houses held by builders suggested a firming of demand. In numerous communities the elimination of rent controls had created conditions more favorable to the construction of apartment projects ; and significant progress had been made through the provision of needed community facilities in removing deficiencies that were impeding the construction of single-family homes. In August minimum downpayment requirements on FHA-insured loans were reduced by administrative order issued under the authority granted by the Housing Act of that year. And the increase in residential construction costs which had been particularly rapid during and a good part of halted In this favorable environment an increase in the flow of private funds into the home mortgage market served rather quickly to initiate an upturn in prospective residential building activity. Indeed the reaction was so marked that it was necessary in January to request authority from the Congress to use additional funds to meet the costs of processing an unexpectedly large volume of applications for FHA loan insurance ( Chart ) Numerous administrative actions were taken to spur building activity In December more than $ million was released for purchases of mortgages by the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and to assist urban renewal. Early in January the rule requiring that closing costs on FHA-insured loans be paid in cash a rule which had been imposed in as a check on the excessive use of credit was rescinded In February a new program was launched by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board to make loans available on a five-year basis to member associations supplementing its shorter-term loan program. In March adjustments were made in allowable discounts on VA loans another $ million was released to the FNMA for the purchase of mortgages under its special assistance programs and the Housing and Home Finance Agency was directed by the President to expedite construction on approved and planned projects for college housing urban renewal and public housing. Early in April minimum downpayment requirements on VA-guaranteed loans were reduced. In the same month several additional steps were taken under authority granted by the newly approved housing legislation. Adjustments were made in the interest rate on military housing to expedite the flow of private funds into this type of investment ; minimum downpayment requirements were reduced on FHA-insured loans ; the interest rate on VA-guaranteed loans was adjusted upward to the maximum permitted under the law in order to draw additional funds into this type of investment ; discount controls which had previously tended to block the flow of funds into FHAinsured and VA-guaranteed loans were removed ; and $ million was released by the President for purchases by the FNMA of mortgages on properties in urban renewal areas and on housing for elderly persons and for military personnel. Funds were made available in April May July and August ^ under the FNMA special assistance program created by the April housing legislation for the purchase of mortgages ranging in amount up to $ At that time the law required that qualifying mortgages be purchased at par. Since this assured financing of projects at costs below the price of funds obtainable from private sources and because the law authorized the issuance of advance commitments builders turned at once to the Federal Government. By the middle of September virtually all of the $ billion authorized by this legislation had been committed to be paid out as mortgages were delivered As already indicated evidence of an imminent upturn in home building was visible even before the end of but the increase naturally lagged by some months behind the improvement in financial conditions. A small increase in housing starts began in March when the seasonally adjusted annual rate rose slightly above the reached in February. By December starts of new homes had reached a rate of The volume of new residential construction expenditures also increased but somewhat later than the rise in housing starts. Although other types of construction activity continued at a high level it was residential building that supplied the major impetus from the construction field to general economic recovery CHART Housing Starts and Requests for Federal Underwriting Private housing starts rose sharply after March Applications for FHA and VA financing increased before midyear then declined MILLIONS OF UNITS ANNUAL R A T E S / " \ PRIVATE NONFARM STARTS fm \ UNADJUSTED ! NEW HOME CONSTRUCTION SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION ( FHA ) AND VETERANS ADMINISTRATION ( VA ) Unemployment Insurance Benefits The primary objective of our Federal-State system of unemployment insurance is directly to aid those experiencing involuntary loss of employment. However by sustaining the aggregate purchasing power of consumers at a level higher than would otherwise prevail these payments contribute significantly to the stabilization of the whole economy In both these respects benefit payments were materially helpful during the recession. Payments rose moderately in the third quarter of and very sharply in the fourth quarter and after the turn of the year as unemployment mounted. From July to April they directly offset about one-third of the decline in wage and salary disbursements and because they are not taxable their effect in maintaining disposable personal income was even greater The contraction of job opportunities meant that unemployment was extended for many workers beyond normal lengths and beyond the period of benefit rights under basic laws. As a result the number of persons exhausting their benefits rose from per month in September to a peak of in July Legislation was requested in March to lengthen temporarily the period of entitlement to unemployment benefits and a bill was enacted in June. States participating in this temporary program or otherwise extending the duration of benefits accounted for percent of covered employment. The number of Unemployed persons eligible for its benefits reached a maximum of in late August Extra benefits amounted to about $ million during the year Defense Procurement The Economic Report of January noted that the economy was beginning to feel the impact of an increase in defense expenditures. In the January Budget Message $ billion of new obligational authority was requested for the military functions of the Department of Defense and budget expenditures of $ billion were contemplated for the fiscal year The latter figure was $ billion higher than the expenditures estimated for fiscal Much of this increase resulted from higher planned expenditures for military research and development programs additional military construction and a contingency reserve for the acceleration of weapons development. In line with national security policy a supplemental appropriation request of close to $ billion was made on January as an advance on the program for the fiscal year ; and in April close to $ billion of additional funds were requested for the fiscal year The acceleration of defense procurement under the amounts appropriated in the calendar year and prior years was soon evident in the awarding of contracts for major items. In the third quarter of gross obligations for major procurement and production in the Department of Defense military functions amounted to $ billion. They rose to nearly $ billion in the fourth quarter of and reached $ billion and $ billion in the first and second quarters of respectively Because changes in the backlog of unfilled orders permit the rate of current production to follow a more even course than would be dictated by the flow of new orders alone this acceleration in defense contracting was not accompanied by a corresponding increase of output in the affected industries. However the rise in defense contracting in the first half of did result in an expansion of defense production and through its effect on the inventory policies of defense contractors had a significantly stimulative effect on the economy Civil Procurement and Construction Steps taken to accelerate needed Government procurement and construction in nondefense programs also had a helpful though necessarily limited effect. Early in March accelerated procurement of needed equipment and supplies was authorized and instructions were issued to agencies calling for the placement of as many planned orders as possible under available authorizations. Stress was placed on the desirability of giving these orders insofar as possible to firms in areas of substantial labor surplus Legislation was requested in March and enacted in April to make available for immediate use one-half of the amounts requested for the purchase of supplies and equipment in the fiscal year The General Services Administration the Veterans Administration and other civilian agencies ordered substantial quantities of supplies under this plan and the Post Office Department placed orders for new trucks earlier than had been scheduled. A program for accelerating the repair and modernization of Federal buildings was also put into operation in March and congressional assent to requests for supplemental appropriations made it possible to continue an accelerated rate of activity on Federal water projects already under way Acceleration of Grants-in-Aid and Tax Refunds Allocations to State and local bodies under various Federal grant programs including aid for the construction of hospitals medical research facilities and airports were accelerated during March and April so that contracts might be negotiated for projects that could be started immediately Special efforts were made by the Internal Revenue Service in to speed up the payment of refunds to those who had overpaid their income taxes. Refunds distributed in the first five months of the year exceeded those of the same period of by $ million Federal-Aid Highway Program In order to maintain construction of the Interstate Highway System on schedule legislation was requested to permit larger allocations to the States than would have been possible under the original provisions of the law. Such legislation was enacted in April and allotments were promptly made. During the following six months contracts were negotiated by the States for the construction of Federal-aid highways to cost $ billion percent more than the amount obligated during the corresponding period of ( Table ) During this same six-month period Federal payments to the States exceeded $ ^ billion. This also was more than percent greater than the amounts paid during the same months a year earlier TABLE Obligations and payments on Federal-aid highway programs [ Millions of dollars ] New obligations for highway construction Federal payments to States Period Total Interstate program Other programs Total Interstate program Other programs ; First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ' First quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Includes Federal and State matching funds Includes primary secondary and urban extension highways Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) Federal Credit Programs Steps to help counter the recession were taken in a number of Federal credit programs outside the housing field. Loan approvals by the Small Business Administration during the first half of amounted to about $ million $ million more than in the corresponding period of The Export-Import Bank contributed even more heavily to the increased volume of Federal lending activity. Its contribution through loan authorizations toward the financing of domestic economic activity is estimated to have been more than $ million larger in the first half of than in the corresponding period of Federal Fiscal Operations Not all Federal actions taken to help counteract recession are reflected in Federal budget accounts. Many involved no additional budget outlays at all and where the placement of contracts and orders was involved some part of the impact on the economy came at an earlier date than would be suggested by their eventual reflection in the budget as expenditures. Even so significant interactions between economic developments and Government fiscal operations are revealed in the Federal budget In the fiscal year Federal expenditures were $ billion higher than in the fiscal year the twelve-month period which preceded the downturn ( Table ) This increase was due in part to actions taken specifically to help counter the recession but in part also to actions which though taken for other reasons had an expansive effect on the economy Directly and indirectly increases in Federal expenditures resulted in an TABLE Federal budget receipts and expenditures fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ] Fiscal year Expenditures Receipts ' I960 i Surplus or deficit ( ) Estimate Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget additional demand for output at a time when private demand had slackened. Furthermore a small part of the impact of the recession on economic activity in general was lessened by a decline in personal income tax payments. Because of the structure of our tax system the decline in personal income after taxes was less than the decline in income before taxes CHART Fe deral Government Receipts and Expenditures No tional Income Accounts ixpenditures rose steadily in Receipts fell in the first part of the year and increased thereafter BILLI ONS OF DOLLARS * __ ^ EXPENDITURES SURPLUS i | i | | ii ^ _ > & & _ ^ HQigiBa.n i1 DEFICIT ! SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES The effect of changes in the Federal Government 's fiscal operations can be followed more closely in our national income accounts. Total receipts and payments as registered in these accounts are larger and differ from those in the budget mainly because of the inclusion of trust fund operations the exclusion of intra-governmental transactions and the timing of transactions on a basis more closely related to their economic effects These accounts show that in the third quarter of the Federal Government was withdrawing more funds from the economy through receipts than it was putting in through disbursements. Aggregate receipts at the seasonally adjusted annual rate of $ billion exceeded disbursements by $ billion. By the first quarter of on the other hand receipts fell short of disbursements by an annual amount of $ billion ; in this quarter therefore the Federal Government 's combined fiscal operations were on balance exerting a stimulative effect on the economy. This turnabout of $ billion nearly three-fourths of which was reflected in the decline in receipts had a greater impact on the economy than did fiscal operations in either of the two other postwar contractions ( Chart ) POLICIES AFTER THE UPTURN With production employment and income moving upward in the second quarter of the economic policies of Government became concerned increasingly with keeping the recovery on a sound basis and promoting a sustainable long-term expansion Credit and capital markets responded quickly to the rapidly strengthening confidence that a firm recovery was under way. The large financing requirements of the Treasury also influenced financial mairkets. The upturn in interest rates which reflected these changed views and conditions was accentuated by the liquidation beginning in June of large speculative holdings of United States Government securities. Interest rates subsequently stabilized however and the liquidation appears not to have had any continuing effect on capital costs. To the greatest extent possible the large-scale Treasury financing that was essential in these months was carried out in ways designed to minimize inflationary consequences and yet not to hamper the recovery and expansion of the economy by putting undue pressure on long-term capital markets The events of presented an unusual variety of problems in the management of the public debt. During the year an increase of $ billion in the public debt had to be financed and $ billion of maturing marketable issues ( exclusive of bills ) needed refinancing. At the same time the reduced pressure of private demand for credit made it practicable to undertake a lengthening of the average maturity of the Federal debt. In the first six months of the year $ billion of intermediate and long-term securities were issued which resulted in a significant increase in the average length of the outstanding marketable debt. But after July heavier than expected subscriptions to the June exchange bond and the later rapid decline in bond CHART Stock Prices and Credit Stock prices rose to a record level in INDEX * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS STOCK MARKET CREDIT- ^ ( END OF MONTH ) * A l I l l I l l l I i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I PERCENT OF MARKET VALUE MARGIN REQUIREMENTS y CUSTOMERS ' NET DEBIT BALANCES AND BANK LOANS TO OTHERS THAN BROKERS AND DEALERS. EXCLUDES U. S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES SOURCES : SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE prices caused the Treasury to repurchase a quantity of its newly issued securities. During the latter part of July the Federal Reserve suspended temporarily its policy of confining open market operations to short-term securities. For the remainder of the Treasury confined its borrowings to maturities not in excess of 2/2 years It was evident by the end of the year that the Treasury 's vast and difficult financing operation was being satisfactorily concluded. By December most of the Treasury 's prospective new money requirements for the current fiscal year had already been met. The Federal debt increased $ billion during the second half of the year but only about $ billion of additional United States Government securities had been absorbed by the banking system. The expansion of the money supply measured in terms of demand deposits and currency in circulation had been limited to about $ billion or percent in the second half of the year. Most of the remainder of the Treasury 's borrowing needs during this half-year were met from nonfinancial corporations and other short-term investors rather than from longer-term holders of securities As business conditions improved monetary and credit policy was shifted with a view to limiting the expansion of bank credit to a sustainable pace The increased restraint on bank reserves was marked by the sharp rise in member bank borrowings that began in August. Discount rates were raised to percent in August and to 2/2 percent in October as short-term money rates moved upward. Margin requirements on new stock purchases were raised from percent to percent in August and to percent in October to prevent the excessive use of credit in stock market transactions equity prices having risen in the meantime to record levels ( Chart ) The response of interest rates to the recovery of the economy and the shift in monetary policy was rapid. Within the short space of four months a rise in short-term borrowing costs wiped out much of the previous reduction long-term capital costs returned to the levels they had reached in the late summer and early fall of and funds became more costly and somewhat less readily available in the mortgage market. By the close of the year capital and credit markets had moved a considerable distance toward the conditions prevailing to months earlier Federal receipts and disbursements also reflected the economic and financial developments of the recovery period. The aggregate of the Federal Government 's disbursements as registered in national income accounts rose from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $ billion in the first quarter of to $ billion in the final quarter. Meanwhile Federal receipts of all types which had declined under the impact of recession to an annual rate of $ billion by the first quarter of rose to a rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter The gap between the Federal Government 's disbursements and receipts narrowed from a rate of $ billion in the second quarter of the year to $ billion as the year ended as the fiscal operations of Government which had tended earlier in the year to cushion the contraction moved in the direction of restoring a balance between outlays and receipts and thereby countering potentially inflationary tendencies. This direction of change in the fiscal operations of Government is favorable to sustainable economic growth and improvement. Its beneficial effects would be extended by enactment of the financial plan presented to the Congress in the budget Chapter A Program for Economic Growth with Price Stability T HE EMPLOYMENT ACT OF under which this Report is submitted to the Congress lays principal emphasis on the need for public and private policies to promote high levels of employment production and purchasing power. Achievement of these goals has assumed increasing importance with the addition of a heavy and continuing burden the maintenance of strong national defenses which our economy must carry while raising the living standards of an increasing population and helping to discharge the Nation 's international responsibilities Experience during the life of the Act has however directed attention more and more to the need for a framework of reasonable price stability in order to achieve sustainable economic growth. A persistent upward movement of prices would do great harm to our economy. Quite apart from the inequities it would impose on those whose incomes would not rise correspondingly it would narrow markets at home for important groups of goods lower our capability to compete in the world 's markets and by requiring restrictive fiscal and monetary policies lessen our chances of fully realizing our potential for economic growth. If price increases were to accelerate the continuing upward movement would sooner or later undermine the confidence on which our economic system depends and would eventually release drastic corrective forces. Since some of the forces that tend to produce an upward movement of prices are themselves expressions of the process of vigorous growth in a free economy the objective of national economic policy must be to balance encouragement and restraint Clearly reasonable stability of costs and prices can not be preserved by any single policy or measure nor by Government acting alone. To achieve the goal of inflation-free sustainable growth requires that we adopt appropriate policies and modify certain practices in both the public and private sectors of the economy. As noted in Chapter every group in the Nation has a responsibility to help check the forces which contribute to increases in costs and prices. Although success depends on a combination of appropriate public and private policies and actions Government must supply the required leadership and direction for its achievement A BALANCED BUDGET The principal means by which Government can express leadership in the effort to preserve price stability is to conduct its own financial affairs prudently. The budget submitted to the Congress for the fiscal year which balances expenditures with receipts at a level of $ billion seeks to fulfill this responsibility The expenditures estimated for fiscal are $ billion less than those estimated for the present fiscal year. A few items account for most of this difference. First an important part is accounted for by a nonrecurring expenditure of about $ billion for the increased quota of the United States in the International Monetary Fund which is recommended for the fiscal year Second during the current fiscal year the Federal National Mortgage Association will purchase most of the mortgages for which commitments were made under the housing legislation enacted in April Net purchases of mortgages under this special assistance program in fiscal will be about $ million less than in fiscal Third all the budget transactions in of the Federal National Mortgage Association and those of the Export-Import Bank as well are being put on a self-sustaining basis by aligning new credit extensions more closely with collections on outstanding credits and by sales of portfolio assets The resulting reduction in net budget expenditures between and will be over $ million for the Federal National Mortgage Association and almost $ million for the Export-Import Bank Fourth the expiration on April of the law providing for a temporary extension of the duration of unemployment compensation payments will result in a decrease of over $ million in expenditures in the fiscal year Fifth the termination of the acreage reserve will reduce expenditures in the fiscal year by more than $ million although a partially offsetting increase will occur in the conservation reserve program Sixth proposals will be made for rate adjustments to cover the costs of operating the postal establishment except for specified public services ; these proposals will lower budget expenditures by $ million. This reduction together with nonrecurring items affecting budget expenditures in the fiscal year retroactive pay increases and higher payments for transportation account for the decrease of the postal deficit by $ million in the fiscal year Seventh the funding of retroactive pay increases to Federal civilian employees apart from the payments to postal employees mentioned above added some $ million to expenditures. These payments were made mainly in the fiscal year and do not recur in the new fiscal year Finally expenditures of other Federal departments and agencies will be reduced to the extent that this is consistent with the satisfactory performance of their respective responsibilities Although the projected expenditures are lower in the aggregate they include increased outlays for many programs that support the growth of our economy and assist growth elsewhere in the Free World. Outlays for research and development will be increased over $ million with emphasis on space exploration peaceful as well as military uses of atomic energy and basic science. Federal expenditures to improve education especially in science and mathematics will rise significantly. Federal expenditures for the conservation and development of land and water resources ( including agricultural ) will rise almost $ million. All Federal expenditures for civil public works including grants to States mainly from the Highway Trust Fund will be increased $ million ; at $ billion they will be higher than ever before. Larger expenditures are estimated for other grants and long-term loans to foster community development. Expenditures by the Federal Aviation Agency primarily for the construction and operation of new facilities for the Federal airways system will increase almost $ million. Programs will be proposed for assistance to areas where unemployment that is considerably above the national average persists and for grants to localities for the modernization of airports ; however the latter will not affect expenditures until after the fiscal year Higher expenditures are expected for economic and technical cooperation under the Mutual Security Program but because of a reduction in the military assistance portion expenditures for this Program as a whole will be decreased The revenues projected in the budget are substantially higher than those estimated for the current fiscal year reflecting the confident expectation that economic recovery will be extended into the calendar year and beyond Certain actions by the Congress are needed to give effect to the financial plan. First changes are required in the laws affecting Federal revenues : the corporate income tax and excise taxes on automobiles and parts cigarettes distilled spirits and wines and beer should be continued at their present levels for one year beyond June ; a temporary increase in the Federal motor fuel tax should be enacted to continue construction of the Interstate Highway System on a self-sustaining basis ; the tax on aviation gasoline should be raised and a similar rate for jet fuels now tax free should be enacted to help pay the Federal cost of operating the airways ; and a revision in postal rates should be authorized. The Congress has been requested to enact a permanent plan for the taxation of life insurance companies and it will be asked to adjust present laws relating to the taxation of cooperatives. The Congress will also be requested to specify the treatment processes which shall be considered as mining for the purpose of computing percentage depletion allowances in the case of mineral products This amendment prompted by court decisions and similar to that recommended last year for cement and clay products would prevent an unintended extension of depletion allowances to the sales price of finished products Recommendations will also be made for certain additional user charges Second the Congress will be requested to grant wider administrative authority for setting maximum interest rates for various credit programs and to make certain adjustments in rates. These include the Veterans Administration programs of home loan guaranties and direct home loans the rental ( including armed services ) and cooperative housing programs of the Federal Housing Administration ( Sections and of the National Housing Act ) the college housing program of the Housing and Home Finance Agency the loan program of the Rural Electrification Administration, and ship mortgage loans of the Maritime Administration The flow of private funds into home construction and other types of building is restricted when market interest rates are high relative to the legally prescribed ceiling rates ; as a result the volume of construction is restricted and an increased part of its financing is shifted to the Federal Government Third improvements are needed in the procedures by which appropriation bills arc enacted into law. The Congress will be requested to grant the President authority to veto or reduce the amounts for specific items in appropriation bills and in other bills authorizing expenditures OTHER GOVERNMENTAL FINANCIAL POLICIES Acceptance by the Congress of the expenditure level of the budget would be the most important single step in discharging Government 's responsibility to help preserve the stability of prices and costs through prudent management of its own financial affairs. Moreover adherence to the proposed expenditure program would provide an opportunity as budgetary results improve with economic recovery to promote economic growth by making a start on constructive tax reduction and reform. The growth of the American economy was significantly aided by the tax changes But our tax burden remains heavy and in important respects Federal taxes are levied in ways that tend to weaken the incentives on which we mainly rely for vigorous economic expansion. If our economy grows at the expected rate and if Government spending is held within the limits set in the proposed budget a significant additional step in tax reduction and reform can be taken in the reasonably foreseeable future Federal debt management policies are also pertinent to the achievement of sustainable economic growth without inflation. In the formulation of these policies account must be taken of the necessarily far-reaching impact on the economy of the continual refinancing of large parts of the present debt of $ billion of which $ billion is held by the public The magnitude of this refinancing problem is indicated by the fact that $ billion of the marketable debt outstanding at the end of exclusive of $ billion of and 26-week Treasury bills will mature in This is in addition to the cash borrowing in the market required by seasonal needs and by the redemption of nonmarketable debt Insofar as possible financial requirements will be met in ways designed to reduce the frequency of Treasury issues and to improve the structure of the debt. By offering securities which are attractive to investors outside the banks particularly to savings institutions pension funds individuals and other long-term investors the Treasury can avoid undue reliance on bank credit and thus assist rather than interfere with the exercise of monetary policies appropriate to the maintenance of sustainable economic growth and price stability. The percent bonds due in that were announced in January are an example of such offerings As indicated in Chapter a large part of the financing of the deficit had already been completed by the end of the calendar year without impairing the effectiveness of monetary policy. Completion of needed financing will bring the public debt to $ billion before June and it will be necessary to renew the request made of the Congress last summer for a permanent debt limit of $ billion $ billion higher than at present. Adherence to the financial plan and receipt of revenues as expected would obviate the need for a larger increase in the permanent debt limit. But a temporary increase of an additional amount will be needed to cover heavy borrowing requirements in the first half of the next fiscal year. These borrowings would be repaid however before June Finally the maintenance of a framework of price stability requires the avoidance of excessive extension of credit. Responsibility for monetary and credit policies rests with the Federal Reserve authorities who have independent status within Government. However to help coordinate the monetary and credit policies so determined with the economic and financial policies of the Executive Branch of Government frequent meetings of principal officials have been held for the exchange of views. These meetings have proved useful and will be continued ADDITIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ACTIONS To MAINTAIN PRICE STABILITY Adherence to the financial plan presented in the budget and the pursuit of appropriate monetry credit and debt management policies would help attain rising production and employment at stable prices Governmental actions in other areas can also help to maintain price stability as our economy expands First the Congress is requested to amend the Employment Act of to make reasonable price stability an explicit goal of Federal economic policy coordinate with the goals of maximum production employment and purchasing power now specified in that Act. Such an amendment would strengthen Government 's hand in restraining inflationary forces and would help build a public opinion favorable to the adoption and vigorous application of needed measures. This amendment would make it clear that Government is as determined to direct its policies toward maintenance of price stability as it is to employ them in combating economic contraction Second a Cabinet Committee on Price Stability for Economic Growth is being established to follow governmental and private activities affecting costs prices and economic growth ; initiate studies by Government or by groups of private citizens of price stability in relation to economic growth ; seek ways to enhance productivity in the American economy and to build a better public understanding of the need for reasonable price stability in a free society and of the conditions necessary to achieve this objective Third a Committee on Government Activities Affecting Prices and Costs is being established to follow the operation of all relevant Federal programs including those involving procurement construction stockpiling and commodity price support and to make recommendations to the appropriate departments or agencies or to the President for the administration of these programs in line with the objective of reasonable price stability Fourth questions concerning the level and movement of consumer prices changes in wage rates and earnings and changes in productivity have assumed such significance in our economy as to require more and better statistics concerning them. Accordingly the Bureau of the Budget has been requested to accelerate programs for enlargement and improvement of public information on prices wages and related costs and productivity ADDITIONAL MEASURES FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH The Federal policies and actions outlined above will do much to assure a vigorous growth of our economy free from inflation. However additional measures should be taken by Government to promote the Nation 's economic strength and well-being Competition The vitality of our economic system depends in large part on vigorous competition which would be enhanced by certain improvements in our antitrust laws. The Congress is urged to act favorably on five proposals as follows : to authorize Federal regulation of the merger of banking institutions accomplished through the acquisition of assets ; to require notification to the antitrust agencies when firms of significant size that are engaged in interstate commerce propose to merge ; to grant the Attorney General power to issue civil investigative demands under which the necessary facts may be elicited when civil procedures are contemplated in antitrust cases ; to make cease-and-desist orders issued by the Federal Trade Commission for violations of the Clayton Act final unless appealed to the courts ; and to authorize the Federal Trade Commission to seek preliminary injunctions in merger cases where a violation of law is likely O Small Business Legislative actions taken last year will greatly enlarge the opportunities for the formation of new businesses and yield important benefits to existing small concerns and to the economy generally. To facilitate the access of small business concerns to capital and credit the Small Business Administration was made permanent ; its loan authorization was substantially increased ; and it was authorized to help State and local development companies extend financial and other aids to small businesses and to license and purchase the obligations of investment companies especially organized to provide capital on a long-term debt and equity basis to small businesses Small concerns may also be expected to benefit from certain changes in the tax laws enacted by the last Congress. These include ordinary-loss rather than capital-loss treatment for losses incurred on the investment of private funds in small business investment companies ; similar treatment of losses incurred by small business investment companies or by an original investor in a small business concern ( up to a limited amount ) ; allowance to small business investment companies of a percent tax deduction for intercorporate dividends received rather than the percent generally permitted ; provision of an additional depreciation allowance for the acquisition of new and used tangible personal property ; the option for certain small corporations of having their profits taxed directly as if they were partnerships ; the option to pay estate taxes over a period of up to years where the estate consists largely of investments in closely held business concerns ; extension of the carryback of net operating losses from two to three years ; and an increase from $ to $ in the minimum accumulated earnings credit Other steps taken in include an Act to improve the opportunities of small business concerns in obtaining Government procurement contracts and a new program of the Small Business Administration to facilitate the sharing by small companies in Government research and development contracts The Cabinet Committee on Small Business which was established in continues to follow closely the position of small firms in the economy A recommendation made by the Committee in its Second Progress Report is called to the attention of the Congress for favorable action namely that the Securities and Exchange Act be amended to extend the privilege of the simplified Regulation A filings to a wider range of security issues Although significant benefits for small business concerns may be expected from the actions already taken and from those proposed the long-run health of small concerns also requires an environment of satisfactory labor-management relations and opportunities to retain a larger share of business earnings. The first of these conditions would be advanced by enactment of the proposals made below for changes in legislation governing labor-management relations. The second would be advanced by adherence to the expenditure level proposed in the budget for the fiscal year which would bring closer the time when additional steps can be taken to make our tax system more conducive to economic growth Personal Welfare Substantial progress has been made by the States in recent years in raising the standards of the unemployment insurance system. Benefits have been increased and their potential duration lengthened. Coverage has been broadened to include more than four-fifths of all employees in nonagricultural establishments Still further improvements are necessary and desirable. Enactment of legislation is requested to provide for extending the coverage of the system to employees of firms having fewer than four workers ; to make its benefits available to employees of Federal instrumentalities nonprofit organizations and certain other groups ; to bring the provisions of the District of Columbia system up to those recommended for the States ; and to provide for extending the system to workers in Puerto Rico. Benefits should be raised so that the majority of covered workers will be eligible for payments equal to at least half their regular earnings ; and the maximum duration of benefits should be lengthened to weeks for any person who qualifies for any benefit and who remains unemployed that long These steps would greatly enhance the contribution that the unemployment compensation system makes to our economy 's capacity to resist recession. During the recent recession this system offset directly about onethird of the decline in wage and salary payments. Supplemented by temporary legislation providing longer duration of eligibility for employees who exhausted their entitlement to benefits unemployment insurance payments substantially alleviated hardships arising from loss of income In an industrial economy occupational accidents may result in hardship for an employee and his dependents. It is therefore again recommended that the States which have primary responsibility strengthen their systems of workmen 's compensation Certain legislative improvements are required in programs that lie within Federal jurisdiction. Proposals will be made to the Congress to extend the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Favorable consideration is again requested for legislation to revise the ambiguous and outmoded provisions of the 8-hour laws applying to Federal and federally assisted construction projects and to carry out the principle of equal pay for equal work without discrimination based on sex The Economic Report of outlined the responsibility of the Government to maintain a framework of laws to protect the basic rights of the individual to promote integrity in labor-management relationships and to foster better industrial relations. Proposed legislation to accomplish these purposes having failed of enactment the Congress will again be requested to require reporting and disclosure of financial dealings between employers and employee representatives and their agents and to require public reports of union finances organization and procedures Requested legislation will also prescribe standards to promote democratic procedures in union affairs including the election of union officers and to correct abuses in the supervision of the affairs of subordinate bodies Modifications will be proposed in the law governing secondary boycotts organizational and recognition picketing and representation elections and authority will be requested for the States to act in labor-management disputes where the National Labor Relations Board declines jurisdiction. Legislation will also be requested to correct shortcomings in the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act enacted by the 85th Congress Area Assistance Despite the forward economic strides of the Nation since the war some communities have suffered substantial and persistent unemployment when measured against national experience. Federal assistance to these communities is required not only to mitigate the hardships of individuals and families but also to provide for the use of underutilized resources to the enhancement of the national welfare A program of assistance through development loans and through grants for technical studies will be recommended to the Congress in order that these communities may share in the general economic advance. By design and administration the program would seek to complement and reinforce community efforts to help themselves to encourage maximum participation by State and local agencies and private investment institutions and to create new job opportunities instead of merely transferring jobs from one locality to another The program would also provide technical aid to towns heavily dependent on a major industry and to rural low-income areas to help them achieve greater economic stability through diversification Agriculture Recommendations will be made to the Congress by the Executive with a view to reducing the cost of price stabilization operations stopping the increase of surplus stocks and making progress in the reduction of accumulated supplies. Major revisions are overdue in the legislation relating to these agricultural programs. In their present form these statutes have the effect of adding many billions of dollars annually to the Federal budget. Net budget expenditures for agricultural price and income support increased from an annual average of $ billion during the fiscal years to an estimated $ billion in the fiscal year What is more experience has demonstrated that it is very difficult to foretell reliably how much the Federal Government will be required to expend in a given fiscal period under what are essentially open-end commitments for price support a fact that greatly complicates the management of the Federal Government 's fiscal affairs Even these large expenditures have not brought farm output into line with commercial demands at home and abroad while maintaining and stabilizing farm income. Ever since the Korean conflict the aggregate output of our farms has exceeded these demands by subs antial amounts Steps taken to reduce surpluses while protecting farm incomes Commodity Credit Corporation support of prices at slightly declining minimum levels retirement of acreage from cultivation and large exports under loan or subsidy arrangements have not succeeded in preventing an increase in surplus stocks. By June there will be a record carryover of billion bushels of wheat the equivalent of more than years of domestic requirements and a carryover of billion bushels of corn. Stocks of cotton remain excessive ; stocks of tobacco and rice are large ; and if it were not for the surplus disposal program stocks of dairy products and of fats and oils would be high The investment of the Commodity Credit Corporation in price supported commodities is expected to rise to more than $ billion by June and to almost $ billion by June To carry out existing commitments on price support activities will probably require use of most of the Corporation 's borrowing authority of $ billion. Expenditures of the Federal Government for storage transportation and interest on these surplus holdings are estimated at $ million for the fiscal year and at $ billion for the fiscal year The recent sharp increase in the cost of our agricultural programs is due in part to exceptionally favorable crop conditions in But a major part of the increase is due to the programs themselves. These are not properly adjusted to the rapidity with which farm technology is improving Remedial legislation should be enacted without delay. Even though action taken at this time can become effective only in the fiscal year steps to bring the price stabilization expenditures of the Federal Government under control and to reduce them materially are urgently needed Actually the majority of farm people derive little or no benefit from our agricultural price support legislation. Cattle ranchers producers of poultry and eggs and growers of fruits and vegetables operate their farms today practically without price supports. Only some million of our commercial farmers are the recipients of price support outlays in any material amounts and within this group those with the higher incomes are the main beneficiaries. More than million farmers whose annual sales are less than $ and who produce each year only about percent of our marketed farm products receive only very small supplements or none at all to their incomes from Government expenditures for price support Foreign Economic Policy Next to maintaining the mutual security of the Free World the chief concern of the United States in its foreign economic policy is to promote conditions favorable to the exchange of goods services technology and capital among nations and to assist in economic growth and development. The efforts to rebuild and expand the economy of Western Europe and Japan to which we have contributed so much have met with remarkable success. We can now look forward to increasingly effective participation by the industrial nations of Europe in the task of supplying credit and investment capital along with goods and services to the less developed areas of the world The United States will continue to share with friendly nations its advanced technology and the achievements of its scientific research in public health resource development agriculture industry and commerce. This policy will be continued through our technical assistance programs as well as through international agencies The impressive gains of the European economies have been accompanied by efforts at removing hindrances to foreign trade. At the end of the leading European countries made their currencies convertible for nonresidents. Simultaneously the European Payments Union was replaced by the European Monetary Agreement which had been prepared by the Organization for European Economic Cooperation several years earlier to become effective when currency convertibility measures were taken Although these countries have not given up their foreign exchange control their step implies the intention of proceeding further with the removal of discriminatory controls and other import restrictions beyond the liberalization measures adopted in recent months by the United Kingdom France and others The European Economic Community of six continental countries which came into existence on January has lowered duties by percent and liberalized quota restrictions as a first move in connection with the development of its common market. Some of these concessions have been extended to other countries The United States is favorably disposed toward such regional reduction and eventual elimination of trade barriers ; but as a signatory to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade it insists on the principle that such regional arrangements must lead to the creation of more favorable trade relations with other countries. The new authority provided by the Congress last year by the four-year extension of the Trade Agreements Act will be used in further efforts to reduce trade barriers on a reciprocal basis and the enlarged loan authority of the Export-Import Bank will promote United States exports as well as contribute to economic growth abroad The increasing participation of other industrial countries in financing the flow of trade and the development of industrially retarded countries is reassuring and welcome inasmuch as additional economic resources are thus brought into action. However the task of financing sound and sustainable economic development in large areas of Latin America Africa and Asia is of such scope and urgency that it requires joint efforts. In this connec- tion the Government of the United States together with other members of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development is proposing that the resources of those institutions be enlarged. Special legislation will be proposed to the Congress The United States is exploring the feasibility of cooperating with other countries in their efforts to establish regional agreements on freer trade and economic development. An inter-American development banking institution is under consideration. The United States has also expressed its readiness to support a regional Arab development institution should the Arab states desire it and support it with their own capital. Also under study is an International Development Association which would be affiliated with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and would extend to less developed countries loans repayable wholly or partially in the currency of the borrowing country. Requests for authorizations for some of these programs will be submitted in due time to the Congress The Development Loan Fund which began in to extend loans for economic growth in less developed countries needs additional obligational authority Authorization for sales of surplus agricultural commodities for foreign currency under Title I of Public Law and for the donation of such commodities for famine relief and other assistance under Title II expires December In view of the continued existence of heavy surpluses of farm products and the desirability of using such stocks constructively the authority should be extended CONTINUING PROGRAMS FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH AND IMPROVEMENT The need for new programs or for legislative changes in those already in existence should not cause us to neglect the contributions to economic improvement that are made by continuing programs that return to the attention of the Congress only with respect to the amount of funds they annually require or for occasional legislative revision Under the budget the Federal Government will continue activities which will strengthen the Nation in health education scientific development transportation and other important areas. The Federal Government 's efforts will of course be supplemented by the efforts of State and local governments and by countless private undertakings. This blend of public and private action will enable us to take full advantage of the opportunities that lie before us for an improvement in the level of living Nowhere are these opportunities more plainly registered than in recent Census Bureau projections of population growth which has proved a sure avenue of economic progress in American circumstances. The lowest of these new projections indicates a rise to million persons by from the present million ; the highest a rise to million. The corresponding estimates for are million and million Projections for selected age groups suggest the magnitude of the developing demand for schooling. By mid-1962 children of elementary school age ( years ) should number about million million more than the corresponding total for mid-1958 ; and the annual growth of this group may exceed million during the remainder of the 's. The number of children of high school age ( years ) which was about million in mid-1958 may increase to million by mid-1962 and to million by mid-1970. By the number of college-age persons ( ) may be about million ; in about million or twice the figure Education To discharge fully their traditional obligation to the younger generation State and local governments will obviously have to increase their efforts greatly to provide needed school buildings equipment and teachers particularly for secondary education. State and private institutions will have to do likewise to accommodate greater numbers of college and graduate students In the areas of secondary and higher education additional support is being requested for the science and education programs administered by the National Science Foundation and the Department of Health Education and Welfare. Projected expenditures of the first of these agencies for science education during the fiscal year are almost one-fifth greater than the estimated expenditures for and four times the outlay. The increased expenditures would be made for graduate and faculty fellowships and for training high school and college teachers of science and mathematics Further Federal assistance to secondary and higher education is provided under the National Defense Education Act of through contributions to student loan funds ; matching grants to States for equipment needed in teaching science mathematics and foreign languages ; fellowships for graduate study ; grants to States for guidance counseling and testing services ; and support of training programs for foreign language teachers. Two other important features of the Act are the authorization of Federal financial assistance to States for improving educational statistics and the authorization of a unit in the Federal Government to provide or arrange for abstracting translating and other services to improve the distribution of scientific information Personal Security and Health Programs designed to enhance personal security also contribute to the Nation 's economic strength and well-being. Protection from want in old age for families losing breadwinners and for persons permanently disabled is afforded by the Federal Social Security system. Broadening of the coverage of the Old Age Survivors and Disability Insurance program in recent years to nearly percent of all persons in paid employment together with the normal increase in the number of persons eligible for benefits has increased benefit payments from $ billion in to $ billion in and to an annual rate of $ billion at the end of The increase in played an important role in helping to maintain the flow of incomes during recession. Benefits are currently being paid to more than million persons and the average monthly benefit for old age is approximately $ Amendments adopted in increased benefit amounts which had been practically unchanged since by percent effective in January Taxes were also increased in order to strengthen the actuarial basis of the program Federal contributions to State-operated public assistance programs in behalf of the aged the blind the disabled and dependent children will continue to rise in fiscal year An Advisory Council authorized by recent legislation is studying the appropriate distribution of financial responsibility between the Federal Government and the States Through the Rural Development Program initiated in and carried forward through existing agencies under the guidance of an interagency committee of the Federal Government efforts are being made to aid farm families most in need of assistance. The program now reaches more than rural counties. Beneficial results in the form of increased job opportunities improved farm practices and higher standards of living are already evident In the area of health sharply increasing outlays have been made in recent years for the medical research and training programs administered by the National Institutes of Health in the Department of Health Education and Welfare. Sizable funds have also been expended to assist the construction of hospitals and health research facilities. Expenditures will increase further in the fiscal year The budget also provides larger sums for the enforcement of the food and drug laws including administration of the new chemical additives amendment enacted in Construction and Transportation The increase in population and changes in the location patterns of people and industry will require greater public and private investment in fields other than education. The formation of new families and the continuing movement from cities will require additional residential construction and places of worship and commercial and community facilities of all kinds including utilities. Responsibility for these undertakings rests largely on private individuals and firms but Government programs of loan insurance and guaranty make an important contribution to home construction. The effectiveness of these programs would be materially increased by favorable action on the proposals made to the Congress to grant greater discretionary authority to the Executive for determining maximum interest rates on certain insured guaranteed and direct loans. Other proposals for changes in present laws affecting housing and home financing and the program of Federal assistance to urban renewal projects will be made to the Congress Construction of Federal-aid highways which form a vital part of the network of roads connecting our cities is increasing rapidly. The interstate highway program enacted in authorizes construction of miles of limited-access roads linking percent of all cities with or more inhabitants as well as many smaller places along the way. The Federal share of the cost is financed out of revenues obtained from highway users Proposals are being made to keep the program on this self-supporting basis In the calendar year total capital outlays for Federal-aid and all other new highway construction reached $ billion about $ million more than in and about three and one-half times the outlay of a decade ago Still higher expenditures may be expected in the present calendar year and in several succeeding years Recent legislation will also strengthen the air rail and waterway components of the Nation 's transportation system. A unified Federal Aviation Agency will allocate air space develop and operate a common system of navigation facilities for civil and military aircraft and make and enforce safety regulations for civilian aviation. The Transportation Act of and the repeal of Federal excise taxes on the transportation of property also enacted last year will help improve the physical and financial condition of the railroads The St. Lawrence Seaway which will open in the spring will provide deep water transportation almost half-way across the continent reducing shipping costs and directly serving eight States that have almost two-fifths of the population and constitute the agricultural and industrial heart of the land. User tolls will make the Seaway constructed with Federal funds in a joint venture with the Canadian Government a self-liquidating project Water Projects and Mineral Exploration Many public and private programs are improving the Nation 's base of material resources. Water and related power projects under way will facilitate the economic development of the Western states. Federal expenditures for such projects are much higher than they were a few years ago and further increases are expected in and Progress toward economical conversion of saline to fresh water by chemical and other techniques will be assisted by legislation for the construction of demonstration plants and by increased appropriations for the fiscal years and Other contributions to the resource base are envisaged. In legislation authorized a continuing program of assistance to minerals exploration. The Congress is requested to enact a long-range program for conservation of the Nation 's supply of helium gas encouraging maximum private participation in and financing of this endeavor Research and Development The Nation 's technological base is being strengthened by Government programs in support of scientific research and development. Many of these programs though undertaken initially or primarily to maintain the Nation 's military might contribute increasingly to peaceful technology. Thus the billions of dollars spent annually for military research and development are extending the horizons of civilian industry providing experience for professional and other skilled workers and expanding private opportunities for investment in new materials processes and products The benefits to be derived from research and development activities can be enhanced by closer working relations between Government and private interests. Large companies and universities already participate extensively in Government contract or Government-supported research supplementing the substantial endeavors conducted on their own account. The research capabilities of small companies are necessarily limited but many small firms have formal programs under way and some have achieved notable success. Explicit provision for the encouragement of research direct and Government contract by small businesses was made in the revision of the Small Business Act Most current research and development activity involves the useful application of known principles rather than the search for new avenues of fundamental advance. Greater attention can appropriately be given by private enterprise to the advantages obtainable from basic research. Meanwhile Government expenditures for basic research are rising. For all agencies they will amount to about $ million in the fiscal year In the same year expenditures by the National Science Foundation for basic research will be about one-third above the figure for and more than double that for In the field of atomic energy important strides have been taken toward the adaptation of military technology to peaceful uses. A full-scale prototype atomic power reactor was operated in and other plants of commercial size are being planned and built under cooperative industry-Government arrangements. The wider industrial agricultural and medical use of radioisotopes and radiation sources is being stimulated. Incentives are being provided to private organizations for the commercial undertaking of activities heretofore performed only by the Government. Technical and financial assistance is being given to the European Atomic Energy Community and through bilateral agreements to separate nations in the development of power reactors and provision of small-scale reactors for research and training. Other efforts are being made through the International Atomic Energy Agency and through diplomatic negotiations to realize more fully for the world the peaceful possibilities inherent in nuclear fission. And progress is being made in cooperative international research on the generation of electric power by the controlled release of fusion energy a project which if successful promises great benefits to mankind Appendix A SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Summary of Recommendations in the Economic Report of the President I. GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL POLICIES a ) Continue for one year beyond June the present tax rate on corporate income and the excise taxes on automobiles and parts cigarettes distilled spirits and wines and beer. [ Page ] b ) Increase temporarily the Federal tax on motor fuels raise the tax on aviation gasoline and impose a similar tax on jet fuels. [ Page ] c ) Authorize a revision in postal rates. [ Page ] d ) Enact a permanent plan for the taxation of life insurance companies and adjust the present laws relating to the taxation of cooperatives [ Page ] e ) Specify the treatment processes which shall be considered as mining for the purpose of computing percentage depletion allowances in the case of mineral products. [ Page ] f ) Grant wider administrative authority in setting interest rates and make certain adjustments in rates for various credit programs as follows : Veterans Administration programs of guaranteed and direct home loans ; Federal Housing Administration programs of rental ( including armed services ) and cooperative housing ( Sections and of the National Housing Act ) ; the college housing program of the Housing and Home Finance Agency ; the loan program of the Rural Electrification Administration ; and the ship mortgage loan program of the Maritime Administration. [ Page ] g ) Provide the President with authority to veto or reduce the amounts for specific items in appropriation bills and in other bills authorizing expenditures. [ Page ] h ) Raise the permanent debt limit by $ billion to $ billion and authorize a further temporary increase for the fiscal year [ Page ] II. MEASURES To PROMOTE ECONOMIC GROWTH WITH PRICE STABILITY a ) Amend the Employment Act of to make price stability an explicit goal of Federal economic policy. [ Page ] b ) Extend Federal regulation to bank mergers accomplished through the acquisition of assets. [ Page ] c ) Require notification to the antitrust agencies of proposed mergers by businesses of significant size engaged in interstate commerce. [ Page ] d ) Empower the Attorney General to issue civil investigative demands in antitrust cases when civil procedures are contemplated. [ Page ] e ) Make Federal Trade Commission cease-and-desist orders final when issued for violations of the Clayton Act unless appealed to the courts [ Page53 ] f ) Authorize the Federal Trade Commission to seek preliminary injunctions in merger cases where a violation of law is likely. [ Page ] g ) Amend the Securities and Exchange Act to extend the privilege of Regulation A filings to a wider range of security issues. [ Page ] h ) Enact a program that will provide assistance through development loans and grants for technical studies to communities that have suffered substantial and persistent unemployment ; and technical aid for the diversification of rural low-income areas and of towns heavily dependent on a major industry. [ Page ] i ) Enact a long-range program to conserve helium gas. [ Page ] III. PERSONAL WELFARE a ) Provide for extending the coverage of the Federal-State unemployment insurance system to employees of firms having fewer than four workers to employees of Federal instrumentalities nonprofit organizations and certain other groups and to workers in Puerto Rico. [ Page ] b ) Bring the provisions of the District of Columbia unemployment insurance system up to the standards recommended for the States. [ Page ] c ) Strengthen State systems of workmen 's compensation. ( State responsibility. ) [ Page ] d ) Extend the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act. [ Page ] e ) Improve the 8-hour laws applicable to Federal and federally assisted construction projects. [ Page ] f ) Carry out the principle of equal pay for equal work without discrimination based on sex. [ Page ] g ) Require reporting and disclosure of financial dealings between employers and employee representatives and their agents and the filing of public reports on the status of union finances organization and procedures [ Pages ] h ) Prescribe standards to promote democratic procedures in union affairs [ Page ] i ) Modify the law governing secondary boycotts organizational and recognition picketing and representation elections ; and provide that States be given jurisdiction in labor-management disputes where the National Labor Relations Board declines to exercise authority. [ Page ] j ) Correct shortcomings in the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act [ Page ] IV. FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY a ) Enlarge the resources of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. [ Pages ] b ) Provide additional authorization for the Development Loan Fund [ Page ] c ) Extend the authority for sales of surplus agricultural commodities for foreign currencies and for the donation of such commodities for famine relief and other assistance. [ Page ] Appendix B REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report for calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully RAYMOND J. SAULNIER Chairman KARL BRANDT PAUL W. McCRACKEN Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council 's attention in the early months of was focused largely on measures to help arrest the economic decline ; after April attention was directed increasingly to measures that would help promote a sound recovery in the economy and a high and sustainable rate of long-term expansion Through its Chairman the Council kept the President informed of economic developments and their policy and program implications. The Chairman attended all Cabinet meetings and reported frequently to the Cabinet on economic developments and policy. The Chairman also attended on direction of the President all meetings of the National Security Council at which economic questions were discussed The Council was called upon frequently during the year to appraise proposals for legislative or administrative actions with special regard to the effect they might have on the growth and stability of the economy. Through its membership on interdepartmental committees and task forces and through frequent consultation with Government and private agencies the Council participated in the formulation of policies affecting economic growth and stability. A Council member serves on the Council on Foreign Economic Policy and the Civil and Defense Mobilization Board. The Chairman of the Council is also Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Small Business and serves on the President 's Special Committee on Financial Policies for Postattack Operations. Council staff members serve on ad hoc committees of the latter committee. The Council conferred frequently with the State Department on foreign economic questions and its senior staff economist on international economic matters attended most meetings of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems The Council participated in a number of international meetings during the year and continued its cooperation with various international agencies In April a member of the staff participated in the Thirteenth Plenary Session of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe held in Geneva Switzerland ; and a member of the Council accompanied by senior staff economists attended two meetings under the auspices of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( OEEC ) in Paris. In July the Council submitted a Survey of Economic Developments in the United States for the Annual Review of the OEEC ; and in February it submitted responses to the United Nations ' annual questionnaire on eco- nomic developments and policies. In December a member of the Council staff participated in a meeting of the " Economic Experts " group of the OEEC held in Paris. Two members of the staff met frequently with foreign groups studying in this country under the auspices of the International Cooperation Administration During the year the Council met with representatives of business concerns financial houses and consumer organizations and representatives of farm and other groups to discuss business conditions the economic outlook and policy questions relating to the economy 's growth and stability. The Chairman participated in the semiannual meetings of the Business Advisory Council of the Department of Commerce and a staff member attended meetings of the technical consultants to that body In accordance with the Employment Act the Council assisted the President in the preparation of the annual Economic Report. This Report which is transmitted to the Congress in January reviews the economic developments of the past year including the steps taken by Government to promote the economy 's growth and stability ; appraises the current position of the economy and the outlook for the year ahead ; and makes recommendations to the Congress and suggestions to the States local communities and private groups for actions and policies to help-achieve the goals set forth in the Employment Act. It also includes an extensive appendix of statistical information bearing on the United States economy Twenty-nine thousand copies of the January Economic Report of the President were published of which half were sold to the public through the Superintendent of Documents. Copies were supplied to all members of the Congress and were made available to depository libraries throughout the country The Council also prepares Economic Indicators a monthly compendium of current economic statistics. This widely used periodical is published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. Like the Economic Report of the President it is distributed to all members of the Congress and to depository libraries. An additional copies of Economic Indicators go to paying subscribers Council Membership The present members of the Council are Raymond J. Saulnier Paul W McCracken and Karl Brandt Dr. Saulnier Professor of Economics on leave from Barnard College Columbia University and from the National Bureau of Economic Research where he is Director of the Financial Research Program has served as a consultant to the Council from to as a member of the Council since April and as Chairman since December Dr. McCracken Professor of Business Conditions on leave from the School of Business Administration University of Michigan has served as a member of the Council since December and previously as a member of the senior staff Dr. Brandt was designated a member of the Council on an interim appointment basis in November He is Professor of Agricultural Economics on leave from Stanford University where he is Associate Director of the Food Research Institute. Dr. Brandt 's name will be transmitted to the Senate for confirmation when the Congress convenes in January Joseph S. Davis Professor Emeritus of Stanford University and formerly Director of the Food Research Institute at tjiat University resigned his membership on the Council in October Dr. Davis had served as a member of the Council from May Council Staff The Council has a staff of persons of whom are senior economists and statisticians. Each senior staff member is assigned one or more areas for special attention and cooperates with other Government agencies and with business labor and other private groups in analyzing and evaluating economic developments. Two of the members are on leave from university faculties ; all others are permanent employees. Supplementing its fulltime staff several university economists serve the Council occasionally as consultants. The present members of the senior staff are Bernard S. Beckler Henry W. Briefs ( on leave Georgetown University ) Samuel L. Brown Robert C. Colwell Frances M. James Marshall A. Kaplan Hal B. Lary David W. Lusher John A. Schnittker ( on leave Kansas State College ) Charles L. Schultze Irving H. Siegel Walter F. Stettner Collis Stocking and Charles A. TafT Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability The Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability which meets weekly under the Chairmanship of the Chairman of the Council was established by the President in to advise with the Council on matters affecting the growth and stability of the economy. Present members of the Board are as follows : Department of State Thomas C. Mann Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Department of the Treasury Julian B. Baird Under Secretary Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Frederick H. Mueller Under Secretary Department of Labor James T. O'Connell Under Secretary Department of Health Education and Welfare Bertha Adkins Under Secretary Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Mills Member of the Board Bureau of the Budget Roger W. Jones Deputy Director Export-Import Bank of Washington Samuel C. Waugh President The White House Office Don Paarlberg Special Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Raymond J. Saulnier Chairman Budget for Fiscal Year For the fiscal year the Congress appropriated $ for the Council 's activities. A supplemental budget request for $ is being made to cover part of the cost of increased salaries due under the terms of the Federal Employees Salary Increase Act of Appendix C SOME MAJOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN I. Employment and Earnings II. Prices III. Agriculture IV. Financial Developments V. Government Finances VI. United States Foreign Trade and Payments I. Employment and Earnings Recession and recovery in and were clearly reflected in the Nation 's labor markets. Employment declined sharply in late and early Recovery began in May and continued through the end of the year. Unemployment which had increased to the highest levels since World War II declined significantly after August Unemployment benefits particularly in view of the longer duration of eligibility made possible by special temporary legislative action played a major part in counteracting the reduction of wage income. Despite the fall of employment and the rise of unemployment wage rates and hourly earnings continued to advance Real weekly earnings declined through April but recovered as the workweek was lengthened and as prices stabilized. Though infrequent for most of the year labor disputes increased sharply in late autumn EMPLOYMENT Total employment in nonagricultural establishments as estimated from employers ' payroll records began to recede in August and by April it had fallen by million seasonally adjusted. Four-fifths of the reduction was in manufacturing mining and transportation although these industries account for only two-fifths of nonfarm employment. The decline was halted in April and employment began to rise moderately in May. The expansion continued to the end of the year although delayed in October and November by labor disputes. In December employment on nonfarm payrolls was million an increase of from the April low figure Part of the decline of nonfarm payroll employment during the recession was due to less extensive dual jobholding and to reduced labor turnover as well as to the fall in the number of employed persons. Monthly estimates of the Bureau of the Census based upon household sample surveys indicated a drop of million from July to April in the number of persons having nonfarm wage and salary jobs as their primary activity compared with a total reduction of million estimated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics from employer payroll records. All of this difference can not be accounted for but part of it is doubtless due to the fact that persons holding two jobs or moving from one job to another and therefore receiving pay from more than one employer are counted only once in the household surveys but twice in the payroll records. The smaller decline of the Census estimates thus in part reflects the lessened dual jobholding and reduced labor turnover shown by other surveys Employment began to recede in several important industrial sectors before the general downturn in business that started after the middle of Moderate reductions commenced in the construction industry in transportation and in nondurable manufacturing as early as the middle of and in durable goods manufacturing after the end of that year However until mid-1957 these declines were more than offset by continued increases in nonmanufacturing sectors especially in trade in State and local government and in financial and service industries. But in the late summer of reductions appeared in mining communications and trade and the downward trend in employment in construction continued TABLE C Changes in nonagricultural employment since December [ Thousands of persons seasonally adjusted data ] Change Major industry group December to July Nonagricultural employment : _ Julv to April April to December Nondurable goods Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures-. _. _ _. Textile-mill products Apparel and other finished textile products Paper and allied products Printing publishing and allied industries ._ Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal. ._ Rubber products Leather and leather products Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities o Ordnance and accessories Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) _ Furniture and fixtures Stone clay and glass products Primary metal industries. _ _ ._ _ Fabricated metal products ( except ordnance machinery and transportation equipment ) Machinery ( except electrical ) Electrical machinery. _ ._. .._ _ _ _ Transportation equipment Instruments and related products... _ Miscellaneous manufacturing industries Durable goods Manufacturing A Wholesale and retail trade Wholesale trade Retail trade Transportation Communication Public utilities Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellaneous Government Federal State and local i Based on preliminary data for December See Table D-22 footnote for type of workers included Source : Department of Labor By the fourth quarter the contraction had become quite general and it was accelerating in most manufacturing industries with particularly sharp reductions in firms producing primary metals transportation equipment and machinery. Steeper declines took place in the first quarter of in transportation and in construction. In financial and service industries on the other hand the hitherto steadily rising employment trend merely leveled out for several months and in State and local governments the strong employment uptrend was completely unaffected by the recession ( Table C-l ) Employment cutbacks were heaviest for hourly-rated production jobs in manufacturing industries. The number of such jobs declined by million or percent from July to April while " nonproduction " or salaried jobs declined by or about percent. The recovery of manufacturing employment since late spring has been due almost entirely to an expansion of production work ; salaried employment has risen only slightly since that time The occupational groups in general civilian employment that were most affected by the recession were operatives and related workers and craftsmen and foremen ( Table C-2 ) The employment of professional and technical personnel which has followed a strong upward trend in recent years continued to increase rising by or around percent between and Contraction of employment was very rapid in the early months of and was aggravated by especially unfavorable weather in February and March. Some signs of recovery appeared in April however as the number of jobs began to increase in construction and firmed in nondurable manufacturing. In late spring and summer the recovery spread to durable goods manufacturing trade and service and financial enterprises and by TABLE C-2. Civilian employment by major occupational group and [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Major occupational group Emplovment- ._ Change to Professional technical and kindred workers Farmers and farm managers Managers officials and proprietors except farm Clerical and kindred workers Sales workers Craftsmen foremen and kindred workers Operatives and kindred workers Private household workers Service workers except private household Farm laborers and foremen Laborers except farm and mine Note Annual figures shown above are averages of data for January April July and October since data prior to are available only for these months. The data represent total employment of the civilian labor force and therefore include proprietors and self-employed persons. See Current Population Reports Series P-57 Xo. Table for list of workers included in each group Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce August employment was expanding moderately in most of the principal sectors of the economy Extensive work stoppages in the automotive and other hard goods manufacturing industries retarded the increase of employment in the final quarter of the year. The number of employees involved in labor disputes which had remained very low until September rose abruptly to more than late in that month rose further to in October and was in November. These stoppages substantially afTected the recovery of employment in the final quarter of the year through their indirect effects on supplying industries as well as by their immediate impact on the workers and firms directly involved Employment in agriculture where trends are especially difficult to estimate over short periods appears to have been unaffected by the recession. The Department of Agriculture estimates that total employment on farms was virtually unchanged in The Census Bureau using different definitions and procedures reports farm employment reduced by percent from to ( Tables D-17 and D-65 ) UNEMPLOYMENT Unemployment which for two years had fluctuated narrowly around million or percent of the civilian labor force began to rise moderately after adjustment for seasonal factors in the third quarter of As employment fell more sharply toward the end of the year and as the labor force continued to grow unemployment increased more rapidly and in April exceeded million. This high level of unemployment seasonally adjusted persisted until September when substantial reductions began. By December unemployment had declined to million a seasonally adjusted rate of percent of the labor force The to percent ratio of unemployment to the civilian labor force that prevailed from the summer of to the third quarter of was considerably higher than that which prevailed before the onset of the recession and was somewhat higher than before the downturn in The reductions of employment in and early resulted ^ therefore in rates of unemployment higher than those reached in the two prior recessions since World War II. However both the recovery of employment and significant reductions of unemployment commenced relatively earlier than in or in ; in December the rate of unemployment was not much different from that in the corresponding period of the recession and recovery although still above the rate of the period A large part of the unemployed are a swiftly changing group during recession as well as in more prosperous times. Although total unemployment rose steeply from December to April an average of a million or more previously jobless workers were able to find work each month. However about three-fifths of those unemployed in any month were still unemployed in the following month and slower rates of hiring and rising layoffs rapidly increased the number of those out of work weeks or more from at the outset of the recession to million in April In September the recall of workers who had been laid off in manufacturing industries brought the first significant reduction of long-term unemployment. Substantial reductions after allowance for seasonal factors continued in the final months of the year Because the decline in unemployment was most severe in durable goods manufacturing and related industries the impact upon the working population was quite uneven. Of the total increase of million jobless persons from April to April by far the greater part were men their numbers rising by million or percent. Men from to years of age were especially affected and the rate of unemployment for married men living with their families that is for those most likely to be strongly attached to the labor force rose from percent in July to.a peak of percent in March In the spring and summer employment opportunities improved and the rate of unemployment diminished for heads of families to percent by the end of the year. Unemployment among women also rose substantially but not to the same extent as among men Durable goods manufacturing industries accounted for about one-third of the total rise of the jobless and rates of unemployment among durable goods workers reached percent in April ; they were especially high in industries manufacturing primary metals and transportation equipment rising to percent and percent respectively. Large increases also occurred in the railroad industry in mining and in construction. Service industries government and public utilities were least affected The uneven effect of the recession on the different areas of the country is shown by the statistics of insured unemployment ( Table C-3 ) By April rates of insured unemployment were percent or more in New England many of the Middle Atlantic and North Central States and California and were more than double the rates in the previous year. In Michigan Ohio and West Virginia the rates had at least tripled. In several Southern and Western States however insured unemployment remained below percent of covered employment. Of the Nation 's principal labor market areas the number having " substantial labor surpluses " increased from in July to by July and then declined to in November according to surveys by the Bureau of Employment Security However reduced unemployment and an improved employment outlook were evident in ? labor market areas during the second half of the year More than four-fifths of nonagricultural wage and salary workers are covered by the system of unemployment insurance. Consequently benefit payments increased rapidly during the recession and partially compensated for the wage loss to the employee and his family. While the provisions of the unemployment insurance system still fall short of the President 's recommendations unemployment benefit payments rose from an annual rate O TABLE C Insured unemployment under State and Federal employee programs April and April Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Insured unemployment ' State Week ended April Week ended April Increase to Thousands Week ended April Weei : ended ' April * Percent United States Alabama Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas _ _ Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts _ Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana _ Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas. Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming _ _ _ _ _ ___ Represents the number of unemployed workers covered by unemployment insurance programs who havo completed at least week of unemployment. Excludes territories Based on unrounded data s Based on average covered employment for months ended June Based on average covered employment for months ended June NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor ( seasonally adjusted ) of $ billion in July to $ billion in April thus directly offsetting nearly one-third of the decline in total wage and salary payments and providing benefits for the laid-off employee averaging $ to $ per week in the principal industrial states. Private supplementary unemployment benefit plans which raised the level of benefits for the unemployed in certain industries also helped to maintain incomes As in earlier recessions the number of beneficiaries exhausting their regular entitlement to benefits began to rise rapidly a few months after the onset of recession. Starting at per month in September these exhaustions increased to a peak of in July Legislation recommended by the President and enacted by the Congress provided by means of agreements with the States for the payment of benefits for additional periods to persons still unemployed who had exhausted their regular benefits. States participating in the program or otherwise extending the duration of benefits accounted for percent of covered employment Unemployed persons claiming benefits under this temporary program reached a maximum of in August and then declined to less than by the end of the year. Extended unemployment benefit payments amounted to approximately $ million during The months of recession also affected other social security and public assistance programs even though these are less closely related to employment trends than unemployment insurance. Total recipients of aid to dependent children increased more sharply than in previous years. Cases of " General Assistance " relief provided from State and local funds where applicants are not eligible for federally assisted programs also increased more in late and early than would be expected for seasonal reasons HOURS WORKED AND EARNINGS The average workweek of production workers in manufacturing industries declined moderately during the first half of and sharply from September through February It then turned upward and advanced through the rest of the year. Gross average hourly earnings which had leveled out at $ in the final months of remained practically unchanged through April but then rose at a quickening pace during the second half of the year reaching $ in December. Hourly earnings excluding premium pay for overtime continued to rise throughout the year. Average weekly earnings reflecting both changing hours and changing rates declined from September to February but by June they had recovered all of their lost ground and at $ in December were $ above earnings a year earlier. In terms of real purchasing power weekly earnings continued to decline through April but recovered sharply by the end of the year as the workweek was lengthened and as consumer prices stabilized The manufacturing workweek and the amount of overtime worked began to recede early in from the high levels of and declined gradually until September when the contraction became sharper The low point was reached in February when average hours of work were lower ( seasonally adjusted ) than at any time since World War II An upturn occurred in March before the beginning of the recovery of employment. This development is typical of periods of recovery. When demand improves production is first increased by lengthening the workweek and later by adding employees Reduced overtime tends somewhat to counteract in recession periods the continued rise of basic wage rates. In February when overtime had been minimized and the workweek was shortest gross average hourly earnings in manufacturing were percent above the level of February while average straight-time earnings were percent higher. The continued rise in basic wage rates in is reflected in the index of hourly earnings excluding premium pay for overtime and adjusted for interindustry shifts of employment ( Table C-4 ) Reduced hours of work and less overtime and the continued rise of consumer prices resulted in a persistent decline of real weekly earnings in and through April despite the rise of basic wage rates. However this tendency was reversed by the increase in hours of work and by the tendency of prices to stabilize after the middle of By the end of the year real weekly wages had recovered nearly all of the ground lost since the record rates of late Pay rates of armed forces personnel and of salaried civilian employees of the Federal Government which had been unchanged since early in were increased by about percent on the average during The increases were made retroactive to January for civilian employees TABLE C-4. Index of average hourly earnings adjusted for overtime and interindustry employment shifts selected periods * [ = ] Month January February March April... May June _ July August September 161.fi October November December * 16L4 ( ) For production workers in manufacturing. See note below Preliminary j-3-Not available Average hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing are affected by changes in pre-mium pay for overtime by changes in the industrial composition of employment and by other factors as ll as by general changes in hourly wage rates. This index excludes the effects of premium pay for overerindustry employment shifts and better reflects the movements of wage rates. Employindustries are based upon average production man-hours DJBpiSStjjnent of Labor resulting in lump-sum cash payments of about $ million in June and July. In all about million persons are receiving higher salaries under this legislation and the total rise of income amounts to about $ billion per year Faim wage rates according to the index compiled by the Department of Agriculture increased by about percent between July and July COLLECTIVE BARGAINING DEVELOPMENTS Basic wage rates established in major collective bargaining situations continued to rise in As in the over-all average wage increase was about cents an hour and increases were negotiated or put into effect for million workers about percent of those covered by major collective bargaining contracts ( Table C-5 ) Improvements of supplementary benefits continued to characterize three out of every four settlements TABLE C Distribution of employees receiving wage increases under major labor agreements * Size of increase ( cents per hour ) Employees receiving wage increases : Number ( millions ) Percent Percentage distribution : Total Under cents and under cents ^ __ and under cents _ _ J3 and under cents cents and over Not specified or computed .__ ^ _ _ _ _ Includes cost of living deferred and newly negotiated wage increases received under collective bargaining situations affecting or more employees and coming to the attention of the Department of Labor Excludes construction services finance and government Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor At the outset of about million employees were covered by labor agreements providing for specified wage increases during the year and in most cases for cost of living adjustments as well. In addition at least one cost of living wage review was scheduled for about million workers before expiration of their contracts in Employees in the steel aluminum meatpacking and railroad industries received total increases ranging from to cents per hour as a result of both deferred and escalator adjustments. Automobile workers received total increases of approximately cents per hour in under both old and newly negotiated contracts The continued advance of the consumer price index until August and the record number million of employees with wages subject to cost of living escalator clauses were major factors in the continued rise of wage rates Wage increases were negotiated for million employees in Negotiated increases tended on the whole to be slightly smaller than in with to cents per hour being the most common compared with to cents in and About percent of workers affected by negotiations received no wage increase After delayed negotiations three-year settlements in the automobile industry were concluded with major firms in September and October. Wage increases of percent at 13-month intervals extra increases for skilled employees continued cost of living adjustments and improvements of severance pay pensions and supplemental unemployment benefits were provided. An agreement reached in the coal mining industry in November increased wages by $ per day effective in and provided higher vacation pay and other benefits II. Prices Prices of most manufactured industrial goods in both retail and wholesale markets have been fairly stable over the last months. On the other hand prices of other types of goods farm products industrial raw materials foods and services have changed by relatively large amounts some fluctuating over a wide range and others rising steadily In wholesale markets farm prices rose during most of the period of contraction and then declined in the last nine months of Prices of industrial raw materials on the other hand moved in the opposite direction falling as economic activity receded and rising during the recovery. Reflecting these offsetting price movements and the stability of prices of most manufactured goods the wholesale price index has been roughly unchanged since mid-195 Prices of consumer services have continued to advance steadily ; food prices rose sharply in early and despite some modest declines in recent months they have remained above levels. Together with higher prices for new and used automobiles these developments accounted for almost all of the percent increase in the consumer price index between July and November FARM AND FOOD PRICES Farm prices rose irregularly throughout and from the abnormally low levels of the winter of and the rise was accelerated in early During the first three months of wholesale prices of farm products rose percent above prices in the same quarter of while the volume of marketings particularly of price-supported crops rose percent Marketings of livestock however were smaller than in the preceding year and unfavorable weather during the winter and early spring reduced the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables. Although the maintenance of consumer income undoubtedly contributed to the rise in food prices during the recession these changing supply conditions played the major role. As food supplies increased in the summer and fall of food prices declined ; nevertheless they remained above levels. During most of the period of rising farm prices marketing margins continued to advance. The higher manufacturing transportation and distribution costs resulted not only from higher wage rates freight charges and the like but also from the costs incurred in continually adding to the quality variety and " built-in " services incorporated in prepared and packaged foods. A large part of the rise in margins came in the second half of when the fall in farm prices was accompanied by a much smaller decline in food prices. In November retail food prices were still about percent above mid-1957 levels CONSUMER SERVICES Ever since World War II prices of consumer services have been rising steadily through economic expansions and contractions. They have increased not only absolutely but also in relation to prices of commodities Because of their relatively small rise during the war years however the increase since then has only recently brought service prices excluding rent back to their relationship to nonfood commodity prices. Rents are still well below their prewar relationship to other prices. While the prewar relationship between prices of services and other prices is not necessarily normal for the current period some of the relatively sharp increase in prices of services during the past ten years may reflect an attempt to achieve in these industries the real income gains attained earlier in other segments of the economy Consumer services cover a wide variety of economic activities ranging from the highly industrialized and regulated public utilities to domestic service. They also include such items as real estate taxes and property insurance premiums which have little immediate connection with the state of business activity. It is not surprising then that there have been significant differences among the various categories in the timing and magnitude of price changes Prices of services provided by the regulated public utilities tend to adjust to inflationary pressures with some time lag. During the nine months following the conflict in Korea for example when other prices were rising sharply prices .of most of these utilities increased moderately. In the succeeding two years on the other hand they rose fairly rapidly while commodity prices were falling. Similarly the prices of this group of services advanced quite gradually from to mid-1957 but since then they have risen at a much more rapid rate. The recent increase is more a delayed reaction to cost increases that occurred earlier than a reflection of inflationary forces currently at work. Since the end of World War II prices of some of these services gas electricity and telephone have risen substantially less than prices of other services. A major reason for the smaller increase is that these services are very highly industrialized and have achieved substantial efficiencies of operation through large investment programs rapid expansion of operations and the introduction of new technology. Certain other utilities particularly local public transit although relatively large users of capital equipment have faced problems peculiar to their industry which have tended to raise their costs and prices even more than for services in general For another large group of services included in the consumer price index prices are influenced by governmental and administrative factors not closely related to the current state of the economy. The most important items in this group are real estate taxes auto registration fees postage rates mortgage interest and automobile and property insurance premiums Some of these items have been included in the consumer price index only since December Since then prices for this group have risen faster than service prices generally. While property taxes insurance rates and other items of a similar nature tend in the long run to be influenced by general economic conditions the specific timing of changes is usually determined by noneconomic considerations For consumer services other than the regulated utilities and the miscellaneous group discussed above a common characteristic is that a large part of their total cost is payment for labor services. They normally can not achieve the efficiencies made possible by heavy capital investment and new technology to the same extent as the commodity producing and public utility industries. For this group of " other " services prices have risen steadily since the end of the war and substantially more than the prices of services provided by the regulated utilities. In many instances an advance in prices for this group when other prices are stable reflects an adjustment of wages and salaries to increases in living costs which occurred at some earlier period. Also wage and salary gains often lead to cost and price increases in many of the service industries in contrast to the industrialized sectors where there is greater opportunity for wage and salary increases to be offset by improvements in productivity Taken altogether service prices excluding rent rose percent between mid-1957 and mid-1958 and another percent in the second half of Since March of last year however the rate of increase has been somewhat slower than during most years since the war. Rent has risen about percent in the months since the middle of While this is about the rate of increase which has persisted since it is well below the annual increases of to percent in earlier postwar years INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS A number of important crude or slightly processed materials used by American industry such as lead zinc copper tin and natural rubber are supplied in whole or in part from abroad. In most instances the United States purchases a significant part of the world supply but other industrial nations are also heavy buyers. Hence prices of these materials were determined during the recession not only by the course of economic activity in the United States but also by the leveling of industrial production and the reduction in inventory purchases by other industrialized nations. Prices of these materials have also been affected in recent years by the termination of largescale stockpiling and by supplies from new sources which have been developed since the post-Korean defense mobilization began. The changes in industrial production and inventories in the United States were nevertheless major factors determining the movement of prices of crude and slightly processed materials not only prices of domestic materials but also those of foreign supplies on which the United States relies heavily Prices of this group of commodities tend to be much more volatile than those of fabricated materials. After reaching a peak in December prices of crude materials exclusive of farm products declined irregularly to mid-1957 as industrial production leveled and purchases for inventory receded. In the succeeding nine months the decline was more rapid as industrial consumption of materials decreased sharply and inventories were reduced. Prices moved upward in the summer of shortly after industrial production began to recover. Since stocks of copper lead and zinc had risen during the recession the increased consumption of these materials was at first achieved by drawing down inventories ; subsequently purchases from primary producers increased. Later in the year the restoration of tariffs on copper and the imposition of import quotas on lead and zinc strengthened the tendency for the prices of these commodities to rise. Prices of steel scrap rubber and tin also advanced sharply as the recovery progressed. Prices of crude and slightly processed industrial materials as a whole began to rise in June and by the end of the year they had almost reached the level recorded prior to the recession SEMIFINISHED AND FINISHED PRODUCTS With some notable exceptions prices of fabricated industrial products ( intermediate materials and finished goods ) changed little during ( Table C-6 ) Prices tended to decline in the first half of the year but subsequently they rose enough to erase these declines. Prices of steel and of many intermediate steel-using products advanced significantly in both and Steel prices were raised on the average by percent in July and by percent in August Both price increases were put into effect shortly after substantial upward adjustments of wage rates in the industry. On the other hand prices of nonferrous metal products along with those of basic copper lead and zinc declined during the recession. Although prices of these products have increased in recent months they are still below their pre-recession peaks. Prices of building materials were relatively stable during and and then declined slightly in early In the second half of the year however the rapid increase in residential building and in public construction was accompanied by a recovery in the prices of construction materials. Prices of semifinished nondurable commodities which had risen only moderately during the overall price advance in and fell throughout For all intermediate materials components and supplies as a group prices at the end of differed little from those prevailing at mid-195 A small rise occurred in the last half of a modest decline during early and an equally modest recovery in the latter part of the year During the two years preceding the recession prices of machinery and equipment rose percent the sharpest increase for any major group of TABLE G Changes in wholesale price indexes since June Percentatje change July to December December to June Commodity group June to July All commodities Farm products Processed foods _ Other than farm products and processed foods ( industrial ) _ June to December 1958> Intermediate materials supplies and components3 Crude materials * _ Materials for durable manufacturing Materials for nondurable manufacturing.. Components for manufacturing Materials and components for construction Finished goods : Producer finished goods Consumer durable goods _ Consumer nondurable goods ( other than food ) Special index : All manufactured products Based on preliminary data for December Excludes a number of partially processed materials such as copper lead and zinc which are discussed in the text along with crude materials. In this table these materials are included in intermediate materials supplies and components Includes groups not shown separately Source : Department of Labor finished products. Even during the last half of when machinery orders and sales were falling rapidly prices advanced another 2l/z percent. After November prices stabilized and remained so for most of Late in the year however there were a number of small increases on particular lines of equipment notably agricultural and construction machinery With the principal exception of automobiles the average increase in prices of finished consumer goods at wholesale and retail was slight in the past months. Prices of new automobiles were raised in and when new models were introduced. However a comparison of published indexes at the end of with those in mid-1957 covering changes for two model years tends to exaggerate the increase since discounts were larger at the beginning of this period than at the end. The changes in prices of consumer goods both as published and as adjusted to eliminate the essentially seasonal changes in prices of automobiles are shown in Table C-7. The rise in prices of used cars was particularly marked in the past months continuing the advance begun in the period of very low prices in early Over the past three years almost half of the percent increase in the prices of consumer durable goods was due to the rise in prices of new cars and another third to the rise in prices of used cars Prices of appliances which had fallen for many years continued to decline after mid-1957 but the decreases tended to be small. Furniture prices also fell slightly ; apparel prices declined after a moderate seasonal increase in late ; and prices of gasoline fuel oil and textile housefurnishings moved lower. On the other hand increases occurred in prices of tires prescriptions and drugs cigarettes newspapers soaps and detergents and many other miscellaneous products. On balance as can be seen from Table G-7 when automobile prices are excluded the indexes of prices of consumer durable and nondurable commodities advanced very slightly TABLE G-7. Changes in consumer price indexes since Percentage change July to Relative November importance in index December Based on Based on published adjusted data data Item Ml items Durable goods New automobiles Used automobiles Other durable goods Appliances Furniture and bedding Nondurable goods Services including rent _ _ Food Other commodities Detail will not add to total because a small number of items could not be allocated to any individual group Indexes for July for groups containing new automobiles were adjusted to eliminate so far as possible the effect of changing discounts during the model year Includes groups not shown separately Change from June to September Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers The index of prices of consumer goods rose percent mainly because of increases in the prices of three groups of items foods services and automobiles. The over-all index of wholesale prices in contrast changed very little in the recession and during the recovery to date. This index includes prices of very few service items but it does include prices of industrial raw materials. In general the prices of these materials moved in the opposite direction from prices of farm products and processed foods falling in the early part of when farm prices were increasing and rising in the latter part of the year when farm prices were declining. Price changes in these two major groups tended to offset each other while prices of semifinished and finished industrial products moved within a very narrow range. The rise in the consumer price index relative to the wholesale price index therefore reflects not an increase in retail margins but rather the substantially different composition of the two indexes COMPARISON OF DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN PRICE DEVELOPMENTS The United States was not the only country to experience an increase in the general level of prices during the past several years ( Table C-8 ) In fact the average change in United States prices between and was somewhat less than the change in many Western European countries though nearly as much as in Germany and Italy. In the United States wholesale prices of nondurable goods and of farm products behaved in substantially different fashion from those of durable industrial products. Despite their rise in and farm prices in the United States were lower at the end of the period than at the beginning while in most WestTABLE C-8. Price changes in the United States and selected other industrial nations to Percentage change to United States United Kingdom France Germany Federal Republic All items i2 Food Price series Norway Italy Gross national product deflators : Total Consumption Gross domesticfixedInvestment- Producers ' ment durable equip. ( ) Consumer price index : Selected wholesale price indexes : Textile products Building materials Machinery _ Index of prices received by farmers ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) i Implicit deflators for gross national product and specified components. For Germany ( ) and France ( ) deflators for producers ' durable equipment were not available ; estimates based on other data were used * Not available Based on data for Paris only < Based on wholesale price index of farm products Sources : Based on data from various agencies of the U. S. Government and international organizations ern European countries they had increased substantially. Prices of many nondurable goods in the United States also were more stable than those abroad and prices of most consumer goods rose less than in Western Europe The increase in prices of durable goods for industrial use on the other hand seems to have been greater in this country both relative to other prices here and to prices of similar goods produced abroad. Prices of machinery and equipment rose at a particularly rapid rate ; scattered evidence from a comparison of prices of processed durable materials indicates that the rise in prices in this country was greater than the increase abroad. The over-all price behavior in the United States compared with other industrial nations thus conceals significantly divergent trends among different commodity groups III. Agriculture For American agriculture was a year of exceptionally favorable weather and marked prosperity. Outstanding developments were record yields and output of many crops increased livestock prices and a sharp rise in farm income. The demand for food remained strong throughout the year as personal incomes fell only moderately and briefly. The food component of the consumer price index averaged percent higher than in as farm prices and the cost of marketing services rose about equally. Also exports of farm products remained high although they were smaller in the fiscal year than in Still domestic and foreign demands were again not large enough to absorb the output of many crops Agriculture 's remarkable productivity aided by favorable weather resulted in record crop output even though the acreage planted was the smallest in many years. As a result the two-year decline in price support activity ended and Federal expenditures for the stabilization of farm prices and incomes are expected to be a record $ billion in the fiscal year Despite continued intensive efforts to dispose of surplus commodities the value of farm commodities under loan and in inventories of the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) by mid-1959 may exceed the peak. Price support commitments now made on crops suggest high expenditures again in the fiscal year if production in is near the average of recent years LEVEL AND SOURCES OF FARM INCOME Realized net income of farm operators in was $ billion percent more than in and the highest since ( Table D-64 ) Delayed marketings of crops chiefly feed grains and cotton contributed more than $ million to the increase in Total net income including inventory change was $ billion percent higher than in Production expenses increased percent as feeder livestock prices wage rates prices of farm machinery and motor vehicles and taxes rose. Farm people earned more than $ billion from nonfarm sources so that their average per capita income from all sources exceeded $ for the first time The rise in farm output and income in contributed to enlarged expenditures on farm machinery and thus to a greater productive capacity Also the living standards of farm families continued to improve as a result of gains in income. In addition the increased farm expenditures helped to moderate the business decline and to speed recovery. However many farm people did not share in the gains in and they still have very low incomes. Wide differences in productive assets per farm and in alternative employment opportunities continue to lead to large income disparities among farmers and to considerable diversity in the problems faced by farm people Farms with annual gross sales of more than $ represent only about percent of all farms but produce nine-tenths of all farm products sold Operators of these farms earn most of their income from farming ; they are the chief beneficiaries of public expenditures for agricultural credit conservation and price support programs ; with the public they share in the important benefits of agricultural research. Per family average income from all sources for the million farms in this group has been comparatively high ( Table C-9 ) Large differences exist within the group however ; in percent of all farms in this group made percent of the group 's sales of farm products TABLE C-9. Number of farms and average income of farm families and Farms with sales of more than $ per year Farms with sales of less than $ per year Year Number ( thousands ) Average income ' Total Farm Off-farm Number ( thousands ) Average income Total Farm l Off-farm $ $ $ $ $ $ i Farm-operator family Source : Department of Agriculture Families on the million low-production farms with annual sales below $ earn little income from farming but their off-farm income is comparatively large ( Table C-9 ) Again there is a wide range within the group. On many of these farms the operator has little supplementary employment and farm sales are his major source of income. However the number of these farmers who are finding off-farm jobs is growing About million part-time and residential farmers make up the remainder of the low-production group. Gross sales of these units are very low since farms are small and many of the farm operators have off-farm jobs. Only percent of all sales of farm products are made by part-time and residential farms which comprise nearly one-third of all farms. Clearly the welfare of the families on low-production farms is more closely linked with the expanding nonfarm sector of our economy than with agriculture as such FINANCIAL POSITION The financial position of agriculture which was already strong continued to improve in Farm debt increased somewhat but farm assets rose by a larger amount as the stock of machinery the number an<i value of livestock on farms and land prices increased. Equities in farm properties reached new peaks with the gain in equities alone nearly equal to the total farm real estate debt PRODUCTION AND PRICES Most of the gains in farm income in are attributable to the coincidence of record output of crops with insufficiently flexible supported prices ; sharply higher prices for certain crops whose output was reduced ; and comparatively high prices for the moderately reduced marketings of livestock In addition the maintenance of personal income and consumer spending during the business contraction contributed significantly to higher farm incomes Crops Total crop production in exceeded the record output of and by percent while harvested acreage was little changed from those years and was percent below the average. New record yields per acre were reported for wheat corn cotton sorghum grain soybeans rice and other crops which together made up percent of all crop acreage in These increases were the joint result of widespread favorable weather and improved technology the latter both a permanent and major source of increased farm output Production of food grains was percent higher in than in An increase of more than million bushels in stocks of wheat is indicated by present estimates of domestic and foreign sales in the year ending June Despite record output and large carryovers the index of prices received by farmers for food grains declined only moderately in as price supports operating through nonrecourse loans set effective limits on the price declines resulting from the large crops. The statutory price support for wheat of the crop was percent below and for rice percent below that of ; prices for both commodities reflected these reductions with wheat prices slightly below and rice prices slightly above the support level Price supports had similar sustaining effects on the prices of feed grains and oil crops in despite sharply increased output. As a result the increase in income from these major price-supported crops was very large ; food and feed grains and oil crops accounted for one-third of the increase in cash receipts from farm marketings in Reductions in the size of crops were rare in ; for two major commodities however reduced output contributed to increases in cash receipts and in net farm income. Smaller marketings of early citrus fruits following frost damage sent their prices up sharply ; the seasonally adjusted index of prices received by farmers for all fruit rose percent in the month preceding April For the year citrus fruit prices were percent higher than in while production decreased percent. As a result the value of production of the reduced crop was $ million $ million more than the value of the larger crop. Noncitrus fruit production was slightly reduced and prices were moderately above those in A shortage of fresh vegetables early in the season caused their prices to rise sharply ; prices fell as supplies increased at midyear Eight percent of the increased cash receipts from farm marketings in was attributable to fruits and vegetables Livestock Per capita meat consumption in was less than in as red meat production declined percent largely early in the year. By midyear monthly pork output began to exceed the volume. Beef output however continued well below as breeding herds were restocked following large reductions in and ; cattle on farms increased by more than million head in Lamb and mutton production was also slightly below but poultry meat production mcreased percent partly offsetting the reduction in red meat supplies ( Table C-10 ) TABLE C-10. Meat and poultry : Prices receipts production and consumption Year Prices received for meat animals ( = ) i Receipts from sale of meat animals ( billions of dollars ) Consumption per capita Production Red meats Total Poultry meat Total Red meats Poultry meat Pounds Billions of pounds s SO { i Index of prices received by farmers for meat animals * Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture The reduction in total and per capita meat supplies was reflected in increased prices in and even larger increases in when the index of prices received for meat animals rose percent. Because of this sharp price response to moderately reduced marketings sales of meat animals accounted for nearly half of the increase in cash receipts from farm marketings O Even though there was some increase in in the volume of marketings of poultry and eggs prices increased slightly. Dairy production and marketings were almost the same as in but prices fell moderately EXPORTS Agricultural exports decreased by percent to $ billion in the year ended June ; nevertheless they were exceeded in only two other years on record. Grains cotton and animal products accounted for most of the decrease. Thirty percent of all exports of farm products were shipped under special programs compared with percent in the fiscal year mostly under provisions of Public Law Cash exports remained at $ billion partly because export subsidies continued to be paid on several commodities in order to bridge the gap between domestic and world prices. Sales for foreign currencies and grants for relief accounted for nine-tenths of the exports under special programs. Barter transactions declined under revised regulations to only one-fourth the volume of the preceding fiscal year The Department of Agriculture expects a small decline in agricultural exports during the fiscal year chiefly because of increased production in importing countries. Cotton exports may not exceed million bales a sharp drop from fiscal while wheat exports are expected to increase slightly. Exports of farm products in the period from July to December were percent below those in the same period in PRICE SUPPORT OPERATIONS Farm income has become increasingly dependent on price supports as rising productivity and increased resources have combined to keep the output of major farm commodities well in excess of total demand at established prices. Somewhat less favorable crop weather the soil bank and large exports based primarily on special financing or grants for relief permitted reductions in the carryover of wheat and cotton in and Feed grain carryover however has increased in each of the last eight years. Oilbearing crops have become heavily dependent on surplus disposal programs High levels of price support activity in grains cotton and oilseeds from the crop indicate a record total of CCC holdings by mid-1959 Since the fiscal year budget expenditures for the stabilization of farm prices and incomes have ranged from $ billion to the record $ billion estimated for the present fiscal year ( Table C-ll ) Most of these expenditures have been in support of the prices of wheat corn and cotton commodities which have continued to present grave problems of overproduction and excess carryover TABLE C Net budget expenditures for agricultural programs fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Agriculture and agricultural resources Stabilization of farm prices and income Fiscal year Total Commodity Credit Corporation Total > _- I9602 _- Excludes the CCC portion of acreage reserve program expenditures as follows : $ million in $ million in $ million in and $ millon in > Estimate Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget COMMODITY MARKETS Per capita consumption of wheat as food in the United States has declined for many years as personal incomes have risen and diets changed From to the total amount of wheat used as food actually fell slightly although population almost doubled. Exports in the period since the war have depended heavily on grants for relief and on sales for foreign currencies. For the crop years through percent of all wheat exported was shipped under special Government programs chiefly Public Law and the Marshall Plan. In that period domestic uses plus cash exports ( excluding those under special programs ) averaged million bushels per year percent of average annual production ( Table C-12 ) At average yields enough wheat to supply these markets can be produced on about percent of the present national acreage allotment. If TABLE C-12. Wheat : Production utilization and carryover [ Millions of bushels ] Utilization Crop year l Production Domestic Regular exports Special exports Change in carryover Carryover end of year Total Under price support program * Beginning July Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture such yields occur production from a larger acreage will either add to the already large carryover or require shipment through surplus disposal programs unless markets are expanded. A substantial addition to stocks appears likely from the crop according to present indications as reported by the Department of Agriculture Utilization of feed grains is tied closely to the production of livestock and livestock products which unlike wheat have been increasingly in demand as per capita incomes have risen. As a result grains fed to livestock have increased although irregularly ; exports also have risen partly under special financing. Yet production has exceeded utilization each year since ( Table C-13 ) Price support holdings of feed grains already nearly $ billion on June may be expected to rise as a result of the large crop TABLE C-13. Feed grains : Production utilization and carryover [ Millions of tons ] Crop year Production Utilization Carryover end of year Under price support program Total ._ Change in carryover Beginning July for oats and barley and October for corn and sorghum grain Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture Cotton has faced strong competition from foreign cotton in the world market as well as from artificial cellulose and synthetic fibers in the domestic market. Domestic per capita consumption has fallen in the past few years and mill consumption has been reduced despite a growing population. Exports have been unstable rising sharply after the war and again in and largely because of foreign shortages and special financing. Stocks in the past six years have fluctuated widely but at present they are only moderately excessive. Total utilization in the crop year ( August to July ) is estimated at million bales only slightly more than production which was reduced sharply because more than one-fourth of the cotton acreage allotment was placed in the soil bank. It is possible that under present programs production in and may again exceed utilization and that stocks may increase Tobacco also poses a serious problem in view of drastically reduced acreage rising yields declining cash exports and large carryover. Under the present program support prices are rising thus increasing the tendency toward higher yields per acre and jeopardizing foreign markets Prices of oilseeds including soybeans cottonseed flaxseed and peanuts also depend heavily on Government support ; excessive Government-held stocks of soybeans and cottonseed have been prevented so far only by heavy exports under Public Law While domestic consumption of these major crops either has declined or has increased slowly and exports have depended heavily on Government programs production per acre has increased sharply because of improved crop varieties expanded use of fertilizer increased irrigation and better cultivation. In crop production per acre was percent above output in ; in it was percent higher. Virtually all crops have shared in these gains. Per acre yields of wheat corn and rice in were respectively and percent more than in Cotton yielded percent more tobacco percent more and soybeans percent more per acre in than in the earlier period. The output of most crops would be raised significantly if farmers were to increase fertilizer applications in response to present favorable crop-fertilizer price ratios or were to adopt available machinery even more rapidly. Also improvements in livestock breeding and feeding have reduced the feed requirements per unit of output for some types of livestock production IV. Financial Developments Shifts in monetary and credit policy during and the changes in the underlying economic conditions that called for them were quickly and strikingly reflected in financial markets. The principal developments affecting the demand for capital and credit the supply of funds available for various users and changes in interest rates and stock prices are described in the following sections DEMANDS IN FINANCIAL MARKETS Corporations The financing requirements of corporations in were lower than in as capital outlays and inventory expenditures declined much more rapidly than the flow of internal funds from depreciation allowances and retained earnings. Loans to businesses from commercial banks declined $ million compared with a growth of $ billion in Gross proceeds of corporate security offerings were $ billion about one-tenth less than the record set in In the second half of the year a rapid improvement in retained earnings limited the need for an expansion of borrowing as economic activity recovered. It was not until the fourth quarter that business loan activity by commercial banks showed a significant increase and this was partially offset by a decline in corporate security flotations Despite the attractiveness given to equity financing by rising stock prices only about one-tenth of corporate flotations last year took the form of common stock compared with about one-fifth in recent years. Although bonds convertible into common stock increased as a proportion of total offerings and rose somewhat in absolute dollar volume over this was more than accounted for by one sizable offering in the first quarter Corporate liquidity improved over the year though it remained close to the low point in the period since the end of World War II. There was a reversal of the decline that had taken place since in corporate holdings of United States Government securities and cash and the proportion of these liquid assets to current liabilities rose somewhat Consumers In for the first time in the years since the war consumer credit outstanding remained practically unchanged ( Table C-14 ) Automobile paper outstanding declined by more than $ billion as the volume of new automobile credit extended fell below repayments which changed very little. This decline was offset mainly by a continued growth in personal loan credit and in noninstalment credit Residential mortgage debt expanded more than in mainly in the second half of the year. The increase reflected substantial commitments made by financial institutions in late and the first half of when easier credit conditions widened the differential between mortgage yields and corporate bond yields and made mortgages a more attractive investment. Further effects of these commitments on mortgage debt will be felt in The increase in nonfarm residential mortgage debt over the entire year was $ billion compared with $ billion in ; for the second half of however the increase has been estimated at $ billion compared with $ billion in the second half of TABLE C-14. Changes in short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Type of credit Total consumer credit outstanding ( end of period ) Net change in consumer credit outstanding : All types of consumer credit Instalment credit _ _ Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper " Repair and modernization loans Personal loans NnninstalTnent credit Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data are not adjusted for seasonal variation Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) Consumers maintained a remarkably good record in meeting debt payments despite the recession. Delinquencies in meeting automobile payments were low although there was a sharp increase in repossessions of automobiles State and Local Governments In order to finance mounting construction expenditures State and local governments further expanded their security flotations to the record figure of $ billion. In addition the dollar volume of bonds authorized at elections was much larger in than in ; however the authorizations fell short of the record level reached in A large part of the increase in proceeds from State and local offerings went for roads and bridges as States obtained funds to match Federal aid for accelerating the highway programs Federal Government The Federal debt rose $ billion during the past year with $ billion of the increase occurring during the second half. In addition the Treasury refinanced a large volume of maturing securities thus heightening the impact of the Federal Government on credit markets. Two very long-term bonds were issued lengthening the maturity structure of the debt. In February about $ billion of 3J/2 percent bonds falling due in were issued as part of a large exchange offering. In June $ billion of } percent bonds due in were offered for cash. The latter issue came at the same time that a large refinancing offer mainly into a new $ percent bond maturing in was made. The sharp decline that occurred shortly thereafter in the prices of Government securities led the Treasury Department to repurchase $ million of the % percent bonds in the open market In the second half of the year the Treasury restricted its financing operations to relatively short-term securities. A notable development initiated in December was the issue of a series of 26-week Treasury bills to supplement the usual 13-week bills. With capital markets again favorable the Treasury issued a long-term security for cash in January SUPPLY OF FUNDS Federal Reserve Policy The first public indication of a reversal of the Federal Reserve 's policy of monetary restraint came in mid-November with the reduction of the discount rate from 3/2 percent to percent. Although this action by itself did little to make money and credit more easily available it helped to initiate a sharp decline in interest rates that continued into early Three further decreases lowered the discount rate to % percent by May To provide funds to commercial banks the Federal Reserve authorities reduced reserve requirements. Successive decreases announced in February March and April lowered reserve requirements against demand deposits from and percent in the three classes of member banks to 5/2 and percent. This was equivalent to releasing about $ billion in reserve funds that could serve as a basis for a multiple expansion of money and credit. In addition the Federal Reserve authorities provided bank reserves through open market purchases of United States Government securities. This need arose in part from an outflow during the year of more than $ billion of gold which if not offset would have reduced bank reserves by an equivalent amount On July the Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve System authorized open market purchases of Government securities other than Treasury bills as a result of the sharp decline in Government security prices. For a short while some long-term securities were purchased by the Federal Reserve System although most of the purchases under this authorization were confined to the new ^ percent one-year Treasury Certificates that were being marketed in July. Open market operations during the major part of the year continued to be restricted to 13-week Treasury bills The effect of the various Federal Reserve actions was to provide the basis for a substantial expansion of bank deposits. From January through July the money supply ( demand deposits and currency ) increased $ billion on a seasonally adjusted basis more than offsetting a decline during the preceding six months. Time deposits at commercial banks increased $ billion. The rise in time deposits on an annual basis was the highest in any year since the end of the war Monetary policy shifted as business conditions improved and concern emerged over possible inflationary developments. In mid-August the Federal Reserve Board approved an increase in the discount rate from percent to percent. A reversal also occurred in the tenor of Federal Reserve open market operations. Previously such operations by providing large amounts of reserve funds to member banks had almost eliminated the need for member bank borrowing at Federal Reserve banks. In late August and early September as the reserve position of member banks came under increasing pressure borrowings from the Federal Reserve banks rose rapidly. In October Federal Reserve banks again raised the discount rate from percent to | ^ percent. Margin requirements against new stock purchases which had been reduced from percent to percent in January were raised again to percent in August and to percent in October. The money supply rose $ million from July through December a rate of increase that was considerably less than the rate in early Time deposits likewise grew at a much slower rate Commercial Bank Credit As a result of Federal Reserve actions in the first half of the year loans and investments of commercial banks ( excluding interbank loans ) expanded by $ billion in contrast to a decline of $ million during the same period of For as a whole the expansion of bank loans and investments was more than $ billion ( Table C-15 ) the largest expansion in any year since the war In the absence of a strong private demand for credit most of the expansion in bank assets took the form of enlarged holdings of United States Government securities. These rose by $ billion ( based on par value ; see Table C-16 ) and accounted for almost all the increase in the publicly held Federal debt. However this increase in commercial bank holdings made possible by additional reserve funds was concentrated in the first half of and was accomplished largely through a reduction in the holdings of other investors ; Government securities outstanding rose very little during the first half of the year TABLE C-15. Net changes in commercial bank holdings of loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loan or investment Loans ( excluding interbank ) and investments * l.l U. S. Government securities. Other securities Investments Business Real estate Consumer Security Agricultural All other Loans ( excluding interbank ) ( ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Total loans are net of and individual loans are gross of valuation reserves > Less than $ million NOTE. See Table D-41 for data including interbank loans Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) After midyear when the public debt rose rapidly commercial banks added to their holdings of United States Government securities at a much slower rate absorbing about one-fourth of the increase in the publicly held Federal debt. The additional Government securities were placed in nonbank hands in some cases with commercial banks serving in effect as underwriters. Thus large-scale monetization of the public debt i. e. additions to bank holdings through reserve funds provided by monetary authorities that might have provided the basis for a renewal of inflationary pressures was avoided TABLE G-16. Net changes in ownership of the publicly held Federal debt during [ Billions of dollars ] investor group First half Second half Debt held by the public : Total Commercial banks Federal Reserve Banks Mutual savings banks Insurance companies Other corporations State and local governments Individuals Miscellaneous investors ,-_,-_-,-. Change based on par value. See Table D-49 Based on preliminary estimates for December by Council of Economic Advisers The change in ownership of Federal debt by commercial banks given in this table differs from Table C-15. This table is based on par values and includes holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions whereas Table C-15 is based on book values and includes only banks within the continental United States NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) The maturity structure of Government securities held by banks was lengthened as a result principally of intermediate-term securities offered in Treasury financing operations. Since such issues are not as liquid as shortterm Government securities the liquidity of banks was not enhanced as substantially as the increase in bank holdings of Government securities might indicate. Moreover after the middle of the year market prices of securities of intermediate- and long-term maturity declined as interest rates rose making banks more reluctant to sell them because of the capital losses that would be entailed In view of the reduced demands for consumer and business loans the major portion of the remaining increase in bank assets consisted of larger holdings of State and local securities and real estate loans. The increase in the former was a substantial fraction of the total increase in State and local securities. Bank loans to aid in financing real estate transactions including mortgages and interim credit also expanded significantly particularly in the second half of the year and the rise in bank holdings of real estate loans was about the same as the record increase Nonbank Financial Institutions Individuals added large amounts on balance to their financial assets The rise in savings capital at savings and loan associations exceeded by more than one-quarter the rise in ( Table C-17 ) In mutual savings TABLE C-17. Flow of funds for selected nonbank financial institutions [ Millions of dollars ] First ten months Item Life insurance companies : Net change in assets Savings and loan associations : Net change in savings capital Mutual savings banks : Net change in deposits Sources : Institute of Life Insurance Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation National Association of Mutual Savings Banks and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation banks which are concentrated in the northeast section of the country the rate of growth in savings accounts increased by more than percent. The flow of savings into life insurance companies as measured by the net increase in life insurance assets was slightly greater than in Savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks used the additional funds available to increase substantially their accumulation of mortgages and life insurance companies increased their accumulation of State and local securities. Holdings of United States Government securities by life insurance companies seem likely to show little change for the year as a whole. This ii i would make it the first year since that life insurance companies did not reduce their holdings of such securities significantly Although the flow of funds from individuals directly into common stocks may have declined somewhat the flow of funds into mutual funds as measured by the accumulation of mutual fund shares was at a record level As a result mutual funds increased their accumulation of common stocks. In addition many pension funds were reported to be enlarging their equity portfolios. Individuals however continue to hold the largest amount of shares and according to the public transactions study of the New York Stock Exchange they continue to account for most transactions on the Exchange INTEREST RATES AND STOCK PRICES The decline in interest rates that began in the autumn of continued into as economic activity diminished and Federal Reserve authorities made credit more readily available. The drop in long-term interest rates was particularly sharp through early January By then the average yield on long-term United States Government bonds had fallen about /a of percent and a further decrease occurred through April Short-term rates declined almost continuously through late May. The rate on new 13-week Treasury bills which had reached ^ percent in fell to about ^ of percent With economic recovery interest rates rose even more abruptly than they had declined. By early autumn interest rates on long-term Government securities not only surpassed the rates in but were the highest since the early 's. Other long-term rates also increased although not quite as much. Short-term interest rates rose swiftly with new Treasury bills yielding almost percent six months after yields significantly below percent had prevailed ; however short-term rates did not attain the high rates of Thus short- and long-term interest rates advanced from the low levels of early in a remarkably brief time in contrast to the protracted period of low interest rates during the economic contraction of A combination of factors contributed to the sharpness of the rise in rates. These included the suddenness with which the upturn in business activity came about ; the projected rise in the supply of Government securities reflecting the Federal deficit ; and widespread discussion of potential inflationary pressures. Another factor was the large-scale selling of United States Government securities by many of those who had bought earlier in the year on the assumption of declining interest rates and rising bond prices Many Government bonds notably the % percent bonds of issued in June had been bought on a thin margin basis. When bond prices began to decline many of these holders had little choice but to sell their securities. This helped bring about further price declines through the summer months making for sharply higher interest rates Stock market prices increased persistently throughout most of By autumn prices of common stocks exceeded their previous highs ; and according to one measure prices of industrial stocks at the end of the year were on the average times the earnings that had prevailed in the year ended September This high capitalization of current earnings had occurred only seldom in the past and then under unusual circumstances. The dividend yield of a composite of stocks declined during from about % percent to 3J4 percent considerably below yields on long-term bonds. After the middle of the year low-price stocks became the most actively traded and they increased in price substantially more than high-price stocks. The proportion of stock market transactions for shortterm and trading purposes was the largest since according to the public transactions study of the New York Stock Exchange Stock market credit as measured by net debit balances of New York Stock Exchange firms and bank loans to others than brokers and dealers increased about $ million from the end of to the end of and about $ million when measured from the peak figure in Most of the rise occurred before August at which time margin requirements on new stock purchases were raised from percent to percent and other moves were taken to restrain general credit expansion V. Government Finances Federal State and local government expenditures increased during the calendar year State and local receipts also rose but Federal Government receipts declined reflecting the effect of economic recession on corporate and individual incomes. For the fiscal year the Federal budget showed a small deficit ( the first in three years ) and a much larger one is estimated for the current fiscal year. State and local debt rose by $ billion during the year ended June ; the Federal debt increased by $ billion in the same period and by an additional $ billion during the second half of the calendar year It is expected to increase by another $ billion by June FEDERAL FINANCES Expenditures Budget expenditures in the year ended June amounted to $ billion $ billion higher than in the preceding fiscal year. There were increases in nearly all categories with the largest increases in the major national security and commerce and housing categories ( Table C-18 ) TABLE C-18. Federal budget expenditures [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Function Total budget expenditures Major national security International affairs and finance Commerce and housing Agriculture and agricultural resourcesNatural resources Labor and welfare Veterans services and benefits Interest General government Allowance for contingencies _ ( estimated ) ( estimated ) NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget A further rise in budget expenditures to $ billion is indicated for the current fiscal year ( ) as increases in nearly all major categories are expected. For each of the four categories agriculture and agricultural resources major national security international affairs and finance and commerce and housing an increase of more than $ billion is estimated * The largest single increase is expected for agriculture and agricultural resources primarily because record crops have caused increased payments to farmers under open-end commitments for price support. To a smaller extent the increase results from additional soil bank payments for corn and cotton acreage. Estimates for expenditures on agriculture and agricultural resources in the fiscal year have been revised upward repeatedly from $ billion in the January budget to $ billion in the midyear review and to $ billion as of January Agricultural expenditures therefore become the third largest category in the Federal budget exceeded only by expenditures for national security and interest payments on the public debt The increase estimated for national security expenditures in the current fiscal year is attributable primarily to higher spending on research and development procurement of missiles larger operating expenditures and higher expenditures for military construction. Expenditures of the Atomic Energy Commission are expected to increase by over $ million. An estimated increase of more than $ billion for research and development ( including testing and evaluation ) will raise estimated expenditures by the Department of Defense in this category to a level percent higher than in the fiscal year Increased expenditures for new weapons and more modern equipment on the other hand will be more than offset by a reduction in expenditures for conventional weapons and equipment resulting in an estimated reduction of $ million in total expenditures for procurement The estimated increase in expenditures for international affairs and finance is due primarily to the recommended expenditure for the additional United States quota in the International Monetary Fund The higher expenditures for commerce and housing in fiscal reflect primarily the purchases of mortgages for low- and medium-priced housing by the Federal National Mortgage Association extension of the direct home loan program of the Veterans Administration larger expenditures for the modernization of airway navigation facilities and greater assistance to small business by the Small Business Administration. Despite the rise in postal rates a significant increase is expected in the net deficit of the Post Office Department owing to the pay increase for postal workers enacted in May and to higher payments to railroads on account of the increase in rates granted them by the ICG in the spring of The increase of almost $ billion estimated for labor and welfare is chiefly the result of the program enacted in June which provides for temporary advances to States for the extension of unemployment compensation benefits and of recent legislation increasing the Federal share of payments to States for public assistance grants Revenues Federal budget receipts in the fiscal year were almost $ billion less than in the preceding year reflecting the impact of the recession. Receipts from taxes on individual incomes declined by about $ million and those from taxes on corporate incomes by $ billion. Revenues from " excise taxes declined by about $ million. However other receipts including customs and miscellaneous receipts rose by more than $ million A further decline in revenues is expected in the fiscal year Receipts from the corporate income tax are expected to fall by $ billion as a result of the decline in corporate profits during the calendar year which was particularly sharp in the first half of the year. On the other hand receipts from the personal income tax which is collected mainly on a current basis are expected to increase reflecting the economic recovery and the rise in personal incomes beginning in the spring of Small declines are estimated for excise and other receipts except customs. The net effect of all these changes will be a decrease of approximately $ billion from the fiscal year in Federal revenues. ( For details on Federal budget receipts by source see Table D-51. ) Upon recommendation of the President the Congress extended for one year the current rates of the corporate income tax and certain Federal excise taxes which were to be reduced last June. It also repealed the taxes on transportation of property ( including coal and oil by pipeline ) effective August at a revenue loss estimated at $ million for the remainder of the fiscal year and somewhat over $ million for a full year. In addition it enacted a number of technical tax revisions including changes aimed at aiding small business ; the revisions from which small business is expected to benefit are estimated as involving a loss of $ million in revenue in the fiscal year Consolidated Cash Statement The consolidated cash statement which presents information on the total flow of money between the public and the Federal Government shifted like the conventional budget from a surplus in the fiscal year to a deficit in fiscal However both the change from the fiscal year to the fiscal year and the deficit in the fiscal year were smaller than those shown by the conventional budget. In every fiscal year from through ( as well as in most prior years ) the Federal budget on a consolidated cash basis has shown smaller deficits or larger surpluses than the conventional budget ( Table C-19 ) Trust funds whose receipts and disbursements are included in the consolidated cash statement but not in the conventional budget have shown a surplus in recent years including the fiscal year In addition accrued interest on savings bonds has exceeded the cash interest paid on redeemed bonds and has contributed to a reduction in Federal cash payments relative to budget expenditures Through the fiscal year the largest of the trust funds the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance ( OASI ) Trust Fund showed a consistent and substantial excess of receipts over payments although the amount of the excess has been declining in recent years. Most of the other trust funds also showed a consistent excess of receipts over payments during this TABLE C-19. Relation between the Federal budget surplus or deficit receipts from and payments to the public and change in the public debt [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Item Less : Net receipts or expenditures ( ) from trust account transactions _ _ _ _ _ Accrued interest and other noncash expenditures ( net ) __ _ _ Budget surplus or deficit ( ) Plus : ( estimated ) ( i ) ( i ) Receipts from exercise of monetary authority Expenditures ( net ) of government-sponsored enterprises Equals : Net receipts from or payments ( ) to the Sublic ( consolidated cash surplus or eficit ) ) ( i ) Plus : Receipts from seigniorage less changes in cash balance held outside Treasury ( i ) Less : Increase or decrease ( ) in Treasurer 's account balance Equals : Net cash borrowing from the public or repayment ( ) rj Plus : Less : Accrued interest on savings bonds and Treasury bills Issuance of public debt securities representing budget expenditures or refunds of receipts _ _ Net investment in Federal securities by government agencies Net sale of obligations of government enterprises in the market Equals : Net increase in public debt ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) Less than $ million Sign changed NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget period. An occasional excess of payments over receipts in one trust fund such as the Unemployment Trust Fund in the fiscal years and was more than offset by an excess of receipts over payments in other funds A change began however in the fiscal year when payments from the OASI Trust Fund exceeded receipts for the first time. Substantial net payments were also shown by the Unemployment Trust Fund in that year. These net payments were more than offset in total by the net receipts of the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund the Federal Employees Retirement Fund and the Highway Trust Fund. In the fiscal year however payments of the Highway Trust Fund as well as the OASI Trust Fund and the Unemployment Trust Fund are expected to be substantially in excess of current receipts ; therefore the current operations of the trust funds are expected to show for the first time in recent years a substantial net excess of expenditures over receipts and the anticipated Federal deficit on a consolidated cash basis is expected to exceed the estimated deficit on a conventional basis ( Table C-19 ) It is estimated that in the fiscal year the situation will be reversed again and that the Federal surplus on a consolidated cash basis will be O larger than the budget surplus on the conventional basis. Current operations of the trust funds are then expected to show again a small net accumulation partly because of higher contributions to the OASI Trust Fund effective January smaller net payments by the Unemployment Trust Fund and increased revenues for the Highway Trust Fund from the recommended increase in the Federal gasoline tax Public Debt The public debt increased by $ billion to $ billion during the fiscal year ended June By the end of the calendar year it had increased to $ billion an increase of $ billion for the year A further increase of approximately $ billion by June is now estimated. The increase in the public debt during the fiscal year was substantially in excess of either the conventional budget deficit or the cash deficit for the same period but the opposite result is expected for the fiscal year ( Table C-19 ) The major reason for this difference is that the Treasury 's cash balance was abnormally high on June Changes in the public debt do not necessarily measure the impact of Government debt operations on the economy in terms of withdrawals of funds from or additions of funds to the public. Net receipts by trust accounts which are invested in United States Government securities provide the Treasury with funds that can be used to redeem securities held by the public or to reduce the amount of borrowing from the public if there is a budget deficit. On the other hand net payments by trust accounts reduce the cash position of the Treasury and may lead to an increase in the debt held by the public as Federal security holdings by these accounts are reduced. The relationships between the budget surplus or deficit net cash receipts or payments and changes in the public debt are shown in Table C-19 for the fiscal years to inclusive FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL FINANCES Data on the net results of the financial transactions of the Federal Government on a cash basis ( Table C-20 ) show that the relationship between Federal cash payments and receipts has fluctuated considerably in recent years. A deficit of $ billion in the fiscal year was practically eliminated in the following year. A deficit of $ billion in was followed by a substantial surplus in the fiscal year and a smaller surplus in the fiscal year In the fiscal year there was a deficit of $ billion By contrast cash receipts and payments of State and local government units show much smaller swings during this period with both cash receipts and payments increasing steadily. Since payments have consistently exceeded receipts with the largest deficit occurring in Except for therefore the net effect of State and local cash transactions has been to reduce the size of the cash surplus or to increase the size of the cash deficit of all government units combined TABLE C-20. Consolidated cash statements of Federal and State and local governments [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Receipts or payments Total government : Cash receipts Cash payments Total cash surplus or deficit ( ) _ Federal Government : Cash receipts Cash payments _ _ __ _ Federal cash surplus or deficit ( ) State and local governments : ! Cash receipts Cash payments _ State and local cash surplus or deficit ( ) i Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid have been deducted from State and local government receipts and payments since they are included in Federal payments Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) All major classes of State and local government expenditures increased during the past year. Expenditures for education more than one-third of the total continued to be by far the largest single outlay followed by ex * penditures for highways and public welfare. As in previous years property taxes and taxes on sales and gross receipts accounted for about three-fifths of State and local revenues. Both these sources of receipts and also revenue from personal income taxes have increased from year to year. Receipts from taxes on corporate profits not an important source of revenue for State and local governments declined in RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES OF FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS : NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS Quarterly changes in Government receipts and expenditures at seasonally adjusted annual rates are shown in Table C-21 in terms of the national income accounts. The presentation of Government receipts and expenditures in these accounts shows the contribution of Government operations to the gross national product and the income of the economy more directly than the piesentation in either the conventional budget or the consolidated cash statement. A major difference between the national income concept and the consolidated Government cash statement is that the former excludes capital transactions such as sales of Government property mortgage purchases by the Federal National Mortgage Association and Government purchases of other existing assets. Adjustments are also made for other reasons such as differences in timing between the recording of certain transactions in the national income accounts and the actual outlay or receipt of cash by the Government. For fiscal the major part of the difference between receipts in the national income accounts and in the consolidated cash statement was due to the difference in timing between the accrual and payment of corporate profits taxes. ( For a reconciliation between Federal Government receipts and payments on a cash basis and on a national income basis see Table D-54. ) As indicated in Table C-21 the surplus of Federal Government operations on income and product account in the third quarter of the calendar year was wiped out in the fourth quarter when receipts and expenditures were nearly in balance ; and in each quarter of the calendar year TABLE G Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts [ Calendar years billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] IS Receipt or expenditure Third quarter Ifi Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third Fourth quarter quarter l Federal Government : Receipts Expenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Qrants-in-aid to State and local governments All other ___ Excess of receipts or expenditures ( ) State and local governments : Receipts. _ _ ._ Purchases of goods and services _ _ All other Excess of receipts or expenditures ( ) ._ ._ Expenditures Preliminary estimate by Council of Economic Advisers See Table D-53 for items included NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) Federal Government operations showed a large deficit the largest being recorded in the second quarter. Both a substantial decline in receipts and an increase in expenditures contributed to the shift from a surplus in the third quarter of to a deficit in the first quarter of Federal receipts reached a low point in the first and second quarters of ; by the fourth quarter they had recovered all the loss since the third quarter of Expenditures however continued to rise in each quarter of ; and by the third quarter they were more than percent above expenditures a year earlier. All major types of Federal expenditures increased with the largest rise occurring in transfer payments Purchases of goods and services by the Federal Government in the first quarter of were about the same as in the last two quarters of but in the following three quarters they increased at an accelerating rate Payments for national defense by far the largest component account for some of the increase during this period. Greater outlays for the support of agricultural prices as well as increased payments to Government employees contributed to the increase in nondefense purchases of goods and services The steady rise in transfer payments through the third quarter of reflects primarily higher unemployment insurance payments as well as increased benefit payments under the old-age survivors and disability system Likewise benefit payments from other social insurance funds and compensation and pension payments to veterans have been increasing Grants-in-aid to State and local governments have been rising particularly in the last three quarters of The two major items accounting for the rise are the increase in Federal public assistance grants to States and grants-in-aid under the highway program State and local receipts and expenditures during this period show a steady upward trend. However while the increases in expenditures in the fourth quarter of and the first quarter of were more rapid than the increases in receipts the gap between receipts and expenditures narrowed in subsequent quarters. State and local purchases of goods and services rose steadily during this period ; the most significant expenditures were for education and for the construction of highways and other facilities VI. United States Foreign Trade and Payments Changes during the past two years in the economic situation in the United States and abroad inevitably affected this country 's foreign trade and payments. While imports were well maintained exports declined sharply after mid-195 ; as a result the United States surplus on transactions in goods and services in the first half of was much below the high level attained a year earlier and about the same as in ( Table C-22 ) At the same time the net outflow of capital remained considerably above the early rate These changes resulted in substantial additions to foreign gold and liquid dollar assets. Thus a movement which had proceeded for several years before the Suez crisis was resumed but at a higher rate TABLE C United States balance of payments selected periods * [ Millions of dollars ] July 1952June ( annual first half first half average ) Receipt or payment First half Third quarter Seasonally adjusted annual rates Merchandise imports Services and military expenditures _ Remittances and pensions Government grants and related capital outflows ( net ) _ United States private and other Government capital outflows ( net ) Excess of receipts or payments : All transactions Goods and services ._ Capital grants remittances and pensions Errors and omissions ( net receipts ) _ __ _ Increase in foreign gold and liquid dollar assets through transactions with the United States .__ 74C United States payments Merchandise exports _ _ Services and military transactions Foreign long-term investments in United States U nited States receipts The selection of periods is dictated by the behavior of certain major items in the balance of payments especially that of United States exports. Mid-1952 to mid-1956 provides a base period of more or less normal development of trade and payments after the repercussions of the Korean conflict were over and before the effects of the Suez crisis were felt ; the first half of is given separately to show the levels prevailing at the end of that period. The first half of shows United States exports and other transactions at their peak influenced by the general level of economic activity as well as by the Suez situation and other special forces The first half and third quarter of give the more current situation affected by the recession and other developments Transfers of military aid are excluded both from exports ( under receipts ) and from grants ( under payments ) Source : Department of Commerce REASONS FOR DECLINE IN UNITED STATES EXPORTS From the first half of to the first half of the value of United States merchandise exports fell more in relative as well as absolute terms than those of all other countries combined ( Table C-23 ; also Chart TABLE C-23. Exports of the United States and other .countries Foreign countries l United States Period Total Western Other Europe Canada countries and Japan Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half. Third quarter __ __ : First half Second half. _ _ _ _ _ Percent Change first half to first half : Value Unit value Excludes exports of U.S.S.R. and Soviet bloc countries Includes Ireland Iceland Finland Spain and Yugoslavia Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce International Monetary Fund and United Nations in Chapter ) The reduction in the value of exports of foreign countries was due chiefly to a fall in export prices of the primary producing countries Exports of the industrially developed countries declined relatively little and unlike those of the United States remained significantly higher in the first six months of than in the first half of Exports adjusted for seasonal variations of these other industrial countries rose moderately again in the third quarter of ; and exports of the United States were slightly higher in that quarter than earlier in the year Examination of the export performance of the United States discloses that by far the greater part of the recent decline as well as much of the sharp rise immediately preceding it is attributable to developments in a few products. Six major commodities or commodity groups which usually constitute only about percent of total United States exports accounted for most of the rise from the first half of to the first half of and for about three-fourths of the fall in the first half of ( Table C-24 ) Special circumstances dominated the movements of petroleum cotton and wheat. Petroleum exports were temporarily swollen in the first half of by the interruption of traffic through the Suez Canal. Cotton exports which had been abnormally low in the first half of pending TABLE C-24. Change in United States exports to [ Millions of dollars annual rates ] Change Exports first half Commodity group ! Total exports excluding " special category " First half First half to first to first half half Other exports * Meat and dairy products lard and other edible animal products Oils greases and other inedible animal products Vegetable food prr ducts and beverages excluding wheat. Rubber and manufactures Oilseeds and expressed oils Wood and paper Lubricating oil and ~ other petroleum products Metal manufactures Machinery all types Chemicals and related products Textile manufactures ( semi- and finished manufactures ) Selected finished manufactures All other products Crude petroleum and selected fuels _ Raw cotton including linters Wheat Coal and related fuels Iron and steel-mill products nonferrous metals scrap and ferroalloys Automobiles and parts and accessories Six main items in the decline ' Exports grouped to show main products accounting for the decline from first half to first half See Table D-73 for additipnal detail by area Includes gas oil fuel oil and motor fuel other than aviation gasoline Includes photographic and projection goods scientific and professional instruments musical instruments miscellaneous office supplies small arms and ammunition books maps and other printed matter Includes in addition to miscellaneous items such exports as tobacco and tobacco products articles for charity and total reexports of merchandise Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers a revision of the United States export price rose subsequently when foreign stocks were being replenished but later declined although they still were relatively high. Wheat shipments were exceptionally large for a time because of the poor harvest in Europe and because of deliveries to the Far East under special programs Two other export items metals and coal proved to be extremely sensitive to changes in demand first when foreign production capacity was strained during the boom and later when excess capacity emerged The effect of this changed world market situation on United States steel exports has been aggravated by intensified price competition from foreign suppliers. United States coal remains strongly competitive at its landed price abroad but it is encountering serious obstacles in Europe. There stocks have piled up at pithead because of continued high coal production in the face of decreased demand as a result of reduced activity in the European steel industry cuts in users ' stocks gains in coal-burning efficiency and further displacement by fuel oil Exports of automobiles parts and accessories have shown a general and pronounced decline after having failed to share in the over-all rise in United States exports in The decline in especially that in exports of motor trucks which had previously increased is attributable in considerable part to cyclical influences. Exports of passenger cars and of chassis however have fallen over the last several years so much that they now represent only a quarter of the total value of exports of this group Meanwhile exports of foreign cars have risen rapidly ; in the first half of their value was equivalent to five times the American exports of passenger cars and chassis. The growth in demand abroad for the small foreign models reflects the spread of the market to lower income groups the increase in traffic congestion in many cities steeply graduated taxes on large cars and high gasoline taxes in many countries continued restrictions on car imports in the producing countries and in some other countries preferential import treatment for small cars In addition to the influence of the shifts in the major export items just discussed United States exports have been affected by changes in the economic situation in certain countries. The annual rate of sales to Canada alone in the first half of was $ million below the rate a year earlier Half of this decline was in exports of products other than the six discussed above ( Table D-73 ) The decline in sales of machinery to Canada is especially noteworthy since it is in contrast to such sales to most other countries and reflects a slower rate of industrial investment in Canada Much of the $ million decline in the annual rate of exports to Western Europe ( Table D-73 ) of items other than the six separately discussed is directly attributable to changes in general business conditions or in agricultural production though the effects of these changes have been felt by other suppliers as well In summary the relatively sharp decline in United States exports after the middle of is accounted for by a combination of factors : the disappearance of certain special circumstances which had for a time raised shipments of petroleum cotton and wheat to exceptionally high levels ; and cyclical shifts which had also lifted certain exports such as steel and other metals to unusually high levels but which now leave them temporarily depressed. Both sets of influences have affected United States exports with particular force because of their broad commodity composition which differs from that of any other industrial country and to some extent also because of their country distribution. These reasons for the wide swings in United States exports however do not diminish the importance of efforts to strengthen the position of the United States in a more highly competitive world market FACTORS OF STRENGTH AND WEAKNESS IN UNITED STATES IMPORTS The total value of United States imports on the other hand has been relatively well maintained. This comparative strength is attributable to several forces including particularly the maintenance of consumer demand '25 TABLE C-25. Change in United States imports to [ Millions of dollars annual rates ] Change Imports first half Commodity group l half Meats meat products and cattle Other foods except coffee Petroleum and products Automobiles _ Items showing little change l Main items increasing l Sawmill products Chemicals and related products _. Machinery including agricultural and office Textile manufactures Selected finished manufactures _-. \ other products Main items decreasing1 First half half Total imports for consumption First half to first to first _. _ Coffee Nonferrous metals iron ore ferroalloys and steel-mill products _ Diamonds rough cut and bort _.. __ Natural crude rubber Wool and other textile fibers Newsprint and paper base stocks Imports grouped according to direction of change from first half of to first half Semimanufactures other than man-made filaments included Leather goods photographic goods scientific and professional instruments toys and athletic goods advanced metal manufactures Cotton silk man-made filaments and hard fibers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce As shown in Table C-25 the value of a substantial number of imported commodities has either increased or changed very little. Imports of automobiles, especially continued to rise during the recession ; imports of meat and other foodstuffs except coffee were substantially greater in the first half of than a year earlier though largely because of temporary conditions affecting domestic supplies of some of these products ; and petroleum imports were also higher but the increase was less than in the first half of when the rise from a year earlier was due to higher prices as well as greater volume The value of imports of coffee in the first half of was sharply below the value in the same period of and of The pressure of coffee supplies on the market resulted in some weakening of prices and therefore in increased caution in dealers ' inventory policies ; as a result the volume as well as the price of coffee imports declined The other main commodity imports shown in Table C-25 as decreasing are all in the nature of industrial materials. This group as a whole declined by an annual rate close to $ million or almost percent from the first half of to the first half of Reductions in volume and in price were of about equal importance These changes in United States imports affected different supplying countries and areas according to the composition of their exports. Exports from the Middle East to the United States increased because of petroleum ; those from Mexico and Cuba expanded chiefly because of meat and other foodstuffs. On the other hand, exports to the United States from the coffee-supplying countries in Latin America were depressed and also those from Canada and Latin American countries for which nonferrous metals and other industrial materials are important. Influenced by good markets for cocoa and for African types of coffee United States imports from Africa were well maintained. Imports from Europe fluctuated very little as increases in automobiles offset decreases in steel and other metals Imports from Japan rose but those from other areas in the Far East fell because of smaller United States purchases of rubber and tin INCREASE IN UNITED STATES INVESTMENT ABROAD Like receipts from exports the net outflow of funds in the form of capital investment and grants from the United States had risen to a peak in the first half of The subsequent decline however was smaller than the decrease in exports and the net outflow of funds in the first six months of still exceeded that in the corresponding period in or earlier ( Table C-22 ) The large outflow in included substantial payments for oil concessions ( Table D-72 ) and related investment activities in Venezuela. The net outflow of capital exclusive of these payments continued to increase during each of the last several years. Preliminary estimates indicate that the net outflow in the third quarter of adjusted to correct for the usual summer lull was about the same as in the first half of the year though with offsetting changes in the component items The largest increase over the first half of at least up to mid1958 was in new foreign security offerings ; United States private direct investment abroad after a considerable expansion in fell back to its earlier level. ( For details by type and area of investment see Tables D-71 and D-72. ) Private short-term credits abroad and Government lending have also risen while the inflow of foreign redemption payments to American bondholders and of foreign long-term investment in this country has declined There may also have been some unrecorded capital outflow following the large shifts of funds to the United States during the Suez crisis and the subsequent currency speculation in Europe. By their nature such shifts frequently do not appear in the recorded data on capital flows and the only evidence of these movements lies in the behavior of the residual items ( errors and omissions ) in the United States global balance of payments ( Tables C-22 and D-71 ) This item normally shows unidentified receipts of several hundred million dollars annually because of overestimates of certain payments or underestimates of certain receipts for which precise records are not available. With due allowance for this dc- ficiency in the estimates the inflow of unrecorded capital during the months from October through September seems to have reached something like $ billion. Any subsequent outflow of these funds has been small at most or outweighed by other unrecorded receipts The high level of foreign security flotations in the United States during the first half of is accounted for largely by bond offerings by the International bank for Reconstruction and Development to finance its growing lending operations abroad and by Canadian issues. The spread between interest rates in the United States and Canada in the early part of the year gave a particular inducement to the flotation of Canadian issues in the United States market. There has also been especially in the latter part of a noteworthy rise in securities offered by overseas countries Foreign bonds payable in United States dollars have again become an attractive investment medium for security buyers both in this country and abroad The large outflow of public and private capital from the United States since the end of the war has helped to achieve a rapid growth in the world economy. It has also made possible a high volume of United States exports directly by providing funds which were spent on United States goods and indirectly by leading to the strengthening of foreign reserves and helping to remove obstacles to international trade and payments. When as recently foreign purchases of American goods slacken for any reason a continuing strong flow of dollars for imports and for foreign investment and grants results for the time being in a faster increase in the gold and dollar holdings of other countries. At the same time however these movements strengthen the basis for economic expansion and generate conditions favorable to the growth of United States exports. Such considerations are pertinent to an appreciation of the foreign trade and payments position of the United States in RISE IN GOLD AND DOLLAR HOLDINGS OF INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES Since the autumn of foreign countries and international institutions have increased considerably their holdings of gold and liquid dollar assets through transactions with the United States. During the year ended September their gains from this source totaled $ billion in dollar funds and $ billion in gold. Inclusive of gold acquired from new foreign production or other sources outside the United States the 12-month gain in gold and dollar balances owned abroad amounted to $ billion This gain however accrued almost exclusively to the industrially developed countries ; the holdings of other countries decreased considerably. The 12-month changes in foreign gold and dollar holdings ( in millions of dollars ) were distributed as follows : United Kingdom ; Netherlands ; Belgium ; Italy ; Federal Republic of Germany. ; Switzerland ; other Western Europe ; Canada ; Japan ; Venezuela ; other Latin America ; all other countries ; international institutions ( see Table D-75 for further details ) The increases were primarily in reserves of countries which ordinarily hold official reserves chiefly in gold though some of them also added to their dollar holdings on official or private account. Conversely the decreases were largely in countries ( for example most Latin American countries ) which usually keep most or much of their official reserves in dollars in addition to private funds held in this currency ; however some of them had to reduce their gold holdings also INCREASE IN THE USE OF DOLLARS FOR MULTILATERAL SETTLEMENTS The large increases in the gold and dollar holdings of the industrially advanced countries Western Europe Canada and Japan resulted in considerable part from the strains in the foreign trade and payments of the less developed countries and of certain others which are also exporters of primary products. Domestic inflation overimporting and widespread declines in the prices of export commodities and in export earnings in recent years have caused sharp increases in the trade and payments deficits of the primary producing countries with third areas chiefly Western Europe. ( For changes in trade flows see Chart and Table D-74. ) As a regular feature of the multilateral trade system part of these deficits is usually settled in dollars. Indirect evidence indicates that the amount of dollars so employed recently has been much greater than in the years prior to ; in this comparison is disregarded because of the exceptionally large deficits on trade or capital account of certain Western European countries and Japan The data in Table C-26 ( though subject to a considerable margin of error ) suggest that the net annual rate of gold and dollars used for multilateral settlements by the countries exporting primary goods was at least $ billion or more higher in the first half of than in the first half of and higher still in comparison with the average. The fact that the net receipts of gold and dollars of Western Europe Canada and Japan via multilateral settlements have risen by a still greater amount in the period since reflects the increased activity of the International Monetary Fund which has helped to relieve strains in international payments and the increase in loans by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development The increase in multilateral settlements far more than any change in the net receipts of the industrial countries from the United States accounts for the recent large increases in the gold and dollar accumulations of this group of countries By far the greater part of dollar settlements of the primary producing countries with the industrial group has been covered by their net receipts from the United States as shown in Table C-26. These receipts together with the growing financial support given by the United States through international institutions have effectively assisted in rebuilding and TABLE C-26. Use of gold and dollars for international settlements selected periods [ Millions of dollars ] July 1952June ( annual average ) Area and item first half first half first half Annual rates Western Europe : Increase in gold and dollar holdings Less : Net receipts from known transactions with the United States ! Goods and services Capital and grants Canada : Increase in gold and dollar holdings LessNew gold production Net receipts from known transactions with the United States Goods and services _ _ _ Capital and grants _ Equals ' Other gold and dollar receipts net Japan : Increase in gold and dollar holdings Less : Net receipts from known transactions with the United States J _ Other countries : Increase in gold and dollar holdings Less * New gold production Net receipts from known transactions with the United States ! _ Equals * Other gold and dollar receipts net Equals * Other gold and dollar receipts net _ Addendum : Deficiency in sum of net gold and dollar receipts as given above Unidentified transfers net to the United States Other unidentified uses [ or receipts ( ) ] of gold and dollars n e t _ _ _ _ _ _ Equals * Other gold and dollar receipts net Equals ' Other gold and dollar receipts net International institutions : Increase in gold and dollar holdings Less : Net receipts from known transactions with the United States ' Goods and services Capital and grants > See Table D-72. The balance for Japan however is a rough estimate by the Council of Economic Advisers and the figures for " other countries " have been adjusted accordingly to exclude Japan Includes movements of long- and short-term U. S. capital and of foreign long-term investments in the United States ( other than United States Government securities ) Excludes gold holdings and gold production of the U.S.S.R. and other countries of the Soviet bloc Errors and omissions item in Table D-71 expressed as an annual rate rounded to the nearest $ million NOTE. The area or country figures on " other gold and dollar receipts " ( derived as a residual in the manner indicated above ) include not only inter-area settlements but also unrecorded transfers to the United States. The latter are known only on a net global basis Cas the errors and omissions item in the United States over-all balance of payments ) They explain as shown in the addendum to the table above most of the discrepancy between the sums of the plus and minus figures for " other gold and dollar receipts. " The remainder of the discrepancy would in principle represent the net effect of such operations as ( a ) use of gold in the arts and industry or for hoarding and ( ) receipts of gold from dishoarding or from Soviet sales Source : Council of Economic Advisers strengthening the framework of multilateral trade and payments and have contributed much to the progress in overcoming restrictive forces in the world economy For the remainder of their multilateral gold and dollar settlements the primary producing countries have drawn on their accumulated gold and dollar holdings. In addition they reduced their balances in other currencies ; sterling balances alone were drawn down in the first half of at an annual rate of some $ million compared with no reduction two years earlier Preliminary estimates indicate that in the third quarter of the primary producing countries continued to make large settlements in gold and dollars covered partly by their net receipts from the United States and partly by further drawings on their reserves. Canada also showed net payments for the quarter though perhaps for seasonal reasons. Western Europe 's net gold and dollar receipts from third countries continued at about the same rate as earlier in the year ; these receipts together with a large surplus in transactions with the United States caused Western Europe 's gold and dollar holdings to rise further UNITED STATES EXPORT PERFORMANCE AND THE ADJUSTMENT PROBLEM The increase in the foreign investment and other payments of the United States in recent years has not been matched by an equally large growth in its exports of goods and services. The annual rate of outflow through private and public investments and grants net of foreign long-term investment in this country was some $ billion higher in the first three quarters of than in ( Table C-22 ) Imports of goods and services together with military expenditures abroad rose over the same period by $ billion Thus the total increase in these transactions was $ billion Exports of goods and services have risen about $ billion above the average or at an annual rate of percent. Most of this increase had occurred by and was surpassed temporarily in because of exceptional demand forces at that time. The level actually attained in can be regarded as a significant increase in relation to earlier years since foreign economic conditions last year were not favorable to the normal development of United States exports. Some major shifts in international trade were unavoidable not only because of the cessation of certain conditions ( such as those related to the Suez crisis ) that had prevailed in the early part of but also because various maladjustments had arisen during the previous period of rapid growth ( see Chapter ) Contrasting developments during the two latest recessions illustrate the significance of sustained world economic growth for United States exports. While United States imports slackened in the recession and remained weak for some time exports after only a momentary pause followed the upward course of economic activity abroad ( Charts and ) and contributed to recovery in the United States Appendix D STATISTICAL TABLES CONTENTS National income or expenditure : D-l. Gross national product or expenditure D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices D-3. Gross private and government product in current and prices D-4. Gross national product or expenditure in prices D-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product D-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups D Personal consumption expenditures D-8. Gross private domestic investment D-9. National income by type of income D-10. Relation of gross national product and national income D Relation of national income and personal income D-l2. Sources of personal income D-l Disposition of personal income D-l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices D-l Financial saving by individuals D-l Sources and uses of gross saving Employment and wages : D-l Noninstitutional population and the labor force D-l8. Employment and unemployment by age and sex D-l Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons D Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment D Unemployment insurance programs selected data and D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments ' D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries D Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries D Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries D-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries D Average weekly earnings gross and net spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices D-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries Production and business activity : D-29. Industrial production indexes D Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and D-31. New construction activity D-32. New public construction activity D Housing starts and applications for financing D Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade D Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders Page Prices : Page D-36. Wholesale price indexes D-37. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing D-38. Consumer price indexes D-39. Consumer price indexes by selected major groups Money supply credit and finance : D-40. Deposits and currency D-41. Loans and investments of all commercial banks D-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves D-43. Bond yields and interest rates D-44. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding D-45. Instalment credit extended and repaid D-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing D-47. Net public and private debt Government finance : D-48. U. S. Government debt by kind of obligation D-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations D-50. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt D-51. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years D-52. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public D-53. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts D-54. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years D-55. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Corporate profits and finance : D-56. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations D-57. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class D-58. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group D-59. Sources and uses of corporate funds D-60. Current assets and liabilities of U. S. corporations D-61. State and municipal and corporate securities offered D-62. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit D-63. Business population and business failures Agriculture : D-64. Income of the farm population D-65. Farm population employment and productivity D-66. Farm production indexes D-67. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio D-68. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture D-69. Level-of-living indicators for farm-operator families selected years D-70. Selected indicators of farming conditions International transactions : D-71. United States balance of payments D-72. United States balance of payments with individual areas D United States exports by selected commodities and markets D-74. World exports D-75. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions and D Price changes in international trade Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE D-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private domestic investment Period PerTotal sonal gross conna- sumptional tion prodexuct penditures i _ : First quarter Second quarter __ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ : First quarter Second quarter __ Third quarter Fourth quarter __ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ Government purchases of goods and services Is ~ 'S fi-3 Federal X ! II j ! >- * * O< ^ o> " Net exports of goods and services CJ w s I en I w o a s h-H e 'cs ' Oi ccid feS ^ c CD ft 9t3 <D J | l A i.'o ( ) ( ) i ! s i * ( ) ( ) Q C ( ) -s ! o ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) g i See Table D-7 for major components See Table D-8 for more detail and explanation of components For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by government were negligible during that period This category corresponds closely to the major national security classification in the Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June Less than $ million Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available Data for the last quarters of have not been revised to reflect lower expenditures reported in the last two surveys of business expenditures for new plant and equipment. See Table D-30 NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Total gross national product Total Gross private domestic investment New construction Produc- Change Dura- Noners ' in busiResible durable Services Total durable ness dential Other equip- invengoods goods Total ( nonment tories farm ) -2.'f ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter. _ _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter.. Fourth quarter M9.2 ^ '61.4 '22.3 * s ( e ) See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices l Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Government purchases of goods and services Net exports of goods and services Period Federal Total --_ State and local National defense Other ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter M : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See Tables D-4 and D ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the scries on change in business inventories For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Surrey of Current Business ( The basic income and product series have been revised beginning ) For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in this table. See Table D-1 for Government sales in current prices * See Table D-1 footnote Not available separately Less than $ million Preliminary * See footnote Table D-1 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] Current prices Total gross national product Period prices * Gross private product l Total Farm Nonfarm Gross government product a Total gross national product Gross private product Total Farm Nonfarm Gross government product ' _ _ 1953_ _-_ __ Gross national product less compensation of general government employees i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world See Survey of Current Business October for description of series and estimates in current and constant prices and implicit deflators for Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities * See Table D-2 footnote Preliminary NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Pusiness Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-4. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 7929-58l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption Gross private domestic expenditures investment Total gross national product Period Q Is ll I ! si II * I be o Net exports of soods and services Government purchases of goods and services Gross private prod1 uct I O OH _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter... Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter... Fourth quarter C6.3 i For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Busmess ( The basic income and product series have been revised beginning ) See Table D-5 for implicit price deflators For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated sine * foreign net transfers by government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available See footnote Table D-l NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) H3 TABLE D-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product i Period Gross private domestic investment ! New construction Total DuraNonble durable Services goods goods Total Residential nonfarm Producers ' durable Other equipment A : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Period Exports Imports Total Federal State and local _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ._ ._ _ ( > ) ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ) ) ) ( _ C ) ) ( ) ) C1 ) ) ) C1 ) ) ) ( ) C1 ) ) ) C11 ) C ) ) Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services and for exports and imports quarterly For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business ( The basic income and product series have been revised beginning ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Business Persons PerDisPersonal sonal posconable sump- saving peror dissonal tion ex- saving income pendi ( ) tures Period International Gross Excess Gross private of re- Foreign Net Excess of net receipts trans- exports transfers dotained mestic or in- fers by of goods or net earnvestand exports ings i invest- ment govern- services ( ) ment ment ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) -'.2 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ _ M9.2 See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] ( jovernmen t Period Less : Tax and Transfers nontax interest receipts or and subaccruals sidies Net receipts Surplus or Statistical GROSS Purchases deficit ( ) discrep- NATIONAL of goods on income ancy PRODUCT and and services product account 1933_ 1934_ <__ Seasonal ! } adjusted a nnual rates : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter _ Fourth quarter, : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. _ : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter. _Fourth quarter Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and excess of wage accruals over disbursements For foreign net transfers by government were negligible ; therefore for that period net exports of 3goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by government net interest paid by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers s See footnote Table D-l NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see S. Income and Output a Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-7. Personal consumption expenditures. [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Period Total personal consumption Toextal penditures % S a ^ a s << li si c3 * " i be be To- | l tal o> s ? % * Nondurable goods <D_0 | Services | x : r C bC " c3 'o o> .s | " o o Total T3 be a O T3 J3 O I & Q ? ? ? 9G.6 ? ? Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ? P ? : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ? ? : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see <S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-8. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Total Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment gross plant and equipment and construction private domestic ConConinvest- Total i Equip- struc- Total Equip- strucment tions ment tion ment Period Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Net change in Other business inventories private construc- Total Non-6 Farm farm tion * ( ) : \ ( ) 1941___ ( ) ( ) __ ._ _ _ ._ s _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter _ Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quartet. Third quarter. ._ Fourth quarter ( ) : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter s O ! Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment are not comparable with those shown in Table D-30 principally because the latter exclude equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense and also investment by nonprofit organizations and professional persons Total producers ' durable equipment less farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants garages miscellaneous nonresidential construction and all other private construction Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus farm machinery and equipment and fanners ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) Includes religious educational social and recreational and hospital and institutional After inventory valuation adjustment Less than $ million Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers See footnote Table D-l NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-9. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Total national income Period Compensation of employees Business and professional income and inventory valuation adjustment Income of In- In- farm come ven- proof tory prieuninTotal corpo- valu- tors ation rated adenter- justprises ment ---._ __ _ _ _ ( ) f ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Rental income of persons Net inInven- terest Cortory porate Total profits valuation before adtaxes justment ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table D-10 Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to farm inventories during the period. Data for differ from those shown in Table D-64 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts See Table D-56 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than $ million Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Provisional NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-10. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Capital consumption allowances Period Plus : Less : Subsidies Equals less Gross Net current Indirect business nanaBusitax tional ness j tional surplus prodDepreof govtransernuct Total ciation I Other product fer State paycharges ment enter- Total Fed- and ments eral local prises Equals : NaStatisti- tional cal income discrepancy ( ) ( ) ( ) '.7 f ~ L2 | ( ) : ' ( ) hi ' LI L2 f '. ( Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 6J : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1.3J : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter ' Fourth quarter _ f4 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( > ) ' l.s ! Accidental damage to fixed capital and capital outlays charged to current account Less than $ million Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : CorpoExcess rate of profits ContriNational and in- butions wage acincome venfor tory social cruals over valu- insurdisation ance burseadjustments ment Period Government transfer payments to persons Net interest paid by government Equals : Dividends Business transfer payments Personal income _ ._ i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Provisional NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-12. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Lahor Proprietors ' Less : income income Per ( wage and sonal NonPerRental salary Trans- contri- agriculTotal income Divi- sonal fer pay- butions personal disbursetural Busiof dends interest ments income ments for persona ] income and other Farms ness and persons social income profeslabor insursional income ) l ance Period ( > 1957_ _. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter _ _ Fourth quarter ! | First quarter _ _ _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : i | First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter.. Fourth quarter i I i i i : : The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table D-9 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess of 2wage accruals over wage disbursements Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to 3net additions to inventories during the period Data for differ from those in Table D-64 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts X on agricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations s Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers XOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement lo the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) '53 TABLE D-13. Disposition of personal income Personal income Period Less : Personal taxes i Less : Equals : Personal DisposEquals : conable Personal personal sumption saving income expenditures Saving as percent of disposable personal income ( percent ) Billions of dollars _ .__ a Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ : First quarter Second quarter. _ ._ Third quarter Fourth quarter Includes also such items as fines penalties and donations Annual percentages are based on data in millions of dollars and may therefore differ slightly from percentages computed on the basis of figures shown in this table Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-14. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Total disposable Per capita dispersonal income posable personal ( billions of income ( dollars ) dollars ) Period Total personal consumption expenditures ( billions of dollars ) Per capita personal consumption expenditures ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current Current Current Current prices prices prices prices prices prices prices prices * _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. __ : First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter. __ : First quarter Second quarter. ._ Third quarter Fourth quarter Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base ( using 11-month average ) Personal consumption expenditures in this table therefore differ from the data in Table D-2 Population of the continental United States including armed forces overseas. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Annual figures for total income and expenditures in prices and for per capita income and expenditures in current prices are computed from data in millions of dollars Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers '55 l TABLE D-15. Financial saving by individuals. [ Billions of dollars ] Currency Total and bank deposits2 Period Securities Savings and loan U.S. Other Corassocia- Total sav- gov- porate ings ern- and tion honds ment other shares ( ) : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. insurance and Mort- Con- Securpen- gage sumer ities sion debts debt loans reserves5 vate ininsur- sured ance penre- sion serves4 funds Less : Increase in debt _ Govern- Pri- Non- ment Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified Includes currency demand deposits time and savings deposits shares and deposits in credit unions and the postal savings system Includes armed forces leave bonds and other U. S. Government bonds ( except savings bonds ) and all securities issued by State and local governments Includes insured pension reserves Includes Social Security funds State and local retirement systems etc Mortgage debt to institutions on one- to four-family nonfarm dwellings Consumer debt owed to corporations largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other dur able consumer goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. Policy loans on Government and private life insurance have been deducted from those items of saving * Change in bank loans made for the purpose of purchasing or carrying securities Less than $ million NOTE. In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The series with the most complete coverage the personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce is derived as the difference between personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included in Securities and Exchange Commission saving : Housing and farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment net of depreciation and increase in debt. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see Securities and Exchange Commission Statistical Bulletin October Revisions for in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into these estimates Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-16. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Private saving Period Total Total Personal saving Government surplus or deficit ( ) Gross busi- Total ness saving Federal State and local Gross investment Statistical Gross disprivate Net for- crepeign in- ancy Total domes- vesttic invest- ment ment _ ( ) ! _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter __ Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter __ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter ' -i ! i Net exports of goods and services less foreign net transfers by Government. For net foreign investment and net exports of goods and services have been equated since foreign net transfers by government were negligible during that period Less than $ million Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE D-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Total Nonin- labor stitu- force Armed tional ( includ- forces i ing popuTotal lation i armed forces ) i Period Total labor force as Unemploypercent ment as perUnem- of non- cent of civilian labor Non- ploy-2 institutional force agri- ment popucullation tural Employment Total Agricultural Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ C3 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ 6J2 New definitions : _ _ See footnotes at end of table TABLE D-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor jorce ^ Continued Civilian labor force Period Noninstitutional population i Total labor force as Employment percent of nonUnem- instituployAgri- Non- ment tional agriTotal culpopucultural tural lation Total labor force Armed ( includ- forces i ing Total armed forces ) i Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Unad- Seasonjusted ally adjusted Percent New definitions : January February ._ March AprilMay June July August September. October November. December... July.. August September October November. December : January February. _ _ March AprilMay June i'o : January February. _ March April. May June ft. July August September _ _ October November. December. __ ^ Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from the estimates See Note Not available NOTE. Civilian labor force data beginning with May are based on a 330-area sample. For January 1954-April they are based on a 230-area sample ; for on a 68-area sample ; for on a smaller sample ; and for on sources other than direct enumeration Effective January persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and persons waiting to start new wage and salary jobs within the foltowing days are classified as unemployed. Such persons had previously been classified as employed ( with a job but not at work ) The combined total of the groups changing classification has averaged about to a month in recent years. The small number of persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs are classified as not in the labor force instead of employed as formerly. Persons waiting to open new imsinesses or start new farms within days continue to be classified as employed. ( New definitions series for periods prior to January are Census Bureau estimates under the old definitions adjusted by Council of Economic Advisers to the new definitions. ) Beginnim : July monthly data are for the calendar week containing the 12th of the month ; previously for week containing the 8th. Annual data are averages of monthly figures For the years estimating procedures made use of Census data ; for subsequent years Census data were used. For the effects of this change on the historical comparability of the data see Annual Report on the Labor Force Series P-50 No. April p. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor ( labor force ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-18. Employment and unemployment by age and sex [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed Period Unemployed Total civil45 years andyears years andyears over Total ian over labor Total emunem- years force ployed years FeFe- ployed FeFeMale male Male male Male male Male male Old definitions ; i ; New definitions : : January February... March April Mav June July August September- October November- December.. : January February. __ March April May68,965 June July August September.. October November.. December. See Note Table D-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age/sex groups above See Note Table D-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons * [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Special groups of unemployed persons Employed persons not at work by reason for not working Period Total Bad weather ( ) ' January February March April May June Industrial dispute ( ) Vacation Illness All other reasons Tempo- New wage rary and salary jobs layoff ' January February March April May June July. August September October November December ( ) 2,C11 ? July August September October November December Data prior to are Census Bureau estimates adjusted by Council of Economic Advisers to the new definitions of employment and unemployment Includes persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days Under the old definitions of employment and unemployment these groups were included in the " employed but not at work " category Persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of the layoff Persons scheduled to start new wage and salary jobs within days. Under the old definitions the " new job or business " group included these persons as well as persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within day ? ( see " all other " category in this table ) and persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs ( these are now classified as " not in the labor force " ) Not available NOTE. See Note Table D-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-20. Unemployed persons by duration oj unemployment Duration of unemployment Period Total unemployed weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter New definitions : > See Note Table D-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to months ( ) Not available NOTE. See Note Table D-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce l62 TABLE D-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and Initial claims Period State veteran State and Federal proemployee grams pro- grams Insured unemployment State All proprograms grams State Benefits paid insured under State prounemgrams ployExhaus- ment tions as perState cent of proTotal covered ( millions Average grams ; employweekly of dol check ment lars ) s ( dollars ) s ( per- cent ) Weekly average ( thousands ) " " f : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December Most of these are instances of new unemployment Data on veterans relate to those under the following programs : Servicemen 's Readjustment Act which became effective in October and expired for most veterans in July and Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of effective October Beginning data include State programs and the program for Federal employees ; all prior years are for State programs only. Beginning data also include workers added by the extension of coverage to smaller firms Represents the number of unemployed workers covered by unemployment insurance programs who have completed at least one week of unemployment. Excludes territories State veteran Railroad Retirement and Federal employee programs State unemployment insurance programs during the period shown excluded from coverage agricultural workers domestic servants workers in nonprofit organizations unpaid family workers the self-employed and ( in most States ) workers in very small firms Represents the number of individuals who received payment for the final week of compensable unemployment in a benefit year. Workers who have exhausted benefit rights do not necessarily remain unemployed ; some find employment and others withdraw from the labor force Monthly totals are gross amounts ; annual figures are adjusted for voided benefit checks For total unemployment only Preliminary Includes activities under the unemployment compensation program for ex-servicemen which became effective October Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining GovTransernCon- portament tract tion FiServ- ( Fedconand Trade nance ice eral struc- public State tion utiliand ties local ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) S02 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ? ? 10r ? Total wage and salary workers Period Seasonally adjusted : January February. March April May June July August September ._ October November. December _ : January February. -March April May June July. August September. October November December Sec footnotes at end of table TABLE D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagr { cultural establishments * Continued [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing Period Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining TransCon- portatract tion Ficonand Trade nance struc- public tion utilities Service Government ( Federal State and local ) Seasonally adjusted : January February. .March April May __ June July August September-October November December Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( Table D-17 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Retail Manufacturing Period Total : January February. March April May JuneJuly August September October November December : January February March April Mav June July August September October November _ December -._ Durable goods Nondurable goods ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) trade Bitumi- Build- Class I ( except ing nous Tele-2 Whole- eating conrail- phone sale coal and trade mining struc- roads i drinktion ing Laundries places ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) fl ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives : from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment Source : Department of Labor TABLE D- Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total BituNonDura- dura- minous coal ble ble goods goods mining Retail Buildtrade ing Class I Tele- Whole- ( except Launconrail- phone sale eating dries trade and struc- roads i drinking tion places ) $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ May June July August September October November December : January February March April May C4 June July August September October November _ _ _ ( ) December * _ _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ : January February March April ( ) ( ) f ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Agriculture $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ " " " ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture TABLE D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I Whole- ( except ing eating Tele- sale nous railconand Duracoal Nontrade drinkstruc- roads i phone ble durable mining tion ing goods goods places ) Manufacturing Period Total $ ? : January February March April.. May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July.. August September October November December _ _ $ $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ < ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) * ( ) $ s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Laundries ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April throughi December because of new series started in April Dec " * " ' " Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries All manufacturing industries Period Average weekly hours Gross ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Average hourly earnings Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings ExExExExExExcludcludcludcludcludcluding Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing overoveroveroveroverovertime time time time time time _ Durable goods manufacturing industries $ ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) $ $ ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ( ( ) ) ) ) ) ) : January February March April May June June Oj July August September October November December ; 37.5J ) July August September October.. _ November December : January February March. April May ) ) Not available Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Preliminary NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment ( in the case of hours ) and man-hours ( in the case of earnings ) Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-27. Average weekly earnings gross and net spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices Average net spendable weekly earnings Average gross weekly earnings Period Current prices prices Worker with no dependents Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices $ $ $ $ $ $ _ June July August September October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March.. _ _ _ _ _ April May : January February March April. May June. July August September October November December .__ ___ Estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base ( using 11-month average ) Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Preliminary Not available NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for payroll periods ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Rates per employees ] Separation rates Period Total Quit i Layoff Discharge military and miscellaneous i Accession rates : January February March April May June July August September.. October November. _ December : January February March April May June July August September.. October Novembers. Prior to military and miscellaneous separations are included with quits January-November average Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to total because of rounding Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE D-29. Industrial production indexes [ = ] Industrial production Manufactures Durable Period i Total Pri- Fabricated Total Total mary metal met- prodals ucts Nonelectrical machinery FurClay niture Elec- Trans- Instru- glass and ments trical porta- and re- and misceltion lated lum- lanemachin- equip- prod- ber ous ery ment ucts prod- manucts ufactures Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August September October November December ' January February March April May June. _ July August September October November December ' See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-29. Industrial production indexes Continued [ = ] ._ Industrial production j Output of consumer durables Manufactures Nondurable Period ChemTex- Rub- Paper ical Foods Minber tiles and bever- erals and and Total and leather print- petro- ages leum and toapparel prod- ing prod- bacco ucts ucts Major Other conTotal Autos house- sumer hold duragoods bles _ ' ( ) : January February March April May Tune ( ) _. Seasonally adjusted July August -_.September October November December : January February March April._ May _ June July August September October November _ December ' Preliminary Xot available NOTE. Detail not available prior to Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufactur ing Total i Period Total Transportation Dura- Non- Mining ble durable goods goods Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and other : Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.. First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ' First quarter .Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter * Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction Annual total is the sum of unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures. See footnote Estimates for fourth quarter and first quarter based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business between late October and early December The quarterly anticipations include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data NOTE. These figures do not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals and institutions and of certain outlays charged to current account This series is not available for years prior to and for to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce TABLE D-31. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Total new construction Period Resi- Nonresid ential building and other construction dential Total i building Com ( nonPublic Otber Total mercial Indusfarm ) trial utility Public construction 1933_ ? _. _ 1I700 _ _ --_ __ Seasonally adjusted annual rates January February March April May June Julv August September.. _ October November. __ December : January February March April _ May June July August September _ _ October Xovember_ _ December _ Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product. ( Table D-l ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Includes farm institutional and all other Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE D-32. New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Total new public construction * Major types of new public construction Fed eral Period All State and public sources Direct Federal local aid Highway Sewer Conand Hoswater servapital tion Educa- and and tional institu- miscel- and detional laneous veloppublic ment service Military facilities All other public For expenditures classified by ownership combine ''Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Includes nonresidential building other than educational and hospital and institutional ( industrial commercial public administration social and recreational and miscellaneous ) public residential buildings and publicly owned parks and playgrounds memorials etc Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE D-33. Housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Proposed home construction New nonfarm housing starts Privately financed Period Total Publicly financed Government programs Total Total i __ VA FHAi Private seasonFHA ally ad- applica- VA appraisal justed tions requests annual rates * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ' January February March April May .Tune July August September _. October November December : January-- _. February March April May June July August. September October November December < _ ' " ' '2.0 _. _ _ ! ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) g t ' is. : i Excludes armed forces housing in ( units ) ; ( units ) ; and ( units ) Units in mortgage applications for new home construction The number of starts for the years respectively was as follows : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in Not available Partly estimated Preliminary Sources : Department of Labor Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) TABLE D-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade. [ Amounts in billions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade M anuf actur ing Wholesale trade J Retail trade ' Period InvenSales2 Inven- Ratio * Sales Inven- Ratio * Sales Inven- Ratio * Sales tories Ratio tories tories tories Seasonally adjusted : January February _ _ March April May June July August September. October November. December. _ : January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November December ' The series beginning in are not comparable with the previous years because of changes in definition for the wholesale series. Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method cf estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census Monthly average shown for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period nd of Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of aveiage end of current and previous months ' inventories to sales for month Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Preliminary NOTE. For a description of the series and their comparability see Survey of Current Business September and November January and June for retail and August for manufacturing and wholesale The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-35. Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders [ Billions of dollars ] Inventories Sales i Period New orders l UnDurable-goods Nondurable-goods filled industries industries Dura- NonDura- Non- orders ble durable ble durable ( unadgoods goods Total goods goods justPur.Purindus- indus- chased Gbods Fin- chased Goods Finindus- indus- ed ) in ished tries tries mateished matein tries tries rials process goods rials process goods ^ s Seasonally adjusted : January February. _ March April May June Julv August September. _ October November _ December- _ : January February March _ April May June July August September. October November 5_ Monthly average shown for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period End of period Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. Seo Table D-34 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE D-36. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods All commodities Period Processed foods Total Textile products and apparel Chemi- Rubber cals and and rubber allied prodproducts ucts Lumber and wood products : January _ February March __ April May June July August September _ October. _ _ November December : January February March April May June July August _ September October November3 December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Farm products See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-36. Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( continued ) Hides skins leather and leather products ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Period Fuel power and lighting materials Pulp paper and allied products Metals Machinand metal products ery and motive products Furniture and other household durables Non- Tobacco metal- manu- Miscellic factures laneous minerand prodals bottled ucts ( struc- bevertural ) ages ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) % ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) & _ July August September October November _ _ December _ _ _ : January February March April May June : January February March April May June July August September- October NovemberDecember __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January These data from January through December represent the revised sample and the weighting pattern. Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Labor O TABLE D Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components l Crude materials Period All commodities Materials and components for manufacturing Food- Nonstuffs food maTotal and terials Fuel feed- except stuffs fuel Total Materials for Total food manufacturing Materials for nondurable manufacturing Materials and Macomterials Compopo- nents for du- nents for for rable conmanu- manu- strucfactur- factur- tion ing ing * : January February _ _ March April May June _ _ __ : January February. March April May June July August September. October November. December _ July August September. October November. December. _ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Period Producer Total Total Other Du- finished nonFoods durable rable goods goods goods InterConsumer mediate Crude materials finished mate- supplies goods exrials and com- cluding ponents foods * July August September October _. _ _ November December : January February March _ April May June .__ July AugustSeptember October _ _ November December : January February March April May June Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Preliminary NOTE. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector and their relative importance see Monthly Labor Review December Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-38. Consumer price indexes For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Housing All items Period Food Total Rent Read- Other Ap- Trans- Medi- Per- ing and goods cal parel porta- care sonal recrea- and tion care tion services ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ' ) ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) _ _ ' January February March April May June _ July August September. October November December : January _ February March April May June July August.. _-_ September October November -__ _ Not available January-November average Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-39. Consumer price indexes by selected major groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Commodities All items Period All All items items less less food shelter All commodi- Food ties Services Commodities less food All NonDura- durables bles All services Rent All services less rent U8.9 _ ._ ._ : January February March__. _ _ _ April May June July August _September October __ _ November December ' January February March April May June July August September October.. _ _ _ _ November January-November average Source : Department of Labor MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE D-40. Deposits and currency [ Billions of dollars ] Total excluding U. S. Government End of period s : January February March April May June. -_ _ July August.. _ _ _ September October November December : January February.March April May _ __June Julys August _ September October November December Demand deposits and deposits Total U.S currency Demand deposits and seasonally adjusted deposits Govcurrency and erncurment Total Time Demand CurDemand Curderency deposits Total deposits rency Total deposits rency posits i ad- outside ad- outside justed banks justed banks Includes U. S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve Banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Includes holdings of State and local governments Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the month except the unadjusted data for December and June and December which are for call dates. All end-of-year figures are for call dates Detail will not necessarily add to total because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period June June June June June June _- _ : January _ _ _ _ February March April _ Mav June July August _ September October November _ December : January February _ _ _ _ _ March _ _ _ __ __ April May_ June__ _ _ July August September _ October November December _ Total loans and investments Loans Total /92.9 Investments Business loans ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total U. S. GovOther ernment obligations * securities End-of-year December June and December figures are for call dates. Other data ( including those for June ) are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net i. e. after deduction of valuation reserves. Includes commercial and industrial agricultural security real estate bank consumer and other loans Beginning with data are shown gross of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks Figures in this table are based on book values and relate only to banks within the continental United States. Therefore they dp not agree with figures in Table D-49 which are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Member bank reserves Reserve Bank credit outstanding Period Total U.S Member bank Government se- borrowcurities ings All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) i i ' January February March April May June July August September October November December * January February -March April May June July August September October November December Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-43. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government securities Period 3-month Treas- month Taxable Aaa ury bonds bills i issues Baa Common stock yields stocks Moody 's ) Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on Prime Fedshorteral comterm Remerbank serve cial loans paper Bank to busidis4 nesscount selected months rate cities ( ) ' January February March April May June.. _ July August September October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ^ ' ( ) See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-43. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Common stock yields 3-month stocks Treas- month Taxable Aaa Baa ( Moody 's ) bonds ury bills i issues U. S. Government securities Period : January February March April May June _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December Average rate on shortterm bank loans to businessselected cities July August September October _ November December Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Prime commercial paper months Federal Reserve Bank discount rate Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) First issued in Series includes : October 1941-March bonds due or callable after years ; April 1952-March bonds due or callable after years ; April to date bonds due or callable years and after Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation TABLE D-44. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of period Total Noninstalment credit Other Repair conPerand sumer modern- sonal goodsl zation loans ioans paper Tqtal Automobile paper l ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ___ _ _ _ : January February March April May June _ _ _ July August September October November December __ ' January February March April _ -_ _ May June _ July August September OctoberNovember December ( ) ( ) Total Charge Other accounts Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Total Repair and Other consumer modernization goods paper loans Automobile paper Period Personal loans Extended i Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Unadjusted ; January February March April May June July August September. __ October November December : January February March April May June July August -_ September. _ October November December i _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted : January. __ February March April May June July August.. _ September October November December : JanuaryFebruary March April May June July August September,.. October November December L _ Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties to 4-family houses End of period All properties Government underwritten Total Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Multifamily Farm and propcomerties Con- mercial venproptional * erties First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarterFourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ Derived figures Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ( except as noted ) TABLE D-47 Net public and private debt * [ Billions of dollars ] Private End of period Individual and noncorporate Corporate Fed- State and Nonfarm eral Total Gov- local governern- Total ment ment ComTotal Long- Short- Total Farm merterm term Mort- cial ConTotal gage and sumer financial * s Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept se Survey of Current Business October Data for State and local government debt are for June of each year Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and Interstate Commerce Commission ( except as noted ) GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE D-48. U. S. Government debt by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest -bearing public debt Gross public debt and guaranteed issues ! End of period ._ : January _ _ February March April May June July August. September October November December _ : January February. March April May -_ June July August September October November December __ _ _. Marketable public issues Nonmarketable public issues Shortterm issues United States savings bonds Treasury bonds Treasury tax and savings notes ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Investment bonds Special issues Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Series A bonds and beginning in April Series B convertible bonds Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Less than $ million The last series of treasury savings notes matured in April Of this amount $ billion was subject to the statutory debt limitation of $ billion Source : Treasury Department TABLE D--49 Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Par values billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of period : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June __ July August September October November December s _ _ _ Held by others Held by U.S GovMutual ernsavings State Total ment Misceland Federal Com- banks Other invest- Total Reserve mercial and in- corpor- local Individ- laneous uals invesment Banks banks surance ations governtors accomments s counts panies IP. United States savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table D-41 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the continental United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies s Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of 6Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE D-50. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt [ Millions of dollars ] Net budget Budget ex- Surplus or Public debt receipts penditures deficit ( ) at end 2of year Period Fiscal year : _ * I9603-- Calendar year : _ _7 ; ._ _ -_ _ _ _- _ ] Gross receipts less refunds of receipts and transfers of tax receipts to the Federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund the Federal disability insurance trust fund the railroad retirement account and the highway trust fund Excludes guaranteed obligations. The change in the public debt from year to year reflects not only the budget surplus or deficit but also changes in the Treasury 's cash balances the effect of certain trust fund transactions and direct borrowing from the public by certain Government enterprises Estimate Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from data available as of January May therefore differ from figures in Treasury Department monthly statement of receipts and expenditures to be released about January NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) O TABLE D-51. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Budget expenditures by function Budget receipts by source Fiscal year All Indi- Corpovidual ration Total income income Excise other taxes retaxes taxes ceipts i Veter- Agrimil culans ' Major serv- ture All naand Inter- other Total tional ices agriest expendand itures security bene- cultural refits sources Budget surplus or deficit ( ) Includes employment taxes estate and gift taxes customs revenues and miscellaneous receipts Includes expenditures for international affairs and finance ( including defense support under the mutual security program ) labor and welfare natural resources commerce and housing and general government ; also includes adjustment to daily Treasury statement ( for actuals ) and allowance for contingencies ( for estimates ) Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget TABLE D-52. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public LBillions of dollars ] Total State and local Cash receipts Calendar year : Fiscal year : Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments ( ) Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of paymerits ( ) Cash receipts Cash payments Period < Federal ( ) ( ) I960 Excess of receipts or of payments ( ) For derivation of Federal cash receipts and payments see Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO and Table D-54 Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts. Cash receipts consist of personal tax and nontax receipts indirect business tax and nontax accruals and corporate tax accruals adjusted to a collection basis. Cash payments are total expenditures less Federal grants-in-aid and less contributions for social insurance. ( Federal grants-in-aid are therefore excluded from State and local receipts and payments and included only in Federal payments. ) See Table D-53 a Less than $ million Preliminary Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-53. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts * [ Calendar years billions of dollars ] Receipt or expenditure First SecFirst SecFirst SecFirst SecYear half ond Year half ond Year half ond Year half ond half half half a half * Total government Receipts Expenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) Federal Government Receipts Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance E xpenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments To persons --Foreign ( net ) Qrants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) State and local governments : Receipts Personal tax and non5.4 tax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals- Contributions for so2.1 cial insurance Federal grants-in-aid.. Expenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Net interest paid Less : Current surplus of Government en1.8 terprises _. Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) These accounts like the cash budget include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike both the conventional budget and the cash statement they exclude certain capital and lending transactions. In general they do net use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services ; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans financed by banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them Seasonally adjusted annual rates Preliminary ; fourth quarter estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) 20O TABLE D-54. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ] I ^ iscal yean Receipts or expenditures RECEIPTS Budget receipts Less * Intragovernmental transactions _ _ ._ Receipts from exercise of monetary authority. _ Plus * Trust fund receipts Equals : Federal receipts from the public ( consolidated cash receipts ) _ Less : Adjustment for agency coverage : District of Columbia revenues _ Plus : Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds Veterans ' life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds _- _ ._ _ Interest dividends and other earnings Adjustments for timing : Excess of taxes included in national income accounts over cash collections : Personal Corporate profits Other Miscellaneous Less : Adjustments for capital transactions : Realization upon loans and investments Proceeds from sale of government property Recoveries and refunds Equals : Receipts national income accounts. .._ _ _. o o g _ _ i _ o o o o EXPENDITURES Budget expenditures _ _ _ Less * Intragovernmental transactions Accrued interest and other noncash expenditures ( net ) Plus * Trust fund expenditures Government-sponsored enterprise expenditures ( net ) Equals : Federal payments to the public ( consolidated cash expenditures ) _ Less : Adjustment for agency coverage : District of Columbia expenditures ._. _ Plus : Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds Veterans ' life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Interest received and proceeds of government sales Adjustments for timing : Accrued interest on savings bonds and Treasury bills Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed non-recourse loans ( net change ) Increase in clearing account ._ _ ._ M i ? cellaneous Less : Adjustments for capital transactions : Loans and other adjustments : Federal National Mortgage Association secondary market operations Other Purchase of land and existing assets Trust and deposit fund expenditures Redemption of International Monetary Fund notes _ _ _ Equals * Expenditures national income accounts NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce 2OI TABLE D ^ -State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Revenues by source Fiscal year J Expenditures by function ReveSales nue and Indi- Corpo- from All Prop- gross vidual ration Fed- other net Total erty re- income income eral reve3 taxes ceipts taxes taxes Gov- nue taxes ernment Public All EduTotal cation High- wel- other ways fare SCO Fiscal years not the same for all governments Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between governments in these categories are also excluded s Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and community redevelopment local recreation general control interest on general debt and other and unallocable expenditures Preliminary NOTE. Data are not available for intervening years See Table D ^ for net debt of State and local governments Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE D-56. Profits before and after taxes ' all private corporations. [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability <36.4 Period _ Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.. _ __ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ __ __ M4.0 Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes $ million Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Provisional NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See Table D-9 for profits before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment Series revised beginning For details see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-57. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class [ Thousands of dollars } Period All asset sizes Under and over Ratio of pro fits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Profits per dollar of sales cents Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter _ Second quarter _ Third quarter NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For details concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U. S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-58. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Durable goods industries Period All private manufacturing corporations Lumber and Furwood niture prod- and ucts fix ( except tures furniture ) PriStone mary clay iron and and glass steel prod- inucts dustries Primary nonferrous metal industries MaFab- chinricated ery ( exmetal cept prod- elecucts trical ) MisEleccellatrical MoIn- neous ma- tor Other stru- manchin- vehi- trans- ments ufacery cles porta- and turreequip- and tion ing ment equip- equip- lated ( inand ment ment prod- cludsupucts ing plies ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.-Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter. Fourth quarter _. ^ : First quarter Second quarter _Third quarter. ._ Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. ( > See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-58. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Period Food TexToand tile kin- bacco mill mandred ufacprod- tures products ucts ProdPrintucts of ing petroand Chemleum Apparel Paper pub- icals Petro- and Rub- Leather and and and allied lishand leum coal ber ing related prod- ( ex- allied refin ( ex- prod- leather prodprod- ucts cept prod- ing cept ucts ucts ucts petronews- ucts leum parefinpers ) ing ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U. S. Manufacturing Corporations by Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-59. Sources and uses of corporate Junds 1947-58l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Total uses Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change in customer net receivables Cash and U. S. Government securities Other assets ._ Total sources Internal sources Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation and amortization allowances External sources Change in Federal income tax liability Other liabilities Change in bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Preliminary estimates Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately Less than $ million Preliminary estimate by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) 2O7 TABLE D-60. Current assets and liabilities of U. S. corporations 1954-58l [ Billions of dollars end of period ] Asset or liability Advances and prepayments U. S. Govern2.4 ment ._ _ Other notes and accounts payable Federal income tax liabilities Other current liabilities. Total current assets Cash on hand and in banks U. S. G o v e r n m e n t securities Receivables from U. S Government Other notes and accounts receivable Inventories Other current assets Total current liabilities Net working capital First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter All corporations in the United States excluding banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies. Data for are based on Statistics of Income covering virtually all corporations in the United States. Statistics of Income data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. Data for are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. As more complete data become available estimates are revised Receivables from and payables to U. S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U. S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U. S. Government advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books Includes marketable securities other than U. S. Government NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D State and municipal and corporate securities offered 1934-58l [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash State and Proposed uses of net proceeds Gross proceeds municipal securities New money offered for cash Retire- Other Com- Pre- Bonds ( prin- Total mon ferred and Total Plant Work- ment purcipal of sestock stock notes and ing amounts ) Total equip- capi- curities poses tal ment Period ? 3C8 ? _ ? 11C : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter B_ no These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions and issues sold through continuous offerings such as securities of open-end investment companies and employee-purchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission The Commercial and Financial Chronicle and The Bond Buyer TABLE D-62. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit Stock market credit Common stock prices index = ( SEC ) i Period Common stock price/ earnings ratioindustrials ( Standard & Poor 's ) Customer credit ( excluding U. S Government securities ) Total Net debit balances Bank loans to brokers and Bank loans dealers to " others " Millions of dollars ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March April May June ( ) O July August September _ _ _ _ October November December : January February March April May Tune July August September October November December -__ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Based on stocks Based on stocks for and stocks beginning Ratio is obtained by dividing aggregate market value at end of period by aggregate earnings for months ending with period shown As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U. S. Government obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except TJ. S. Government obligations. However some U. S. Government securities are included after Series revised beginning July and March Data are for last Wednesday of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities including U. S. Government obligations. Series revised beginning July and January Data are for last Wednesday of period Not available Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange 2IO TABLE D-63. Business population and business failures Operating businesses and business turnover ( thousands of firms ) i Period Business failures < New business DisincorOper- New con- Busi- poratinating busi- ued ness tions busi- ness- busi- trans- ( numnesses es s ness- fers s ber ) ess _ ? ._ _ : January February.. March April. May June July August September. October November. December__ : January February March April May.. _ June July August September. October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) CO ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Business failure rate Liability size class Total Liability size class Total Under $ Under $ and and $ over $ over C ' Excludes firms in the fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he has either an established place of business or at least one paid employee Annual data through are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June Beginning annual data are for January Total for period Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc s Failure rate per listed enterprises. Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Not available Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data NOTE.- Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstrcet Inc I AGRICULTURE TABLE D-64. Income of the farm population Income from agricultural sources Farm operators ' income Net farm income Realszed gross farm income Wages of Farm Real- Total farm Cash reproceipts from ( inized resimarketings Gov- duc ( ex- clud- dent ing ern- tion clud- net workTotal i exing ment penses net change ers Livepaystock change in and Crops ments in in- inprodven- venucts tories ) tories ) s Period Income from all sources ( including net change in inventories ) Per capita income from all sources ( dollars ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total Income ( infrom clud- noning agrinet culchange tural in sources inven- tories ) Billions of dollars * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter 5_ Second quarter ' Third quarter '_ Fourth quarter ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Also includes nonmoney income furnished by farms ( value of farm products consumed in farm households and gross rental value of farm dwellings ) not shown separately Realized gross farm income less farm production expenses Data prior to differ from farm proprietors ' income shown in Tables D-9 and D-12 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department of Commerce Not available Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-65. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April ) i Period Farm employment Average ( thousands ) Net migross gration hourly Manto and earn- hours ings of of As per from farm Num- cent of farms hired ber farm work ( thou-3 Total Family Hired workers workers work ( thou- total sands ) ers sands ) population Farm output per manhour Crop production Per manhour Per acre Index = $ _ ( ) Farm population as denned by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i. e. civilian population living on farms both urban and rural regardless of occupation Total population as of July including armed forces overseas Net change for year beginning in April estimated by Department of Agriculture. For and subsequent years includes inductions and enlistments into the armed forces and persons returning from the armed forces. For all years includes persons who have not moved but who are in and out of the farm population because agricultural operations have begun or have ceased on the place where they are living Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Agricultural Marketing Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census ( see Table D-17 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected. For further explanation see monthly reports on Farm Labor by the Department of Agriculture Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per-hour basis Preliminary Not available Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce O TABLE D-66. Farm production indexes [ = ] Livestock and products Period Crops Farm outPoulFeed put i Total Meat Dairy tr ani- prod- and Total grains mals ucts eggs ? ; Hay To- Oil and Food Vege- Fruits Cot- bac- bearand for- grains tables nuts ton co ing age crops _- Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes certain items not shown separately Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain other items not shown separately < Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-67. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio 1Q29 [ = ] Prices paid by farmers Prices received by farmers bo .s fl " S I | " o Poultry and eggs C8 SH Dairy products | a I bo Meat animals All farm products Livestock and products All livestock and products l Period All crops ' Crops All terns interest taxes Famand r y wage living rates terns ( parity index ) Parity Pro- raduc- tio tion terns May. June July August September October November December- 302i 28C j " 26C 22C | 19f 19C 20f * 26C 22S 23S 22C 2U > ! 2U > | 28C 28C 27C 33S 33C ? ! ( ) 27C 27C ? _ _ ._ _ : January February March April : January February. .March April May June July August September October November _ December. ! ! ! ! Includes items not shown separately Percentage ratio of index of prices received by farmers for all farm products to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-68. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of period Financial assets HouseMahold chinReal furTotal estate ery Live- and Crops ! nishstock motor ings and vehiequipcles ment Real Other DeposInvestits U.S. ment Total estate debt debt and savings in cocur- bonds operarency tives Proprietors ' equities ^ .._ Includes all crops held on farms for whatever purpose and crops held off farms as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Estimated valuation for plus purchases minus depreciation since then Preliminary Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-69. Level-oj-living indicators Jos farm-operator families selected years Level-of-living indexes l ( U. S. average in = ) Period Percentage of all families reporting : ./ United North- North South West Elec- Tele- Auto- Running tricStates east Central ity phones mobiles water Mechan- Tele- Home ical refrig- vision freezers erators Indexes based on percent of farms with electricity telephones and automobiles and the average value of products sold or traded in the year preceding the appropriate Census of Agriculture Differs in minor respects from series shown in Table D-70 Gas or electric lights Based on Special Cooperative Survey of Farmers ' Expenditures Source : Department of Agriculture 2l6 TABLE D Selected indicators of farming conditions Period Total investfarm Average ment inand plant Number value of equipment of farms production ( millions of ( thou- assets per dollars ) sands ) farm ( dollars ) Gross Net Real estate Foredebt as closure percent of rate per value of real estate farms ( percent ) Percent of farms Operators ' Farm in- allwith net income come per central per farm worker station ( dollars ) ( dollars ) electrical service ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) s ( ) ( ) ( ) L ( ) ( ) Farm real estate less value of dwellings crops held for feed livestock machinery and equipment less percent of the value of automobiles and demand deposits used for production. Data are for January Gross investment less depreciation and other capital consumption Data are for January * Data are for year beginning March s Including Government payments and excluding the net change in inventories e Net income of farm operators including Government payments and excluding the net change in inventories plus farm wages of resident workers and other hired workers Data are for June except for the Census of Agriculture years : ( January ) ( April ) ( January ) and ( April ) Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS TABLE D-71. United States balance of payments J952-58l [ Millions of dollars ] July 1952Junc ( annual average ) Type of transaction Private net ' Total Direct investments net New issues Redemptions _ _ _ __ Other long-term net Short-term net Government net ' Total United States receipts : Total Exports of goods and services : Total Second half First Third half quarter r> United States capital net : Total First half Government grants Remittances and other transfers Second half net excluding _- First half Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services excluding military Military expenditures Income on investments : Private Government '792 'l45 Merchandise adjusted excluding military _ _ _ _ _ _ Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services Military transactions Income on investments : Direct investments Other private Government Foreign long-term investments in the United States net Increase in liquid dollar holdings by foreign countries and international institutions United States gold sales or purchases ( ) Net United States payments ( ) Errors and omissions Excludes transfers of goods and services under military grant programs Excludes investment in U. S. Government securities Source : Department of Commerce Imports of goods and services : Total Long-term capital outflow Repayments Short-term net _ United States payments ' Total Unilateral transfers military Total 2l8 TABLE D-72. United States balance of payments with individual areas 1952-58l [ Millions of dollars ] July 1952June ( annual average ) Area and type of transaction 19f >6 19v58 First half Second half First half Second half First half '976 Net United States receipts or payments ( ) 'l52 _1 'l36 Western Europe : United States payments : Total Imports of nonmilitary goods Military expenditures _ France Germany _ United Kingdom Other services Remittances and other transfers net Government grants and capital net. Greece Spain Turkey Yugoslavia and Private capital net outflow Direct investments Other long-term Short-term United States receipts- Total Exports of nonmilitary goods Income on investments abroad : Government -_ Private Other services and military transactions Foreign long-term investments in the United States net Canada : United States payments : Total Imports of nonmilitary goods Military expenditures Other services Remittances and other transfers net Government capital net Private capital net outflow Direct investments Other long-term _ .._ _ ._ Short-term United States receipts : Total Exports of nonmilitary goods Income on investments : Government _ -_ Private Other services and military transactions .-_ Foreign long-term investments in the United States net Net United States receipts or payments ( ) ( % } ( ) See footnotes at end of table p. Third quarter TABLE D-72. United States balance of payments with individual areas. l Continued [ Millions of dollars ] July 1952June annual average ) Area and type of transaction ^ >7 First half Second half First half Second half First half Military expenditures. Japan Other services _ Remittances and other transfers net. Government grants and capital net Latin America : United States payments ' Total Imports of nonmilitary goods _ Military expenditures Other services Remittances and other transfers net-Government grants and capital net Private capital outflow net Direct investments Oil concession payments to Venezuela -_ Other long-term Short-term United States receipts ' Total Exports of nonmilitary goods Income on investments : Government Private Other services and military transactions Foreign long-term investments in the United States net Net United States payments ( ) receipts or Other countries' United States payments : Total Imports of nonmilitary goods Japan Private capital net outflow Direct investments Other long-term Short-term United States receipts : Total Exports of nonmilitary goods Japan Income on investments : Government Private _ _ Other services and military transactions Foreign long-term investments in the United States net receipts _ Cambodia Laos Vietnam Korea and China ( Taiwan ) Japan India Pakistan Net United States pavments ( ) or See footnotes at end of table p. Third quarter ( ) TABIE D-72. United States balance of payments with individual areas Continued [ Millions of dollars ] July 1952June ( annual average ) Area and type of transaction International Institutions : United States payments : Total Second half First half First half Third quarter Imports of nonmilitary goods Militarv expenditures _ Other services Remittances and other transfers net Government grants and capital net United Kingdom Private capital net outflow Direct investments United Kingdom O ther long-term Short-term ._ _ _ ._ United States receipts : Total Exports of nonmilitarv goods Income on investments : Government.. Private Other services and military transactions Foreign long-term investments in the United States net r e c e i p t s or _ _ g g Addendum : Total sterling area : United States payments : Total Net U n i t e d S t a t e s receipts or payments ( ) .____. _ Exports of nonmilitary goods Income on investments : Government _._ .__ Private Other services Foreign long-term investments in the United States net Excludes transfers of goods and services under military grant programs Not available Excludes investment in U. S. Government securities Source : Department of Commerce Second half United States receipts : Total Net U n i t e d States payments ( ) First half Government grants and capital net. Private capital net outflow Other payments TABLE D United States exports by selected commodities and markets [ Millions of dollars annual rates ] Total all countries Commodity and period Main countries accounting for decline from first half to first half Total Total exports excluding " special category " : : First half First half : First half Western Europe ] Canada All other countries Japan Iron and steel-mill products scrap nonferrous metals and ferroalloys : : First half First half : First half Automobiles parts and accessories : : First half : First half : First half _ Machinery all types : : First half First half : First half Chemicals and : First : First First Six main groups in the decline : : First half : First half : First half Crude petroleum and related fuels : : First half _._ First half : First half Cotton raw including linters : : First half ._ First half : First half Wheat : : First half First half : First half Coal and : : related fuels : First half First half First half Other exports : : First half First half : First half _ _ _ related products : _ half _- _ half half Textile manufactures : : First half _ : First half. _ _ ' First half All other exports : First half : First half. : First half ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i Excludes Greece and Turkey " Special category " includes those commodities for which detailed statistics are withheld for security reasons. The data for the first half of include estimates for commodities declassified in a revision of " special category " coverage in Less than $ Includes semimanufactures as well as finished products except those for Japan which include finished manufactures only Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-74 World exports [ Millions of dollars annual rates ] ^ \ ^ ^ Exports to Exports from ^ \ ^ World : : First half Change first half : United States : First half Change first half : United Kingdom Iceland and Ireland : : First half Change first half : Continental Western Europe : : First half Change first half : Canada : First half Change first half : Japan : First half Change first half : Outer sterling area : First half Change first half : Latin America : : First half Change first half : All other countries : : First half Change first half : United KingUnited dom World i States Iceland and Ireland ContiOuter nental Western Canada Japan sterling area Europe i Latin America All other countries ( ) Q Totals for each exporting area include amounts for which destinations are not specified in sources and therefore exceed sums of destination details Excludes U. S. military aid exports Excludes U. S. " special category " shipments for which destination details are withheld on security grounds. Figures for and for changes are based upon the " special category " coverage in effect until mid-1957 while changes are computed from revised data reflecting the more limited " special category " coverage subsequently in effect Less than $ NOTE. Data exclude exports of U. S. S. R. and Soviet bloc countries to each other Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce TABLE D Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country Sept Dec Sept Dec Mar June Sept United Kingdom. _ Other Total Continental Western Europe Austria Belgium-Luxembourg ( and Belgian Congo ) France ( and dependencies ) Germany ._ Italy Netherlands ( and Netherlands West Indies and Surinam ) Scandinavian countries ( Sweden Norway Denmark and Finland ) Other Sterling area Canada Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia ._ _ Cuba Mexico Peru ._ Venezuela Other Asia Japan Other All other countries..International institutions NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of gold reserves of U. S. S. R. and other Eastern European countries and of international institutions ( International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund United Nations and others ) Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements ( both for its own and EPU account ) and of the Tripartite Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold are included under " other " Continental Western Europe Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-76. Price changes in international trade [ = ] ! Trade sector First quarter Third quarter Manufactured goods Nonferrous base metals Primary commodities Foodstuffs Other agricultural commodities _ Wool e Minerals Metal ores Crude petroleum First Third quar- quarter ter First Second Third quar- quar- quarter ter ter United States foreign trade : Exports : Total Foodstuffs Industrial materials Finished manufactures _ _ Imports for consumption : Total Foodstuffs _ Industrial materials Finished manufactures _ _ _. _ __ World trade : Industrial countries ' Exports Other countries : Exports _ ( ) ( ) Commodity classes : Data shown for United States foreign trade and for country groups and for manufactured goods in the world trade section of the table are unit value indexes. All others are price indexes For description of world trade indexes by commodity classes see " Methods in Compiling the United Nations Price Indexes for Basic Commodities in International Trade " Statistical Paper Series M No United Nations New York The series shown for foodstuffs is the weighted average of the two commodity classes crude foodstuffs and manufactured foodstuffs. The series shown for industrial materials is the weighted average of the two commodity classes crude materials and semimanufactures Excludes trade of U. S. S. R. and Soviet bloc countries Not available s Exports e Exports and imports Sources : Department of Commerce and United Nations U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O