330JANUARY I960 Economic Report or trie President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : I960 Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.G Price of single copy $ LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE January } To the Congress of the United States : I present herewith my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of The Report was prepared with the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers and of the heads of the executive departments and independent agencies directly concerned with the matters it discusses. It summarizes the economic developments of the year and the steps taken in major areas of economic policy to promote the sound expansion of employment production and income. It also puts forward a program for the year which in the context of present and prospective economic conditions would effectively implement the purposes of the Employment Act The major conclusions and recommendations of the Report are set forth below in part in the words of the Report itself By the first quarter of the recovery that started early in had already carried production and income to levels higher than ever before attained in the American economy. A considerable further advance was scored during the remainder of despite the deep effect of the 116-day strike in the steel industry The Nation 's output of goods and services in the fourth quarter of was at an annual rate of $ billion. When adjusted for price changes this rate of output was 3/2 percent higher than the rate attained in the corresponding period in By December total employment had reached a record level million on a seasonally adjusted basis. And personal income payments in December were at an annual rate of $ billion $ billion greater than a year earlier. After adjustment for increases in prices the rise in total personal income in represented a gain of nearly percent in the real buying power of our Nation As we look ahead there are good grounds for confidence that this economic advance can be extended through Furthermore with appropriate private actions and public policies it can carry well beyond the present year Hi However as always in periods of rapid economic expansion we must avoid speculative excesses and actions that would compress gains into so short a period that the rate of growth could not be sustained. We must seek through both private actions and public policies to minimize and contain inflationary pressures that could undermine the basis for a high continuing rate of growth Three elements stand out in the Government 's program for realizing the objectives of high production employment and income set forth in the Employment Act : first favorable action by the Congress on the recommendations for appropriations and for measures affecting Federal revenues presented in the Budget for the fiscal year ; second use of the resulting surplus now estimated at $ billion to retire Federal debt ; third action by the Congress to remove the interest rate limitation that currently inhibits the noninflationary management of the Federal debt. Numerous additional proposals many of which are described in Chapter of the Economic Report will be made to supplement the Federal Government 's existing economic and financial programs Following the budget balance now in prospect for the fiscal year these three elements of the program will strengthen and be strengthened by the essential contributions to sustainable economic growth made through the policies of the independent Federal Reserve System. Fiscal and monetary policies which are powerful instruments for preventing the development of inflationary pressures can effectively reinforce one another But these Government policies must be supplemented by appropriate private actions especially with respect to profits and wages. In our system of free competitive enterprise and shared responsibility we do not rely on Government alone for the achievement of inflation-free economic growth. On the contrary that achievement requires a blending of suitable private actions and public policies. Our success in realizing the opportunities that lie ahead will therefore depend in large part upon the ways in which business management labor leaders and consumers perform their own economic functions A well-informed and vigilant public opinion is essential in our free society for helping achieve the conditions necessary for price stability and vigorous economic growth. Such public opinion can be an effective safeguard against attempts arbitrarily to establish prices or wages at levels that are inconsistent with the general welfare. Informed public opinion is also necessary to support the laws and regulations that provide the framework for the conduct of our economic affairs Further progress is needed in establishing a broad public understanding of the relationships of productivity and rewards to costs and prices. It would be a grave mistake to believe that we can successfully substitute legislation or controls for such understanding. Indeed the complex relationships involved can not be fixed by law and attempts to determine them by rv restrictive governmental action would jeopardize our freedoms and other conditions essential to sound economic growth Our system of free institutions and shared responsibility has served us well in achieving economic growth and improvement. From our past experience we are confident that our changing and increasing needs in the future can be met within this flexible system which gains strength from the incentive it provides for individuals from the scope it affords for individual initiative and action and from the assurance it gives that government remains responsive to the will of the people DWIGHTD. EISENHOWER CONTENTS Page CHAPTER Economic Growth in a Free Society Record of Growth in the American Economy New Challenges and Opportunities Shared Responsibility for Economic Growth and Improvement Roles of Government Roles of Individuals and Private Groups CHAPTER Economic Developments in Expansion of Output Employment and Income Financial Developments Prices Agriculture International Economic Developments Change in the World Market Situation United States Foreign Trade and Payments Outlook ' Prospective Expansion of Demands Balance of Payments Prospects Conditions for Sound Advance CHAPTER Economic Policies in Federal Fiscal Policies Federal Debt Management Monetary and Credit Policy Federal Housing and Home Financing Federal Aid for Highways Foreign Economic Policy CHAPTER A Legislative Program for Federal Finances Competition Small Business Agriculture Natural Resources Research and Development Education and Health Personal Security Area Assistance VII CHAPTER Continued Housing and Home Financing Foreign Economic Relations Federal Statistics Combining Private Actions with Public Policies page APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Some Recent Economic Developments I. Growth of Population II. Employment and Earnings III. Agriculture IV. United States Foreign Trade and Payments C. Statistical Tables Relating to the Diffusion of Weil-Being D. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production Ill LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS ( Chapters and and Appendix B ) Tables Net Changes in Commercial Bank Holdings of Loans and Investments Changes in Consumer Price Index in Changes in Wholesale Price Index in World Imports United States Exports July to October and Federal Budget Expenditures Residential Mortgage Holdings of Selected Federal Programs Obligations and Payments on Federal-Aid Highway Programs B-l Population and Components of Its Year-to-Year Changes B-2. Population Born Before July by Age Groups : and Projections for " B-3. Population Born Before July : Projected Percentage Changes by Age Groups B-4. Population Born After July : Projections by Specific Age Groups Under Various Assumptions Regarding Fertility VIII Tables B-5 B-6 B-7 B-8 B-9 B-10 B ~ l B-12 B-13 B-14 B-15 B-16 B-17 B-18 B-19 B-20 B-21 B-22 B-23 B-24 B-25 B-26 B-27 B-28 B-29 Page Farm Population Net Migration from Farms Number of Households by Type and Residence Number of Households Projections for Growth of the Civilian Labor Force and Expansion of Employment Growth of the Total Labor Force by Sex and Age Civilian Employment by Major Occupational Groups and Industrial Structure of Employment and Changes in Nonagricultural Employment After April by Major Industry Groups Expansion of Labor Income and Related Items During Months Following Cyclical Low Points Distribution of Employees Receiving Wage Increases Under Major Labor Agreements by Size of Increase Carryover of Grains Cotton and Tobacco and Prospect for Output of Farm Products Indexes of Productivity in Agriculture Indexes of Agricultural Inputs Agricultural Resources in Use Farmers ' Income and Financial Position Selected Periods Civilian Food Consumption Per Capita Selected Periods Caloric and Protein Content of Daily Food Consumption of Civilians Per Capita Agricultural Output Per Capita of Total Population United States Balance of Payments Average and United States Imports Average and United States Exports Average and Changes in United States Shares of World Exports of Manufactures to Selected Markets to Relation of Machinery Imports to Investment in Machinery and Equipment Excluding Transportation Equipment Selected Countries Ill Charts Gross National Product Employment and Unemployment Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing Personal Income Corporate Profits IX Charts Consumer Instalment Credit Stock Prices and Yields Consumer Prices Wholesale Prices Indicators of Agricultural Conditions U.S. Balance of Payments Foreign Industrial Production Surplus or Deficit of the Federal Government Interest Rates and Bond Yields Member Bank Reserves Page Chapter Economic Growth in a Free Society T HE VIGOR of the underlying forces that make for growth in the American economy was clearly evident in Employment production and income at the end of the year were substantially above the levels reached at the end of despite the prolonged strike in the steel industry. As this Economic Report is transmitted to the Congress the outlook is good for an extension of growth through and beyond In these circumstances it is appropriate that the first chapter of this Report should be addressed to the question of how best to extend economic growth into the years ahead at a high and sustainable rate and in ways that strengthen and reinforce our political and economic freedoms. Other chapters of the Report summarize the leading economic developments in ; describe the policies that were pursued in the past year to promote higher employment production and purchasing power ; and set forth the Administration 's program for extending the Nation 's economic progress RECORD OF GROWTH IN THE AMERICAN ECONOMY A few facts illustrate the ability of the American economy to continue raising what has long been the highest living scale in the world while carrying a heavy defense burden and meeting broad international obligations In the years since the passage of the Employment Act employment has advanced on the average by nearly a year. In real terms the Nation 's output of goods and services as well as its personal income has increased by more than percent or at a rate of percent per year ; and the output of the private sector of the economy has advanced at a slightly higher rate percent. For industrial production the rate of increase has been percent. The annual increase of percent in total national output which corresponds to a doubling every years is roughly equivalent to the long-term average reached in our previous history. Thus the American economy has sustained its long-term record of growth despite the high level of industrial development already achieved and despite temporary setbacks The increase in national output has made possible very great gains in the well-being of American families. Evidence of the advances made in this respect since passage of the Employment Act is presented in the Appendix on " Diffusion of Well-Being " included in this Report. Real income per capita has increased by nearly percent since and the increase per family has been percent. As incomes have risen and as paid vacations have become longer and more common leisure time has increased and recreational activities have become more widely enjoyed. The shortage of housing so evident immediately after World War II has been virtually eliminated. Since the housing supply has been increased by the construction of million private nonfarm dwelling units and there have been marked improvements in the quality of housing. At the same time there has been a general increase in home ownership ; some percent of all nonfarm dwelling units are owned by the occupant families Attention to such material advances should not obscure the accompanying gains made with respect to other components of our well-being some of which are less tangible. In health there has been remarkable progress in the reduction of infant and maternal mortality in the prevention mitigation and treatment of many diseases in restoring the physically handicapped in making available a better balanced diet at lower cost and in creating other conditions conducive to longer years of life and greater efficiency. Health services are more and more widely available and the great majority of Americans now have some protection under voluntary plans of hospital surgical and medical insurance Notable gains have been made in education and other cultural areas School enrollment has risen in the last years from percent to about percent of all persons in the age group of to years. From to the number of Bachelor 's and first professional degrees conferred annually almost trebled and the number of Master 's and second professional degrees showed a still greater relative increase. To some extent these advances represent the resumption of academic work interrupted by war but the large gains made in the past few years indicate a rising trend that will accelerate in the years ahead. The number of earned Doctorates conferred rose sharply after the war reaching in a new high which has been maintained for several years. In the past decade more than Doctorates have been conferred compared with some during the 's and about in the 's. Marked increases are expected also in the next several years. Another source of satisfaction is the record of scientific achievement. Since close to half of the Nobel awards for contributions to medicine chemistry and physics have been bestowed on American citizens The economic security of American families has been advanced significantly in the years since World War II. About million persons percent of all those in paid employment are now covered by the Federal Government 's old-age survivors and disability insurance system and related programs. More than million persons are covered by privately financed pension plans. The Federal-State Unemployment Compensation System which has proved its worth as a defense against loss of income during periods of economic adversity now provides protection for nearly percent of all persons on nonfarm payrolls But the progress made under Government programs should not divert attention from the extensive provisions made independently by Americans for personal and family security. The number of life insurance policyholders for example has increased by about percent since ; about million persons were insured through legal reserve companies in The volume of time and savings deposits of individuals has increased by nearly $ billion or more than percent since Share accounts in savings and loan associations have also risen by $ billion in this period by nearly percent And it is not too much to say that we have made good progress in moderating fluctuations in our economy. Although economic recessions however minor must remain a matter of concern to all Americans the relative mildness and short duration of the three since the war have to be reckoned as a major factor in the strengthening of personal security NEW CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES These improvements in the well-being of the American people offer convincing testimony of the productiveness of our free economy and the wide distribution of its annual yield. Continuing efforts are needed however to assure that advances are extended into the future at high rates One important line of progress to this end is the lessening of fluctuations in our economic development. Although the severity and duration of economic recessions have been limited in the postwar period we must strive for a steadier rate of growth. This would not only reduce the personal hardships incident to economic setbacks but could also yield a higher annual rate of growth over a period of years In addition to lessening cyclical declines in employment efforts should be made to improve the skills of our labor force and to make consistently fuller use of economic resources in all parts of the Nation. In general unemployment rates in the United States have not been high for an economy which allows and experiences considerable labor mobility and job change but they can and should be lower. Since unemployment is typically highest among those persons with inadequate training in the skills demanded by a dynamic industrial economy better schooling and improved counseling services are clearly desirable. Also while advances in economic activity and in well-being have been widely shared constructive measures are needed to draw more fully into the mainstream of economic growth those communities and areas that experience persistently high unemployment In the decade we have just entered a new factor the expected sharp increase in the labor force will require and will help to achieve more rapid economic growth. Over the past decade our labor force increased at an average rate of about a year. But the sharp rise in births in the years since the war means that the annual increase in the number of persons available for employment will rise rapidly in the next ten years Projections suggest something close to a doubling of this annual increment to the labor force by the end of the 's. The rapid expansion of our manpower will offer a unique opportunity for increasing our rate of output By the same token our economy will have to supply additional employment openings by the end of the decade at a rate twice that required in the 's The coming of age of this large group of young people will also require great increases in the output of housing and of consumer goods and services of all kinds as new families are formed and new households are established in increasing numbers. Meeting these output and employment demands in the next decade will require a vast increase in savings and invested capital to supply needed tools and facilities. It will require continuing extensive private and public support of basic and applied research. It also will require greater efforts primarily by local and State governments and private groups in education and training Success in providing the additional new job opportunities would of itself accelerate our rate of economic growth. By the end of the 's this acceleration and an improvement in productivity similar to the average for recent decades would yield an annual national output close to half again what it is today. And this performance could be bettered if we succeed in creating conditions that favor a higher rate of increase in productivity SHARED RESPONSIBILITY FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH AND IMPROVEMENT The economic tasks of the next decade pose impressive challenges but there is every reason to believe that they will be met just as similar challenges have been met in the past. We should regard these challenges as opportunities and recognize that we have great advantages as we go about meeting them. A large productive base already exists in the American economy and our competitive enterprise system is well able to expand this base as needs increase. The ideals freedoms incentives and rewards of our enterprise society are powerful forces in directing efforts and material resources to the meeting of new tests. And our traditional and proven system of sharing responsibility for economic growth and improvement between the private and public spheres of our society and among the several levels of government provides a means for guiding those efforts along fruitful lines The premises of this system of shared responsibility recognized by the Congress in Section of the Employment Act deserve renewed emphasis as we prepare for the challenges and opportunities of the new decade. In our society the maintenance of a climate conducive to orderly and vigorous economic growth is not exclusively the function of government. Indeed excessive reliance on governmental machinery may not only frustrate the quest for steady growth and reasonably stable prices but may also have undesirable consequences for our economic system and our freedoms. The more effective the job done by individuals and private groups and by government at the State and community levels the less the danger of Federal encroachment in areas that have traditionally been the province of private enterprise and of local government. Our various levels of government and private individuals and groups have distinctive roles in our free society 's system of shared responsibility. At this point it is well to recall these roles with particular reference to the problem of maintaining a high rate of economic growth Roles of Government In a free society government makes its major contribution to economic growth by fostering conditions that encourage and reinforce the efforts of individuals and private groups to improve their circumstances. This includes the preservation and enhancement of competition the maintenance of a stable currency the moderation of fluctuations in employment and output participation in the development of human and natural resources the enhancement of personal security provision of a sound national defense and the maintenance of mutually advantageous ties with other countries Responsibility for many of these roles is divided among the various levels of government but none can be carried out adequately without the initiative and cooperation of individuals and private groups. This network of relationships is the product of our history. It embodies the American concept of government as the responsive instrument of the people The Federal Government 's contribution toward preserving and strengthening the institutions of our competitive enterprise system to which the Employment Act properly directs attention is of special importance. Open markets perform the essential task of channeling economic resources into the uses that businessmen and consumers deem most satisfactory ; in this way they contribute to the productiveness of our economy and to the quality of our living. They should remain free of unwarranted restraints. Leaders of business labor farming and the professions as well as the various levels of government have responsibilities for maintaining the openness and resiliency of our economic system. The competitive nature of this system is closely linked to our ideals of freedom and individual initiative which have far more than economic significance. A free society free political institutions and a free economy are interdependent and reinforce each other As indicated earlier Federal action to help smooth out economic fluctuations affords another opportunity to promote growth. Deep and prolonged declines of production involving substantial reductions in investment not only interrupt current advance but impede future growth. It is widely acknowledged that to avoid such declines Government should take measures appropriately designed and timed to counter recessionary tendencies. It is also important that appropriate measures should be taken to restrain surges in economic activity that might lead to drastic corrections Governmental decisions regarding the volume and character of public expenditures have powerful effects on the health of the economy and on its prospects for vigorous and sustainable growth. Especially in a briskly growing economy the kind to be expected in the current decade demands on economic resources are heavy and rising and public outlays are made at the expense of private spending. The public use of funds whether to continue established programs or to initiate new ones must be justified on the ground that it makes a larger contribution to well-being and economic strength than could be made by their private use. The entire range of Federal spending must be continuously under review with this criterion in mind. Many public programs make important contributions to growth both directly by increasing the productive capacity of individuals and business firms and indirectly by facilitating and encouraging the greater private investment that enlarges our capacity for future production. It must always be borne in mind however that we grow only by investing more and producing more not simply by spending more The way taxes are levied also affects the advance of productivity and output. We must remain alert to the possibility of making the tax system a more effective instrument for promoting economic growth. Taxes affect the ability of individuals and corporations to save. Likewise their impact on the risk and return of investment influences the willingness to make productive use of savings. Our tax system should give encouragement to productive effort and should facilitate the mobility and efficient use of capital. We should continue to review our tax system from these standpoints as well as from the standpoint of equity The Federal Government can make a basic contribution to an environment favorable to economic growth through a constructive forward-looking management of its finances. To meet this vital responsibility in fiscal affairs while performing its functions adequately Government must give clear evidence in actual results of its ability and determination to control its expenditures. When the Nation is prosperous as it is today with production employment and incomes rising the most appropriate fiscal policy is one that provides a sizable excess of Federal revenues over Federal expenditures. In the economic circumstances now prevailing and expected in the near future a budgetary surplus used to retire debt would be a powerful aid in helping to restrain inflationary pressures and to promote sound growth. The added savings which it would supply to the economy would help keep interest rates lower than otherwise and facilitate private investment activity and the financing of public projects by State and local governments. The monetary authorities would have a freer hand in pursuing policies aimed at promoting steady inflation-free growth. And such a fiscal policy would be a potent instrument for strengthening confidence in the dollar at home and abroad. Indeed a sizable budget surplus at this time used to retire Federal debt would effectively implement the objectives proclaimed in the Employment Act Roles of Individuals and Private Groups Since the vast majority of economic decisions in a free society are made by private individuals and groups the rate at which national output grows and the character of that output are determined chiefly by private attitudes and actions. The expenditures of consumers command about two-thirds of the Nation 's total product and private investment expenditures command another one-eighth or more. Individuals and business concerns supply the bulk of the Nation 's savings and the major responsibility for directing these savings into private and public investment rests with private institutions. Finally as citizens of a democracy individuals determine directly or through chosen representatives what they want done through government and at what cost. Obviously the performance of our free economy depends largely on how individuals and private groups fulfill their many critical roles In their key role as consumers individuals can contribute to the Nation 's economic strength by spending wisely just as government acting as their agent can promote growth by prudence in its spending. By the use to which they put their income they determine in large measure how economic resources are allocated. And in buying carefully for price and quality they exert a restraining influence on the cost of living Individuals and corporate groups in their roles as business leaders can help strengthen the economy by the use they make of the resources under their control. They may be able to speed the increase in productivity in the private sector through allocating a greater share of these resources to investment and research and through pricing policies that favor the expansion of markets. Also they can speed growth by upgrading worker skills by improving the skills of management and by eliminating wasteful practices Equally leaders of labor have an opportunity as well as a responsibility to help realize more fully the Nation 's economic potential. They can contribute significantly in this direction by fostering arrangements favorable to higher labor productivity And leaders of business and labor have a joint responsibility for facilitating economic growth through the conduct and results of collective bargaining. This responsibility is especially great in industries that are basic to the Nation 's defenses and economic health. Events of the past year demonstrate the damage that can be done when established methods for settling industrial disputes break down. An obvious way to achieve our economic potential more fully is to improve on this aspect of the past year 's record Labor-management disputes in basic industries should be settled promptly preferably without recourse to strikes and certainly without extended interruptions of production that cause widespread dislocation and unemploy533287 i ment and threaten to paralyze our entire economy. They should be settled also on terms that are fair to the public at large as well as to the parties directly involved Labor-management negotiations in all industries offer opportunities to help promote sound growth by avoiding settlements that contribute to inflation. Settlements should not be such as to cause the national average of wage rate increases to exceed sustainable rates of improvement in national productivity. A national wage pattern that fails to meet this criterion would put an upward pressure on the price level. Hourly rates of pay and related labor benefits can of course be increased without jeopardizing price stability. Indeed such increases are the major means in our free economy by which labor shares in the fruits of industrial progress. But improvements in compensation rates must on the average remain within the limits of general productivity gains if reasonable stability of prices is to be achieved and maintained. Furthermore price reductions warranted by especially rapid productivity gains must be a normal and frequent feature of our economy. Without such reductions we shall not be able to keep the price level as a whole from advancing A well-informed and vigilant public opinion is essential in our free society for helping achieve the conditions necessary for price stability and vigorous economic growth. Such public opinion can be an effective safeguard against attempts arbitrarily to establish prices or wages at levels that are inconsistent with the general welfare. Informed public opinion is also necessary to support the laws and regulations that provide the framework for the conduct of our economic affairs However we must go further in establishing a broad public understanding of the relationships of productivity and rewards to costs and prices. It would be a grave mistake to believe that we can successfully substitute legislation or controls for such understanding. Indeed the complex relationships involved can not be fixed by law and attempts to determine them by restrictive governmental action would jeopardize our freedoms and other conditions essential to sound economic growth Our system of free institutions and shared responsibility has served us well in achieving economic gro \ yth and improvement. From our past experience we are confident that our changing and increasing needs in the future can be met within this flexible system which gains strength from the incentive it provides for individuals from the scope it affords for individual initiative and action and from the assurance it gives that government remains responsive to the will of the people Chapter Economic Developments in HE ECONOMIC RECOVERY in the United States that started early in carried production and incomes to new high levels by the first quarter of The Nation 's output in terms of the physical volume of goods and services surpassed its previous peak. The flow of income payments also exceeded the previous record and civilian employment though still below the high reached in the second quarter of was million greater than in mid-1958 after seasonal adjustments These advances were extended into though economic activity was sharply affected by the 116-day steel strike which began on July Developments in the steel industry had first an expansive and then an increasingly contractive effect. Anticipatory purchases of steel and products of steel quickened the advance in the Nation 's output in the first half of the year but led to a drop in gross national product in the third quarter as about percent of steel capacity was idled and the output of steel-using products had to be sustained in the main out of previously produced steel supplies. Still by the end of the year the Nation 's aggregate output amounted to $ billion on an annual rate basis ; employment had risen to million ( seasonally adjusted ) the highest in the Nation 's history ; and personal income was being received at the rate of $ billion a year percent ( adjusted for price changes ) higher than in the last month of T EXPANSION OF OUTPUT The rapid rise in general economic activity already in progress as began raised output to $ billion in the second quarter of the year ( Chart ) This exceptionally rapid expansion reflected not only the abnormal demand for inventories induced by the expectation of a steel strike but also a substantial continuing increase in the final demand for goods and services. To a certain extent these two factors reinforced one another but increasing outlays by business concerns on plant and equipment rising expenditures on residential construction and increased purchases of durable goods by consumers had significant independent effects in stimulating the expansion of production employment and income CHART Gross National Product Gross national product in reflected continued growth in final purchases and marked shifts in inventory investment BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The shift between early and mid-1959 in the inventory policies of business had a marked economic effect. Inventory accumulation began in the latter part of following a full year of liquidation. It quickened during the first half of as business firms replenished their stocks of materials and finished goods to meet rising operating needs ; and it became especially rapid in the second quarter of the year as businesses sought to assure continuance of their operations in the event of an interruption of steel production. Approximately one-third of the inventory accumulation in the second quarter was attributable to increased holdings of steel mill products. And inventory accumulation alone was equal to one-third of the rise in gross national product from the recession low to the high The advance in final purchases of goods and services which began in the second quarter of also reached a peak rate in the second quarter of Virtually all the main categories of final purchases increased Improved investment opportunities supported by higher business earnings and retained income provided a basis for increased business outlays on plant and equipment. These rose by about percent from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter of to $ billion in the second quarter of ( Table D-8 ) Within nonfarm business investment outlays expenditures on equipment moved forward somewhat more swiftly rising approximately percent from the end of to mid-1959. But nonresidential construction grew at a slower rate as substantial expenditures for public utility and commercial projects were partially offset by a decline in factory building. Residential construction on the other hand rose rapidly in the early months of The public sector of the economy provided a moderately expansive impetus to aggregate output. State and local purchases of goods and services continued to rise while those of the Federal Government remained stable. Net exports were the single contractive factor among the major components of national output declining from $ billion at the close of to minus $ billion ( on a national accounts basis ) in the second quarter of The underlying strength in these categories of final purchases of goods and services helped bring about a rise in employment and income and consumers responded by expanding their outlays substantially. A further rise of income incident to the production of goods to meet abnormal inventory needs particularly in the second quarter also helped to swell consumer incomes and spending. And consumer confidence reflected in high personal borrowings brought particular strength to purchases of durable goods Economic developments in the second half of the year were also greatly affected by the inventory factor. In this case however it exerted on balance a pronounced contractive influence. Largely reflecting reductions of holdings by manufacturers and retail dealers affected by the steel strike inventories which had been accumulated at an annual rate of $ billion in the second quarter were reduced by $ billion in the third quarter This reduction was the dominant economic force in that quarter. Although making possible a continued though less pronounced increase in final purchases the drawing down of inventories incident to the stoppage in steel production resulted in a rather sharp drop $ billion in gross national product. During the fourth quarter of the year deficiencies and imbalances of steel inventories moderated the growth of final purchases despite the resumption of steel production in November. As a result the increase in gross national product ( GNP ) was limited to $ billion and most of the recovery in economic activity expected after the strike was postponed beyond the end of the year. Nevertheless GNP in the fourth quarter was nearly $ billion ( annual rate ) above the level in the fourth quarter of 1I Divergent movements in the second half of the year in the major components of national output reflected in part the impact of steel shortages. Sales of consumer durable goods which had been rising rapidly fell as demands could not be fully met. New construction expenditures which had been very high in early decreased noticeably though part of this decline may have reflected the increased competition for funds arising in other sectors of the economy. On the other hand purchases of consumer nondurable goods and services and of producer durable equipment and purchases by State and local governments continued to advance in the second half of the year. And net exports of goods and services which had been a contractive influence before midyear became moderately expansive EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME The gains in employment and earnings that followed the upturn of the economy in were extended at a rapid rate into By January the average length of the manufacturing workweek had increased to hours ( seasonally adjusted ) from a recession low of hours. Total civilian employment had risen by more than million ( seasonally adjusted ) from its cyclical low and unemployment had been reduced from the recession high of 7/2 percent of the civilian labor force to percent As the year advanced economic expansion brought about increasingly heavy demands for labor. The average length of the workweek in manufacturing industries advanced to hours in April the highest since April and the average amount of overtime for production workers increased rapidly to almost hours a week in June. Longer workweeks and increased overtime were the rule also in most nonmanufacturing industries Unemployment changed very little during the early months of because the expansion in employment was nearly matched by the growth of the labor force. But in the early spring as production reached record levels the number of employed persons rose swiftly exceeding the growth in the labor force and unemployment declined. Total nonfarm employment expanded by nearly million ( seasonally adjusted ) in the four months from February to June and unemployment was reduced by By midyear unemployment had fallen to about percent of the labor force ; long-term unemployment the number of individuals seeking work for weeks or more was million below its recession high of nearly million ; unemployment among men years of age and over was sharply below that in ; and the unemployment rate for family men in June was percent likewise far below its recession high. Nevertheless these unemployment rates were above those prevailing prior to the recession and unemployment remained comparatively high especially for persons lacking work experience for mining employees and for nonwhite persons However total unemployment was being reduced at a rapid rate until the trend was reversed in July by the beginning of the steel strike ( Chart ) CHART Employment and Unemployment Employment increased and unemployment fell until July These trends were interrupted by the steel strike but resumed after its end MILLIONS OF PERSONS * PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ) YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR After some employees in the steel industry went on strike on July nearly other persons were soon laid off in related industries especially in mining and rail transportation. Even though substantial inventories of steel had been accumulated by many firms stocks were being depleted rapidly by mid-October and serious imbalances were making themselves felt. As a result layoffs became increasingly heavy. By the time steel production was resumed on November under a Federal court injunction employment in steel-related industries had declined by more than exclusive of the number on strike. In most other industries employment ceased to advance during this period and in October the rate of unemployment increased to percent of the civilian labor force The resumption of steel production brought an increase in employment by the end of the year and unemployment was again reduced. Although the replenishment of working stocks of steel could not be accomplished immediately total employment reached million ( seasonally adjusted ) in December slightly above the record of million that had been attained in June. Unemployment in December was million ( seasonally adjusted ) or percent of the labor force The employment situation in areas of heavy labor surplus was improved significantly by the economic advance of Although in November there were major continental labor markets where unemployment exceeded percent of the labor force the number of such areas was far below the peak of reported in July and September of And by November unemployment had fallen below the percent level in major areas. Also most labor market areas regardless of their over-all unemployment situation experienced shortages in of certain types of workers notably professional technical clerical and skilled The improving employment situation was reflected in substantial gains in personal income. In the early months of higher hourly wage rates supplemented the effects of longer workweeks and more extensive overtime employment on average weekly earnings ( Chart ) Wage rates in manufacturing industries advanced in the first six months of the year by about percent on the average. On an annual rate basis this gain was about the same as the increases in and Average weekly earnings for workers in these industries were percent higher in the first six months of than in the last six months of In nonmanufacturing industries also earnings of workers increased. Despite the fact that the advance of weekly earnings and employment was interrupted by the strike in the second half of the year wage and salary payments in the fourth quarter exceeded payments a year earlier by $ billion or percent Other forms of personal income not as large in dollar terms as wages and salaries personal interest dividends incomes of nonfarm proprietors ( including self-employed professional persons ) and transfer payments also rose above their levels at the end of Rental income increased slightly while the income of farm proprietors declined. The aggregate of '4 CHART Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing Hourly earnings were much higher in than in as wage rates continued to rise and overtime became more common DOLLARS FOR PRODUCTION WORKERS AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS GROSS Weekly earnings increased rapidly until the steel strike reflecting longer workweeks and higher hourly earnings HOURS DOLLARS FOR PRODUCTION WORKERS IOO AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS ( L E F T SCALE ) AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS * ( RIGHT SCALE ) I ( I * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE all these income payments total personal income rose by $ billion or percent and the amount of income available for spending and saving after the payment of personal income taxes disposable personal income increased at the same rate Since prices were relatively stable in much of the first half of the year the increases in disposable income were reflected almost entirely in increases in real income. In the next six months however part of the gain was offset by increases in prices. Over the year as a whole per capita disposable income in dollars of constant purchasing power increased by percent ( Chart ) Personal savings which had expanded earlier in the recovery period leveled off in the first half of as consumer expenditures on goods and services rose by about as much as disposable income. In the final six months as consumption continued to rise in the face of a much slower CHART Personal Income Disposable personal income rose significantly in but some of the gain was offset by price increases in the latter part of the year BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME * * LI PERSONAL INCOME LESS T A X E S SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS growth in personal incomes the share of disposable income that was saved fell to about percent. the lowest since early This decline was reflected both in a less rapid addition to most financial assets of individuals and in a more rapid expansion of personal borrowings Corporate profits which are especially sensitive to fluctuations in business activity expanded in in response to the increase in production and improvement in profit margins. By the second quarter earnings ( before taxes ) reached a record figure of nearly $ billion $ billion more than in the second quarter of when they had been severely depressed Subsequently they declined as the steel strike caused a curtailment of activity and were about the same as in early ( Chart ) CHART Corporate Profits Corporate profits reached a new peak in the second quarter of but declined as the steel strike 's impact spread BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * * / NO ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Dividends did not match the rapid advance of profits after taxes for the year ended in mid-1959 ; accordingly retained earnings recovered sharply. Together with the continued growth in funds generated through depreciation allowances and rapidly rising tax accruals these retained earnings made it possible for corporations to acquire a substantial volume of United States Government securities in the first half of while at the same time increasing their outlays for inventory and for plant and equipment FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS The impact of rising economic activity was clearly evident in credit and capital markets in Inventory accumulation in the early part of the year the resurgence in consumer spending on durable goods and a high level of construction activity combined to produce a heavy demand for commercial bank credit. Reflecting these demands bank loans expanded almost $ billion about the same as the record increase in However Federal Reserve policy made possible only a small expansion in total bank assets and banks financed about $ billion of their loan expansion through sales of United States Government securities. The financial markets were Under considerable pressure in absorbing these security sales since they were also financing the Treasury deficit and meeting substantial demands for funds from mortgage borrowers State and local authorities and corporations ; and interest rates particularly in the short-term and medium-term range advanced sharply The distribution of the increase in bank credit among the major users largely reflected the character of the year 's advance in economic activity ( Table ) The growth in both consumer loans and real estate loans of TABLE Net changes in commercial bank holdings of loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans and investments Loans ( excluding interbank ) and investments ___ i U.S. Government securities Other securities Investments .__ ( ) .___ Business Real estate Security Agricultural All other Loans ( excluding interbank ) Consumer ( ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers ; excludes Alaska and Hawaii and other bank structure changes Total loans are net of and individual loans are gross of valuation reserves s Less than $ million NOTE. Sec Table D-41 for data including interbank loans. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) commercial banks appear to have exceeded the high rates of The expansion of business loans up to the middle of the year was comparable to that of but the liquidation of inventories after midyear reduced this use of bank funds considerably below the amounts extended in Nevertheless the business lending activity of banks was markedly greater than in as most major groups of commercial and industrial businesses employed more bank credit Not only was consumer lending by banks at a record rate but so was the over-all increase in consumer credit outstanding ( Chart ) All major categories of instalment credit other than that extended for the purchase of automobiles rose more than in Contrary to the developments in that earlier year however there appears to have been no appreciable liberalization in of the maximum terms on which instalment credit was made available to consumers Long-term capital markets were subject to divergent influences but on balance experienced larger demands. Corporate security offerings for new money were lower than in by abount $ billion or percent as a result of the sharp increase in corporate retentions of income and the greater reliance on bank borrowing. The latter reflected the predominantly short-term nature of business financing requirements in this period and possibly the high level of long-term interest rates prevailing. However the reduction in corporate offerings was more than offset by the flow of credit into home building. The amount of nonfarm residential mortgage credit in use increased by a record $ billion compared with an increase of $ billion in State and local security issues exceeded those in any previous year as new authorizations of State and local securities continued to build up a large backlog of issues The credit markets were also required to supply funds associated with an increase of $ billion in United States Government debt and to absorb outside of the banking system the $ billion reduction referred to above in bank holdings of United States securities. Most of the new issues of Federal securities were obligations of short- and intermediate-term maturity because the 4J4 percent interest rate limitation effectively precluded flotations of longer-term United States Government securities after the early part of the year. Hence the Federal Government was forced to do much of its needed financing in the same maturity range in which commercial banks were reducing their holdings of Government obligations Investment sources outside the commercial banking system absorbed the new offerings of Federal securities as well as bank sales of short- and intermediate-term Federal obligations but at a substantial increase in rates Nonfinancial corporations expanded their holdings by $ billion ( Table D-49 ) mostly in very short-term securities ; foreign and international accounts savings and loan associations and individuals likewise added to their portfolios These developments in the banking system and in capital markets jointly with the policies pursued by the monetary authorities had significant effects on the financial position of the major lending institutions and of nonfinancial businesses and individuals. The liquidity position of commercial banks as measured by the ratio of their holdings of United States securities to deposits was at about its postwar low and the cash and CHART Consumer Instalment Credit The amount of consumer instalment credit outstanding rose substantially in as extensions increased much more rapidly than repayments BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ) CREDIT EXTENDED JJLL NOTE : SEE APPENDIX TABLES D-44 AND D-45 SOURCE : BOARD OFGOVERNORS OFTHE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM United States Government security holdings of insurance companies mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations declined relative to their respective liabilities For the economy as a whole holdings of liquid assets increased only moderately though there were significant differences among the components of the total. The money supply expanded by about percent. Time deposits of commercial banks advanced by 3/2 percent and mutual savings bank deposits by percent rates of increase that were appreciably lower than in recent years. The volume of outstanding Series E and Series H savings bonds including accrued interest leveled off early in the year and then declined ; however the decline was reversed after a new rate of % percent was announced for these bonds and the total at the end of the year was almost the same as at the beginning. Total savings bonds which include other series not currently being sold decreased by about $ billion during the year though this decline partly reflected advance refunding into marketable securities. Savings and loan share accounts rose by percent about the same as in The decline in the rate of increase in savings-type liquid assets reflected the failure of personal savings to keep pace with disposable income as well as a shift of the flow of savings into less liquid assets. On the other hand the volume of marketable United States Government securities with maturities of less than one year increased by about $ billion or percent contrasted with a small decline in The advance in the cost of borrowing in though less steep than in the second half of continued through most of the year. The 13-week Treasury bill rate rose from percent to more than percent The prime rate of commercial banks was raised in two stages from percent to The average yield on outstanding long-term taxable Government bonds increased from about percent to while that on outstanding corporate Aaa bonds rose from percent to It is estimated that the yield on FHA-insured home mortgages purchased in the secondary market rose from around percent to about A significant development was the considerably more rapid advance in short- and intermediate-term interest rates than in long-term rates. The change in this relationship was such that short- and intermediate-term borrowing on which the Federal Government was compelled to rely because of the percent limitation on its new issues of longer-term securities became considerably more expensive than long-term borrowing The exuberance that characterized the stock market in gave way to a more restrained tone in most of Stock prices advanced about percent and the amount of credit used in stock market transactions varied little during the year ( Chart ) Since dividends increased at about the same rate as stock prices the average yield on common stocks remained at CHART Stock Prices and Yields Stock prices rose more slowly in than in Yields fluc- tuated within a narrow range INDEX = BILLIONS OF DOLLARS COMMON STOCK PRICES ( L E F T SCALE ) ( SEC ) MILLIONS PERCENT PER ANNUM COMMON STOCK YIELDS ( MOODY 'S ) J/ END OF MONTH SEE APPENDIX TABLE FOR EXPLANATION SOURCES : SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE AND MOODV 'S INVESTORS SERVICE about the * percent level that prevailed in the last few months of The margin between the yield on outstanding long-term United States Government securities and the yield on common stocks continued to widen as interest rates in general advanced PRICES The stability of the consumer price index that prevailed from the spring of through the first five months of was followed by an upward movement in the succeeding months. By November the index was percent higher than at the end of the previous year ( Table ) TABLE Changes in consumer price index in Percentage change Relative importance December December May December to to ( percent ) to May November November Item All items Commodities Food Food at home Commodities less food Nondurable commodities Apparel. Footwear Durable commodities Cars new Cars used Durables less cars Appliances Services ._ Rent All services less rent _ Weights do not add to because the miscellaneous category not actually priced but imputed is omitted Includes household appliances radios and television sets. Comparisons are for December to June and June to September Source : Department of Labor Continuing declines in food prices during the early months of the year offset increases in the prices of consumer services and small advances in the prices of nondurable goods other than food. Prices of consumer durable goods changed little in this period. After late spring however food prices fluctuated within a narrow range primarily in response to seasonal and weather factors whereas the prices of nondurable commodities ( exclusive of food ) and of consumer services rose at an increased rate. Accordingly the over-all index began to rise and continued upward almost without interruption through the end of the year though at a slower rate than in the corresponding months of and ( Chart ) The index of wholesale prices changed very little in but divergent trends among its components ( Table and Chart ) are significant for O--60 CHART Consumer rrices umer Pri The rise in the consumer price index was largely due to higher prices of services Food prices fell but other commodity prices rose moderately INDEX * SOURCE. DEPARTMENT OF L A B O R the current movement of consumer goods prices and possibly also for future changes in the cost of living. Declines in wholesale prices of a number of farm products and processed foods brought reductions in retail prices of food during the year. Sizable reductions in pork prices reflected a cyclical expansion in hog production ; and at the year-end beef prices which for most of had been higher than in also showed a moderate decline. A sharp increase in supplies exerted downward pressure on poultry and egg prices during the year. At the same time higher wholesale prices of wool and hides and skins and a pronounced rise in the prices of intermediate wool and leather products were major factors in the percent increase in the retail prices of apparel. In the latter part of the year hide prices declined and a large cotton harvest in combination with somewhat lower price supports helped to moderate the rising trend in prices of textiles and apparel Prices of crude and semifinished materials and other items important in the manufacture of durable goods rose during though there was some diversity in their behavior. Prices of steel mill products which had risen significantly in the second half of remained substantially unchanged in as did wholesale prices of consumer finished durable goods. Prices TABLE Changes in wholesale price index in Percentage change Item December to June All commodities Crude materials for further processing Intermediate materials supplies and components ' _ _ _ Consumer foods Consumer other nondurable goods Consumer durable goods Producer finished goods _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Intermediate materials for food manufacturing Intermediate materials for nondurable manufacturing ( excluding food ) _ _ _ _ _ _ Intermediate materials for durable manufacturing Components for manufacturing Materials and components for construction _ Special group : Steel mill products.-- _ _ l Crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs Crude nonfood materials except fuel for manufacturing Crude fuel _ Finished goods June December to Decem- to Deber cember A Total for this group includes some items not shown separately Source : Department of Labor of semifinished aluminum products were stable over most of this period but price increases were announced at the end of the year. Primary nonferrous metals as a group and the corresponding semimanufactured products advanced in price especially during the final months Materials of importance for construction became somewhat more expensive in By late spring lumber prices were percent higher than a year earlier but they receded in the autumn reflecting a lower rate of home building and seasonal factors in lumber production. Other building materials particularly those used extensively in nonresidential construction displayed mixed price trends The wholesale price index of producer finished goods including electrical metalworking and general purpose machinery and equipment and related capital goods advanced in extending a rise that had begun in Septmber Including the increase the index of these prices has risen almost percent since August Such a development unless offset by commensurate increases in operating efficiency has important consequences for the prices of consumer goods since in due course the costs of capital equipment influence retail prices. Foreign trade of the United States could also be affected adversely by these price advances since machinery accounts for about one-fourth of the country 's total exports The fact that and marked somewhat similar phases in the business cycle suggests a comparison between price developments in these two years. In the consumer price index remained fairly stable but substantial cost increases became noticeable as the year progressed. These CHART Wholesale Prices The index of wholesale prices was stable in Declines in farm product prices offset some increases in industrial prices INDEX * I9X55 INTERMEDIATE MATERIALS ^ ^ FOR DUR ABLE MANUFACT URIN6 NDURABLE MANU FACTORING FOR NO ~ \ iwmr ^ ^ mj JJU-I m'mtmm * " i * * -g / ' ^ ' * FINISHED GOODS PRODUCER GOODS ^ * * _-> " f CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS ^ * ^ / CONSUMER NONDURABLE G ( DODS EXCLUDING FOOD MI i ii i i iti i i iii i i1 i i i ii SOURCE * DEPARTMENT OF LABOR i i i i i i i i i i n i i i i i i ii made themselves felt to an extent through price rises at wholesale of such items as building materials steel nonferrous metals and natural rubber and foreshadowed the consumer price rise that began after the spring of In events followed a somewhat different course. Wholesale prices of intermediate materials for durable goods manufacturing advanced as a group but at a much slower rate than in especially after midyear. The corresponding group of materials for nondurable goods manufacturing ( food excluded ) showed somewhat larger wholesale price increases last year than in ; but significantly most of the increase in occurred after June while in the index increased scarcely at all over the second half of the year as several important materials declined from earlier levels. On balance rising costs of materials last year exerted less upward pressure on the prices of finished manufactured goods than they did in even if the influence of foods is excluded. This is reflected in the fact that the wholesale price index for industrial products rose only about percent in compared with more than percent in The contrasting behavior of consumer prices in these two periods is largely explained by the more rapid rise last year in the prices of consumer services and by the fact that prices of consumer durable goods declined in but were for the most part unchanged in AGRICULTURE Agricultural output in including a very large harvest of corn and a continued rise in the production of livestock equaled the high volume and was percent above the average output of Although per capita food consumption rose to near-record levels the full volume of this output could not be absorbed by total domestic and export demands at prevailing prices some of which are supported under provisions of law and carryover stocks of several price-supported crops continued to increase. An especially large increase in carryover stocks of corn is in prospect from the harvest. On the other hand wheat may account for only a small addition to stocks and an increase in the carryover of cotton may be avoided in the new marketing year This imbalance between production and commercial demand was also reflected in the lower prices received by farmers in compared with Most of the reduction was in prices of livestock and livestock products ; crop prices averaged nearly as high as in Declines in prices of hogs poultry and eggs were especially sharp. However a substantial part of the decrease in livestock prices during was directly traceable to a cyclical increase in the production of beef cattle and hogs which had been in short supply in and for which prices had been unusually high Among crops price reductions in were largely confined to wheat and fruit and oil-bearing crops In the realized net income of farm operators from farming fell back from $ billion in to the level of $ billion ( Chart ) CHART Indicators of Agricultural Conditions Net farm income declined in to its level Farm pro- prietors ' equities continued to rise BILLIONS OF DOLLARS REALIZED GROSS FARM INCOME- ! / s S TOTAL NET FARM INCOME- ^ ^ REALIZED NET FARM INCOME-1/ NET INCOME FROM NONFARM SOURCES-2/ I I I I I I I N D E X = PRICES PAID INTEREST TAXES AND WAGE RATES / ( PARITY INDEX ) ^ * * * PRICES RECEIVED ( ALL FARM PRODUCTS ) J_ I I I I BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FARM PROPRIETORS ' EQUITIES ( JANUARY I ) -/ INCOME OF FARM OPERATORS INCLUDING GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS ^ INCOME OF ALL FARM PEOPLE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE The fall was due in part to the decline in farm prices and an accompanying rise in average production costs. Another cause however was that income in had been lifted well above the amounts recorded in the immediately preceding years by certain factors that could not be expected to recur. Among these were the delayed marketings of crops from the previous year 's harvest ; the record crop of wheat sold at a supported price ; payments to farmers for participation in the acreage reserve which has since been discontinued ; and a cyclically strong demand for beef cattle sheep and hogs The realized net income of farm operators in was not greatly different however than that in the years immediately prior to especially if allowance is made for the reduction in the number of farms. In fact realized net income per farm in was approximately equal to the average for the period since the end of the Korean conflict exclusive of Income earned by the farm population from nonfarm sources on the other hand continued to increase in to an estimated $ billion thus probably amounting to more than half of the net income derived from farming itself Farm land values which had been rising for five years continued to do so in the first quarter of The rise was practically halted however toward the end of the year. Farmers ' indebtedness increased but by a smaller amount than assets so that by the end of farmers ' equities were percent larger than at the beginning of the year and percent greater than in INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS In as in United States payments in international transactions exceeded receipts by a wide margin ( Chart ) Exports seasonally adjusted fell to a low level in the first quarter of the year but then began to strengthen and in the third quarter rose vigorously. Though this expansion was interrupted later in the year by the steel shortage the value of exports in the months through November was about the same as in the corresponding period of Imports which were little affected by the recession staged an exceptionally rapid increase until mid-1959 and on a seasonally adjusted basis remained steady thereafter at a level much higher than in previous years These developments in trade were superimposed upon a heavy outflow of capital and military expenditures though both of these flows especially that of private capital funds were smaller in than in The transfer of gold and liquid dollar assets resulting from the gap between aggregate payments and receipts reached an annual rate of $ billion in the second quarter of This rate slackened a little in the third quarter and there was further improvement in later months reflecting in part a $ million advance repayment by the United Kingdom to the Export-Import Bank CHART U.S. Balance of Payments The balance of payments deficit remained large in though exports strengthened after the first quarter BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * i,,,r ^ * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES. * * INCLUDES UNIDENTIFIED RECEIPTS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Among the underlying factors that have contributed to the change in the trade and payments position of the United States since the early postwar years have been the steady recovery and growth in the productive capacity of other countries including the re-establishment of old comparative advantages and the introduction of new technologies. On the side of demand the pressures on domestic resources which persisted in many countries long after the war have generally subsided. In some cases new international cost and price disparities may now have developed to the advantage of these other countries and the depressed level of ocean freight rates since has facilitated the marketing in the United States of certain foreign products Much of the change in trade may be attributable however to intensified production and export efforts by other countries on the basis of previously existing cost differences These influences have not operated exclusively in one direction A detailed examination by the Department of Commerce of recent changes in the shares of the United States in different export markets for manufactured goods reveals a considerable diversity of trends with many gains as well as losses. Moreover the serious contractions have been concentrated in a few items. Among these automobiles and steel stand out as they do in the rise in imports A review of recent developments in the foreign trade of the United States must also take account of the effect of business fluctuations at home and abroad and of the special circumstances affecting trade in particular products that figure prominently in this country 's exports or imports. Thus the decline of exports after mid-195 was associated with a general weakening of foreign import demands aggravated by the reversal of special forces which had contributed ( notably in the cases of petroleum coal cotton and wheat ) to the earlier upswing. Similarly the strengthening of exports during reflects the renewal of economic expansion abroad. The progress of expansion in countries that are the principal customers for exports from the United States accordingly deserves attention Change in the World Market Situation Economic conditions in virtually all industrially developed countries improved in In Canada as in the United States production had begun to recover in ; after some hesitation in the summer of it rose again in the autumn. Production in Japan had also rebounded sharply in and continued an extraordinarily rapid rate of expansion In Western Europe the check to production at the end of though enough to produce marked effects on inventory and import demands in did not result in any widespread downturn and a new rise in output got under way early in The difference of about nine months between North America and Western Europe in the inception of the expansion was of some significance for the development of trade and payments on both sides By the second half of most of the more developed countries were reporting impressive increases in economic activity compared with a year earlier ( Chart ) This strengthening extended to most industries although coal mining remained a major exception with adverse effects on United States coal sales in Europe. In most countries business fixed investment seems to have played a small role compared with other demands in starting the upturn and the market for capital equipment was generally weak at the beginning of the year. It strengthened however in most industrial countries as the expansion gained force and in some of them notably Germany and Japan new orders in the capital goods industries increased markedly in the course of the year The renewed expansion in industrial countries abroad was initiated in part by an increase in demand for their exports. It is noteworthy however that these increases were at first almost exclusively in sales to the United States and Canada which rose strongly after mid-1958. Elsewhere these other industrial countries faced much the same market conditions as those confronting the United States. The trade among Western European countries at the beginning of was scarcely higher than a year earlier but in March it began to rise significantly. Their exports to the nonindustrial countries in the first quarter were percent below shipments in the first quarter of ; and in the second quarter they were still no higher than a year earlier The weakness of demand in the nonindustrial countries at the beginning of reflected their generally strained foreign exchange position resulting from the slowness with which their imports had adjusted downward to the progressive fall in their export prices after mid-1957. In some cases excess capacity contributed to the weakness in these prices. By the first quarter of the general level of prices in world trade for primary commodities was percent lower than at the beginning of and percent lower than at the beginning of ( Table D-76 ) In Latin America a market that is relatively much mor.e important to the United States than to Europe or Japan the fall in export prices ( exclusive of petroleum ) over the twoyear period was about percent. The volume of exports from the nonindustrial countries had however begun to improve and in some of them began to enjoy better export prices and sufficient earnings to permit both some replenishment of their foreign exchange reserves and some increase in their imports. Sterling area countries were helped especially by the improved markets for wool and rubber. Export gains by other primary producers notably the Latin American countries were more moderate or were delayed and some of these countries continued to experience foreign exchange difficulties The improvement in the world market situation during is shown by the summary import figures in Table In the first quarter imports of industrial countries other than the United States and Canada were little higher and in sonic cases lower than in and those of the nonindustrial * CHART Foreign Industrial Production The pace of production abroad which had slowed after mid-1957 increased rapidly in INDEX = ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ) WESTERN EUROPE CAN ADA AND JAPAN ~ IOO I I I i I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i i i \ I I SOURCES : ORGANIZATION FOR EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS TABLE World imports [ Billions of dollars ] Country or area First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Seasonally adjusted annual rates World imports ( c.i.f. ) ! United States ._ All other countries __ Nonindustrial countries Continental OE EC countries. _. ___ United Kingdom Canada. _ _ _ Japan Other industrial countries Unadjusted annual rates Nonindustrial countries Sterling area excluding United Kingdom _ Latin America _ All other } Excludes Soviet Area and Communist China The world total and the total for the nonindustrial countries in the third quarter of are provisional Figures for the United States include an adjustment by the International Monetary Fund to a c.i.f ( cost insurance freight ) basis for purpose of comparability with other countries ' data Sources : International Monetary Fund Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers countries were sharply reduced. In the second quarter imports of the industrial countries and of some of the nonindustrial countries strengthened appreciably and the improvement continued in the third quarter United States Foreign Trade and Payments In the early months of United States exports continued to reflect the consequences of the relatively low world demand and certain other unfavorable influences. Goal exports despite the price advantage favoring the United States met increasing obstacles because of the oversupply of coal in Europe ; cotton shipments were held down in prospect of a change in the United States export price at the start of the new crop season ; and exports to many of the primary producing countries especially in Latin America remained weak In the second quarter and still more in the third these influences were offset by the resurgence of economic expansion in the more developed countries. United States exports responded well to the upturn in inventory investment and in expenditures on machinery and equipment in these countries ( Table ) Agricultural exports other than cotton also strengthened in the course of the year and by the fourth quarter cotton exports were beginning to show the anticipated large increase over the previous year TABLE United States exports July to October and JulyOctober Item JulyOctober Percentage change Millions of dollars Total exports excluding " special category " Cotton unmanufactured Coal petroleum and related products Exports excluding above items to Latin America __ Geographic distribution : Canada Western Europe Japan Other countries excluding Latin America Commodity distribution : Agricultural products Machinery Transportation equipment All other including reexports A l l other exports _ ___ ____ Total and area data include reexports ; commodity data exclude reexports NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce On the other hand a decrease in exports of machinery and vehicles in November appeared to be attributable to shortages of steel arising from the work stoppage in that industry United States merchandise imports rose in little more than a year by about percent from their recession low in the first quarter of The principal elements in this expansion were the strengthening of demand for industrial materials as domestic economic activity began to increase ; the continued rise in purchases of foreign automobiles and other consumer manufactures ; and special demand situations relating to meat steel and building materials. With the easing of some of these demands total imports seasonally adjusted did not increase further after midyear Changes in service transactions in were of much less consequence than those in trade. Among United States expenditures abroad military disbursements were somewhat lower in the first three quarters of the year than in the same period of and travel outlays somewhat higher Among receipts income from direct investments abroad while lower than in tended to strengthen in the course of the year Influenced by the rise in interest rates in this country the outflow of capital in the first three quarters of remained considerably below the high rate of the preceding year thereby offsetting part of the adverse shift in the goods and services balance. The net outflow of capital was exceptionally low in the first quarter but rose in the second and remained steady in the third. With imports of goods and services also remaining unchanged and exports rising from the second to the third quarter the excess of payments on recorded transactions declined. Net transfers of gold and liquid dollar assets to other countries did not diminish correspondingly in the third quarter. This disparity is thought to be due to lags in crediting payments to foreign accounts with the result of understating the gold and dollar outflow in the second quarter and of overstating it in the third Incomplete data for the fourth quarter indicate a decline in the rate of gold and dollar transfers partly attributable to large advance payments of foreign obligations to the United States OUTLOOK Although it is always difficult in a dynamic free economy such as ours to depict in advance the course likely to be taken by production employment and income present indications warrant the expectation that the expansion now in progress will be extended through And there are good grounds for belief that with appropriate public policies and private actions the expansion can continue well beyond the present year Prospective Expansion of Demands Past developments and present conditions clearly suggest that the demands of business concerns for capital goods and for inventories will be especially important factors in the year ahead. Expenditures on capital goods have been rising for more than a year and should continue upward in In part and especially during the early months the increase will represent a catching-up on projects delayed or postponed because of shortages attributable to the steel strike. Chiefly however capital investment should rise in response to favorable underlying factors now discernible and likely to strengthen as the year progresses. Surveys of businessmen 's intentions and the increased volume of contract awards and of new orders for industrial machinery confirm this outlook. A good demand from the farm economy for machinery and equipment may also be anticipated Expenditures for residential construction a second major category of capital investment are not likely to be as high as in However the extent of the decline should be limited and activity in this sector of the economy should exceed that of most recent years. Outlays for modernization and alterations should be a steady expansive force in the building industry Within the aggregate of government outlays Federal expenditures for goods and services should change little in the first half of the year ; but later in line with provisions in the fiscal budget for the development of water resources and other public works and for space and aviation programs they should increase moderately. The upward trend of expenditures at the State and local level which reflects particularly the provision of services needed by the growing urban population may be expected to continue though possibly at a slower rate. The construction of schools public service enterprises and community facilities in general is expected to advance moderately and to outweigh declines in activity that occur under the Federal-aid highway program as a result of the mandatory reduction in apportionments under the present law Changes in investment in business inventories are likely to be less regular during the year than the changes in final demands. Restocking needs are clearly apparent not only for steel but also for many steel-using intermediate and finished products ; and further additions to inventories will be required throughout the economy as production and final sales increase Inventory expenditures and the other outlays noted above should contribute to a strong expansion in production employment and income The increase in employment should exceed that of the labor force and correspondingly unemployment may be expected to fall. Within this context consumer incomes and expenditures may be expected to increase substantially during the year. Also consumer confidence is favorable to an increasing volume of purchases of consumer durable goods The financing of the investment needs outined here together with a significant volume of consumer credit will make strong demands upon the Nation 's capital and credit markets. At high levels of income and savings a greater supply of investment funds may be expected. The sizable Federal budget surplus projected for the fiscal year would be helpful in relieving pressure on the supply of funds Balance of Payments Prospects A moderate improvement in the United States balance of international payments seems to be ahead in Imports of capital equipment and consumer manufactures may on balance continue their upward trend And as industrial production continues to rise imports of industrial materials may grow though presumably more slowly than in the recovery phase following the recession. On the other hand the particular supply and demand situations noted earlier in this chapter which have been responsible for the rapid rise of certain imports are shifting ; these imports are now expected to increase less rapidly and some of them may even decline. The growth of total imports therefore may well be considerably smaller in than the rise in the period from early to mid1959 Exports should gain from the strong expansion of production and investment that is proceeding in the industrial countries abroad. This expansion should benefit United States sales indirectly also as the primary producing countries find their purchasing power raised by their higher exports to the industrial countries. Moreover certain major exports that declined in as discussed above may cease to decline in or may increase On this appraisal exports in should rise appreciably more than imports. Also receipts from services are expected to rise faster than payments for services and military expenditures abroad. Net exports of goods and services as registered in our national income accounts should show a positive balance. On the other hand new United States invest- ment abroad may increase especially if interest rates in other countries continue to rise. Therefore the over-all payments deficit may still be relatively large in To assist in attaining a needed adjustment of the balance of payments consistent with our goal of promoting multilateral world trade a strengthening of exports continues to be essential. The level of exports will depend on such fundamental conditions as the rate and regularity of expansion of activity abroad the progress of other countries toward more liberal trade policies and our own efforts to strengthen the competitive position of United States products in foreign markets Conditions for Sound Advance Our success in realizing the opportunities that presents and for extending economic growth at a high and stable rate into the future will depend upon the actions of business management labor leaders and consumers as well as on the policies of Government toward maintaining the balance in our economy that is required for sustainable growth. A Federal program for that is designed to help achieve our national economic objectives is offered in Chapter together with suggestions for appropriate private action Chapter Economic Policies in HE PRIMARY OBJECTIVES of the Administration 's economic policies in were first to extend the economy 's expansion already well advanced when the year began ; second to counter the development of imbalances that might jeopardize a sound expansion ; third to restrain potential inflationary pressures ; and fourth to improve the economic basis for the Nation 's international policies The present chapter describes briefly how the Federal Government 's fiscal and monetary policies were administered during the year to help achieve these objectives. It also summarizes the steps taken directly to strengthen the Nation 's balance of international payments and to achieve program objectives in two areas in which the Federal Government 's role is especially important housing and highway construction. Activities conducted under other continuing programs that have a significant bearing on economic growth and well-being including measures taken in agriculture are dealt with in Chapter T FEDERAL FISCAL POLICIES As the year began a budget deficit of substantial size was indicated for the fiscal year ending June Although it proved to be $ million smaller than was estimated in January it amounted to $ billion more than four times the deficit in the fiscal year ( Chart ) The two factors jointly responsible for this budgetary outcome were a sharp decrease in Federal revenues below what might have been obtained if there had not been an economic recession in and a sizable increase in Federal expenditures. Although tax receipts in fiscal fell substantially below first estimates they were only slightly under those of the fiscal year A decrease of nearly $ billion in corporate income tax receipts was offset in part by a rise of $ billion in receipts from individual income taxes. The former reflected the impact of recession on corporate earnings in the calendar year ; the latter reflected the steady rise in personal incomes which by mid-1959 were significantly higher than they had been a year earlier On the expenditure side all major categories except interest payments on the public debt rose in fiscal ( Table ) Part of the increase can be attributed directly to actions taken to help counteract economic recession O CHART Surplus or Deficit of the Federal Government A balanced budget is estimated for fiscal year I960 and a sizable surplus for fiscal year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CONSOLIDATED CASH STATEMENT NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS SURPLUS I FISCAL YEARS SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT BUREAU OF THE BUDGET AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Expenditures in this category involved mainly advances to the States for the temporary extension of unemployment compensation payments purchases of mortgages by the Federal National Mortgage Association and the acceleration of construction of water projects and other public works. Yet these increases were not large in relation to the total rise in spending. The major items were a rise of $ billion for national security programs ; an increase of $ billion for agricultural programs ; an additional subscription of $ billion to the International Monetary Fund ; and substantial amounts for higher pay for Government personnel ( both civilian and military ) increased public assistance grants larger expenditures for health increased grants to local governments for the support of education in federally affected areas and an increased Post Office deficit TABLE Federal budget expenditures [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Function Total budget expenditures ___ ( estimated ) ( estimated ) Major national security International affairs and finance Commerce and housing __ Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Labor and welfare _ Veterans services and benefits Interest General government Allowance for contingencies NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Br.dget In addition to these expenditures all encompassed within the conventional administrative budget payments from the old-age and survivors trust fund and from the highway trust fund which are reflected in the consolidated cash accounts were substantially higher in fiscal than in the previous fiscal year. An excess of payments over receipts in each of these two funds and in the unemployment trust fund accounted for the fact that in the fiscal year in contrast to most previous years of deficit the excess of the Federal Government 's payments over its receipts in the consolidated cash accounts was larger than the deficit in the conventional administrative budget Largely owing to seasonal factors by far the greater part of the budget deficit in fiscal occurred in the six months ended December $ billion contrasted with $ billion in the next six months ended June Similarly in the consolidated cash accounts $ billion of the total excess of payments over receipts occurred in the six months ended December and only $ million in the next six months. This substantial lessening of the deficit between the first and second halves of the fiscal year reflected in addition to seasonal factors a significant rise in revenues attributable to economic recovery The changes in the deficit between the first and second halves of the fiscal year and their relationship to economic developments become clearer when stated in terms of the national income accounts which reflect the accrual of tax liabilities as they are incurred and also give expression to certain other circumstances affecting the budget. In these terms the peak of the deficit ( $ billion seasonally adjusted ) was in the April-June quarter of although the impact upon the administrative budget and the consolidated cash accounts was felt principally in the fiscal year In the April-June quarter of the budget again in national accounts terms was already showing a small surplus With a continuing economic advance in prospect the Administration 's fiscal policy as set forth in the January Budget was designed to achieve a balance of revenues and expenditures to forestall inflationary pressures to promote a sustainable rate of expansion and to help restrain the rapidly rising pressures of demand in capital and credit markets. It contemplated expenditures and receipts balanced at $ billion Actual expenditures during the first half of fiscal exceeded the rate projected in the January Budget partly as a result of increases that had not been anticipated in expenditure programs not directly subject to administrative control partly because of the continuing uncorrected deficit of the Post Office Department and partly because appropriations enacted for certain Federal programs were higher than requested. On the other hand despite the adverse effect of the prolonged steel strike on Federal corporate and individual income tax collections the rapid recovery and expansion of the economy now suggest that revenues will be higher than estimated in January ; accordingly a budget surplus of $ million is anticipated FEDERAL DEBT MANAGEMENT The Federal Government 's indebtedness rose in the calendar year by $ billion almost entirely : ) as a result of the budget deficit. To this financing requirement was added the refinancing of $ billion of maturing marketable issues ( exclusive of $ billion of weekly bills ) which was accomplished by refunding $ billion and paying off $ billion These latter payments plus the net redemptions during the year of savings bonds and other nonmarketable debt added further to the Treasury 's cash financing needs As far as possible the Administration sought to conduct these large financing operations without contributing to inflationary pressures and on as economical a basis as conditions permitted. Whenever feasible it sought to lengthen the maturity structure of the debt. Two issues of securities with long-term maturities $ million of a percent bond of issued at and $ million of a percent bond of were marketed during the first part of the year. Before midyear however the general rise in interest rates stemming from increasing private and public demands for capital and credit maole United States Government securities with maturities of more than years no longer competitive within the range allowed by the statutory maximum rate of * percent. In recognition of this situation the Congress was requested on June to remove the ! /4 percent interest rate limitation on new issues of Federal securities with maturities of over years Since no action was taken on this request Treasury financing for the remainder of the year became limited to the issuance of securities with maturities of years or less. This contributed to the decline in the average maturity of the public debt from years and months at the end of June to years and months at the end of December. Partly because demands for short-term credit in this period were particularly large in the private sector of the economy the additional pressures on short-term credit markets incident to Treasury financing caused interest rates on short- and intermediate-term Government securities and on private borrowings as well to rise considerably more than rates on long-term issues. Indeed during much of the year rates on Federal securities with maturities of less than years except on the very shortest-term issues actually exceeded rates on long-term securities. Thus the statutory limitation on interest rates on longer-term United States securities made Treasury financing more costly in its immediate effect and possibly also in its longer-term effect than it might otherwise have been Still more serious the interest rate limitation impaired the ability of the Federal Government to manage its debt with a minimum potential inflationary impact. Excessive reliance on short-term Government securities is an undesirable financing practice since such securities are in some respects the equivalent of money and like additions to the money supply help stimulate expenditures. Moreover the frequent refunding entailed by a large volume of short-term debt may complicate in the future the pursuit of the monetary policy most appropriate to the economy 's needs The adverse effects of this constraint on longer-term financing were minimized during the year by a more orderly spacing of short-term issues and by the issuance insofar as feasible of securities with maturities close to years. An exchange offering in July at % percent of marketable Treasury notes with maturity of almost years totaled $ billion ; and a cash offering in October of percent notes of similar maturity amounted to $ billion. The October offering attracted a much broader range of individual savers than usual. Subscriptions included $ million from subscribers largely individuals who submitted paid-up subscriptions for $ or less. Another intermediate-term issue a % percent 4-year note was offered as part of a refunding operation in November and issues of these notes to holders of two maturing securities totaled $ billion. The % percent notes issued in July were reopened in November for holders of Series F and G savings bonds maturing in and close to $ million was added to the issue in this way. Thus between July and November more than $ billion of new Treasury issues were placed in the year area These intermediate-term issues however did not eliminate the need for the longer-term funding of a significant part of the Federal debt Adjustments were also made during the year in the United States Savings Bond program. Sales of Series E and H bonds some $ billion of which are held by individuals were adversely affected as the interest rates paid on other forms of savings increased steadily making the 3J4 percent interest rate on these securities increasingly less attractive. As indicated above the net drain on Treasury cash on the part of savings bonds of all series added to the already large financing requirements of the Federal Government Accordingly a recommendation was made to the Congress that the percent interest limitation on savings bonds be removed to permit the Treasury to restore the attractiveness of these securities relative to other savings media. In September legislation was enacted to increase the maximum limit on the interest rate on savings bonds to % percent and the rate on new Series E and H savings bonds was promptly raised to % percent effective June The return on outstanding Series E and H bonds purchased before June was also increased by approximately l/z percent over their remaining life if held to maturity. November and December were the first months in in which sales of new Series E and H savings bonds exceeded those in the corresponding months a year earlier ; and by the year-end the amount outstanding had recovered to the level of the end of MONETARY AND CREDIT POLICY Monetary policy in was designed to influence the availability of funds and the liquidity of the economy in ways that would help foster the steady growth of production and employment and prevent the development of potential inflationary forces. In seeking to achieve these results Federal Reserve authorities increased the degree of the restraint that they had been exercising on credit markets since August when recovery from recession called for a gradual change in policy In pursuance of a policy of greater restraint Federal Reserve Banks in March May and September raised the discount rate charged by them to member banks from 2/2 to percent paralleling the rise in the interest rate on 3-month Treasury bills ( Chart ) Open market operations in United States Government securities were a major policy tool used to influence member bank reserves. With Federal Reserve operations in the Government securities market withdrawing somewhat more reserve funds than usual on balance over the first half of the year and with the demand for bank credit expanding commercial banks were under pressure to enlarge their borrowings at Federal Reserve Banks ( Chart ) These borrowings increased from a range of $ million to around $ billion about mid-year and they remained near the higher level during the rest of CHART Interest Rates and Bond Yields Short-term interest rates rose sharply in PERCENT PER ANNUM ' and long-term rates increased during much of the year PERCENT PER ANNUM r SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE CHART Member Bank Reserves Federal Reserve purchases of U.S. securities helped offset effects on reserves of increased currency and gold outflow in BILLIONS OF DOLLARS f CURRENCY IN CIRCULATION U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES HELD BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS MEMBER BANK RESERVE BALANCES _L ^ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I t I I I I I I I ! Borrowings at Federal Reserve Banks surpassed excess reserves of member banks by late and the gap widened thereafter BILLIONS OF DOLLARS f ( ENLARGED SCALE ) MEMBER BANKS _ _ BORROWINGS FROM / " " * FEDERAL RESERVE B A N K S / / ' ^ " ^ % * ^ ' FREE RESERVES ( EXCESS RESERVES LESS BORROWINGS ) L_L t AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES * INCLUDES VAULT CASH ALLOWED SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM the year. Over the year as a whole total member bank reserves available for monetary and credit expansion changed only slightly. Reserves supplied by open market purchases of United States Government securities when added to those supplied through the increased borrowings and other factors sufficed to offset a drain on bank reserves resulting from changes in the gold stock and in the amount of currency in circulation Some additional funds for seasonal monetary and credit needs were released in early December when the Federal Reserve took its first step in exercising the authority provided by Public Law to include vault cash in meeting required reserves. Country banks with vault cash holdings greater than percent of demand deposits were allowed to count the excess to meet their required reserves while central reserve city and reserve city banks were permitted to count any excess greater than percent. However this move released only $ million of vault cash out of an average of $ billion held by member banks Reflecting all developments influencing the availability of reserve funds the money supply ( demand deposits and currency ) grew by about percent in compared with percent during Additions to time deposits of commercial banks also were smaller ; they amounted to about percent compared with an increase of percent in At the same time the amount of marketable U.S. Government securities with maturities of less than one year increased by about $ billion Regulations T and U were amended by the Federal Reserve authorities as of June to make margin requirements more effective as a restraint on the use of credit in stock market transactions. No change was made in the percent margin requirement FEDERAL HOUSING AND HOME FINANCING Increasing demands for capital and credit in led to more intensive competition for funds in the markets from which much of the financing of home construction and purchase is normally drawn. As construction financing and commitments for mortgage funds became less readily available in an increasing number of housing market areas and as borrowing costs rose numerous adjustments were required in Federal housing and home financing programs. These actions were taken to facilitate the flow of private funds into home financing and thereby to help sustain an adequate level of home building and to avoid unnecessary demands for Federal financial assistance First adjustments became necessary in the maximum interest rate that private lending institutions are permitted to charge on Government-insured or guaranteed home mortgage and project loans. In the absence of such adjustments the availability of private funds for families wishing to purchase homes with federally insured or guaranteed mortgages and for the construction of apartment projects under such financing would have decreased rapidly. In March the Federal Housing Administration raised to 4/2 percent the maximum permissible interest rates on armed service project mortgages. In September the maximum permissible interest rate on FHAinsured home loans was raised to % percent. Pursuant to the authority granted by a legislative act the Veterans Administration in July increased to } percent the ceiling rate chargeable on its guaranteed and insured home loans and charged by it on direct home loans. Also following approval of the Housing Act of on September interest rate ceilings were raised on FHA-insured loans on rental and cooperative projects ; the maximum size of home loans eligible for insurance by the Federal Housing Administration was increased ; and the limits were raised on the size of mortgages that could be insured for rental housing projects. Other adjustments permitted by the new legislation were put into effect where needed to take account of changes in construction cost and design that had taken place in earlier years. The Farmers Home Administration raised the interest rate on direct home loans to farmers from ^ to percent in September ; a similar increase had been made in December on certain types of insured home loans Second changes were required in Federal programs that supplement and support private sources of credit and capital for home construction and purchase. The Federal National Mortgage Association made several reductions in its schedule of mortgage purchase prices under special assistance programs. In the Association 's secondary market operations prices on FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed percent loans were reduced in a series of five changes and corresponding reductions were made in the prices of mortgages bearing other interest rates. The several Federal Home Loan Banks advanced interest rates on loans to member associations to bring the cost of these borrowings into closer alignment with conditions in the capital markets Despite these changes total demands for assistance under Federal programs that supply funds directly to the home mortgage market increased rapidly during the year as progressively higher yields on long-term nonmortgage investments tended increasingly to attract investment funds that might otherwise have been available for the purchase of home mortgages In the Federal National Mortgage Association purchased $ million of mortgages under its secondary market operations program and $ million under its special assistance programs ; purchases in had totaled $ million under all programs. The advances of the Federal Home Loan Banks to their member institutions most of which are savings and loan associations increased by approximately $ million over the year a rise of nearly percent ; the increase in these advances had been only $ million or percent. The Veterans Administration made $ million of loans to veterans for the purchase of homes in areas eligible for such assistance under its direct lending program. And the Farmers Home Administration extended credits of $ million for the purchase or improvement of farm homes ( Table ) TABLE Residential mortgage holdings of selected Federal programs [ Millions of dollars ] Federal National Mortgage Association Farmers Home Administration Secondary market activities Special assistance functions Veterans Administration direct home loans : December : March. June September December End of period Direct loans Secondary market activities Sources : Federal National Mortgage Association Veterans Administration and Farmers Home A dministration These direct financial supports of home financing themselves involved demands on the capital markets. To obtain additional funds the Federal National Mortgage Association increased its debentures to the public by $ million during the year. It also increased by $ billion its use of funds furnished by the Treasury. In other home loan operations the Veterans Administration used $ million and the Farmers Home Administration $ million of Federal funds. The expanded advances of the Federal Home Loan Banks necessitated an increase of more than $ billion in their capital market borrowings FEDERAL AID FOR HIGHWAYS Progress continued during the past year in carrying forward the interstate highway program initiated in By the end of some miles of this ' nation-wide system of highways had been completed and some miles of additional roads were under contract for construction The cost of this construction is financed predominantly by the Federal Government out of taxes on highway fuels and certain other excise taxes paid by highway users. To the end of total construction expenditures on the program amounted to $ billion of which some $ billion was financed by grants to the States from the highway trust fund. During this period the Federal Government also made grants to the States of $ billion for primary and secondary highways and roads under a Federal assistance program that extends back for many years ( Table ) Under legislation enacted in apportionments of grant-in-aid funds to the States for highway construction under Federal-aid programs were sharply increased to combat the recession. As a result the highway trust fund in the absence of additional revenues faced prospective deficits beginning in the fiscal year Moreover the likelihood that such deficits would arise made it necessary under the mandatory terms of the basic legislation to discontinue apportionments to the States on behalf of the interstate program until a prospective balance of revenues and disbursements in the trust fund could be foreseen TABLE Obligations and payments on Federal-aid highway programs [ Millions of dollars ] New obligations for Jhighway construction Period Total : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Total Interstate Other program programs : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.. Interstate Other program programs Federal payments to States __ Includes Federal and State matching funds Includes primary secondary and urban extension highways Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) In order to avoid the costly cutback in highway planning and construction that a cessation of apportionments would entail and to assure continuance of the interstate program on a self-sustaining basis and on the scale originally scheduled the Administration requested an increase of 15/2 cents per gallon for a period of five years starting July in the excise tax levied on highway fuels. The Congress chose to raise the tax by only one cent per gallon starting October and continuing until July and during the subsequent three years to transfer from general revenues to the trust fund part of the revenue from the excise taxes on automobiles automobile parts and accessories. However these revenues are less than are needed to maintain apportionments at the level provided for in the legislation. Accordingly while the legislation authorized apportionments of $ billion the amount apportioned to the States in October covering the fiscal year was necessarily limited to $ billion FOREIGN ECONOMIC POLICY The Administration continued in to provide substantial assistance for the economic development of less developed areas as well as military and economic assistance to countries of the free world. The importance of these programs and their need for adequate budgetary support was emphasized in a special message of the President transmitted to the Congress on March During the year the United States increased its participation in existing international financial institutions and encouraged the setting up of certain new institutions designed to promote the flow of capital to underdeveloped countries. The United States also continued its traditional efforts to reduce impediments to international trade The economic potential and the security of the free world and the future growth of the less developed countries depend in large measure upon the economic strength of the United States in both its domestic and its international aspects. With a view to safeguarding that strength action was taken in to improve the United States balance of payments in which a sizable deficit was anticipated for the year. The payments deficit underlined the importance of the firm fiscal and monetary policies being pursued to restrain domestic inflationary pressures and to assure stable economic growth. These policies served to maintain confidence in the dollar throughout the world. They also helped to lessen the danger that through inflation the competitive strength of United States trade in foreign markets might be weakened Throughout the United States emphasized that the strong economic position attained by the other industrial countries justified moves on their part to liberalize commercial policies and to expand foreign investment. A great rise had occurred in their gold and exchange reserves their balance of payments positions had become strong and major progress had been made toward currency convertibility. Thus at the Fifteenth Session of the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariff 's and Trade it was agreed that discriminatory import restrictions based on financial reasons largely affecting the United States should quickly be eliminated Moreover the rise in reserves of most industrial countries provides the basis for reducing quantitative import restrictions generally. The United States pressed this view at other international meetings also as well as directly with the governments concerned. By the end of the year many countries had taken action to reduce discriminatory restrictions against imports from and travel to the United States. A number of these countries indicated their intention to take further action in the near future. The United States also asked the industrially advanced nations to increase their assistance to less developed countries. The economic progress of these industrial countries was clear evidence of their capacity to provide increased aid A specific step to improve the balance of payments was taken with the announcement that the Development Loan Fund ( DLF ) henceforth would place primary emphasis in its lending to the less developed countries on the financing of goods and services which these countries require from the United States. This decision was taken in the knowledge that other industrial countries are now capable of financing their exports of capital goods to these countries on a long-term basis. Also steps were taken to transfer from the International Cooperation Administration ( 1CA ) to the DLF to the greatest extent possible assistance which ICA affords in the form of aid to specific development projects. Projects so transferred are subject to the new DLF financing procedures. There is reason to expect that these measures in addition to strengthening the United States balance of payments will bring about an increased volume of foreign lending by other industrial countries Several steps were taken during the year to augment the flow of capital from the United States and other nations to the less developed countries and to strengthen international financial agencies. On June the President signed legislation authorizing an increase in the subscriptions of the United States to the International Monetary Fund and to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The added subscriptions amounted to $ million to the Fund and $ million to the Bank A second step to expand the flow of capital was taken when the United States joined with the Latin American countries in the establishment of the Inter-American Development Bank. It is contemplated that the Bank will have an ordinary capital of $ million in addition to a separate fund of $ million for special operations. The United States contribution will amount to $ million A third move was the decision taken by the Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on the initiative of the United States to proceed with the formulation of plans for an International Development Association ( IDA ) This institution would have resources of about $ billion including a prospective United States contribution of somewhat more than $ million payable over approximately five years It would be closely affiliated with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and would give greater flexibility to the operations of that institution. It would also facilitate the use for development purposes of the local currencies of certain member countries provided to IDA out of holdings by other members. Such use would be with the consent of the countries whose currencies were involved The economic aid extended in various forms by the United States to other countries almost entirely to less developed countries totaled about $ billion in the year ended September Disbursements under the Mutual Security Program for economic assistance amounted to about $ billion exclusive of disbursements by the Development Loan Fund. The latter whose operations were still in an initial stage disbursed $ million and committed $ million. Under Public Law agricultural surpluses were disposed of as follows : $ million against local currencies ; $ million through transfers to private welfare and international relief agencies for foreign operations ; and $ million through deliveries for famine and other emergency relief purposes. The Export-Import Bank disbursed $ million in loans and committed $ million while receiving repayments of $ million. During the year it increased the portion of suppliers ' credits which it will finance Under the national security provision of the trade agreements legislation the President approved a finding that oil and oil products were being imported in such amounts as to threaten to impair the national security and instituted a program for regulating these imports. The Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization found no threat to national security from imports of certain heavy electrical equipment fluorspar and cobalt. Under the escape clause provision of the trade agreements legislation the President approved a Tariff Commission finding of injury from imports of certain stainless steel flatware products but disapproved such findings for tartaric acid and cream of tartar. The Tariff Commission found no injury in eight cases and terminated three other cases without formal findings In pursuance of its policy of seeking a reduction of barriers to international trade the United States in October proposed to the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade that they sponsor a new round of multilateral tariff negotiations. The proposal was approved by the Contracting Parties in May and the tariff conference is scheduled to begin in September Its successful conclusion will permit further progress toward the attainment of higher levels of trade Chapter A Legislative Program for T HE PROGRAM for promoting high employment production and income is intended to supplement and reinforce the large body of pertinent laws already administered by the Federal State and local governments. It also takes account of the pervasive influence on economic growth and well-being of the institutions and practices of the private sector of the economy. Thus it is consistent with the concept of the Employment Act that responsibility for economic advance in our free society is shared by the Federal Government with other political divisions and the private economy The specific proposals have been shaped with a view to their appropriateness in the current economic context and with due regard to the longer-range challenges and opportunities noted in Chapter FEDERAL FINANCES In view of present economic conditions and prospects a Federal budget that not merely balances expenditures with revenues but achieves a significant surplus for debt retirement is clearly the fiscal plan most appropriate for promoting the purposes of the Employment Act. Such a plan has been transmitted by the President to the Congress for the fiscal year In addition to making adequate provisions for defense for meeting the obligations of our international leadership and for supplying other needecf services the proposed budget would make an essential contribution to the strengthening of our national economy by yielding a $ billion surplus of receipts over expenditures. By helping to restrain inflationary pressures such a budgetary surplus would be a significant factor in promoting steady and vigorous economic growth. It would help meet demands for savings in credit and capital markets and thus facilitate and make less costly the financing of private and State and local investment projects important to economic growth and well-being. It would greatly facilitate the economical and noninflationary management of the Federal debt. It would also reinforce confidence at home and abroad in the United States dollar and contribute in this way not only to the strength of our economy but also to the economic health of the entire free world Attainment of the projected surplus in the fiscal year will depend in part on economic conditions in the next year and a half. However favorable action by the Congress on certain tax and postal rate pro- posals and on recommended expenditures is also needed to assure this highly desirable budgetary outcome The Congress has been requested to extend the corporate income tax at the present rate for another year ; to postpone for an additional year the reduction of excise taxes on alcohol tobacco automobiles and automobile parts and accessories that is now scheduled for June ; and to postpone for a year the repeal of the tax on local telephone service and the reduction of the tax on transportation of persons likewise scheduled for June The Congress has also been requested to make certain corrective amendments in the tax laws applicable to cooperatives ; to preclude unintended and excessive percentage depletion allowances for mineral products if this problem is not satisfactorily resolved through litigation pending before the Supreme Court ; to tax as ordinary income any gain realized by the sale of depreciable personal property used in business to the extent of the depreciation deductions previously taken on the property ; to defer the taxation of income earned in less developed countries of the world ; to increase the aviation fuel tax to 45/2 cents per gallon ; and to impose a tax of ^ cents per gallon on jet fuel. To assure construction of the interstate highway system at a high rate and on a self-supporting basis the Congress has been asked to increase the highway fuel tax by l/z cent per gallon and to continue the tax at ^ cents per gallon until June This action would obviate diversion of excise taxes from the general fund. In addition favorable action by the Congress has been requested on an adjustment of postal rates. The effect of the recommended rate increases would be to reduce the deficit on postal operations by about $ million and to contribute by this amount toward the attainment of the desired surplus Expenditures in the fiscal year are estimated at $ billion an increase of $ billion above the estimate for the current fiscal year. Some of this increase will occur under commitments already made in accordance with existing laws ; some would be incurred under recommendations made to the Congress in the budget for fiscal A considerable part of the rise involves programs that directly support our economy 's capacity for growth. Among these are programs for the development of land and water resources ; for the promotion of research education and science ; for the construction of physical facilities in the field of health ; for urban renewal ; for the expansion and improvement of highway and air transportation ; and for aid to other nations of the free world A major proposal has been made to the Congress for legislative action in the field of public debt management. This proposal is of particular importance in view of the large amount of the public debt now more than $ billion and its heavy cost involving interest payments in the fiscal year estimated at $ billion. Specifically the Congress is requested to remove the % percent ceiling on the interest rate which can be paid on United States Government securities with a maturity of more O than years. Events since this request was first made have underscored its importance for minimizing the hazard of creating inflationary pressures through public debt transactions ; for giving greater latitude in the conduct of monetary and credit policies conducive to the growth and stability of the economy ; and for financing the debt as economically as possible Also to permit the financing of seasonal increases in the Federal debt during the fiscal year it is necessary to enact a temporary debt limit that is somewhat higher than the present permanent limit of $ billion A proposal to this effect will be made to the Congress prior to the expiration on June of the present temporary limit of $ billion COMPETITION The importance of vigorous competition to the promotion of economic growth is recognized in the Employment Act which calls upon the Federal Government to pursue policies for economic expansion in ways that foster free competitive enterprise. To strengthen competition some improvement is needed in the existing body of antitrust laws Four specific legislative actions recommended last year are again requested of the Congress. The first would require that antitrust agencies be notified when firms of significant size engaged in interstate commerce propose to merge. The second would authorize the Federal Trade Commission to seek preliminary injunctions in merger cases where a violation of law is likely. The third would strengthen Federal law governing bank mergers accomplished through the acquisition of assets. The fourth would grant the Attorney General power to issue civil investigative demands under which the necessary facts may be elicited when civil procedures are contemplated in antitrust cases. This recommendation which was acted upon favorably last year by the Senate is urgently needed to strengthen the investigative authority of the Attorney General SMALL BUSINESS Federal policies and programs to benefit small business which also contribute to the competitive quality of our enterprise economy have evolved along lines marked out by recommendations of the Cabinet Committee on Small Business and by various laws The Small Business Administration ( SBA ) provides a wide variety of services to eligible firms and individuals. For example it supplies loan funds for periods up to ten years to small businesses unable to obtain financing from other sources on reasonable terms. Under this program SBA in approved a total of loans amounting to $ million to small business concerns ; $ million was to be supplied directly by SBA and the remainder by private financial institutions under participation arrangements. Second in cooperation with the Defense Department and civilian procurement agencies SBA reserves certain proposed Government procurements for competitive bidding exclusively by small businesses These " set-asides " amounted to $ billion for the months through November As a result of them contracts amounting to $ million were awarded to small firms in the first months of contrasting with $ million in the full year and $ million in Third with the concurrence of the Attorney General and the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, SBA approves the formation of small-business pools to assist enterprises in overcoming handicaps attendant upon a small scale of operations in carrying out production and research and development contracts. Fourth SBA publishes and distributes information on management and technical subjects and has developed a program of courses in cooperation with educational institutions to acquaint owners and managers of small concerns with more efficient methods of planning organizing and conducting business operations. Fifth SBA awards grants to universities colleges and State agencies for research on problems of small businesses ; these grants in totaled $ million. Finally loans are being made under the authority provided in the Small Business Investment Act of for long-term loans to State and local development corporations for the ultimate benefit of small business concerns ; by the end of these loans amounted to some $ million The use of the new powers granted by the Small Business Investment Act of to license and help finance investment companies that specialize in providing equity capital or long-term loans to eligible small concerns was promptly initiated by the Small Business Administration. Some such companies are now licensed with a present total capitalization of $ million of which $ million has been committed by SBA Experience so far suggests that the specifications set down in the Small Business Investment Act as to the types of securities that may be purchased by small business investment companies are perhaps too rigid. Accordingly proposals have been made to the Congress for amendments to the Act to provide the needed flexibility. Long-term financing by small business concerns would also be assisted by favorable Congressional action on a request repeated again for an amendment to the Securities Act of to increase from $ to $ the maximum amount of a corporate security issue for which the privilege of simplified Regulation A filings may be accorded AGRICULTURE Federal expenditures for agriculture and agricultural resources in the fiscal year are expected to total $ billion. Of this amount some $ billion is for the support of research conservation marketing and similar services and for loan programs ; and $ billion is for price and income stabilization. A sizable portion of the latter amount is absorbed by interest charges storage and transportation costs and disposal losses on excess stocks of farm commodities To the extent possible under present legislation administrative actions were taken in the past year to help bring about a better adjustment between agriculture 's greatly expanding capacity to produce and the demand * for farm products to improve farm incomes and to reduce the heavy cost of agricultural programs to the Federal Government. More emphasis is being placed on the development of markets for farm products at home and abroad on efforts to support prices at levels that will more nearly balance production with potential demand on the removal of cropland from production and on the development of the nonagricultural resources of marginal low-income farm areas Several actions taken in these directions during were of special importance. First support prices for cotton were adjusted as individual producers were given for the first time a choice between ( ) continuing compliance with tightly restrictive acreage allotments with prices supported at percent of parity and ( ) freedom to plant up to percent beyond the allotment with prices supported at percent of parity. Second under existing legislation corn producers abolished ! their acreage allotments by referendum late in and thereby put into effect a single schedule for price support at percent of the three-year average market price with a minimum price support level of percent of parity Third support prices for several commodities including rye oilseeds dry beans and feed grains other than corn were reduced under discretionary authority of the Secretary of Agriculture. A number of these commodities are selling at prices above support levels. The /support prices for tobacco were increased under mandatory provisions of the law. Fourth under the law efforts were continued for the disposal abroad without disrupting ordinary commercial markets of as large a volume as possible of stocks of the Commodity Credit Corporation. This action was aided ' by a renewal of the International Wheat Agreement and by a lowered price and an increased export subsidy for cotton. Fifth in accordance with legislation the acreage reserve portion of the Soil Bank was terminated after the season but the Conservation Reserve was increased from million acres in to million in Sixth the Rural Development Program was strengthened with the establishment by Executive Order of an interdepartmental committee responsible for the coordination of policies and actions of all participating Federal agencies and for the acceleration of activities under the Program. Finally under a newly enacted law benefits under price support loans for were limited for a number of crops to $ per producer unless acreage is reduced percent below the amount or the part of the loan in excess of $ is repaid within months Additional agricultural legislation is urgently needed however in view of the continuing high program costs borne by the Federal Government and the continuing accumulation of surpluses of farm products. Such legislation should assist an orderly transition toward eventual balance between production and demand for farm products so that the restrictive limitations to which agriculture is subject under present law may be removed The Conservation Reserve Program should be expanded provided certain conditions are fulfilled and adapted to the correction of specific commodity problems on a regional basis. Legislation is proposed to extend through the crop year authority which expires after the crop year to bring additional land into the Conservation Reserve ; and to expand the program by increasing the basic limitation on the total payments in any calendar year from $ million to $ million. It is planned under the proposed legislation to add about million acres to the program during the crop year thus bringing the total to about million acres. Together with this expansion in acreage in the Conservation Reserve realistic price support programs are needed especially for wheat Specific authority will be requested for the Secretary of Agriculture to give special consideration in allocating Conservation Reserve funds to those States and regions in which curtailment of production of wheat or other surplus commodities is consistent with long-range conservation and production-adjustment goals. The future authorization for the Conservation Reserve Program should not be increased above the level unlejss needed price-support legislation is enacted for wheat. Federal policy on cost-sharing should be concentrated in the future on conservation measures that foster needed shifts to less intensive uses of cropland ; and cost-sharing assistance should be eliminated for practices which increase output of agricultural commodities already in excess supply New obligational authority of $ million is requested for the Great Plains Conservation Program the same as for the fiscal year Under this Program conducted in designated counties of the ten Great Plains States the Federal Government provides technical assistance to farmers who enter into long-term contracts to make needed adjustments of land use on their farms and it shares in the cost of making such adjustments The Sugar Act which expires on December should be extended early in the present session of the Congress Limitation on price support for certain crops grown on newly irrigated or drained land should be extended for another three years The Congress should again consider the amendments to the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of ( Public Law ) proposed last year to make more effective the program for surplus disposal abroad Favorable action by the Congress is also requested on pending legislation to place the loan program of the Farmers Home Administration on a revolving-fund basis and to make other improvements in the laws affecting this activity The Rural Electrification Administration ( REA ) continues to provide additional electric power generating capacity and heavier transmission and distribution facilities. At present percent of all farms have central station electric service and more than one-half of REA 's power is sold to nonfarm customers. The latter comprise over percent of the new customers served. Legislation is proposed under which REA 's borrowings from the Treasury would be at an interest rate not in excess of the average rate paid by the Treasury on recently issued long-term marketable obligations and REA would charge that rate plus one-fifth of one percent on future electric and telephone loans. Also pending legislation should be enacted to place REA 's operations on a revolving-fund basis NATURAL RESOURCES The Federal Government has traditionally pursued policies designed to assure an adequate supply of raw materials for current economic activity and also to conserve and develop resources for future needs. Significant advances in geological and geophysical exploration methods have led to the discovery of new bodies of ore. Another area of Federal activity is participation in the construction maintenance and operation of water projects. These projects meet various needs often simultaneously human consumption irrigation flood control power generation navigation and recreation. Expenditures for such purposes are expected to rise to $ billion in the fiscal year The Congress is requested to enact a pending proposal for establishing a consistent basis on which non-Federal beneficiaries will share the costs of protection against floods Additional programs are being conducted by the Federal Government to improve the water supply which is a major problem in many parts of our country. Encouraging progress is being made in research on techniques of converting brackish and sea water into fresh water. Important research advances have also been made in water conservation techniques The Congress will be requested this year to strengthen the enforcement provisions of Federal legislation for control of water pollution. Increasing attention is being directed also * o local needs for limiting air pollution Sound management of timber resources is another aspect of Federal concern in the development of natural resources. The Government seeks not only to improve timber stands in national forests and on other public lands but also to promote conservation practices on private woodlands. More than $ million is being spent annually on Federal programs concerned with forest resources in addition to outlays for soil conservation on farms a part of which is also directed to improving forest resources In recent years increasing amounts of Federal funds have been spent annually for the conservation development and wise use of recreational and fish and wildlife resources. Intensive efforts are being made to accommodate an ever-increasing number of visitors to national parks expected to reach million by In this connection enactment has been requested of a pending proposal for the preservation of certain undeveloped shoreline areas for public use Federal assistance is also being provided for the enlargement and diversification of the Nation 's mineral reserves. Mapping surveys field appraisals and research programs on extraction methods and product utilization contribute directly to these ends. Other contributions are being made for example through the schedule of depletion allowances in the Internal Revenue Code and the mandatory limitation of imports of petroleum and petroleum products. Legislation will again be recommended for a long-range program to conserve helium gas for contract authority on coal research and for revision of the fee schedule for noncompetitive oil and gas leases on public lands RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT The annual investment of sizable amounts of Federal funds in research and development programs has served significantly to enlarge the scientific and technological potential of the Nation. These outlays which have increased rapidly in recent years exceed those made by business firms and nonprofit institutions for the improvement of the technical base of our society. According to revised compilations recently reported by the National Science Foundation and the Bureau of the Budget Federal research and development obligations for the fiscal year exceed $ billion ; they were $ billion for the fiscal year and $ billion for fiscal Estimates of expenditures for the same three periods are somewhat lower $ billion $ billion and $ billion The predominant share of the Federal funds for research and development is devoted to military projects ; but even so the benefits obtained from them by the civilian economy have been and will remain impressive. The billions of dollars spent annually for procurement and construction under programs of the Department of Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission likewise have a peacetime value apart from their immediate contribution to the Nation 's security. Many areas of defense spending that will continue to influence civilian technology may be cited for example the development and production of aircraft and missiles data-processing machines electronic communication and control equipment high-energy fuels unconventional devices for generating electrical energy solar furnaces and metallic and other materials meeting strict performance requirements under stress and at extreme temperatures The peacetime usefulness of atomic energy is also being demonstrated in both research and production. Thus more than patents have been released for public use without payment of royalties. Civilian nuclear power reactors are being developed for eventual economic use in the United States and abroad. Research is being conducted in the realms of highenergy physics and controlled thermonuclear fusion. Radioisotopes are being used in agricultural research and various industrial processes Through bilateral agreements participation in the International Atomic Energy Agency cooperation with regional atomic energy organizations and international conferences and exchanges of visits efforts are being made to widen these opportunities for the constructive application of nuclear energy By far the greater part of the Federal research and development budget supports projects that are performed extramurally by profit and nonprofit organizations under contract. Accordingly many of the benefits of new knowledge are diffused quickly and widely. Thus some companies acquire patents and know-how that serve and will continue to serve productive purposes that range far beyond the objectives of the original research projects. Employees acquire new skills and specialized experience and the backgrounds of participating teachers doctors and other professional workers are also enriched. In the fiscal year extramural projects will account for about $ billion of the Federal obligations for research and development. The corresponding figure for the fiscal year is $ billion and for the fiscal year $ billion The civilian economy is deriving technological advantages not only from Federal expenditures for research procurement and construction but also of course from the multibillion-dollar annual research outlays of business firms and other private organizations. Various Federal legislative provisions have been designed to encourage business participation in private research ventures. Among these are Section of the Internal Revenue Code of which permits business expenditures for research to be deducted from taxable income and Section of the Small Business Act of which encourages small business concerns to engage in joint research and development efforts Federal support of basic research in the physical biological and social sciences has been expanded in recent years and an increasing proportion of the funds for such research is being channeled into educational institutions including research centers administered by colleges and universities The amount obligated for basic research in the fiscal year as in is close to $ million an increase of almost one-half over the total for EDUCATION AND HEALTH In our Nation responsibility for education and training and for health services has traditionally been borne by local and State governments and by private groups. The Federal Government supplements these efforts however. In the current fiscal year its expenditures for the promotion of education will total $ million. Indeed Federal support for public education dates from the Ordinance of ; another landmark is the land grant college system which will soon celebrate its 100th anniversary Federal interest in health may be traced to when the Public Health Service was established ; the first food and drug law was enacted over half a century ago The efforts in these fields at all levels of government local. State and Federal and by private groups are impressive and they are expanding rapidly. In the last ten years total public and private expenditures for education have almost tripled reaching $ billion in ; the number of teachers in elementary and secondary schools has increased by and their average compensation has risen by percent Public and private expenditures for health and medical care have almost doubled during this period from more than $ billion to about $ billion Annual Federal expenditures for health and medical programs rose from about $ million to $ billion and State and local expenditures increased from $ billion to well over $ billion Yet as noted in Chapter increased public and private efforts in education and health will be required to meet the needs of a growing population and labor force. During the next five years the population aged to will increase by nearly annually compared with per year from to The Nation 's educational institutions will have to prepare to accommodate far greater numbers of high school college and graduate students. State and local governments will have to redouble their programs to provide teachers and equipment for secondary and higher education. The assurance of an adequate supply of doctors and other health personnel will require an expansion of medical training facilities. Since the growth of the seasoned labor force of persons over years of age will be small in contrast to the increase in the number of younger and less-experienced persons who will be seeking employment business firms will find it advisable to expand job-training programs For its part the Federal Government has already been providing largescale support for education programs administered by the Department of Health Education and Welfare the National Science Foundation the Atomic Energy Commission and other agencies. Under the National Defense Education Act of Federal contributions are being made to student loan funds ; matching grants are being provided for equipment needed in teaching science mathematics and foreign languages ; and assistance is being given to teacher training in foreign languages graduate study in all fields including science and mathematics and guidance counseling and testing services. Other programs include graduate and faculty fellowships institutes for college and high school teachers of science and mathematics traineeships and grants for research and equipment. In the current school year about college students almost three times as many as last year are expected to make use of the loan funds established under this Act Expenditures for education and training of veterans currently requiring nearly $ million will amount to a little more than $ million in the fiscal year For ex-servicemen having service-connected disabilities however a necessary program of vocational rehabilitation will be recommended to the Congress As noted programs for raising standards of health throughout the Nation have been given large and increasing Federal support in recent years These programs include the research conducted at the National Institutes of Health research grants to medical schools and research institutions and grants to States for the construction of hospitals and other health facilities. They will entail Federal expenditures approaching $ million in about double the amount spent for these purposes in the fiscal year Finally a program involving Federal expenditures of nearly $ billion in the fiscal year serves veterans eligible for hospitalization and other medical benefits under existing law PERSONAL SECURITY The efforts of Government to foster sustainable inflation-free economic growth are its principal contribution to strengthening the foundations of personal security for all Americans. An expanding economy offers opportunities for better jobs and self-advancement for good homes and for greater independent financial provision against the hazards of life. As indicated in Chapter of this Report Americans have scored impressive improvement in recent years in individual security and well-being. Nevertheless as earlier Economic Reports have pointed out a dynamic urban economy also presents hazards to personal security that in some instances may be met inadequately or not at all by individual efforts. By helping individuals overcome these hazards Government strengthens the foundations of personal security ; and by improving morale and efficiency and helping to maintain incomes in times of economic slack it further enhances the economy 's capacity for healthy growth Existing programs for promoting personal security and welfare should be adjusted in certain respects. First improvements are needed in the Federal-State unemployment insurance system. The scope of this system under which some $ billion was paid in ( exclusive of benefits for Federal employees veterans and railroad employees ) should be extended to employers of one or more persons to nonprofit institutions and to Federal instrumentalities that are not now covered. It is also recommended that the Federal-State system be extended to Puerto Rico which now has its own unemployment insurance law and that the provisions of the District of Columbia law be brought up to the standard recommended for all States Under the present Federal-State system the responsibility for the amount and duration of benefits rests with the States. In general benefits have lagged behind the rise in wages and it is again recommended that the States increase their benefits to make the great majority of covered workers eligible for payments equal to at least half their regular earnings ; and that the States increase the maximum duration of benefits to weeks a year for all eligible workers who remain unemployed that long The heavy unemployment benefit payments during the last recession strained the finances of several State unemployment funds. Three of these States secured $ million in loans from the Federal Unemployment Account. Three other States were eligible for such advances. It is possible that the funds of a few additional States would be in a precarious financial condition if another recession should occur in the next few years unless their finances are improved. This problem is under study by the Secretary of Labor The proceeds of the present Federal unemployment tax barely suffice to finance the administration of the Federal-State employment security system as it stands today. Steps should be taken to provide additional funds for administration as the system expands and also to rebuild the Federal Unemployment Account which is virtually exhausted Amendments are needed to remedy serious defects in the legislation enacted in to protect the interests of the Nation 's working men and women in private pension and welfare plans under which funds amounting to more than $ billion have been accumulated. Corrective legislation was proposed in the last session of the Congress to allow the Secretary of Labor to make necessary interpretations of the law and to enforce compliance. The proposal also contained provisions necessary to deal with such crimes as bribery and embezzlement. Both of these amendments are again recommended to the Congress The Congress is again requested to extend the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act to several million workers not now receiving its protection While such a law does not deal with the fundamental causes of low incomes it may help safeguard the economic interests of workers at the fringes of competitive labor markets To enhance the progress being made toward equalizing economic opportunity for all citizens certain legislative improvements are required in programs that lie within Federal jurisdiction. Favorable consideration is again requested for legislation to revise the outmoded provisions of the 8-hour laws applying to Federal and certain federally assisted construction projects and to carry out the principle of equal pay for equal work without discrimination because of sex. The Congress should also establish a statutory commission on equal job opportunities under Government contracts Efforts to reduce the hardship and loss occasioned by occupational accidents which amount to nearly million each year should be intensified by employers and by State and local governments. Where necessary the States should improve workmen 's compensation systems with respect to benefits administration and provision for rehabilitation Nearly million persons are currently receiving benefits under the Federal program of old-age survivors and disability insurance compared with million at the end of and million at the end of Old-age benefits exceed $ per month on the average for a retired worker and his wife ; aggregate benefits amounted to $ billion in compared with $ billion in The liberalization of benefit amounts in and an increase in the number of beneficiaries caused the rapid rise in total benefit payments. The provision of benefits for permanently disabled workers and their dependents which became effective in has added more than persons to the rolls. The average monthly benefit for a disabled person exceeded $ in The public assistance programs to which the Federal Government now contributes more than $ billion of the funds expended annually distributed more than $ billion to needy persons in the fiscal year compared with $ billion in Programs designed to return handicapped persons to remunerative employment are administered by all States. The Federal Government supports State programs with grants averaging about percent of total State agency expenditures. Federal grants in support of rehabilitation and rehabilitation research and training totaled $ million in the fiscal year In that year persons were rehabilitated compared with less than in and the long-range objective of at least persons annually AREA ASSISTANCE Although the number of labor market areas in the United States with a substantial surplus of labor beyond current requirements has been reduced significantly as economic activity has expanded many communities continue to suffer from substantial and persistent unemployment. Assistance to these communities is available through a number of Federal agencies whose activities in this connection are coordinated through an interdepartmental Committee To Coordinate Federal Urban Area Assistance Programs as well as from State and local groups. In the Office of Area Development of the Department of Commerce which carries the principal responsibility for providing Federal assistance aided an increasing number of area development groups in their efforts to strengthen the economic bases of their communities. Technical assistance furnished by the Office included counseling on methods used by various communities to solve their development problems on community industrial foundations and industrial parks and on State and local financing plans for promoting economic development The Department of Labor aids community organizations in connection with manpower aspects of economic development and with on-the-job training. Financial assistance to business concerns is furnished through the Small Business Administration. The " set-asides " of defense contracts for concerns located in areas of substantial labor surplus help to bolster economic activity in particular communities Legislation is needed however to supplement and strengthen these efforts to help areas of persistent unemployment create new job opportunities Such legislation should stimulate and complement the efforts of communities to help themselves should promote maximum participation by private financial institutions and by State and local agencies should encourage the creation of new job opportunities rather than the mere transference of jobs from one area of the country to another and should encompass technical aid for the economic diversification of rural low-income areas and single-industry communities A recommendation has already been made to the Congress for a program that meets these specifications. It would provide for Federal participation in loans to business concerns for financial assistance to State and local development groups and for technical assistance to local groups seeking to strengthen their regional economies HOUSING AND HOME FINANCING The past year was an exceptionally active one in the home building and home financing industries. Some new private dwelling units were started of which were financed under mortgages either insured or guaranteed by the Federal Government. The funds that flowed into this use in are estimated at $ billion a record amount despite the increasingly intensive competition of other financing requirements The role of the Federal Government in home financing has assumed great importance in terms of the impact on housing and home financing markets and in respect of the burden on the Federal budget. Thus the Federal National Mortgage Association now holds a portfolio of $ billion of mortgages and utilizes $ billion of Treasury funds for this purpose. Under the Urban Renewal Program nearly $ million has already been paid out in grants as the Federal share of clearing city areas for redevelopment and some $ billion of additional funds will ultimately be paid to the cities under existing contracts and reservations of funds. Nearly $ million has already been paid out under the public housing program in annual contributions to local housing authorities ; and the Federal Government is obligated to make annual contributions for the next several decades to repay $ billion of outstanding indebtedness together with interest under contracts for projects completed or under construction. Loans of about $ million have been disbursed to colleges and universities under the college housing program and about $ million of commitments and reservations for additional loans are outstanding. The Veterans Administration has employed $ billion of Treasury funds for direct loans to veterans for the purchase of homes Under present law the Federal Housing Administration 's program for the insurance of home improvement and modernization loans will expire on October unless extended. This program under which some $ billion of loans have been insured since its inception in should be made permanent. Also the present ceiling on VA interest rates is again restricting the ability of veterans to avail themselves of this form of home-purchase financing. The Congress should accordingly place this program on the same basis, with respect to maximum interest rate requirements as FHA programs. The maximum permissible interest rate on armed service housing loans insured by FHA should also be adjusted to permit such loans to be made at rates above the present 4/2 percent ceiling FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS Stronger efforts must be made at this time to expand United States exports of goods and services. Fiscal and monetary policies designed to restrain inflation provide a solid basis for such efforts but more needs to be done to strengthen the competitive position of our exports. In this connection the Federal Government should encourage intensified use of Department of Commerce facilities for disseminating foreign trade information to exporters and potential foreign buyers of American products ; strengthen the commercial activities of our Foreign Service ; increase the number of our trade missions to other countries ; and arrange for more extensive United States participation in trade fairs abroad These steps should make more effective the efforts of private businesses to increase foreign sales. Expansion of exports should be a major aim of American business in the coming year. To take full advantage of expanding market opportunities abroad businessmen will have to price competitively sell aggressively adapt and design products to meet the needs of foreign buyers and offer adequate credit and service facilities Markets for United States products were significantly expanded last year particularly toward the end of the year by the reduction of quantitative restrictions on dollar imports by many of our trading partners abroad as described in Chapter of this Report. The United States intends to continue encouraging the removal of remaining restrictions on imports from the dollar area. These efforts which are expected to result in a further expansion of United States export opportunities will be made in such international forums as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the International Monetary Fund as well as through bilateral consultations with foreign governments It is hoped that the industrial countries consonant with their growing financial ability will increase their long-term lending to less developed countries and this subject is being actively discussed with the governments concerned. For its part the United States will continue vigorously with its plans to aid the economic growth of less developed countries. The efforts of many of these countries have already been fruitful and the groundwork is being laid for more rapid advances in the future. In many instances however the level of living in the less developed countries remains very low The efforts of the United States to aid less developed countries to improve their productivity and level of living will be channeled through institutions that have served in the past including both the Development Loan Fund and the Export-Import Bank ( which has just observed its twenty fifth anniversary ) and through appropriate new institutions. The InterAmerican Development Bank which came into existence late last year will begin operations shortly. This institution which brings together the United States and the countries of Latin America manifests the enduring interest that the United States has in the economic progress of its neighbors The formation of the International Development Association will also be pursued actively during the year. It is expected that funds for the initial United States subscription will be requested during the year FEDERAL STATISTICS Significant steps have been taken in recent years to achieve an improved and better integrated program of Federal statistics on the Nation 's economy Important additional improvements are proposed for the coming fiscal year The budget for current statistical programs provides for a net increase of about $ million over appropriations. This increased appropriation would make it possible ( ) to provide better crop and livestock estimates based on experimental work previously undertaken ( ) to improve retail trade statistics ( ) to initiate a monthly survey of the service trades and a quarterly survey of State and local government finances and ( ) to carry forward work initiated this year within the framework of the national income and product accounts for a table of interindustry purchases and sales and for real output estimates by major industries In the area of social statistics provision is made for obtaining data from health examinations of a scientifically selected random sample of the population as part of the national health survey program initiated in Improvements in statistics on education and on marriages and divorces are also planned Provision is also made for the continuation of work on the periodic censuses and on the five-year project to revise the consumer price index. The budget recommends funds for tabulating and processing economic and demographic data collected through the 18th Decennial Census and for final publication of the results of the Censuses of Business Manufactures and Mineral Industries. The major appropriations for these censuses were made last year. Funds are alsa included for preparatory work on the Census of Governments A consumer expenditure survey will be undertaken as an integral part of the revision of the consumer price index * This index along with additional needs for price information is being studied by a Price Statistics Review Committee which will make recommendations concerning these programs by October Improvements are also being made in the statistics on wages and salaries for different occupations and in different industries and labor markets ; on fringe benefit costs ; and on current wage rate changes COMBINING PRIVATE ACTIONS WITH PUBLIC POLICIES This chapter has presented the major legislative proposals of a program to supplement and reinforce existing Federal laws that contribute to our Nation 's capacity for inflation-free economic growth. In accordance with the language and the spirit of the Employment Act this program acknowledges that the State and local governments and the private sector of the economy have vital roles to play in the achievement of such growth Indeed in the present economic circumstances when opportunities for vigorous expansion are abundantly evident these roles should be encouraged to the fullest extent while the Federal role should become more restrained The current economic setting is favorable for the enactment of proposals of long-run significance for sound growth and greater well-being. Accordingly the program looks to a modification of farm programs and includes proposals for enhancing the competitive character of our economy for improving the effectiveness of various Federal lending and loan insurance programs for extending and strengthening present provisions for personal security and welfare for helping to provide new job opportunities in areas with high and persistent unemployment and for establishing a new international agency to assist the less developed countries of the free world At the present time the Federal Government could make its greatest contribution to inflation-free economic growth through financial policies that help create an environment favorable to the exercise of maximum private initiative. The major step in creating such an environment would be the achievement of the recommended budget surplus for debt retirement in the fiscal year The effectiveness of this policy would be heightened by removal of the interest rate limitations that currently inhibit the noninflationary management of the Federal debt. Following the budget balance now in prospect for the fiscal year and complemented by the policies of the independent Federal Reserve System these elements of the program would make important contributions to sustainable economic growth Fiscal and monetary policies gain strength from each other and are powerful instruments for preventing the development of inflationary pressures which can endanger the healthy growth of our economy. But there is need to supplement these Government policies with appropriate private actions especially those affecting profits and wages. Our markets must be sufficiently flexible to allow downward as well as upward adjustments in individual prices if we are to achieve greater stability in the general level of prices. Achievement of this desirable result is unlikely unless the national average of increases in wage and salary rates and related labor benefits remains within the limits of national productivity gains. Under such a standard price reductions in sectors of the economy where productivity is advancing especially rapidly would offset increases that might be warranted elsewhere The general wage-productivity-price relationship emphasizes the importance of private actions favorable to the acceleration of productivity gains. The achievement of widely shared and sustainable increases in economic rewards without inflation must rest on a solid foundation of productivity advance. Accordingly it is important for management and labor to cooperate for more complete attainment of the productivity potentials afforded by continuing technological progress In our free economy and under our system of shared responsibility we do not rely on Government alone for the achievement of inflation-free economic growth. On the contrary the attainment of this objective requires a blending of suitable public policies and private actions both of which rest upon an informed public opinion. To enhance public awareness of the damage that could be done by inflation and to support Government 's efforts to restrain inflationary forces the Congress should amend the Employment Act of to make reasonable price stability an explicit goal of national economic policy. Although this goal may already be implied in the declared objectives of the Act such an amendment would express more firmly our national determination to curb inflation. The amendment that has been proposed by the Administration is limited to a change in the language of the Act 's declaration of policy. Such an amendment would help accomplish the desired purpose without causing changes in our economic institutions that might be inimical to the freedoms we now enjoy I Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report for calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully RAYMOND J. SAULNIER Chairman KARL BRANDT HENRY C. WALLIGH Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During In pursuance of the duties set forth in the Employment Act of the Council continued in to follow developments in the economy to analyze their significance for outlook and policy and to keep under study major policy questions having a bearing on the objectives of the Employment Act. The Council consisted of Raymond J. Saulnier Chairman Karl Brandt and Henry C. Wallich Through its Chairman the Council reported frequently to the President and to the Cabinet on current economic developments and on the economic effects of Government policies and programs. As circumstances warranted it submitted recommendations for legislative enactments and for administrative actions under existing programs which in its judgment would help to further vigorous sustainable inflation-free economic growth. The Council made numerous analytical reviews of legislative proposals emanating from the Congress The Council continued to draw heavily on the resources of the operating departments and agencies of the Federal Government and to avail itself fully of the information and counsel of individuals and private groups As in previous years it was aided by the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability which is particularly helpful in maintaining close and constructive working relationships with various departments and agencies of the Government. Member agencies of the Board are presently represented by the following officials : Department of State Thomas C. Mann Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Department of the Treasury Julian B. Baird Under Secretary Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Philip A. Ray Under Secretary Department of Labor James T. O'Connell Under Secretary Department of Health Education and Welfare Bertha Adkins Under Secretary Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Mills Member of the Board Bureau of the Budget Elmer Staats Deputy Director Export-Import Bank of Washington Samuel C. Waugh President The White House Office Don Paarlberg Special Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Raymond J. Saulnier Chairman Committees and Task Forces The Council participated during the year in the work of a number of important committee groups and task forces within Government. The Chairman of the Council serves as a member of the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability for Economic Growth chaired by the Vice President of the United States. He also serves as a member of an informal group which discusses problems of financial policy with the President ; the other members are the Secretary of the Treasury the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Special Assistant to the President with responsibilities in the economic area The Chairman of the Council attends all Cabinet meetings special meetings on legislative matters and those meetings of the National Security Council at which economic matters are discussed. Members of the Council and its staff participate in the work of the Planning Board of the National Security Council The Chairman of the Council serves as Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Small Business and of the Committee on Government Activities Affecting Prices and Costs. He is a member of the Board of the Federal National Mortgage Association represents the Council on the Civil and Defense Mobilization Board and on the President 's Special Committee on Financial Policies for Postattack Operations and participates in semiannual meetings of the Business Advisory Council of the Department of Commerce. Meetings of the technical consultants to the Business Advisory Council are attended by a member of the staff of the Council of Economic Advisers Dr. Brandt served as a member of the interdepartmental Committee for Rural Development Program and as a member of the interagency work group on research and analysis of the Federal Council on Aging. He also attended regularly the sessions of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy and of the National Agricultural Advisory Commission Dr. Wallich participated in the work of the National Advisory Council and served as a member of the interdepartmental Committee To Coordinate Federal Urban Area Assistance Programs under the Chairmanship of the Under Secretary of Commerce The Council met during the year with representatives of industrial and commercial concerns and financial houses with professional economists from universities with representatives of agriculture industry and labor and with groups considering business conditions the economic outlook and policies relating to economic growth and stability. Throughout the year Council staff members were in touch with experts of other Government departments and agencies and outside groups as the need arose Participation in international meetings here and abroad and frequent discussions with foreign visitors continue to be an important part of the Council 's activities. In the past year two members of the Council and members of the Council 's staff took part in meetings held in Paris under the auspices of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( OEEC ) and prepared as in previous years a report on the United States economy for use in the OEEC 's annual review of world economic developments. The Council and members of its staff received various visiting groups of economists and officials from other countries and international organizations and two members of the Council staff held a number of seminars for foreign businessmen and Government officials Publications Work In keeping with its responsibilities under the Employment Act the Council assisted the President in the preparation of his annual Economic Report to the Congress ; copies of the January Report were printed Copies were distributed to members of the Joint Economic Committee all other members of the Congress departments and agencies of the Government representatives of the press and depository libraries throughout the country. The Superintendent of Documents sold copies to the general public The Chairman of the Council accompanied by the other Council members testified in executive session before the Joint Economic Committee on the Economic Report of the President. At these hearings the character and effectiveness of economic policies for the preceding year were reviewed the prospects for were appraised and recommendations were made for policies that would promote economic growth and price stability in the year ahead The Council prepares Economic Indicators a monthly compendium of current economic statistics published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. Copies of this publication are distributed to all members of the Congress and to depository libraries. In addition copies of each monthly issue are sold by the Superintendent of Documents to subscribers and others Council Members and Staff Dr. Saulnier served as Consultant to the Council from to has been a member of the Council since April and its Chairman since December He is on leave of absence from Barnard College Columbia University where he is Professor of Economics and from the National Bureau of Economic Research Dr. Brandt who received an interim appointment as a member of the Council in November was confirmed by the Senate on March He is on leave of absence from Stanford University where he is Professor of Economic Policy and Associate Director of the Food Research Institute Dr. Wallich was appointed a member of the Council on April and confirmed by the Senate on May He is on leave of absence from Yale University where he is Professor of Economics. Dr. Wallich succeeded Paul W. McCracken Professor of Business Conditions at the School of Business Administration of the University of Michigan who resigned on January to return to his University work ; he had served as a member of the Council from December The Council is assisted by a staff of senior economists and statisticians who are experts in their fields. Each staff member is responsible for obtaining the cooperation of other Government agencies and of business labor and other private groups in analyzing and evaluating economic developments in his assigned areas and for keeping the Council advised of current and foreseeable developments. The full-time staff members are Bernard S. Beckler Harold F. Breimyer Henry W. Briefs ( on leave from Georgetown University ) Samuel L. Brown Robert C. Colwell Frances M. James Marshall A. Kaplan Hal B. Lary David W. Lusher Irving H. Siegel Walter F. Stettner and Collis Stocking who is also Administrative Officer of the Council. Charles A. Taff of the University of Maryland serves as a Consultant to the Council Charles L. Schultze resigned from the Council staff on January to join the faculty of Indiana University and John A. Schnittker on August to return to his post of Associate Professor Department of Economics Kansas State University For the fiscal year the Congress appropriated $ for the Council 's activities the same amount appropriated for the fiscal year Appendix B SOME RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS I II III IV Growth of Population Employment and Earnings Agriculture United States Foreign Trade and Payments I. Growth of Population Notable changes have occurred during the past decade in the size and structure of the United States population and in the composition of both families and households. The impact of these changes is already evident in numerous sectors of the economy and will have a further important bearing on national economic development in the decades immediately ahead. An understanding of the dimensions of the accelerated growth of the population in recent years and of the structural changes in economic demands that are inherent in its changing age composition should be helpful in orienting public and private policies appropriately to these important movements POPULATION INCREASES DURING Between January and July the estimated population of the United States including armed forces abroad increased from to persons. This increase of more than 17/2 percent in the course of 5/2 years resulted from more births than deaths a net immigration of and the addition of Alaskans ( civilian population on January ) to the United States TABLE B-l. Population and components oj its year-to-year changes [ Thousands ] Change from preceding year Year ended July Population Net change * Births Number Percent Net civilian Deaths immigration <261 Includes change due to admissions into and discharges from armed forces abroad Adjusted for underregistration Deaths occurring in the United States adjusted for underregistration of infant deaths plus estimated deaths occurring in armed forces abroad * Preliminary ; based on final statistics for period ended July NOTE. The data in this table exclude Alaska ( civilian population of on January ) and Hawaii but include armed forces abroad Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health Education and Welfare population. The population of Hawaii which is estimated to have been about on September will further increase the national totals for January and thereafter Except in and the estimated annual net increase in each year ended July in the last decade exceeded that of the preceding year ( Table B-l ) ; the percentage increase ranged from to per annum. As recently as the increase had been less than percent. The estimated number of births each year ended July during the last decade was larger than the number in the preceding year with the exception of and The number of deaths also increased each year except in and but the annual average increase was only about one-third of the annual average increase in the number of births. Net civilian immigration varied from year to year within the range of to per annum FUTURE AGE GROUPINGS OF PERSONS BORN BEFORE JULY Because birth rates as measured by the number of live births per of population have varied considerably over the last hundred years the distribution of our population among age groups is relatively uneven. Not only did the rising birth rate after World War II cause a disproportionate increase in the number of persons now under years of age but the declining birth rate during the decade of the 's and the very low birth rate of the 's reduced the size of the group that is now between and years of age Many of our future demands for goods and services as well as our needs for specific resources with which to supply them will depend on the number of persons in the various age groups at the time. Needs for education and employment and also the timing of household formation are for the population as a whole closely related to the number of persons who pass certain age marks each year Table B-2 gives estimates of the number of persons in various age groups on July of and and of the distribution in selected years up to on the assumption of a moderate reduction in mortality rates and about the same volume of immigration as in recent years. The percentage change from in the number of persons in each age group is shown in Table B-3 Of particular interest is the marked increase during the next decade that is indicated for the number of high school and college-age boys and girls Also substantial increases are expected during at least the next years for the age groups from which new entrants to the labor force are drawn Those who reach the average age for marriage are generally in the same age groups as those who commence working. Thus the projected increase in the number in these groups foretells a corresponding growth in the rat ; e of household formations and in the creation of additional demands for housing and for a wide range of commodities and services generally pur- TABLE B-2. Population born before July by age groups : and projections for [ Millions of persons * ] Age Under years to years to years to years to years _ to years to years to years to years years and over -._. _ _ ( ) ( ) ( 2> ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C2 ) ( ) ( ) As of July Number of persons will depend on births occurring after July Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-3. Population born before July : Projected percentage changes by age groups 1960-80'i Percentage change from Age Under years to years to years. to years to years ._. ( ) ( ) __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) to years to years to years to years years and over ( ) Percentage changes are based on thousands of persons Number of persons will depend on births occurring after July Source : Department of Commerce chased by newly employed and newly married persons. However it is significant that almost no change during the next five years is indicated for the total number of persons between the ages of and the period of typical first ownership of homes. But the projections show that after the group between and years of age will expand considerably while the group between and will decline slightly until after Rather sharp increases will occur during the next two decades in the number of persons aged and over and by there will be nearly twice as many persons in this group as there were in Estimates of the size and composition of the labor force over the next decade have been constructed on the basis of various assumptions. These estimates point toward a labor force growth of from million to million by with the greater part of the increase occurring in the second half of the decade. Women are expected to comprise some percent of the increase. For men the rate of growth will be substantially greater in the younger working groups particularly those under than in the older groups ; for women however proportionately greater increases are expected in groups years of age and older ESTIMATES OF POPULATION GROWTH The future size of the population in the younger age groups will be influenced more by birth rates than by death rates or by net immigration. Over the past fifty years the birth rate has fluctuated considerably in contrast to the death rate which has declined gradually ; and in recent years net immigration has been relatively unimportant in shaping the size of the total population. Thus estimates of the number of persons expected to comprise the various groups under years of age until will be governed largely by the assumptions made regarding the birth rate during the interim years Because of the previous variability in birth rates and their dependence on factors that in many cases can not be accurately forecast the projections of the population born after July shown in Table B-4 were based on TABLE B Population born after July : Projections by specific age groups under various assumptions regarding fertility ) [ Millions of persons ] l Age Series I : Under years to years to years to years to years. _ ( ) ( ) _ Series II : Under years to years to years to years to years Series III : Under years to years to years to years to years Series IV : Under years. _ to years ] to years to years to years ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) As of July Persons born before July ; see Table B-2 Source : Department of Commerce several fertility assumptions that span the high and low rates actually experienced in recent years. Fertility as used in this connection refers to a measure which takes into account both birth rates according to the ages of women and the number of women of childbearing age. Series I which shows the largest increase over the period assumes a fertility rate from to of percent above the average ; Series II that the rate will remain at the average until ; Series III that by the rate will decline to the level and will remain there to ; and Series IV that by fertility will drop to the level and will then even out. All computations are carried forward from July as a date of reference It is apparent from the projections that steady or rising fertility rates during the next two decades will cause substantial increases in the pre-school and school-age segments of the population. It should be noted however that there are significant differences in the various projections depending on the assumptions made with respect to fertility rates CHANGES IN FARM POPULATION The farm population has declined by about percent since ( Table B-5 ) The decrease in the number of persons living on farms was rather gradual until World War II but since then net migration has proceeded more rapidly. While the farm population has been dwindling the total TABLE B-5. Farm population Farm population * Year Number ( millions ) ._ _ As percent of total population i As of April * Based on thousands of persons. The percentages in this table may differ from those in Table D-66 which are based on total population as of July Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce population of the United States has been growing so that the proportion living on farms has declined substantially. Fifty years ago one out of three persons lived on a farm ; at present one out of eight is a farm resident The decline in farm population since has been much greater among persons to years of age than among other age groups. Because of this farm people years old and over now outnumber for the first time farm persons who are to years of age. The total number of males on farms slightly exceeds the number of females except in the age group to years The net migration of persons from farms in the past four decades has been substantially larger than the decline in the farm population as farm families have continued to contribute to the growth of the total population During the 's as a result of the depression the rate was considerably less than in the 's ; but World War II caused a record increase. The O annual average migration was very high in the years owing in part to the Korean conflict declined somewhat until but rose again in the following three-year period ( Table B-6 ) Since net migration from farms has totaled nearly million persons ; however the farm population has declined by only million from million to million. The continuing migration from farms to urban areas has contributed to the increase in the nonagricultural labor force and to the growth of towns and cities TABLE B-6. Net migration from farms 1920-59l Annual average ( thousands ) Period to to 1940tol950 to to to Percentage change ( annual average ) _ Includes persons who have not moved but whose residence is no longer classified as a farm Years beginning April and ending March Source : Department of Agriculture The employment status of persons years old and over living on farms has changed significantly since when out of nearly million such persons employed nearly percent worked in agriculture. The number of employed farm residents has since declined by almost million and less than percent or 4J/2 million now work in agriculture. During the past decade the number of persons who live on farms but are engaged in nonagricultural activities increased and as a percentage of the farmresident labor force rose from percent in to percent in Participation in off-the-farm employment among employed farm residents is more common for women than for men CHANGES IN HOUSEHOLD FORMATION The number of households in the United States increased from in July to in March Households that include both a husband and wife rose from to during this period while all other households including single persons living alone in a dwelling unit increased from to ( Table B-7 ) Over the past fifty years the number of nonfarm households has increased by ; the number of farm households rose moderately until but since then it has declined by more than During the past decade nonfarm households have increased at an average rate of about per year while the number of farm households has declined at an annual average rate of about TABLE B-7. Number of households by type and residence Number of households ( millions ) Percent of total By type of household Year i Total households 1920_ Husbandwife Other By residence Nonfarm ( ) -._ Farm ( ) Husbandwife Nonfarm households ( ) Data relate to the following months : July ( ) April ( and ) and March ( and ) From to data represent total farm households and total nonfarm households ; from to data are urban and rural nonfarm households and rural farm households Based on thousands of households Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce HOUSEHOLD AND FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS Differences in the composition of households are a reflection of current economic and social influences. In nearly percent of the households included a husband and wife over percent had as a head a person either living alone or with unrelated persons and percent were comprised of related persons but not including a husband and wife. More than three times as many women as men were the heads of families that did not contain both spouses In urban places husband-wife families comprised only about percent of all households while in rural farms they accounted for nearly percent. Conversely the households of single and unrelated persons made up over percent of the total in urban places but less than percent in rural farm areas The median age of husbands in husband-wife households was years in and the median age of wives was years. However in other households the median age of the head was years. In nearly a million cases where married couples lived in the household of relatives the median age of the husband was years and that of the wife was years Since there has been a marked increase in the number of husbandwife families having two or more children under years of age. In that year percent had two or more children of their own percent had one child and percent had none. By percent had two or more chil- dren percent had one child and percent had none. The increase in the number of their own children was less marked in farm families than in nonfarm families PROSPECTIVE INCREASES IN HOUSEHOLDS On the basis of projected population growth and various assumptions concerning continuation of the changes in marital and household status that occurred between and estimates have been made of the number of households there will be in the United States up to In constructing such estimates several assumptions had to be made which involved different rates of household formation in future years. Accordingly as shown in Table B-8 the outlook for household growth is expressed in terms of four separate series. Because of the variations in the assumptions the four series differ in respect of the amount of increase in the number of households from to TABLE B-8. Number of households projections for [ Millions ] Series A Period July : ._ to : Estimated increase.-- Percentage increase Series B Series C Series D Source : Department of Commerce These estimates rest in a considerable degree on projections of the population in various age brackets. Until the latter part of the 's the number of households formed will be determined largely by the marriage divorce and mortality rates of persons now living and by their actions regarding the formation or dissolution of households. Sometime before however the number of households will be influenced also by the birth rate during the next several years The economic significance of the indicated growth in the number of households is considerable. Since most of the increase will arise in husbandwife households the requirements for family dwelling units will grow correspondingly. From this will stem the related demands for household equipment and furnishings and a wide range of related items of consumption II. Employment and Earnings As the recovery movement was extended in into a more general expansion employment increased and unemployment was substantially reduced. During the first half of the year workweeks were lengthened and hourly and weekly earnings increased rapidly. Real earnings also were sharply higher because price increases were small. From July to November however prolonged strikes in industries producing primary metals adversely affected employment and earnings but expansion was resumed by the end of the year EMPLOYMENT AND THE LABOR FORCE The total number of persons employed in civilian occupations averaged million in compared with million in ( Table B-9 ) Employment increased rapidly until July but then was seriously checked by the widespread effects of the long strike in the steel industry ; before the TABLE B-9. Growth of the civilian labor Jorce and expansion of employment [ Millions of persons years of age and over seasonally adjusted data ] Employment status Civilian labor force E mploy ment Agricultural _ Nonagricultural Unemployment Rate of unemployment ( percent ) Third Fourth First Second Third Fourth quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because series are seasonally adjusted separately and because of rounding Source : Department of Labor end of the year however expansion was renewed. In December the total number employed was million ( seasonally adjusted ) a rise of more than million from the recession low of and an increase of nearly above the high point attained in Agricultural employment in which a decreasing proportion of the labor force is engaged changed little during the year The civilian labor force increased by nearly in but since employment increased by a greater amount unemployment was substan- tially reduced averaging about less than in The growth of the labor force like the expansion of employment was greater in the first half of the year than in the second. Women especially those over years of age accounted for much of the increase in the labor force. For men over years of age the increase was slight ; this reflected the small number of births in the 1930Js and the greater inducements to retirement provided by the social security system for those reaching age The great rise in the number of births which began in the 's is now beginning to affect the labor force however ; for the teen-age group the labor force increase was comparatively large in ( Table B-10 ) As the generation of the 's comes of working age in the next decade the labor force is expected to grow more rapidly TABLE B-10. Growth of the total labor force by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Change Sex and age annual average Total labor force to _ Females ._ 14-19years years years years years and over Males years years years years years and over. __ annual average Source : Department of Labor Over the years technological progress and rising levels of living bring about substantial changes in the occupational and industrial structure of employment. " White collar " employment especially of professional and technical staff gains rapidly ; agricultural employment declines ; and other manual occupations do not keep pace with the general long-term expansion Employment in the service industries trade government and others tends to increase more over the long run than in industries producing goods ( Tables B-ll and B-12 ) These trends suggest in broad outline the character of the employment opportunities that may be expected for the growing labor force Over the shorter period of the business cycle however different changes take place in the occupational and industrial distribution of the employed population. Just as employment declines most sharply among production workers in durable goods manufacturing industries during periods of recession so it recovers most rapidly in these industries during periods of TABLE B-l Civilian employment by major occupational groups and [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] i Major occupational group Civilian employment Change to _ Managers officials and proprietors except farm..- _ Professional technical and kindred workersSales workers Clerical workers _ _ _ __ " White collar " employment Manual workers except farm_ Craftsmen and foremen... _ _ Operatives and kindred workers Manufacturing Service workers. __ Laborers Household domestics Farm employment ( ) _ Farmers and farm managers Farm laborers and foremen Annual figures shown for and are averages of data for January April July and October since data prior to are available only for these months. These averages therefore will differ slightly from the annual averages shown in Table D-17 Not available NOTE. The data represent total employment of the civilian labor force and therefore include proprietors and self-employed Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-l Industrial structure of employment and [ Thousands of persons ] Industry Change to i Q oods-producing industries Production employees Salaried employees Service-producing industries Trade Service and miscellaneous Transportation and public utilities Finance insurance and real estate Government __ Federal State and local Agriculture. Contract construction Mining _ _ _ __ Manufacturing.. Total i Preliminary NOTE. The data in this table include employees in nonagricultural establishments reported by the Department of Labor and all persons doing work on farms reported by the Department of Agriculture The figures for total employment and agricultural employment will differ from those shown in Tables B-ll and D-17. For explanation of differences see Table D-22 footnote and Table D-69 footnote Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Labor expansion. This occurred in the recent recovery when between April and the middle of there was a net increase of million in employment in the Nation 's factories a rise of percent. The industries in which employment recovered most rapidly were primary and fabricated metals machinery transportation equipment and apparel but nearly all major industries shared in the expansion. Employment in nonmanufacturing industries which had been less affected by the recession rose by nearly million an increase of percent in the same period ( Table B-13 ) TABLE B Changes in nonagr { cultural employment after April by major industry groups [ Thousands of persons seasonally adjusted data ] Change April to July ( months ) Major industry group Total * July to October October to Decem ( steel strike : ber i months ) ( months ) _ Apparel and other finished textile products Textile-mill products Chemicals and allied products Leather and leather products Rubber products Paper and allied products Printing publishing and allied industries Tobacco manufactures Products of petroleum and coal Food and kindred products Manufacturing Durable goods Primary metal industries Electrical machinery Machinery ( except electrical ) Transportation equipment Fabricated metal industries Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) Stone clay and glass products Furniture and fixtures Miscellaneous manufacturing industries Instruments and related products Ordnance and accessories Nondurable goods Nonmanulacturing ,_ Wholesale and retail trade Government Federal State and local Service and miscellaneous Contract construction Transportation Finance insurance and real estate Public utilities Mining Based on preliminary data for December See Table D-22 footnote for types of workers included Source : Department of Labor During the long steel strike which began on July and continued until suspended by injunction on November employment ultimately declined by more than persons in the industries affected exclusive of the steel industry whose striking workers also numbered approximately In the early weeks of the stoppage employment fell by less than almost all the decline occurring in the mining and transportation industries which service steel production. Layoffs in steel-using industries increased slowly at first. By the middle of October however work forces were being cut back rapidly as inventories were drawn down. Because of the need to replenish working stocks of steel additional layoffs occurred in some steelusing industries for nearly a month after the mills were reopened. Employment ceased to expand in most other major industries during the period of the strike ; but as steel output was resumed in November employment began to recover rapidly UNEMPLOYMENT Unemployment in averaged million or percent of the civilian labor force compared with million or percent in the previous year During the spring and early summer the number unemployed was reduced to about percent of the labor force seasonally adjusted as employment expanded and furloughed employees were recalled. However for reasons associated with the strike in the steel industry the number increased in the third quarter. This trend was reversed during the final months of the year and in December unemployment was percent of the civilian labor force seasonally adjusted The individuals comprising the jobless group changed substantially in every month of as people seeking work found jobs or retired from the labor force and as others became unemployed or began to look for work On the average about million persons became unemployed voluntarily or involuntarily each month and nearly million found work or left the labor market. During the spring the number of people newly unemployed ( i.e. those seeking work for less than weeks ) declined to pre-recession levels ; it increased again in the autumn with the spreading effects of the steel strike. The number unemployed for periods of weeks or more which had reached the high figure of almost million in declined rapidly in the first half of but did not change much thereafter. By December this group had been reduced by million but it still numbered about more than before the recession Unemployment during the recession increased most among men aged to ; correspondingly the reduction during recovery was greatest for this group. Rates of unemployment were also reduced but not so substantially for younger people for men over and for women. Unemployment among married men living with their families the group most firmly committed to the labor force averaged percent of their number in the labor force during compared with percent in and percent in The increase of unemployment attributable to the steel strike occurred chiefly among men During the recession unemployment was highest in durable goods manufacturing mining rail transportation and construction. But by May unemployment rates in these industries had been sharply reduced by extensive recalls of laid-off employees and by shifts of workers to other lines of activity. Rates of unemployment for less experienced workers employees in mining and construction and nonwhite workers remained higher in than before the recession Insured unemployment which covers only persons eligible to draw unemployment compensation benefits declined rapidly in the first half of By July the number in this group was million or about percent of the number of insured employees ; this was approximately the level prevailing before the recession. Beginning in August insured unemployment seasonally adjusted increased again as employees laid off in industries related to steel production filed claims for benefits. By the end of the year million people or percent of insured employees were claiming benefits In all about $ billion was paid in unemployment benefits in ; payments in totaled $ billion The general expansion of employment is reflected in data on employment conditions in the Nation 's major continental labor markets. In July major urban areas were officially classified as " areas of substantial labor surplus " indicating unemployment in excess of percent of the labor force. The number was reduced to in January to in July and to in November. Of the major areas where unemployment remained relatively high in November were in New England or other eastern States. In this month of the areas were classified in categories indicating a rate of unemployment lower than percent in contrast to in July ; of the areas ( including in the midwestern industrial region ) had unemployment rates lower than percent. Surveys indicated that while there were adequate numbers of workers in nearly all of the Nation 's labor markets persons seeking work often lacked the skill or training required for the job opportunities that were available Shortages of professional scientific clerical and skilled manpower are the rule in most labor markets HOURS OF WORK AND EARNINGS The average length of the workweek of production employees in manufacturing industries turned upward in March and increased without significant interruption through June From the low point in February the average workweek increased by hours or percent a larger expansion than occurred in the corresponding period of the recovery. Increases were greatest in the durable goods industries but they were substantial also in nondurable goods and nonmanufacturing industries Longer workweeks normally mean more overtime hours of work and result in sharply increased hourly as well as weekly earnings. An increase in overtime was general throughout manufacturing industry in the first half of and was especially important in the industries producing primary and fabricated metals machinery textiles and rubber products The annual rate of flow of labor income was augmented by $ billion between April and June This rise of percent in months of recovery and expansion was larger than that in the corresponding 14month period from July to September Important elements of the increase were the longer workweeks and higher employment which have already been noted and the substantial increase in hourly earnings resulting from higher wage rates and increased overtime ( Table B-14 ) Average weekly earnings of production workers in manufacturing industries rose from $ in April to $ in June or by nearly percent ; and the increase in real purchasing power was nearly as great since prices of consumer goods advanced only a little during this period TABLE B-14. Expansion of labor income and related items during months following cyclical low points Percentage increase * Item October July to to December September April to June Income : Labor income Wage and salary disbursements in manufacturing Employment : Nonagricultural employment ' Manufacturing4 Hours and earnings for production workers in manufacturing industries : Average weekly earnings : Gross Average weekly " real " earnings Average hourly earnings : Gross Wage rate Overtime etc _ Average weekly hours Percentage increases are based on seasonally adjusted data for all series except weekly and hourly earnings Wage and salary disbursements and other labor income Employees in nonagricultural establishments : See Table D-22 footnote for employees included All employees Based on earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base * Excludes overtime and interindustry shifts Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor Labor income declined during the steel strike from an annual rate of $ billion in June to $ billion in October ; by December it had increased again to $ billion. Lower employment reduction of the average workweek and reduction of average hourly and weekly earnings because the employees on strike or laid off had been employed in relatively high-paid industries were important factors in the decline DEVELOPMENTS IN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING Wage rates continued to rise and fringe benefits continued to grow in Wage increases were put into effect for million employees about TABLE B Distribution of employees receiving wage increases under major labor agreements by size of increase 1956-59l Item Employees receiving wage increases : Number ( millions ) _ Percent Percentage distribution : Total Under cents and under cents and under cents and under cents cents and over __ Not specified or computed _ _ Includes cost of living deferred and newly negotiated wage increases received under collective bargaining situations affecting or more employees and coming to the attention of the Department of Labor. Excludes construction services finance and government Preliminary In percent of employees receiving wage increases received less than cents and percent received cents to cents NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor to percent of those covered by major labor agreements ( Table B-15 ) The average wage increase was smaller in than in primarily because cost of living changes were smaller. The most common increase was about cents per hour compared with about cents in Settlements negotiated in were concentrated in nondurable goods manufacturing and in nonmanufacturing industries and affected nearly million workers. As in negotiated wage increases averaged or cents per hour and fringe benefits were improved in out of major contracts. Revisions of health and welfare plans were the most frequent type of fringe improvement. Relatively few settlements were concluded in heavy industries in ; negotiations were not completed in railroads ; settlement of the steel dispute was not reached until January ; and contracts negotiated in earlier years and providing for deferred increases were already in existence in the automobile and related industries The steel agreement provided for wage rate increases which including incentive pay effects average cents per hour effective on December and cents per hour on October in addition to liberalized insurance and pension benefits. The companies will assume immediately employee contributions for insurance thus increasing hourly take-home pay by about ^ cents. Steel companies estimate the increase in hourly employment costs by the end of the 30-month contract period at to cents including maximum effects of cost of living adjustments and indirect effects on premium pay for overtime social security holidays etc. This settlement involves substantially smaller percentage hourly employment costjncreases than in previous postwar steel settlements In the construction trades about out of union wage scales were raised in about the same proportion as in prior years. The average increase for all scales was about cents per hour compared with cents in and Longer-term contracts and the use of cost of living escalator clauses continued to be important in However cost of living increases were much smaller than in amounting to cent per hour in steel cents in railroads cents in the automobile and related industries and cents in major bargaining situations in the trucking industry. Several new agreements reached in placed limits on cost of living adjustments Agreements in the aluminum industry and in can manufacturing limited adjustments to a maximum of cents in each of the second and third years of the contract. In the steel industry the agreements concluded in January also limited such increases to cents in each of the last two years of the contract period and provided that increases due under these clauses will be used to offset anticipated higher costs of insurance. Deferred increases most commonly amounting to or cents an hour became effective for 2J4 million workers in Concern with problems of unemployment was evident in the terms of some settlements. Severance pay was established or liberalized and in two instances funds were established to cushion the impact of technological change on employment Extended work stoppages occurred in in the basic steel nonferrous metals meat-packing and rubber industries. For the year as a whole the number of strikes recorded and the number of workers involved were not notably high judged by experience since World War II but the number of man-days of idleness due directly to labor-management disputes was estimated at million the highest total for any year since The 116-day steel strike lasting from July to November accounted for more than one-fourth of the million workers directly involved in strikes during the year and for about percent of the time lost III. Agriculture Despite less favorable weather output on the Nation 's million farms in slightly exceeded the record volume attained in and was percent above the average. Crop production was virtually unchanged while livestock production increased slightly. The corn harvest increased by million bushels to a new high of billion and cotton output rose by million bales to million. These gains offset a decrease of million bushels in wheat and sizable declines in oats barley and soybeans. Production of hogs broilers and eggs increased substantially while milk production declined somewhat OVERPRODUCTION AND EXCESS STOCKS Food and natural fiber production in was so great that it exceeded once again the absorptive capacity of domestic and foreign demand. As a consequence carryover stocks already excessive continued to grow. The magnitude of present and prospective stocks is indicated by the data in TableB-16 TABLE B-16. Carryover of grains cotton and tobacco and prospect for * Crop Million short tons Grains ( ) : Total _ _ _ Wheat _ feed grains _.-__ Government financed _ _ Million bales Cotton : Total Government financed _ __ Million pounds ( farm-sales weight ) Tobacco : Total Government financed Inventory date is July for wheat oats and barley ; October for corn and grain sorghums ; \ ugust for cotton ; July for flue-cured types ( ) of tobacco and cigar wrapper types ( ) and October for all other types of tobacco Prospective Fiscal and not operating data Source : Department of Agriculture The stock of million tons of five grains expected to be on hand by the summer and fall of exceeds by million tons the estimated size of reserves required to meet the initial needs of defense emergencies and all but the worst weather contingencies. Cotton stocks also are much in excess of a desirable carryover The major part of total stocks is in Government hands and constitutes a burden on the Federal budget. This ties up sizable amounts of Federal funds : during the fiscal year I960 Commodity Credit Corporation investment in inventory and loans may at times reach nearly $ billion and by June it is expected to be about $ billion. Expenditures during the year for storage transportation and interest will exceed $ billion and substantial losses will be incurred as those commodities are disposed of in domestic and export markets MAGNITUDE OF OUTPUT As Table B-17 indicates United States agricultural output increased slowly during the three decades preceding World War II and then advanced steeply during the two decades from through Output TABLE B-17. Output of farm products Product group average average average average average l Million short tons Crops : major food and feed crops grains root crops oil-bearing crops commercial vegetables _ _ fruits Cotton. __ _ Tobacco Livestock products : Red meat and poultry Beef and veal Lamb and mutton Pork excluding lard Poultry __ Milk Eggs_ ( ) 2x9 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) M6.9 ( ) = Index of total output _ All crops _ All livestock and products Preliminary Not available Excludes grain sorghums which probably average million tons Potatoes sweet potatoes sugar beets Soybeans flaxseed peanuts Dressed weight of slaughter average Meat animal component is based on live weight production on farms Source : Department of Agriculture IOI was particularly large in and when for the first time annual grain production exceeded million tons ; this is percent more than the average annual production during the decade before World War II. Production in of all kinds of meat including poultry meat exceeded million tons a rise of nearly percent since the 's. Cotton and tobacco production have increased less rapidly The more than million tons of grain and million tons of meat currently produced in the United States compare with an estimated million tons of grain and million tons of meat produced in the Soviet Union in and with a total of million tons of grain and million of meat produced in the member countries of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( OEEC ) Yugoslavia and Spain Yet the population of the Soviet Union is million more than that of the United States and the population of the European countries is almost twice the United States total. Production per capita in the United States averaging pounds of grain and pounds of meat compares with pounds of grain and pounds of meat in the Soviet Union and pounds of grain and pounds of meat in the European countries GROWTH IN PRODUCTIVITY The growth in United States farm output " has been achieved through an extraordinary increase in production per unit of labor and per unit of land ( Table B-18 ) Production per man-hour on farms in was more than three times the average. The increase in the last ten years was about percent a growth rate of percent per year or from to times the increase per year in nonfarm output per man-hour. Production TABLE B-18. Indexes of productivity in agriculture [ = ] Output ratio average average average average Per man-hour of farm work : All farm output Livestock and products Crops Per acre : All crops _ Corn Wheat. _ Cotton Per unit of capital : Livestock production per breeding unit Farm output per unit of assets used ^ Per unit of total input ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) average Aggregate index computed from variable yearly weights Live weight of farm production of meat animals plus output of livestock products per head of breeding stock Not available Aggregate farm output per unit of total input Source : Department of Agriculture IO2 per man-hour has increased much faster in crop production than in animal husbandry since high mechanization and the heavy use of fertilizer in crops have had no equivalent counterparts in livestock production The national average production of crops per acre increased by percent from to In view of the very large acreage devoted to farming and the wide variation in latitude and climatic conditions under which farming is carried on this over-all productivity increase is most significant. Underlying it is an even more rapid rise in yields per acre of such important crops as wheat corn and cotton which have been pushed in recent years to levels twice those in the decade prior to World War II There is as yet no sign of a halt in the uptrend in yields per acre Although the increase in productivity has been less for livestock than for crops livestock output per man-hour per animal and per dollar of total capital has shown sizable gains especially since the 's Because as described below increasing quantities of resources other than labor and land have been employed in agriculture productivity has risen less rapidly in terms of total input than in terms of labor and land. The ratio of output to total input is estimated to have increased at an annual rate of about percent during the last ten years and to have been more than percent higher in than in the 's. This increase in efficiency is the composite result of greater precision in apportioning and coordinating factors of production the use of improved crop varieties and hybrid animals a reduction of losses by plant and animal protection and most important of all the increased managerial skill of farm operators CHANGES IN TYPES AND RATES OF INPUT The changes in technology and management in agriculture leading to the remarkable growth in output per man-hour and in output per acre of land have involved extensive shifts in the mix of factors of production. By labor input had been reduced to scarcely half that used in ( Table B-19 ) Much labor has been replaced by capital. Investment in labor-saving machinery has increased greatly and purchases of petroleum fuels have multiplied several times. The inputs of mechanical power and machinery including fuels were more than times the inputs in the decade prior to World War II owing in part to the substantially faster increase in farm wage rates than in prices of farm machinery and motor fuels A second important factor has been the increase in the application of purchased plant nutrients to crops and pastures. Commercial fertilizer applied in was times the average. In addition to intensive application to cotton truck crops root crops soybeans and irrigated pasture the use of fertilizer in the production of feed crops has increased rapidly in recent years. According to the latest Census of Agriculture data the amount of nitrogen used on corn oats and barley in was times that in A comparatively stable cost has encouraged this larger use of O I O3 TABLE B-19. Indexes of agricultural inputs average Item ^ average average average average = Aggregate inputs : J Total _ ._ Paid vs. unpaid inputs : Paid Unpaid Labor Capital M.36 Farm real estate Farm labor Mechanical power and machinery Fertilizer and lime Feed seed livestock services Short tons Concentrate feeds : Supply per animal unit Fed per animal unit ( ) ( < ) Proportion of total inputs : Mechanical Feed seed Farm real Fertilizer Farm labor power and livestock Miscellaneous estate and lime machinery services Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers ' purchases a Farm operator and family labor plus inputs of real estate and other capital owned by farm operator Not available average feeding season Source : Department of Agriculture fertilizer. For instance the price of $ per unit of pounds of pure nitrogen in the form of anhydrous ammonia differed little from the average for the last years. The marginal return for expenditures on fertilizer appears to have continued high. For it is estimated to have been $ per dollar spent on fertilizer for corn $ for soybeans $ for grain sorghum $ for barley $ for oats and $ for wheat Since then it appears to have been reduced somewhat as prices of those commodities have declined Another input factor that has contributed to the expansion of output is the application of supplementary sprinkler irrigation in subhumid and humid climates which is being used increasingly in connection with nitrogen fertilizer. Also such inputs as commercial mixing of feed pesticides and other materials the services used in livestock production selective weed-killing chemicals and related items used in crop production have been rising rapidly When all inputs are combined their total traces a slowly rising long-term trend. During the last few years however withdrawal of land from use by the Soil Bank and continued reductions in labor inputs have brought some declines in total inputs Indicative of the changing mix of inputs is the shifting proportion between those which are " paid " and " unpaid. " The former refer to cur- rent cash costs the latter to farm family labor and owned capital including land. Paid inputs increased by two-thirds from to ; unpaid declined by one-third. The increase in paid inputs reflecting greater commercialization in farming makes agriculture increasingly sensitive to the prices of goods and services that farmers buy prices that recently have been rising CHANGING ORGANIZATION OF AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES The rapid increase in productivity in agriculture has been a major factor in releasing resources for use in the industrial economy. Only 8l/2 percent of the civilian labor force is now engaged in agricultural production on the farm ; the remainder is available to the nonfarm economy High productivity in agriculture reducing labor needed for farm production was achieved as profound structural changes in agricultural resources took place. The number of farms declined from million in the 's to million in ( Table B-20 ) The average size increased by approximately acres. Yet the total acreage of cropland TABLE B-20. Agricultural resources in use Item average average average average average Unit Farms : Number Cropland per farm Grazing land per farm Millions Acres Acres Cropland : Total Million acres Million acres Million acres Million acres Million pcres Manpower : Family workers Hired workers Man-hours used in farm work Millions Millions Power and machinery : Horses and mules Tractors Trucks. _ Automobiles Combines Millions Millions Millions Millions _ Millions Billions Livestock on farms : Grain consuming Million units Per farm_ Units Roughage consuming... Million units Per farm Units Units of production ? _ Millions ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Preliminary Averages for census years except and Permanent pasture and woodland pasture ; excludes cropland pasture Census concept of land area Less than Feeding year beginning during previous calendar year Based on concentrate feed Source : Department of Agriculture i Million acres Harvested Idle fallow soil improvement Pasture Grazing land : In farms Not in farms M61 declined slightly. Moreover in only percent of cropland was actually used for harvested crops ; of the other percent much is reserve capacity. Even so at present yields per acre the number of acres used for harvested crops is too great relative to the effective demand The number of tractors trucks and automobiles on farms increased from million in the 1930Js to million in or from less than per farm to nearly per farm. The value of the inventory of machinery and motor vehicles increased from $ billion in to $ billion in INCREASING PREDOMINANCE OF LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION Among agriculture 's major structural changes is the shift in land utilization toward more animal husbandry. Some million acres of land are used for grazing animals. In million acres were planted to the feed grains and million acres to soybeans all sources of concentrate feed. The milling and other processing by-products of oilseeds sugar beets other bread grains and other food cereals as well as the by-products of the dairy and meat-packing industries are converted to food by animals As the farmers ' managerial skill in primary production of vegetable matter increased the secondary livestock industry expanded converting more and more feed into animal products in response to increasing consumer demand. Livestock and products contributed roughly percent to the cash receipts from marketing in The number of grain-consuming animal units ( each equivalent to milk cow ) increased from million in the 's to million in ( Table B ) With an increase in output per animal livestock production rose even more from million units ( each equivalent to the milk produced from milk cow ) to million units. The value of all livestock on farms in was $ billion considerably above the value of $ billion in FARMERS ' INCOME AND FINANCIAL POSITION Realized gross income from farming ( including cash receipts from farm marketings Government payments to farmers home consumption of farm products and the rental value of farm dwellings ) declined from $ billion in to $ billion in With a slightly increased volume of farm marketings prices averaged about percent less in than in Because of increased prices of production cost items farm operators ' realized net income from farming ( Table B-21 ) was probably $ billion in compared with $ billion in $ billion in and $ billion in Since the number of farms has been declining the average of $ per farm operator while $ less than in was about equal to the average for Despite rapid adjustments in the structure of resources and the number and size of operational units average income of farm operators has not shown the same advance that has generally characterized the nonfarm economy. On the other hand many farm people particularly those living on units with a small income-earning capacity have availed themselves of the opportunities afforded by general economic expansion and are earning income outside the farm. In farmers ' income from nonfarm sources amounted to $ billion compared with $ billion in and $ billion in The average total net income per capita of the farm population from all sources was $ in compared with $ in and $ in TABLE B-21. Farmers' ' income and financial position selected periods average average Item ' Billions of dollars Realized net income : Operators ' from farming Farm population all sources _ Assets of farmers * Machinery Livestock _ .__ _ Real estate 4debt Other debt Proprietors ' equities * __ __ _ .__._. _. ( ) From farming Nonfarm sources ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Dollars Operators ' realized net income from farming per farm Average net income6 of farm population from all sources per capita Preliminary " Realized " income as received without adjustment for change in inventories. Includes Government payments Operators ' plus farm wages received by farm residents * For other items not shown separately see Table D-71. Preliminary estimate for January : Assets total ; real estate debt ; other debt ; proprietors ' equities Not available Based on total net income which includes net change in inventories Source : Department of Agriculture Agriculture as an industry continues to be in a financially strong position Total agricultural assets have risen steadily for many years ; the increase in was percent to $ billion at the end of the year. This value was percent above the average and percent above that for Farm real-estate debt at the end of was about percent higher than at the end of or more than twice the average Yet total liabilities including non-real-estate debt amounted to only percent of total assets ; thus proprietors ' equities of $ billion were percent higher than in and percent higher than in The foreclosure rate of per farms for the year ended March was near the very favorable low average of the last decade ; since March the rate probably has changed very little CHANGES IN DEMAND FOR FOOD The structural change in the resources used in agriculture as well as the shift to more animal production has been induced by the general expansion of the United States economy rising consumer incomes and the resulting trend in demand toward preferred food commodities within a better balanced diet TABLE B Civilian food consumption per capita selected periods [ Pounds ] aver- average age Food group Red meat and poultry Fats and oils fat content Fruits farm weight equivalent Vegetables farm4 weight equivalent Cereal products Dry beans and peas Potatoes and sweet potatoes Sugar refined ___ _- _ Beef and veal Lamb and mutton Pork excluding lard Chicken and turkey Eggs _ -_ Fluid milk and cream Cheese Other milk products Preliminary Ready-to-cook weight Excluding butter. Milk equivalent fat solids basis Includes corn sugar and sirup Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-23. Caloric and protein content of daily food consumption of civilians per capita Percent of total consumption Quantity Food group average average average average ! Number of calories Total Foods of livestock origin Fats and oils Flour and cereal products _ Potatoes and sweet potatoes. _ _ Sugar and sirup Other foods Grams of protein Total Foods of livestock origin Flour and cereal products. _ _ Other foods Preliminary a Excludes fat cuts and butter ; includes fish Includes fat cuts and butter Source : Department of Agriculture According to the data in Table B-22 the civilian per capita consumption of red and poultry meat increased by pounds between and By contrast consumption of wheat products declined by pounds in the same period and of all cereal foods by pounds Of the total caloric content of the American diet in percent was derived from foodstuffs of livestock origin ; in those foods contributed percent of the total ( Table B ~ ) The share of the total caloric intake in obtained from the starchy items such as bread cereals potatoes and sweet potatoes was only percent appreciably less than in Animal protein made up percent of all protein consumed in compared with percent in Nevertheless there is no indication that per capita consumption of animal products has reached saturation SCOPE AND DEGREE OF MALADJUSTMENT The problems of commercial agriculture are chiefly the result of oversupply a supply which exceeds even the very strong domestic and fairly strong foreign demand and rising costs of production. Changes in the output of major commodity groups measured in pounds per capita of the total population of the United States are given in Table B-24. The most impressive change shown is for the output of all grains root crops and oil-bearing crops ; on a per capita basis the output of these crops in was about pounds or percent above the high average for TABLE B-24. Agricultural output per capita of total population [ Pounds ] Crops : major food and feed crops ( ) average average average average average Product group ( ) grains root crops oil-bearing crops _ commercial vegetables fruits _ Cotton Tobacco _ __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Livestock products : Red meat and poultry Beef and veal Lamb and mutton Pork excluding lard Poultry Milk Eggs ._ ( ) __ Preliminary Not available Excludes grain sorghums Potatoes sweet potatoes sugar beets Soybeans flaxseed peanuts e1924-29 average Source : Department of Agriculture ( ) ( ) i Correction of the existing maladjustment would require persistent efforts to lower output toward market equilibrium and to dispose of the accumulated excess carryover of commodities with the least possible market impact The magnitude of the problem is demonstrated by the size of the surplus : the excess carryover of grain would feed all the Nation 's livestock for almost six months ; if converted over a period of six years into meat it would yield more than million short tons ( carcass weight ) per year or more than short tons of canned meat. The excess stocks of cotton would run the cotton mills for six months. Obviously correction requires an adjustment of production to effective demand. Until this adjustment is accomplished the problem of surpluses will even when seemingly dormant remain a cause of public concern no IV. United States Foreign Trade and Payments The United States has had a large deficit in its balance of payments for the greater part of two years ; over most of this period it has ranged around $ billion on an annual rate basis as measured by net transfers of gold and recorded liquid dollar assets to foreign ownership. The main constituents of the deficit have varied much more widely however with partially offsetting changes in goods and services and in capital movements There were indications in the second half of that the deficit was diminishing. The third quarter brought a substantial rise in exports seasonally adjusted for the first time in two years ( Table B-25 ) Imports which had been increasing rapidly held steady on a seasonally adjusted basis and the net outflow of United States capital on private and public TABLE B-25. United States balance of payments average and [ Billions of dollars ] ( annual average ) Payment or receipt First Second Third quarter quarter quarter Seasonally adjusted annual rates United States payments l United States receipts ! Merchandise exports Services and military transactions Foreign long-term investments United States in Errors and omissions ( net receipts ) Increase in foreign gold and liquid dollar assets through transactions with the United States * ._ Merchandise imports Services and military expenditures Remittances and pensions Government grants and related capital outflows ( net ) United States private and other Government capital outflows ( net ) * } ( ) ( ) Transfers of military aid are excluded both from exports ( under receipts ) and from grants ( under payments ) Includes United States military expenditures abroad in billions of dollars as follows : ; ; ; ; ( first quarters at an annual rate ) Reflects $ million advance repayment by Germany on postwar debt to the United States Excludes $ million for increase in United States subscription to the International Monetary Fund s Less than $ million NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Ill account combined showed no change from the second to the third quarter at a level lower than in Total recorded receipts thus increased in the third quarter while total recorded payments leveled out but the improvement was only partially reflected in a decrease in net transfers of gold and liquid dollar assets to other countries. This discrepancy ( which is reflected in the wide shifts in the errors and omissions item of the balance of payments ) is believed to be attributable to lags in crediting payments to foreign accounts with the result of understating gold and dollar transfers in the second quarter and of overstating them in the third. Incomplete data for the fourth quarter show a much lower rate of transfer of such assets partly because of a $ million repayment by the United Kingdom to the Export-Import Bank Development of the Deficit With respect to the evolution of the deficit it is relevant to note that in the last several years the United States would have had to achieve an extraordinarily rapid growth in its earnings from exports and other receipts to match within the same period the swift rise which occurred in its payments As a starting point for this comparison the years may be taken This was a relatively quiet period between the disturbances associated with the Korean conflict and those produced by the Suez crisis. It may be noted however that the United States was in deficit in its balance of payments at that time in the sense of transferring gold and liquid dollar assets to other countries at a rate averaging some $ billion annually. These transfers were related on the one hand to the position of the United States as an international reserve center and on the other hand to the needs of other countries to reconstitute and to add to their exchange reserves as international trade expanded Measured from the average United States payments to other countries rose with some irregularity by almost $ billion or percent to the second and third quarters of All of the main categories of payments contributed to this increase as may be seen in Table B-25 ( also Chart in Chapter ) The magnitude of this expansion as well as the adjustment problem which it presented for exports is brought out by the fact that the total value of world trade rose by only about percent over the same period A striking feature of the evolution of the United States balance of payments is that until mid-1957 the rise relative to in export earnings and other receipts was even faster than the rise in payments. The underlying circumstances proved however to be short-lived. Starting in the latter part of total receipts fell back sharply and then fluctuated for a time before recovering in the third quarter of to the level reached three years before that is some percent higher than in INCREASE IN PAYMENTS SINCE The outflow of United States capital and grants at the rates prevailing in the second and third quarters of was more than one and one-half times the rate in ( when however the movement averaged less than in earlier years ) after having risen to even higher rates in the intervening period. United States private direct investment abroad moved up rapidly in and in connection with major petroleum and other resource development projects especially in Latin America and Canada This movement subsided during the recession but in the first half of the outflow of United States capital through new issues of foreign securities and other portfolio investments rose in response to the markedly higher level of yields prevailing in other financial centers. But these capital flows also declined subsequently as monetary policies in the United States became more restrictive. Net credits by the United States Government increased in and and have since varied only moderately except as they were reduced by large repayments by the Federal Republic of Germany in the first quarter of and by the United Kingdom in the fourth quarter Among services the chief increases have been in payments for transportation and foreign travel both of which were some $ million higher in than in These outlays have been stimulated by the rise in the volume of foreign commerce and in personal incomes in this country United States military expenditures abroad rose by some $ million from to but they have now moved part way back to the earlier level as payments on procurement contracts and construction projects abroad have declined Expansion of Merchandise Imports The rise in the value of merchandise imports by the United States was interrupted briefly by a dip chiefly affecting industrial materials during the recession. After that the increase became extraordinarily rapid for a time the total value of imports expanding by almost onequarter from April-June to the same period in Finished manufactures have been among the most important elements of growth since ( Table B-26 ) Passenger cars led the rise until mid-1959 but were imported at lower rates during the rest of the year. The growth of imports of other consumer goods was resumed after a pause during the recession ; these goods have included both wearing apparel and a wide variety of sundry consumer items ( Appendix Table D-74 ) Imports of capital goods though small compared with the amounts exported have also moved up rapidly. Petroleum figured prominently in the import increase until but has since been limited by import controls In addition imports of certain other products rose substantially in owing in part to temporary circumstances : steel because of the anticipated TABLE B-26. United States imports average and [ Millions of dollars ] average Commodity or source Second half First half AprilSeptember Annual rates Total general imports By commodity : Meat products and edible animals Coffee. _ Other foods and drugs _ _ Newsprint and paper base stocks Petroleum and products Building materials Steel-mill products Other industrial materials Passenger cars and parts. Wearing apparel O ther consumer manufactures l Materials and equipment for use in agriculture Capital equipment ( nonfarm ) All other By source : Industrial countries : Western EuropeCanada Japan Oil-exporting countries : Venezuela and Caribbean Middle East Other nonindustrial countries : Latin American Republics excluding Venezuela Sterling area excluding oil exporters All other See Table D-74 for detail Includes noncommercial entries unclassified imports and military equipment Source : Department of Commerce and actual effects of the strike on deliveries from domestic producers ; building materials because of the high level of housing construction during recovery from the recession ; and feeder cattle and beef for processing because of relatively short domestic supplies of beef and veal while cattle herds were being built up. Normal demands for imported industrial materials were also intensified as expansion spread throughout the economy The unusual speed of the increase in United States imports from the second quarter of to the second quarter of may thus be attributed to a combination of forces. Some of these began to exercise a less buoyant effect in the second half of and total imports seasonally adjusted remained at about the level set in the second quarter The products leading the import expansion since have come mainly from the industrially developed countries. Until imports from the petroleum-producing countries also grew rapidly. Imports from other nonindustrial countries on the other hand showed little tendency to rise until stimulated by the quickening of United States demand for industrial materials in Even with this pick-up the value of imports from Latin America ( exclusive of Venezuela ) remained lower than in ; the fall in coffee prices from the extraordinary peak had a particularly depressing influence on the value of imports from this area VARIATIONS IN RECEIPTS Merchandise exports have accounted for the greater part of the swings noted in United States receipts from abroad since ; these changes will be examined more closely below. It is also relevant to observe that receipts from services including earnings on foreign investments rose swiftly up to but then fell the next year by more than $ million ( Table B-25 ; also Appendix Table D-72 ) This decline ( largely in transportation earnings as a result of the reduction in export cargoes and in freight rates ) contrasted with a further increase of about the same amount in in United States payments abroad on services and military expenditures. The two sides of the services account together thus contributed some $ million to the deficit in that year The Decline in Exports The fall in United States exports after mid-1957 was not unrelated to the forces behind the preceding upsurge. Some of these forces were of a quite specific character including the effort to ensure Europe 's petroleum supplies during the closure of the Suez Canal in and the special supply and demand situations affecting cotton and wheat ( Table B-27 ) These developments for particular commodities were superimposed on a much more general shift in the world economic climate. For some years foreign countries especially the more developed ones had been experiencing a rapid growth in capacity and in output. Inflationary tendencies were fairly common and there was a general pressure on supplies of fuels industrial materials and capital equipment. The Suez crisis accentuated these demands. Whether or not the expansion had run its course policies of restraint became imperative in a number of countries whose imports of capital goods and industrial materials had grown faster than their export earnings or other means of financing. As a result the pace of production abroad slowed down and capacity was less fully utilized ; investment activity became more hesitant in many countries ; inventory policies shifted toward liquidation ; and prices and earnings of countries supplying primary products weakened TABLE B-27. United States exports average and [ Millions of dollars ] Change from to AprilSeptember by areas Product ( annual average ) AprilSeptember Western Europe Canada and Japan Latin American Republics All other Annual rates Total exports excluding " special category " Coal and related products. _ Petroleum and products Cotton unmanufactured. Inedible vegetable oils and oilseeds Iron and steel-making raw materials _ _ _ -_ _ Iron and steel-mill products Nonferrous metals Metal manufactures Foodstuffs __ Construction excavating mining and hauling equipment L Other machinery Passenger 2cars parts and accessories Aircraft and engines Railroad equipment Textile semi- and finished manufactures Chemicals and related products All other including reexports.. Includes tractors and trucks Also includes busses special-purpose vehicles and truck parts and accessories Source : Department of Commerce This shift in the foreign economic situation together with the changes that affected particular commodities brought a severe setback to United States exports. About two-thirds of the decline from to was in fuels and industrial materials. For petroleum and coal the decline though immediately attributable to the short-term factors mentioned seemed to mark a shift in the world energy situation. The weakness in the steel market abroad largely attributable to a reduction in inventories by the steel-consuming industries was more temporary but enough to cause a fall in aggregate steel output in Western Europe and Japan Finished manufactures accounted for only about one-third of the decline in total exports from to Within this group a few major types of capital equipment ( Table B-27 ) were affected most sharply because of their apparent sensitivity to the investment cycle. These items are construction excavating and mining equipment and tractors and trucks Among other finished manufactures the declines from appear relatively modest when the change in the business situation in some of our leading markets is taken into consideration Divergent Tendencies in Exports During Unfavorable conditions continued to affect certain of our main export commodities and markets through part and in some cases all of Among our leading exports cotton shipments to all destinations were extremely low through the third quarter ( Table B-27 ) Market conditions abroad improved as consumption rose and stocks fell but United States exports lagged pending an announced change in export price policy with the start of the new crop year. In the fourth quarter this change was Deflected in a steep rise in cotton shipments and heavy export bookings extended well into Exports of coal petroleum products and steel remained very weak throughout the year. For the first two this weakness reflected the shift in the world fuel balance and the growth of foreign refining capacity. The further decrease in steel exports like the rise in steel imports may have been influenced by diverging trends of United States and foreign prices but the more immediate factor in both cases was the prolonged steel strike in the United States. Late in the year the steel shortage began to affect also the availability of products made of steel Exports of railway equipment fell in following large deliveries in the two preceding years financed by export credits. Exports of civilian aircraft in each of the first three quarters of also were consistently lower than a year earlier but rose from the second to the third quarter of as deliveries started against large orders for the new plane models Among our major markets United States exports during were particularly affected by weaknesses in the trade and payments position of the Latin American countries which normally take about one-quarter of our total exports. The reductions were in a broad range of export products especially in the capital equipment field The weaknesses noted in certain key products and in some of our main markets tended during much of the year to offset the increases in exports of foodstuffs oils and oilseeds machinery tractors automotive parts chemicals and other manufactures to Canada Western Europe and Japan where economic activity was expanding. But as the year advanced and the tempo of economic activity increased further in the leading industrial countries the gains outweighed the losses and total exports in the third quarter were above those a year earlier. Subsequently however exports were restrained by the relatively brief dock strike in October and possibly also by the spreading effects of the steel shortage RELATIVE PERFORMANCE OF UNITED STATES EXPORTS As the preceding analysis points out changes in foreign demand associated with changes in general economic conditions abroad and shifts in the market situation with respect to particular products have had an important effect on United States exports. It is also relevant to consider whether the behavior of our exports reflects any general deterioration in the ability of United States producers to compete in foreign markets. This question is chiefly of interest with respect to finished manufactures. These constitute about percent of total United States exports though as noted above they accounted for a much smaller part of the setback in exports after United States Share in Export Markets for Manufactures Measured on a global basis the share of the United States in total exports of manufactures by all industrial countries to all destinations has declined appreciably in the last ten years. Its share so computed was around or percent in the early 's remained slightly over percent through and has since declined to or percent. There are however several reasons why this type of global calculation is unsatisfactory as a criterion of the performance of United States exports. For one thing the shift was in part a necessary consequence of the belated but then swift recovery in the exports of Germany and Japan which caused a decline not only in the United States share of the export market but still more up to in the shares of other industrial countries. Second the over-all shares are appreciably affected by the rapid increase in recent years in other countries ' exports of manufactures to the United States itself. Similarly the global percentages are affected by the rapid expansion of Western European exports of machinery and steel to the Sino-Soviet bloc. A further distorting influence arises from the fact that two markets which are of much greater importance to the United States than to Europe or Japan have recently been rather depressed Canada in and Latin America in thus reducing the United States share in any simple global calculation An analysis by the Department of Commerce examines recent changes in the United States share for each of items or groups of manufactures in each of six regional markets ( that is product-market subdivisions ) comprising together by far the greater part of free world trade in manufactured goods. The analysis compares the shares in with the averages for on the basis of uniformly classified trade statistics compiled by the United Nations. Had the earlier United States shares prevailed in all the cases considered United States exports of manufactures would have been some $ million greater in than they actually were ( Table B-28 ) It is noteworthy moreover that the declines in the United States share were heavily concentrated in automobiles iron and steel and aircraft Shortfalls in these three categories totaled $ million. It may be significant that the first two of these groups especially iron and steel were marked by greater-than-average price increases in the United States over the last ten years. United States losses in the automobile market abroad were universal and were the continuation of a trend of some years ' duration. The decrease in our share of steel exports on the other hand was predominantly in Europe and was attributable at least in part to tempo- TABLE B-28. Changes in United States shares of world exports of manufactures to selected markets to Standard International Trade Classification number Product group Total of groups specified Total excluding iron and steel automobiles and other road motor vehicles ships and aircraft United States exports to regional markets in Value ( millions Percentage share of dollars ) Index of United States shares ( = ) * Value equivalent of change from average ( millions of dollars ) Rubber manufactures Paper and manufactures Textiles excluding clothing Chemicals Iron and steel Other metals _ Metal manufactures _ Power generating machinery Agricultural machinery Tractors ___ _ Office machinery Metalworking machinery Industrial machinery Electrical machinery and appliances.. Railway vehicles Automobiles and other road motor vehicles Ships and miscellaneous road vehicles Aircraft Scientific photographic professional and other instruments Canada Latin America Western Europe Africa Near East and Far East ( excluding Japan and Australasia ) Trade with communist countries excluded Condensation of product groups making up about percent of total United States exports of manufactures covered in the analysis a Share of United States exports in total exports by the United States OEEC countries ( excluding Iceland Ireland and Switzerland ) and Japan to markets specified Weighted average for regional markets Weighted average of indexes for individual commodity groups Sources : Department of Commerce and United Nations rary market conditions in that area in though in the steel strike here continued to depress our share in export markets for this product In aircraft the decline was attributable to the switchover in production to the new jet and turbo-jet models ; large export deliveries of the new planes are scheduled for after which however they are expected to fall again as the reequipment of the major airlines is completed Exclusive of these three groups and also of ships ( exports of which from the United States include mere transfers of registry ) the weighted index of United States shares in the six regional markets for manufactures showed virtually no change in compared with In none of the manufactured items other than those specified were the decreases in market shares particularly great insofar as the dollar magnitudes are concerned. The decreases as well as the increases in the United States share in different products and regions were not sufficiently great to provide any CX clear sign of significant shifts. This reserved judgment seems all the more warranted when account i&taken of the effects of cyclical movements during the period on United States exports of machinery Machinery Exports and Investment Activity Abroad The competitive position of the United States as a supplier of machinery is of particular importance to its trade and payments position. Machinery alone accounts for almost one-quarter of United States exports and has a strong growth potential in view of the stress placed on construction projects and industrial expansion in both underdeveloped and developed economies In the United States supplied one-third of all machinery exports of the industrial countries to markets outside the United States. Its share in the total and in most machinery categories was however slightly less than in ( Table B-28 ) and still less than in the early postwar years when the United States was drawn upon even for items of which it had not been traditionally a major exporter. The supply capacity of other countries has greatly strengthened since that time. There are also some indications though this is a difficult area of measurement that machinery prices may have increased rather more in the United States than in most other countries especially during the investment upsurge in Foreign demand for United States machinery is also closely related to the state of business abroad and especially to changes in investment activity This relationship may be further examined in the light of Table B which shows for a number of countries investment in machinery and equipment ( exclusive of transportation equipment wherever possible ) and machinery imports both total and from the United States over the period The availability of information limits these comparisons to Canada Japan and a number of Western European countries and the data for are necessarily based on partial information or forecasts for the year. Most of the countries considered went through fairly pronounced cyclical phases in machinery and equipment investment over the last several years ; in the United Kingdom however the fluctuations were small after and in Germany Sweden and Denmark the expansion proceeded without interruption. The data in the table permit the following generalizations with respect to the behavior of the machinery imports of the various countries : ( ) When investment rose strongly total imports of machinery tended to rise proportionately more strongly. It is also true that machinery imports from the United States tended to rise more than proportionately when investment activity in these countries was expanding rapidly. At such times the rise in machinery imports from the United States tended to equal or frequently to exceed the rise in total machinery imports of the countries considered at least up to or TABLE B-29. Relation of machinery imports to investment in machinery and equipment excluding transportation equipment,1 selected countries Country average value ( millions of dollars ) Indexes of current dollar values = Canada : Machinery and equipment investment Machinery imports From the United States Japan : Machinery and equipment investment Machinery imports _ From the United States OEEC ( member countries combined ) : Machinery and equipment investment including transportation equipment Machinery imports From the United States ( ) ( ) <130 United Kingdom : Machinery and equipment investment _Machinery imports From the United States Germany Federal Republic of : Machinery and equipment investment including transportation equipment Machinery imports From the United States France : Machinery and equipment investment Machinery imports From the United States ] Belgium : Machinery and equipment investment Machinery imports __ From the United States ( ) Switzerland : Machinery and equipment investment including transportation equipment Machinery imports From the United States ( ) Sweden Norway and Denmark : Machinery and equipment in ' vestment Machinery imports From the United States Italy : Machinery and equipment investment Machinery imports From the United States Netherlands : Machinery and equipment investment Machinery imports __ From the United States Except as noted for the OEEC group Germany and Switzerland ( ) Figures for are based on first six or nine months or in some cases on official estimates s Not available * Based on trend shown in United States export statistics * Investment and trade indexes are derived from dollar equivalents of data in French francs converted at average annual exchange rates and reflect the franc devaluations of August-October and December Indexes of current franc values are higher by percent in percent in and percent in Sources : United Nations OEEC national statistical sources and Council of Economic Advisers ( ) In most countries where investment activity ceased to rise after or where it fell there was a weakening tendency in total machinery imports and still more in machinery imports from the United States. In countries which were still fairly numerous where investment remained below earlier peaks the relative weakness in imports of machinery from the United States usually continued into ( ) Where however the expansion of machinery investment continued or was resumed in strength in machinery imports from the United States usually responded vigorously. The increase in such imports by Germany one of the strongest competitors in this field is especially noteworthy though Germany 's total machinery imports rose even more strongly. The increase in imports of United States machinery by the Scandinavian countries in was also substantial and greatly exceeded the increase in their total machinery imports Machinery exports from the United States in thus appeared to reflect in accentuated measure the differing degrees of intensity in the investment activity of foreign countries. A firmer view of these relationships and trends as currently experienced can scarcely be formed until investment has risen further in countries where it is still sluggish in relation to earlier peaks As far as the past is concerned however the observations made with respect to Table B-29 suggest that machinery exports from the United States do well under conditions of sustained investment expansion in other countries or in periods of strong cyclical upswing but may fare relatively badly when investment abroad slows down and the machinery production capacity in other countries is underutilized. Price disparities could contribute to this result. Another influence could be the greater cyclical sensitivity of some types of machinery than of others ( as suggested above with regard to the fall in United States exports of construction excavating and mining equipment ) Moreover even in the absence of price or other differences any foreign discrimination against imports from the United States would have a greater adverse impact in slack periods when foreign producers have spare capacity available than in periods when they have long delivery dates THE CONTINUING ADJUSTMENT PROBLEM The preceding analysis has described the present balance of payments position of the United States largely in terms of the changes that have taken place since At that time payments already exceeded receipts by some $ billion annually and since then have risen faster the increase being about percent in payments against some percent in receipts measured to the third quarter of Neither of these percentage increases is in any sense a stable figure. On the payments side imports contain certain strong growth elements even though there were some exceptional ones in the recent past which are not expected to continue. And the outflow of private capital from the United States for investment abroad which was lower in than in the three preceding years has undoubtedly been restrained in some measure by conditions that may be subject to change. These include the relatively lower demand for capital prevailing until recently in foreign financial centers and the relatively large production facilities built up in earlier years for certain raw materials which especially in a period of slack demand have been a deterrent to the further expansion of capacity Receipts have varied rather more widely than payments over the last five years first rising and then falling abruptly in response to a combination of cyclical and special influences. More recently despite unfavorable conditions affecting some of our main export products and markets export earnings have strengthened in response to the renewed upswing in other industrial countries. Other more temporary factors have also influenced the current development of exports some favorably as in the case of aircraft deliveries and others unfavorably as in the case of steel. These factors too are subject to change By some standards our recent export performance in relation to the level is not unfavorable. The increase in exports for example was greater than the rise of about percent in world trade as a whole over the same period though less than the rise of some percent since in intra-European trade which has set a remarkably fast pace The rise in export earnings and other receipts has not been sufficient so far however to offset the extraordinary rise in payments and the deficiency appears to be greater than can be attributed to still depressed conditions in some of our major markets or to temporary factors which have affected trade in cotton and steel The problem has been complicated by obstacles that have developed to our coal exports and by changes in the international automobile trade The latter alone has had an adverse effect of some $ billion on the United States trade position including both the rise in our imports and our failure to share in the growth in export markets abroad Such changes as these increase the burden of adjustment to be borne by other United States exports and especially by other manufactures. Some of the latter have gained and others have lost in relative standing in different markets but without a decisive impact either way on the dollar magnitudes involved. Increases in United States shares of export markets sufficient to meet the balance of payments problem would have been difficult to attain under the relatively dull or depressed conditions prevailing in international trade until the last few months. The current upturn in economic activity abroad and in world trade together with further steps taken recently by other countries to eliminate or to reduce discrimination against dollar goods and the anticipated increase in their financing extended to the less developed countries provides a more favorable setting for the attainment of the desired expansion in our exports. As discussed in Chapter the realization of these potentials would be aided by efforts of United States producers to strengthen their competitive position in foreign markets Appendix C STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO THE DIFFUSION OF WELL-BEING CONTENTS C-l. Population growth and vital statistics C Gross national product total and per capita in current and prices G-3. Civilian employment C-4. Personal income total and per capita in current and prices C-5. Disposable personal income total and per capita in current and prices C-6. Personal income disbursements : Percentage distribution by type of income C-7. Average family personal income before and after Federal individual income tax liability in current and prices C-8. Real personal income of families : Number and percent of families by income group and C Average gross hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing industries in current and prices C Average weekly earnings of production workers in manufacturing industries in current and prices C Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries in current and prices C Work stoppages resulting from labor-management disputes C Total and per capita personal consumption expenditures in current and prices C-l Vacations and vacation activities C-15. Automobile ownership C-16. Home ownership and C-l Household status of married couples C-l Homes with selected electrical appliances C-19. Life insurance C-20. Financial assets and net equity of individuals C-21. Shareowners in public corporations and C-22. Fall school enrollment C Percent of civilian noninstitutional population to years of age enrolled in school by age group October of each year C-24. Educational expenditures and selected measures of educational achievement C-25. Old-age survivors and disability insurance coverage : Number and percent relation to total population and to paid employment C-26. Old-age survivors and disability insurance benefits C Unemployment insurance coverage and benefits C-28. Beds in civilian hospitals C-29. Hospital surgical and medical expense coverage C-30. Physicians dentists and nurses C-31. Communicable diseases C-32. Injury-frequency rates in manufacturing industries Page Statistical Tables Relating to the Diffusion of Well-Being The following tables present certain indicators of the improvement of well-being that has been attained in the United States since Necessarily they are limited to those aspects and conditions of personal welfare that can be expressed in quantitative terms. Although they fail to reveal except indirectly the qualitative aspects of welfare they may be useful indicators of some of the material conditions on which improvements in the quality of living are based. Tables are included on production and employment ; personal income and its distribution ; consumption ; material comforts and conveniences ; conditions of work ; education ; leisure and recreational activities ; personal financial security ; and health TABLE G-l. Population growth and vital statistics Population Year Number ( thousands ) Annual percentage increase Birth rate Death rate Age- adjusted death rates Per population Infant mortality rate Maternal mortality rate Per live births <26. <.35 As of July ; includes armed forces abroad Adjusted for under-registration The age-adjusted rate makes allowance for changes in age composition of the population. The ageadjusted rate for a giver during the given year distribution of the popu Provisional Preliminary ; based on provisional data for January-November Preliminary ; based on provisional data for January-October NOTE. The birth rate for is based on total population including armed forces abroad. Birth rates for and death rates for are based on total population excluding armed forces abroad. Alaska and Hawaii are excluded from all data Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health Education and Welfare TABLE C Gross national product total and per capita in current and prices Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Year In current prices In current prices In prices In prices l For method of deflation see U.S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Preliminary ; includes fourth quarter estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-3. Civilian employment [ Millions of persons years of age and over ] Civilian employment Year Total Old definition : New definition : Male -_ ( ) __ ( ) See Note Table D-17 Not available Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with prior data. See Note Table D-17 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Female TABLE G Personal income total and per capita in current and prices Total ( billions of dollars ) Year In current prices In prices J Per capita ( dollars ) In current prices In prices Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditure component of gross national product on a base Preliminary ; includes fourth quarter estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-5. Disposable personal income total and per capita in current and prices 59l Total ( billions of dollars ) Year _ _ _ In current prices In current prices In prices __ ._ _- _-_ _ _ _ In prices Per capita ( dollars ) Disposable personal income is personal income less personal taxes Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditure component of gross national product on a base Preliminary ; includes fourth quarter estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Sources ; Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers '3 * TABLE G-6. Personal income disbursements : Percentage distribution by type of income Percent of total income disbursements Year Total Labor income and transfer personal Proprietors ' income Investment income income payments disburseWage ments Busiand ( billions Rental PerTransof dol- Total salary Other fer pay- Total ness Farm Total income Divi- sonal labor and dis- income ments of dends interest lars ) profesbursepersons income sional ments Personal income receipts plus personal contributions for social insurance Preliminary ; includes fourth quarter estimate by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE G Average family personal income before and after Federal individual income tax liability in current and prices Average ( mean ) personal income per family Number of families and unattached individuals ( millions ) Year __ _ In current prices After tax In prices In current prices In prices > __ Before tax $ $ ( ) $ ( ) $ Includes unattached individuals Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditure component of gross national product on a base Not available Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G Real personal income of families : Number and percent of families by income group and Family personal income in prices ( before income taxes ) Year Under $ Total $ and over Under $ $ and over $ and over Under $ Under $ $ and over Families ( millions ) _ __ Percent of families _ An approximate conversion of the and the income distributions of families and unattached individuals into dollars has been made by applying the implicit price deflator of the personal consumption expenditure component of gross national product to the current dollar distribution for the earlier years Separate indexes applicable to the various income brackets are not available. It is therefore necessary to use the same index throughout the income range even though all brackets may not have been actually affected in the same way by the price rise Includes unattached individuals Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G-9. Average gross hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing industries in current and prices $ In current prices Year _ $ _ _ _ $ In prices l __ _ _ _ _ _ _ Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base Preliminary NOTE. Average hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing are affected by changes in premium pay for overtime by changes in the industrial composition of employment and by other factors as well as by general changes in hourly wage rates Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-10. Average weekly earnings of production workers in manufacturing industries in current and prices Average gross weekly earnings Year In current prices In prices Average spendable weekly earnings ' Worker with no dependents In current prices In prices Worker with three dependents In current prices In prices $ $ $ $ $ $ Average gross weekly earnings less Federal social security and income taxes Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base Preliminary NOTE. Average gross weekly earnings are affected not only by changes in average gross hourly earnings but also by changes in the length of the workweek part-time work stoppages for varying causes labor turnover and absenteeism Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries in current and prices [ For production workers or nonsupervisory employees ] Manufacturing Year Total Building conDurNonstrucable durable tion goods goods Retail trade Whole- Class I Telerailsale trade roads phone Laundries Bituminous coal mining In current prices $ $ $ $ i $ $ $ $ $ $ In prices $ _ _ $ $ i $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Data beginning with not comparable with prior data Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base s Preliminary Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers O TABLE G -Work stoppages resulting from labor-management disputes l Man days idle Work stoppages ( number ) Year Number ( thousands ) Percent of estimated working time of all workers Workers involved ( thousands ) The number of stoppages and workers involved pertain to stoppages beginning in the period involving or more workers and lasting a full day or shift or longer. Data on man-days of idleness pertain to all stoppages in effect during the period Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Total and per capita personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Total ( billions of dollars ) Year In current prices In prices Per capita ( dollars ) In current prices In prices * _ For method of deflation see S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Preliminary ; includes fourth quarter estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE G Vacations and vacation activities Number of weeks of vacations ' ( millions ) Year Visitors to areas administered by National Park Service ( millions ) Total National Parks only Paid licenses ( millions ) l Hunting Fishing _ _ _ _ <62.6 <22.3 Data relate to persons with a job but on vacation Data relate to year ended June Includes National Parks national monuments and other areas Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Interior TABLE C-15. Automobile ownership Number of families owning automobiles ( millions ) Percent of all families owning automobiles One or more Two or more automobiles automobiles One or more Two or more automobiles automobiles Year ) W i Not available NOTE. Data relate to ownership of an automobile by some member of the family early in each year Data are not available prior to Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-l6. Home ownership and Total owner-occupied dwelling units l Year Number ( millions ) Nonfarm owner-occupied dwelling units Percent of total occupied dwelling units Number ( millions ) Percent of nonfarm occupied dwelling units December Since data are available only for years shown NOTE. Data are for the early part of each year usually March or April unless otherwise indicated Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-17. Household status of married couples Year Total Married couples with own household Married couples without own household Percent with own household l Millions Percents are based on data in thousands NOTE. Data for relate to June for and to March and for all other years to April Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G Homes with selected electrical appliances Wired homes with Television Refrigerators sets End of year o | " d ^ S ? i-t'tn si Si Vacuum cleaners ( floor ) Freezers ! * <D -H ! fe H ^ 4J.C Is Dryers ( electric and gas ) Electric washers II if ol +jfC fe fr S ^ & * O>T3 g II II l J8 II I ! | f ! -M.CJ T3 * I Air conditioners i * * IS * l Source : McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. ( Electrical Merchandising Week ) TABLE G-19. Life insurance _ ._ _ _ _ _ _ Life insurance per family ( dollars ) End of year Policy reserves of United States life insurance companies ( billions of dollars ) Number of Number of policypolicies holders ( millions ) i ( millions ) Total of ordinary group industrial and credit Figures beginning with are not strictly comparable with the earlier data because of a change in the method of estimation. The result of this change in procedure was to raise the figure by or percent over the figure that would have been obtained by the old method Estimates Source : Institute of Life Insurance TABLE C-20. Financial assets and net equity of individuals [ Billions of dollars ] Financial assets Govern- IndividTime State Prement U.S and and CurCorpo- ferred PriPriinsur- uals ' rency saving Govern- local rate vate vate net and ance equity and deposits ment Govern- bonds com- insurTotal penand demand and secur- ment and ance sion mon reserves reserves pendeposits savings ities secur- notes i shares sion shares ities reserves End of year ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Rough estimates of market value J Total financial assets less total liabilities ( mortgage debt consumer debt and securities loans ) The year-to-year changes are not equivalent to savings shown in Table D-15 which do not reflect revaluations in certain of the components a Not available Data prior to do not include individuals ' holdings of corporate securities and therefore are not comparable with subsequent data Preliminary Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-21. Shareowners in public corporations and Number of shareowners ( thousands ) Year _ NOTE. Data for and relate to the early part of the year and for to the end of the year Sources : Brookings Institution and New York Stock Exchange TABLE C-22. Fall school enrollment [ Thousands of persons ] Kindergarten October Elementary school College or professional school High school PriTotal Public vate school school Total PriPriPriPublic vate Total Public vate Total Public vate school school school school school school ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ ( ) ( ) Civilian noninstitutional population to years of age Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-23. Percent of civilian noninstitutional population to years of age enrolled in school by age group October of each year [ Percent ] to years of age Total to to Hand and and to years of age Total years J years * to years years years years years years October to to years of age years ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes children enrolled in kindergarten Not available Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-24. Educational expenditures and selected measures of educational achievement Education expenditures per pupil in average daily attendance ( dollars ) Year Earned degrees conferred Percent enrolled in school or college Bachelor 's Master 's Doctor 's Total ( to and first and second or equiv- to years years of professional professional alent of age ) age to years of age Total * Current ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _. For pupils in public elementary and secondary schools For school year ended in year shown Percent of civilian noninstitutional population to years of age ,Total of current expenditures capital outlays and interest paid Not available enrolled as of October of each year Preliminary Sources : Department of Health Education and Welfare and Department of Commerce TABLE G-25. Old-age survivors and disability insurance coverage : Number and percent relation to total population and to paid employment Paid employment Population Year Total Covered by OASDI including joint railroad retirement O A S D I Covered by OASDI coverage as percent of including joint railroad retirement PopulaPaid emOASDI tion ployment coverage Millions of persons years of age and over Percent Monthly averages : _ _ _ The Social Security Amendments of expanded by more than million the number of jobs eligible for coverage by old-age and survivors insurance in a given month. The Social Security Amendments of extended coverage to an additional ^ i million jobs eligible for coverage on an average monthly basis while the Amendments to the Social Security Act further extended coverage to nearly million civilian workers and million members of the armed forces on a contributory basis in The Social Security Amendment of had only a slight effect on coverage of the program. Members of the armed forces are also included in the earlier years although on a noncontributory basis as provided under special provisions of the Social Security Act. Thus percent of all gainfully employed persons are covered or eligible for coverage The expansion in the number of jobs eligible for coverage did not result in an equal number of additional covered persons for three reasons. First many persons holding these newly covered jobs had been working at some time during the year in other jobs already covered ; for these the coverage was strengthened rather than extended. Second a substantial number of persons affected by the amendments were eligible for coverage on a group elective basis and not all of these groups had elected coverage by the end of Data on covered workers in this table include only those workers hi the voluntary coverage group who had elected to be covered. As of December there were about 7l/i million persons in jobs subject to coverage on a group elective basis. Approximately three-fifths of the number of persons in this group comprised primarily of ministers ( eligible on an individual elective basis ) and employees of State and local governments and nonprofit organizations had elected coverage. Third even in those jobs for which coverage was compulsory some persons had not reported their earnings for social security tax purposes Civilian noninstitutional population of the United States excluding Alaska and Hawaii and all armed forces Beginning monthly averages are based on four calendar months : March June September and December Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Health Education and Welfare Railroad Retirement Board and Interstate Commerce Commission TABLE C-26. Old-age survivors and disability insurance benefits Number of Amount of beneficiaries benefits paid receiving ( millions of monthly dollars ) payments ( thousands ) Year _ _ _ __ __ _ _ _ _ __ Status at the end of the year November used. December not available Preliminary Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare TABLE G Unemployment insurance coverage and benefits Civilian employment ( millions of persons years of age and over ) Year Total Nonagricultural ! Covered by unemployment compensation Covered employment as percent of non agricultural employment Average weekly payment for total unemployment ( dollars ) Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers Data for relate to persons covered by State Railroad Retirement and Federal employee programs. For they relate only to State and Railroad Retirement programs s Data for relate to State and Federal employee programs. For and they relate to State unemployment programs only Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-28. Beds in civilian hospitals 1'947-591 Number of beds ( thousands ) End of year _ _ _ _ -_- Excludes Federal facilities Preliminary NOTE. Data relate to the United States and Territories Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare TABLE C-29. Hospital surgical and medical expense coverage Net number of persons protected ( millions ) End of year Hospital expense _ _ Regular medical expense Major medical expense Surgical expense J -__ _ Adjusted for duplication Estimates Source : Health Insurance Council _ TABLE G Physicians dentists and nurses Number of persons ( thousands ) Period Physicians ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Active professional graduate nurses ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Active dentists Active professional Physicians graduate nurses Active dentists Rate per population ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) As of various dates Based on population estimates as of July for United States excluding Alaska and Hawaii but including armed forces abroad Estimates Not available Sources : American Medical Association American Dental Association and American Nurses Association TABLE G-31. Communicable diseases Number of cases reported Brucellosis ( undulant fever ) Period Diphtheria Malaria Meningococcal infections Smallpox Tuberculosis Typhoid fever i2 * il These cases do not fulfill the generally accepted criteria for a diagnosis of smallpox Estimates Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare TABLE C Injury-frequency rates in manufacturing industries Year _ _ _._ _ Ratei _ _ _ ' _ i Average number of disabling work injuries per each million employee-hours worked a Preliminary ; based on data for first months Source : Department of Labor Appendix D STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National income or expenditure : D-l. Gross national product or expenditure D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices D-3. Gross private and government product in current and prices D-4. Gross national product or expenditure in prices D-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product D-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups D-7. Personal consumption expenditures D-8. Gross private domestic investment D-9. National income by type of income D-10. Relation of gross national product and national income D Relation of national income and personal income D-12. Sources of personal income D-l Disposition of personal income D-l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices D-l5. Financial saving by individuals D-l Sources and uses of gross saving Employment and wages : D-l Noninstitutional population and the labor force D-l Employment and unemployment by age and sex D-l Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons D-20. Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment D-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries D-24. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries D-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries D-27. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices D-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries Production and business activity : D-29. Industrial production indexes D-30. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and D-31. New construction activity D-32. New public construction activity D-33. Housing starts and applications for financing D-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade D-35. Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders 15l Page Prices : D-36. Wholesale price indexes D-37. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing D-38. Consumer price indexes by major groups D-39. Consumer price indexes by special groups Money supply credit and finance : D-40. Deposits and currency D-41. Loans and investments of all commercial banks D-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves D-43. Bond yields and interest rates D-44. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding D-45. Instalment credit extended and repaid D Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing D-47. Net public and private debt Government finance : D-48. U. S. Government debt by kind of obligation D-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations D Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt D Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt D-52. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years D Government cash receipts from and payments to the public D-54. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts D Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years D-56. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Corporate profits and finance : D-57. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations D-58. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class D-59. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group D-60. Sources and uses of corporate funds D-61. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations D-62. State and municipal and corporate securities offered D-63. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit D-64. Business population and business failures Agriculture : D-65. Income of the farm population D-66. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio D-67. Farm production indexes D-68. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs D-69. Farm population employment and productivity ^ D-70. Selected indicators of farming conditions D-71. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture Page International statistics : D-72. United States balance of payments D-73. U.S. Government grants and credits by areas and major countries fiscal years D-74. United States imports of miscellaneous consumer manufactures D-75. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions selected periods D-76. Price changes in international trade Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE D-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private domestic investment Total gross national product Personal consumption expenditures i g 1932_ _ _ _. Government purchases of goods and services Federal ' g EH Period Net exports of goods and services si ii ! fc r go & ( H -M | ft O1 PH e I I w H ( ) ( ) a a " * rt " cS " o EH " o o C3T3 EH ll O w ; _ o> T5 ? ? S OQ CO O> ( ) c c8 ) ( ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ) ( ( ) < ) ) ( 5s ( ( ) ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) See Table D-7 for major components See Table D-8 for more detail and explanation of components For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period This category corresponds closely to the major national security classification in the Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO See Table D-52 Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Per sonal consumption expenditures Total gross national product Period Gross private domestic investment New construction Produc- Change Dura- Noners ' in busiTotal ble durable Services Total Residurable ness goods goods dential Other equip- invenTotal ( nonment tories farm ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter _ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices l Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Net exports of goods and services Period Federal Total National Total defense _._ _ _ ( ) ! ._ Government purchases of goods and services Other ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) State and local ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ' First quarter ._ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ i These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See Tables D-4 and D-5. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on change in business inventories For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in this table. See Table D-l for Government sales in current prices See Table D-l footnote Not available separately Less than $ million Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-3. Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] Current prices Total gross national product Period prices Gross private product Total Farm l Nonfarm Gross government product Total gross national product Gross private product Total Farm Nonfarm Gross government product ._ _ Gross national product less compensation of general government employees i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world See Survey of Current Business October for description of series and estimates in current and constant prices and implicit deflators for s Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation oi employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the ' sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities * 'See Table D-2 footnote Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-4. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-59l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Dtion Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services Nondurable goods | c c i * Perse nal cc ( 3xpen Period Total gross national product ._ O o ^ to '> L .S " S o * Gross private product o I ' * ll.l Net exports of goods and services fi I Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter... Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter... Fourth quarter i For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business See Table D-5 for implicit price deflators For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national prodTotal uct Period Gross private domestic investment ! New construction Dura- Nonble durable Services goods goods Total Residential nonfarm Producers ' durable Other equipment f> ' First Quarter Second quarter,. __ _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _-- _ _ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and importsl of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Period Exports Imports Total Federal State and local 1940_1941 _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ : First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ' ) C1 ) ) C1 ) ) C11 ) c ) ) C1 ) ) ( ' ) ) C11 ) C ) ) ) ) ( > ) ) ) C1 ) ) ) ( ' ) Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services and for exports and imports quarterly For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U.S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups * [ Billions of dollars ] Persons Business International PerDisPerGross Excess sonal sonal Gross private of re- Foreign Net posnet con- saving receipts trans- exports able sumpdogoods per- tion ex- or dis- tained mestic or in- fers by of and earnvestsaving ings invest- ment govern- services sonal income pendi- ( ) ment ment tures ( ) Period Excess of transfers or net exports ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates __ ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Government Less : Tax and Transfers nontax interest receipts or and subaccruals sidies Period Net receipts Surplus or Statistical Purchases deficit ( ) discrepof goods on income ancy and and services product account GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ._ * _.- .-_ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. __ : First quarter Second quarter. _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ ( ) ( fl ) ( ) ( fl ) Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and excess of wage accruals over disbursements a For foreign net transfers by Government were negligible ; therefore for that period net exports of 3goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest paid by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will riot necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-7. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Total personal consumption Toextal penditures Period Nondurable goods i ft TJ ~ ! ? i b/o M * gS s Total JU % * T1 o> o ' % ^ < EH fl o> fl I w c CJ tJO J3 ts O Services s a a T3 Total s o> JjJ o T3 b 'o ^ W I O w S3 O W _. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second Quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-8. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Period Total Nonfarra producers ' Farm equipment gross plant and equipment and construction private domestic ConConnvest- Total i Equip- struc- Total Equip- strucment tion ment tion mcnt Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Net change in Other pri- business inventories vate construc- Total Non-6 Farm farm tion ( ) * ( ) s ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter- Third quarter _ _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter _ _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. 8_ Fourth quarter Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment are not comparable with those shown in Table D-30 principally because the latter exclude equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense and also investment by nonprofit organizations and professional persons Total producers ' durable equipment less farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants garages miscellaneous nonresidential construction and all other private construction Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) Includes religious educational social and recreational and hospital and institutional After inventory valuation adjustment Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-9. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Business and professional income and inventory valuation adjustment InTotal Comcome penna- sation of tional of emIn- farm Inin- ! ploycome ven- procome tory prieof ees uninTotal corpo- valu- tors ation rated adenter- justprises ment Period ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Rental income of persons Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Net Ininven- terest Cor- tory porate Total profits valubefore ation adtaxes justment f5 ) o ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter.. _ Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) g -L6 ( ) National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table D-10 Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to farm inventories during the period. Data for differ from those shown in Table D-65 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts See Table D-57 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate s Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-40. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : Subsidies Equals : less Gross Net current Indirect business nanaBusi ; ional tax tional surplus ness prodDepreof govtransOther i prodernuct Total ciation uct fer charges ment State payenter- Total Fed- and ments eral local prises Less : Capital consumption allowances Period _ * i ._ ._ Equals : StaNatisti- tional cal ncome discrepancy .< < ] <-2.7 i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) \ ! s Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter. ( ) ( ) C5 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C l.C l.C S ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ C C ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ C ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Accidental damage to fixed capital and capital outlays charged to current account Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) O TABLE D-l Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : CorpoExcess rate of National profits Contri- wage income and in- butions acfor vensocial cruals tory over insurvaludisance ation burseadjustments ment Period Government transfer payments to persons Net interest paid by government Equals : Dividends Business transfer payments Personal income i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter L_ ( ) ( ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-12. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Labor Prop rietors ' inc 3me income ( wage and PerRental Total salary Transincome Divi- sonal fer paypersonal disburseBusiof dends interest ments income ments ness and persons income and other Farms profeslabor sional income ) Period Less : Personal Noncontri- agriculbutions tural for personal social income * insurance ___ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter ._ _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter s _ _ _ The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table D-9 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess of 2wage accruals over wage disbursements Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to 8net additions to inventories during the period Data for differ from those in Table D-65 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-13. Disposition of personal income Less : Equals : Personal Less : Equals : conPersonal Personal Disposable Personal income taxes i personal sumption saving income expenditures Period Saving as percent of disposable personal income ( percent ) Billions of dollars _. _ _1958 _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. -Second quarter Third quarter _ _ Fourth quarter : First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ Includes also such items as fines penalties and donations Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABIE D-14. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures ^ in current and prices Total disposable Per capita dispersonal income posable personal ( billions of income ( dollars ) dollars ) Period Total personal consumption expenditures ( billions of dollars ) Per capita personal consumption expenditures ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current l Current l Current Current prices prices prices prices prices prices prices prices _ __ _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter... : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the implicit deflator for personal consumption expenditures on a base See Table D-2 for explanation Total expenditures in prices diyided by population Population of the United States excluding Alaska and Hawaii ; includes armed forces abroad. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE D-15. Financial saving by individuals 1939-59l [ Billions of dollars ] Securities Currency SavTotal and ings U.S. Other Corbank shares Total sav- gov- porate deings ern- and posits bonds ment other Period Private insurance reserves4 Noninsured pension funds Government insurance and pension reserves5 __ Less : Increase in debt Mort- Con- Securgage sumer ities debts debt ? loans8 ( ) _ : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter ( ) Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified Includes shares in savings and loan associations and shares and deposits in credit unions Includes U.S. Government issues ( except savings bonds ) nonguaranteed Federal agency securities and securities of State and local governments Includes insured pension reserves Includes Social Security funds State and local retirement systems etc Mortgage debt to institutions on one- to four-family nonfarm dwellings Consumer debt owed to corporations largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumer goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. Policy loans on Government and private life insurance have been deducted from those items of saving Change in bank loans made for the purpose of purchasing or carrying securities Less than $ million Preliminary NOTE. In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce are derived as the difference between personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included in Securities and Exchange Commission saving : Housing farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment net of depreciation and increase in debt. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see Securities and Exchange Commission Statistical Bulletin July and Survey of Current Business July The Federal Reserve Board 's flow-of-funds system of accounts includes capital investments as well as financial components of saving and covers saving of Federal State and local governments businesses financial institutions and consumers. While the Federal Reserve Board 's estimates of consumer saving in financial form are similar to the Securities and Exchange Commission estimates of individuals ' saving there are some statistical and conceptual differences in the two sets of data Revisions for in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have riot yet been incorporated into these estimates Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-16. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Total PerTotal sonal saving Statistical Gross disprivate Net for- crepTotal domes- eign in- ancy tic in- vest-1 State vest- ment and ment local Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Period Gross investment Gross busi- Total ness saving Federal -.'7 ( ) ^ <73.9 i ^ -j -e'7 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter -_ : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Net exports of goods and services less foreign net transfers by Government. For net foreign investment and net exports of goods and services have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE D-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Period Noninstitutional population i Civilian labor force Total Total labor labor force as UnemployEmployment force Armed percent ment as per ( includ- forces * Unem- of non- cent of civiling ian labor Total ploy- instituAgri- Non- ment tional armed force agriforces ) i Total culpopucultural tural lation Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : a Percent ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) New definitions : ._ Oil G5 See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Total Period Nonin- labor stitu- force tional ( includ- Armed popu-1 ing forces * Total lation armed forces ) i Total labor force as Employment percent Unem- of nonploy- instituAgri- Non- ment tional agriTotal culpopucultural tural lation Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Unad- Seasonjusted ally adjusted Percent New definitions : * : January _ -February March April May June * July. _ August September October. November December : January February March April May.. June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December. Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside the United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from the estimates See Note ' Not available NOTE. Civilian labor force data beginning with May are based on a 330-area sample. For January 1954-April they are based on a 230-area sample ; for on a 68-area sample ; for on a smaller sample ; and for on sources other than direct enumeration Effective January persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and persons waiting to start new wage and salary jobs within the following days are classified as unemployed. Such persons had previously been classified as employed ( with a job but not at work ) The combined total of the groups changing classification has averaged about to a month in recent years. The small number of persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs are classified as not in the labor force instead of employed as formerly. Persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days continue to be classified as employed Beginning July monthly data are for the calendar week ending nearest the 15th of the month ; previously for week containing the 8th. Annual data are averages of monthly figures For the years estimating procedures made " se of Census data ; for subsequent years Census data were used. For the effects of this changv * on the historical comparability of the data see Annual Report m the Labor Force Series P-50 No. April p. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rou iding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-18. Employment and unemployment by age and sex [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed Period Unemployed Total civil45 years andyears years andyears ian over Total over labor Total emunem- years force ployed years FeFe- ployed FeFeMale male Male male Male male Male male Old definitions : ! Oil : January February March-April May.. June _ July August September October. November _ _ December New definitions : : January February March April May June July August September October November December l See Note Table D-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age/sex groups above See Note Table D-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed persons not at work by reason for not working Special groups of unemployed persons Period Total Bad weather Industrial dispute Vacation Illness All other reasons ' Tempo- New wage rary and salary layoff job * New definitions : ( ) ( ) ( ) June July August September _ _ October November-December. ._ _._ : January February March_ April MayJune July August September. October November. December. : January February- _ _ March April May Includes persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days Under the old definitions of employment and unemployment these groups were included in the " employed but not at work " category s Persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of the layoff Persons scheduled to start new wage and salary jobs within days. Under the old definitions the " new job or business " group included these persons as well as persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days ( see " all other " category in this table ) and persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs ( these are now classified as " not in the labor force " ) See Note Table D-17 for explanation Not available NOTE. See Note Table D-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Unemployed persons by duration oj unemployment Duration of unemployment Period Total unemployed weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter < ( ) New definitions : * See Note Table D-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to months ( ) Not available NOTE. See Note Table D-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor ! TABLE D-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data and Initial claims Period Insured unemployment State veteran and State Federal proemployee grams pro- grams All pro- State programs grams State Benefits paid insured under State prounemgrams ployExhaus- ment tions as perState cent of procovered Total Average grams employ- ( millions weekly of dolcheck ment lars ) ( dollars ) ( per3 cent ) Weekly average ( thousands ) _ _ _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May _ June July August September. October November _ _ _ _ _ _ _ December Most of these are instances of new unemployment Data on veterans relate to those under the following programs : Servicemen 's Readjustment Act which became effective in October and expired for most veterans in July ; Veterans ' Readjustment Assistance Act of effective October ; and the unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen program which became effective October Data include State programs and the program for Federal employees for the period January through December Data for all other periods are for State programs only Represents the number of unemployed workers covered by unemployment insurance programs who have completed at least one week of unemployment. Excludes Territories prior to inclusion of data for Alaska and Hawaii beginning January State veteran ex-servicemen Federal employee and railroad programs State unemployment insurance programs during the period shown excluded from coverage agricultural workers domestic servants workers in nonprofit organizations unpaid family workers the self-employed and ( in most States ) workers in very small firms Represents the number of individuals who received payment for the final week of compensable unemployment in a benefit year. Workers who have exhausted benefit rights do not necessarily remain unemployed ; some find employment and others withdraw from the labor force. Includes final payments under the Federal employee program for the period January through June Includes benefits paid under the Federal employee program for the period January through June Monthly totals are gross amounts : annual figures are adjusted for voided benefit checks For total unemployment only Includes $ million paid out under State programs which temporarily extended duration of benefit pay ments Estimated for December Includes $ million paid out under State programs which temporarily extended duration of benefit payments Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagr { cultural establishments l [ Thousands of employees ] Period Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Government ( Federal State and local ) Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining TransCon- porta- Wholetract tion sale conand and struc- public retail2 tion utili- trade ties ( ) ( ) Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellaneous ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) S02 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ? ? _ _ _ ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted : January February. _ _ March April May June..- _ _ July August September. October November-December, See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagr { cultural establishments * Continued [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing Period Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods TransCon- porta- Wholetract tion sale Min- conand and ing struc- public retail tion utili- trade ties Finance Service insur- and ance misceland lanereal estate ous Government ( Federal State and local ) Seasonally adjusted July August September. October November. _ December.- : January February _ _ _ M arch April May June July August September. October November December * _ : January February March April. May June Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagriculturaJ employment of the civilian labor force ( Table D-17 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes ; bad weather etc. ; and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total 1958.fl : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October.. November _ _ December _ _ _ Durable goods ( ) ( ) ( ) Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I ( except ing nous Tele-2 Whole- eating conNonrailsale coal and struc- roads phone dutrade drinkrable mining tion ing goods places ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( <37.3 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Laundries ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only ' Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment Source : Department of Labor TABLE D- Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Retail trade Bitu- Building Non- minous con- Class I Tele- Whole- ( except LaunDura- dura- coal rail- ] phone2 sale eating dries ble Total struc- roads trade and ble goods goods mining tion drinking places ) $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ May June. _ July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November _ _ _ ( ) December " > _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) L932 : January February March April ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Agriculture $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ " " ns " " " ( ~ ) " ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April ? Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture < l83 TABLE D-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Retail trade Bitumi- Build- Class I ( except ing nous Tele- Whole- eating conrail- phone sale coal Dura- Nonand trade drinkdurable mining struc- roads * ble tion goods goods ing places ) M anuf actur ing Period Total _ : January February March April May June _ _ July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October fl November ._ December _ _ $ $ $ 8P. $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ * s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Laundries ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all emoloyees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period en-ling nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries All manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Period Gross Durable goods manufacturing industries Average hourly earnings Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings ExExExExExExcludcludcludcludcludcluding Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing overoveroveroveroverovertime time time time time time ) .._ $ ) ) $ ) ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) _ ) ) ) June _ July August ._ September October November December ) : January February March April. _ _ May : January February March April May_ June July August September October November December ) $ z.963 ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Not available Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Preliminary NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment ( in the case of hours ) and man-hours ( in the case of earnings ) Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-27. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable- in manufacturing industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings Average gross weekly earnings Period Current prices prices l Worker with no dependents Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices * $ $ $ $ $ $ : January February March April May June _ ._ _ __ July _ August September October November December : January.. February March April May June __ Julv August _ September October _ November3 December ( ) ( ) ( ) ._ __ __ Estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base ( using 11-month average ) Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes * Preliminary Not available NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Rates per employees ] Accession rates Separation rates Period Total Quits Layoffs Total i _._ ..._ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March. April May June July August September October November __ New hires Includes rehires and other accessions not published separately Includes discharges and miscellaneous separations not published separately Not available January-November average Preliminary Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE D-29. Industrial production indexes = Market Industry Period Total industrial production1 Final products Manufacturing Total Durable Nondurable Mining Utilities Total Consumer Equipment Materials _ _ Seasonally adjusted ' January February March April May June M ay June July August -_ September October _ November December3 July August September October November December : January February M arch April See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-29. Industrial production indexes Continued = Industry Period Total industrial production Market Manufacturing Total Durable Final products Nondurable Mining Utilities Total Consumer Equipment Materials Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August. _ September.. : October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November3 December -._ Annual indexes ( = ) for respectively are : and Annual indexes ( = ) for respectively are : and Preliminary NOTE. The data in this table are the revised series on industrial production. Coverage has been broadened to include electric and gas utility production in addition to manufacturing and mining. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin December Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-30. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ! Transportation Manufacturing Total i Period Total Dura- Non- Mining ble durable goods goods Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and other _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter... Second quarter Third Quarter _ _ _ Fourth quarter _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ __ : First quarter _ _ Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction Annual total is the sum of unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures. See footnote Estimates for fourth quarter and first quarter based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and November The quarterly anticipations include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data NOTE. These figures do not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals and institutions and of certain outlays charged to current account This series is not available for years prior to and for to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce TABLE D New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Total new construction Period Resi- Nonresidential building and other construction dential Total i building ( nonComTotal mercial Indus- Public Other farm ) utility trial Public construction ._ _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : January February March April May June _ July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September _ _ October November December * _ _ Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product. ( See Table D-l ) z Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages * Farm institutional and all other < Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-32. New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Total new public construction Major types of new public construction Federal Period All public sources Direct Federal aid State and local HosHigh- Educa- pital and way tional institutional Sewer Conand water servation and miscel- and delaneous veloppublic service ment Military facilities All other public _ For expenditures classified by ownership combine " Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Includes nonresidential building other than educational and hospital and institutional ( industrial commercial public administration social and recreational and miscellaneous ) public residential buildings and publicly owned parks and playgrounds memorials etc a Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D Housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Proposed home construction New nonfarm housing starts Period Total Publicly financed Privately financed Government programs Total Total ._ _. ._ _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January _ February March April May June July August September October November77 December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) FHA VA ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Private seasonFHA VA apally ad- applica- praisal justed tions requests annual rates ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly financed starts but excluded from the privately financed starts for FHA and Government programs Units in mortgage applications for new home construction The number of units started for the years respectively was as follows : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and * FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in 'Not available Partly estimated Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) TABLE D Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in billions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Wholesale trade * Retail trade J Period InvenSales Inven- Ratio < Sales Inven- Ratio * Sales Inven- Ratio4 Sales tories Ratio4 tories s tories tories _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted : January February. _ March April May June July August... -_ September. October November. December : January February March April May June July August September. October fl November _ December The series beginning in are not comparable with the previous years because of changes in definition for the wholesale series. Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method of estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census Monthly average shown for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November 'Preliminary NOTE. For a description of the series and their comparability see Survey of Current Business September and November January and June for retail and August for manufacturing and wholesale The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-35. Manufacturers ' Sales inventories and orders [ Billions of dollars ] Inventories Sales i Period New orders UnNondurable goods Durable goods filled industries industries Dura- NonDura- Non- orders ble durable ble ' durable ( unadgoods goods PurTotal goods goods justPurindus- indus- chased Goods Fin- chased Goods Finindus- indus- ed ) a tries tries mateished mate- in ished tries in tries rials process goods rials process goods Seasonally adjusted : January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January February. __ March April May June July August September. October November Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period End of period Based on data through November * Preliminary NOTE. See Table D-34 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE D-36. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] * All coinmodities other tha n farm pr oducts and foods All commodities Period Farm products Processed foods Total Textile products and apparel Chemi- Rubber cals and and rubber allied prodproducts ucts Lumber and wood products ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ' January February March April May June _ July August September October November _ _ December : January February March April May June July August September October November3 _ December See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-36. Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( continued ) FurniMachin- ture and ery and other motive houseprodhold ucts durables Hides skins leather and leather products Fuel power and lighting materials ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I il ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( a ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March April May June Period _. _ .._ _ July August September- October November December : January February March April May June July August September. October November.. December3 Pulp paper and allied products ( ) ( ) Metals and metal products ( ) Non- Tobacco metal- manu- Miscelfactures laneous lic and minerprodbottled als ucts ( struc- beverages tural ) ( ) ( a ) ( ) This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January Data beginning January represent the revised sample and weighting pattern. Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index Not available * Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-37. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials Period All commodities Materials and components for manufacturing Food- Nonstuffs food maTotal and terials Fuel feed- except stuffs fuel Materials and Ma- MaMa- terials terials Com- compoterials for po- nents Total for for nondu- nents for Total food du- rable for conmanu- rable manu- manu- strucfactur- manu- factur- factur- tion ing ing factur- ing ing _ * : January February. .March April May.. June July August September. October November. _ December : January February- _ March April May June July August September. October November. December See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-37. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Period Producer Total Total Crude materials a Other Du- finished goods nonFoods durable rable goods goods InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods exand com- cluding ponents foods * : January February March April May June _ _ July August -_ September October. November December : January _ February March April May June._ July August -_ September October ._ _ November December Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Preliminary NOTE. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector and their relative importance see Monthly Labor Review December and Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes ( BLS Bulletin No. ) Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Consumer price indexes by major groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Housing All items Food Period Read- Other Ap- Trans- Medi- Per- ing and goods cal parel porta- care sonal recrea- and tion care tion services Total Rent ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) C ) ) ) ( ' ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( l ) ) : January February March April Mav June July August .September October November December _ _ _ -_ /144. : January February March April. .May June- _. July August September October. November _ 1942_ __ _ __ _ _ Not available January-November average Source : Department of Labor C1 ) ) ) ) TABLE D Consumer price indexes by special groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Commodities All items Period Services All All Commodities less food items items All less less All shel- com- Food food ter modiNon- servDura- dura- ices All ties bles bles Rent All services less rent 7L. ' January February March. _ _ _ _ _ _ April May June July August September October November December : January _ February March April May June __ July August September October November _ J January-November average Source : Department of Labor MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE D-40. Deposits and currency [ Billions of dollars ] Total excluding U.S. Government deposits End of period Demand deposits and currency Total U.S seasonally adjusted Demand deposits and deposits Govcurrency ernand Time ment curDemand CurDemand Curde- Total derency posits Total deposits rency Total deposits rency posits * adoutside ad- outside justed * banks justed banks __ _ * ^ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May 14C.9 June __ July'. Ul-4 August September October _ November December * Includes U.S. Government deposits at Federal Reserve Banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes U.S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Includes holdings of State and local governments Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the month except the unadjusted data for December which are for the call date. All end-of-year figures except are for call dates Between January and August this series was expanded to include data for all banks in Alaska and Hawaii. In December demand deposits were reduced as a result of a change in the definition of such deposits Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) 2O2 TABLE D-41. Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period June June ! s June June Junefi June * January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December Total loans and investments l _- _ Loans Total Investments Business loans ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total U. S. GovOther ernment obligations * securities ! End-of-year ( except ) and June and December figures are for call dates. Other data ( including those for June and December ) are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net i. e. after deduction of valuation reserves. Includes commercial and industrial agricultural security real estate bank consumer and other loans Beginning with data are shown gross of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks * Figures in this table are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Therefore they do not agree with figures in Table D-49 which are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Between January and August this series was expanded to include data for all banks in Alaska and Hawaii Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Period Total U.S Member Governbank ment se- borrowcurities ings Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) i i i * January February March April Mav June _- _ July August September October _ __ November December * January February March April May June July August September October November December i Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Includes vault cash allowed which averaged $ million in December Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System _4U TABLE D-43. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Period Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) 1-month Treas- month Taxable Aaa ury bonds bills i issues Common stock yields stocks Baa ( Moody 's ) Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on Prime Fedshort- comeral term Remer- serve bank cial loans paper Bank to busidis4-6 ness count selected months rate cities ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : January February March April May June __ July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-43. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Common stock yields 3-month stocks Treas- month Taxable Aaa Baa ( Moody 's ) bonds ury bills i issues U.S. Government securities Period : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August _- _- _ September October November _ __ December Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on shortterm bank loans to businessselected cities Prime commercial paper months Federal Reserve Bank discount rate Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) First issued in Series includes : April to date bonds due or callable years and after ; April 1952-March bonds due or callable after years ; October 1941-March bonds due or callable after years Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less s Series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial institutions NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation 2O6 TABLE D-44. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit Total End of period Total Other conAutomobile sumer paper goods paper Noninstalment credit Repair and Permodern- sonal ization loans loans Total Charge acOther counts ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) June July August September October _ _ _ November December ___ .._ _ _ _ ' January February March April May : January February March April May June July August September October November December ( ) ( ) Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin November Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August respectively Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-45. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Total Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper Repair and modernization loans Period Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended ,3S8 : January February March. April May June July August September October November December : January February March _ April May June July _ August September October November December i _ _ _ : January February March _. _ April May ._ June July August September October November December January February March April ._ May June July August September October November December * 1953___ * Repaid Personal loans Re- Extended paid Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted i Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. See also Table D-44 Series revised beginning June For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin November Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August respectively. Therefore the difference between extensions and repayments for January and August and for the year do not equal the net change in credit outstanding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE D-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties to 4-family houses All properties End of period Government underwritten Total Total Total FHA insured ConvenVA tional l guaranteed Multifamily and commercial properties Farm properties * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter .__ _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ _ __ : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Derived figures Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ( except as noted ) 2O9 TABLE D-47. Net public and private debt l [ Billions of dollars ] Private End of period Corporate Individual and noncorporate Fed- State and eral Nonfarm Total Gov- local governernment ment Total ComTotal Long- Short- Total Farm ' merterm term Mort- cial ConTotal gage and sumer financial * _ 40'.5 Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see Survey of Current Business October Data for State and local government debt are for June Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Revisions beginning in the consumer credit data of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into this series Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and Interstate Commerce Commission ( except as noted ) GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE D-48. U. S. Government debt by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest -bearing public debt Gross Marketable public public Nonmarketable public issues issues debt and guaranteed Short- Treasury United Treasury Investissues i States tax and term ment bonds savings savings bonds issues bonds notes End of period : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September __ October November December _ _ ( ) % CO CO ( ) CO ( ) CO ( ) ( ) ( ) CO CO CO CO CO CO ( ) CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO Special issues * Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Bills certificates of indebtedness and notes * Series A bonds and beginning April Series B convertible bonds * Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Less than $ million * The last series of Treasury savings notes matured in April Source : Treasury Department TABLE D Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Par values,i billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of period 19f6 : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May -_June July August September October November8 ___ December _ Held by others Held by U.S GovMutual ernsavings State Total ment MiscelFederal Com- banks Other and invest- Total Reserve mercial and in- corpora- local Individ- laneous ment uals invesbanks banks surance tions * governactors ? comments counts panies United States savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table D-41 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U.S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE D-50. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity classes End of period Amount outstanding Within year Ito5 years years Average length to to 20and years years over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : _ _ _ July August September October November December * January February March April May June _ July August September October November December _ _ _ ' January February March April May June Years Months NOTE. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which are classified to earliest call date Source : Treasury Department TABLE D-51. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt [ Millions of dollars ] Net budget Budget ex- Surplus or receipts * penditures deficit ( ) Period Public debt at end 2of year Fiscal year : _ ___ < _ _ _ _ _ -_ _ _ Calendar year : _ __ ._ * Gross receipts less refunds of receipts and transfers of tax receipts to the old-age and survivors insurance trust fund the disability insurance trust fund the railroad retirement account and the highway trust fund Excludes guaranteed obligations ; therefore differs from total shown in Tables D-48 and D-49. The change in the public debt from year to year reflects not only the budget surplus or deficit but also change ? in the Treasury 's cash balances the effect of certain trust fund transactions and direct borrowing from the public by certain Government enterprises Estimate Preliminary ; subject to minor changes NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) TABLE D-52 Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by Junction fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Budget expenditures by function Budget receipts by source Fiscal year Veter- Agri<->nl culans ' All All Indi- CorpoMajor serv- ture vidual ration Excise other Total naand Inter- other Total income income taxes retional ices agriest expendceipts i itures taxes taxes security bene- cultural refits sources _. Budget surplus or deficit ( ) Includes employment taxes estate and gift taxes customs revenues and miscellaneous receipts Includes expenditures for international affairs and finance ( including defense support under the mutual security program ) labor and welfare natural resources commerce and housing and general government ; also includes adjustment to daily Treasury statement ( for actuals ) and allowance for contingencies ( for estimates ) Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget O TABLE D-53. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Federal Total Period Cash receipts Calendar year : Excess of receipts Cash or of repayments pay- ceipts ments ( ) Cash State and local * Excess of receipts Cash payor of rements pay- ceipts ments ( ) Cash Excess of receipts payor of ments payments ( ) Cash ( ) .._ Fiscal year : ( ) _ _ r-1.5 i For derivation of Federal cash receipts and payments see Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June SO and Table D-55 i Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts. Cash receipts consist of personal tax and nontax receipts indirect business tax and nontax accruals and corporate tax accruals adjusted to a collection basis. Cash payments are total expenditures less Federal grants-in-aid and less contributions for social insurance. ( Federal grants-in-aid are therefore excluded from State and local receipts and payments and included only in Federal payments. ) See Table D-54 Less than $ million < Preliminary Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers 2l6 TABLE D-54. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts [ Calendar years billions of dollars ] Receipts or expenditures First half Second half First half Second half SecFirst ond half half Seasonally adjusted annual rates Total government Receipts Expenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) Receipts Personal tax and non29.2 tax receipts Corporate profits taxaccruals _ _ Indirect business tax and nontax accruals. Contributions for social insurance E xpenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments To persons Foreign ( net ) Qrants-in-aid to State and local governments _ Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of Govern1.2 ment enterprises Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) _ Federal Government ( ) ( ) State and local governments Receipts Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Federal grants-in-aid Expenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Net interest paid Less : Current surplus of government enterprises Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) ( ) ( ) 4.C ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Approximation for the year as a whole. See also footnote Table D-57 Not available These accounts like the cash budget include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike both the conventional budget and the eash statement they exclude certain capital and lending transactions. In general they do not use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services ; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans financed by banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-55. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ] Fiscal years Receipts or expenditures RECEIPTS Budget receipts Less : Intragovernmental transactions _ Receipts from exercise of monetary authority Plus * Trust fund receipts Equals : Federal receipts from the public ( consolidated cash receipts ) Less : Adjustment for agency coverage : District of Columbia revenues _ Plus : Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds Veterans ' life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Interest dividends and other earnings Adjustments for timing : Excess of taxes included in national income accounts over cash collections : Personal Corporate profits Other M iscellaneous Less : Adjustments for capital transactions : Realization upon loans and investments Proceeds from sale of Government property Recoveries and refunds Equals : Receipts national income accounts EXPENDITURES Budget expenditures _ _ Less ' Intragovernmental transactions Accrued interest and other noncash expenditures ( net ) Plus * Trust fund expenditures Government-sponsored enterprise expenditures ( net ) Equals : Federal payments to the public ( consolidated cash expenditures ) _ Less : Adjustment for agency coverage : District of Columbia expenditures Plus : Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds Veterans ' life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Interest received and proceeds of Government sales Adjustments for timing : Accrued interest on savings bonds and Treasury bills Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed non-recourse loans ( net change ) Increase in clearing account Miscellaneous Less : Adjustments for capital transactions : Loans and other adjustments : Federal National Mortgage Association secondary market operations Other Purchase of land and existing assets Trusts and deposit fund expenditures Redemption of International Monetary Fund notes E quals E xpenditures national income accounts NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce 2l8 TABLE D State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of doUars ] Revenues by source Fiscal year ! Expenditures by function ReveSales nue and Indi- Corpo- from All Prop- gross vidual ration Fed- other Total erty net re- income income eral reve3 taxes ceipts taxes taxes Gov- nue taxes ernment EduTotal cation High- Public All wel- other ways fare -_- Fiscal years not the same for all governments Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between governments hi these categories are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and community redevelopment local recreation general control interest on general debt and other and unallocable expenditures NOTE. Data are not available for intervening years See Table D-47 for net debt of State and local governments Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ^ CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE D-57. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations. [ Billions of dollars ] _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ Corporate tax liability Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Period * Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits ( J ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter ._ Fourth quarter _ _ _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See Table D-9 for profits before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) 22O TABLE D-58. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class Asset size class ( millions of dollars ) Period All asset sizes Under ItolO to to and over Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter. _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter- _ _ : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ _ : First quarter Second quarter-. Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter- _ _ : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Profits per dollar of sales cents Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For details concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U. S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-59. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales ; private manufacturing corporations by industry group Durable goods industries Period All private manufacturing corporations Lumber and Furwood niture prod- and ucts fix ( except tures furniture ) Mis- Stone clay and glass products Primary iron and steel industries EleccellaPri IT nInmary Fab- Ma- trical Mo- Other stru- neous ma- tor mannon- ri- chin- chinferery vehi- trans- ments ufacrous cated ( ex- ery cles porta- and turtion remetal metal cept equip- and equip- lated ing ( inin- prod- elec- ment equipand dus- ucts trical ) sup- ment ment prod- cluducts ing k plies ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter.. lol3 : First quarter.. Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter. BASED ON SIC : First quarter i Second quarter O Third quarter Fourth quarter.. q A : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter... r \ n .u C n y O Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter. : First quarter.. Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter. BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter ~ Third quarter- .Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-59. Relation of prof is after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Period Printing and Food To- TexAp- Paper puband tile pare ! and lishkin- bacco mill and ing dred man- prod- related allied ( exufacprod- tures ucts prod- prod- cept ucts ucts ucts newspapers ) \ Products of petroChemleum icals Petro- and Rub- Leather and and leum coal ber allied refin- ( ex- prod- leather prod- ing cept ucts products ucts petroleum refining ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ..-BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter. ._ 2J : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter.-BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. _2.2 Third quarter NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U.S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-60. Sources and uses of corporate funds 1948-59l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Total ases Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( book value ) Customer net receivables Cash and U.S. Government securities Other assets Total sources Internal sources Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation and amortization allowances External sources Federal income tax liability. _ Other liabilities Bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) ( ) ( ) l Excludes banks and insurance companies Preliminary estimates Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately Less than $ million Preliminary estimate by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE D-61. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations 1939-59l [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets 'd e a-a " W End of period .a " ea " o z * a o il ! ka * * 'S S * e I O 0> GQ S | P Current liabilities $ CJ * : First quarter Second quarter. _. Third quarter Fourth quarter. | S <S e O c3 U> ! * s if l ~ li t ^ -Sao << f 0> <S I lie * : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter... Third quarter ll fi w ! | t iss i | &l o> fc o O Net working capiI * tal S fc-s S ~ -v " All United States corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Year-end data through are based on Statistics of Income ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. Statistics of Income data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. As more complete information becomes available estimates are revised Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books Includes marketable securities other than U.S. Government NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-62. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash State and Gross proceeds Proposed uses of net proceeds municipal securities New money offered for cash Retire- Other Com- Pre- Bonds ( prin- Total mon ferred and Total Plant Work- ment purcipal of se- poses stock stock notes and ing amounts ) Total equipcapi- curities ment tal Period ? ? % ? : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions sales of investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as offerings under employeepurchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of notation Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission The Commercial and Financial Chronicle and The Bond Buyer TABLE D-63. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit Common stock prices index = ( SEC ) i Period Common stock price/ earnings ratio industrials ( Standard2 & Poor 's ) Stock market credit Customer credit ( excluding U. S Government securities ) Total Net debit balances Bank loans to " others " Bank loans to brokers and dealers Millions of dollars -_ * January February March April May June July August September October November December ' January February March April May June July August September October November December ( fl ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fl ) ( ) CO ( ) ( ) ( ) Based on stocks Based on stocks for and stocks beginning Ratio is obtained by dividing aggregate market value at end of period by aggregate earnings for months ending with period shown As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U. S. Government obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. From through June loans for purchasing or carrying U.S. Government securities were reported separately only by New York and Chicago banks Accordingly for that period any loans for purchasing or carrying such securities at other reporting banks are included. Series also revised beginning July March and July Data are for last Wednesday of period. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin August Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Series revised beginning July January July and July Data are for8 last Wednesday of period. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin August Not available Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange TABLE D-64. Business population and business failures Operating businesses and business turnover ( thou ! sands offirms ) Period Business failures < New busiAmount of current ness Number of failures liabilities ( millions of Disincor- Busidollars ) conOper- New tin- Busi- pora- ness Liability size ating busi- ued ness tions failLiability size class busi- ness- busi- trans- ( numclass ure nesses es ness- fers s ber ) rate Total $ Total Under $ Under ess and and $ over $ over -_ _._ ._ 2,839.T _._ ___ : January February March April May June July 57JO. August September October November. December. : January February.- March April May June July August September. October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C ) ( ) % ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fl ) g S S g 6g.O ( ) ( ) CO ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Excludes firms in the fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he has either an established place of business or at least one paid employee. Series revised beginning Data through are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June Beginning data are for beginning of period. Quarterly data shown here are seasonally adjusted Total for period Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of 5real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises. Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Not available Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Beginning January 1959,'data for Hawaii are included. Total for including Hawaii is Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE D-65. Income of the farm population Income from agricultural sources Net income from all sources Period Net income from agricultural sources l Farm operators ' income Realized gross farm income Income from nonReal- Total agriculized ( in- tural ( excludes cludes sources net net change change in in inveninven- tories ) tories ) Net farm income Real- Total Real- Total ProExized ized ( in ( includ- duc ( ex- cludes ( ex- cludes tion ing cludes net cludes net exTonet change net change tal Gov- penses ernchange in change in ment in in payinven- inven- inven- inventories ) tories ) tories ) ments tories ) Billions of dollars ( ) ( ' ) Oper- Total net ators ' income total from net all income sources per per farm person Dollars ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter _ _ _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter. __ Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( fi ) ( ) ( ) ( ) W ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) CO Net farm income plus wages received by farm resident workers not shown separately Cash receipts from marketings ; Government payments ; and nonmoney income furnished by farms ( value of farm products consumed in farm households and gross rental value of farm dwellings ) Gross farm income less production expenses Data prior to differ from farm proprietors ' income shown in Tables D-9 and D-12 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department of Commerce s Not available Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-66. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio ^ [ = ] Prices received by farmers Crops Period Livestock and products All Feed grains All farm Oil- liveand hay Poulprod- All Food Cot- To- bear- stock Meat Dairy try ucts ^ crops i grains aniton bacco ing and mals prod- and ucts eggs Feed crops prodTotal grains ucts i U93 May June July August September. __ October November.. _ December 1P3& : January February March. April : January February March April May June July August September October _ November December See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE D-66. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Continued [ = ] Prices paid by farmers All Commodities and services items inProduction items terest taxes Famand All wage items living All Motor Farm Fermarates items produc- Feed ve- chin- tition l ( parity hicles ery lizer items index ) Period fly : _ _ January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December Includes items not shown separately Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments Source : Department of Agriculture Parity In3 Wage ratio ter- Taxes rates4 est2 ~ ~ ~ " ~ TABLE D-67. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Livestock and products Farm Oil Period outPoulput J Total Feed Hay Food Vege- Fruits Cot- To- bear- Totals Meat Dairy try and and ani- prod- and grains forage grains tables nuts ton bacco ing mals ucts eggs crops 1956.-1957_._ 4_ Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-68. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs Cropland harvested ( millions of acres ) Year Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Livestock breeding Exclusive of units use for ( 1947Total feed for = horses ) and mules Manhours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm labor Farm real estate3 Mechanical power and machinery Fertilizer and lime Feed seed and live- Miscelstock laneous purchases s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens. Differs from series in Table B-20 which is a Census land area concept Animal units of breeding livestock excluding horses and mules Includes buildings and improvements on land Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers ' purchases Preliminary Not available Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-69. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April ) i Period Farm employment Net ( thousands ) migration to and from Per Num- As per- farms cent of Family Hired unit ber total ( thou- Total workers workers of ( thou- poputotal sands ) lation sands ) input Farm output LiveCrop stock proproduc- duction Per man-hour tion per per breeding acre Liveunit Total Crops ' stock Index = _ 7__ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Farm population as denned by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms both urban and rural regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July excluding Alaska and Hawaii ; includes armed forces abroad Net change for year beginning in April estimated by Department of Agriculture. For and subsequent years includes inductions and enlistments into the armed forces and persons returning from the armed forces. For all years includes persons who have not moved but who are in and out of the farm population because agricultural operations have begun or have ceased on the place where they are living * Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Agricultural Marketing Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table D-17 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected. For further explanation see monthly report on Farm Labor September Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Not available Preliminary NOTE. Farm population figures have been revised for A similar revision of net migration data for is in process but not yet completed. Therefore the two series are not strictly comparable for the periods mentioned Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce TABLE D-70. Selected indicators of farming conditions Value of production assets ( dollars ) i Number of farms ( thousands ) Year Current prices prices Per farm Per farmworker Per farm Per farmworker Investment during year in farm plant and equipment ( millions of dollars ) Gross Real Foreestate closure debt as rate per percent of value ( percent ) farms < Net Percent of all farms having central station electrical service ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) c ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Farm real estate less value of dwellings ; livestock ; crops held for feed ; machinery ; farm share of value of 2automobiles ; and demand deposits used for production. Data are for January Gross investment less depreciation and other capital consumption Data are for January Data are for year ending March of the year following that indicated s Data are for June except for Census of Agriculture years : ( January ) ( April ) ( January ) and ( April ) Not available ? Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-71. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture T940-60 [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of period MachinReal Total estate ery Live- and Crops i stock motor vehicles Household furnishings and equipment Financial assets Deposits U.S and savings cur- bonds rency ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' ment debt debt equiin coties operatives a 1960S ( W ( < ) C4 ) ( ) ( ( < ) Includes all crops held on farms for whatever purpose and crops held off farms as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Estimated valuation for plus purchases minus depreciation since then Preliminary Not available Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE D-72. United States balance of payments l [ Millions of dollars ] ( annual average ) First quarter Government grants ._ _ _ Remittances and other transfers Type of transaction United States payments : Total Imports of goods and services : Total Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation _ Travel Miscellaneous services excluding military. Military expenditures Income on investments : Private Government Unilateral transfers net excluding military : Total _ _ United States capital net : Total Private net : Total _ Direct investments net New issues Redemptions ther long-term net Short-term net Government net : Total ' Long-term capital outflow Repayments Short-term net _ __ United States receipts : Total Exports of goods and services * Total Merchandise adjusted excluding military Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services M ilitary transactions _ _ Income on investments : Direct investments Other private _ _ Government Foreign long-term investments in the United States net * Net United States payments ( ) Increase in liquid dollar holdings by foreign countries and international institutions United States gold sales or purchases ( ) Errors qnd omissions Second Third quar- quarter ter Excludes transfers of goods and services under military grant programs > Includes $ million for increase in United States subscription to the International Monetary Fund of which $ million was in gold and $ million in non-interest-bearing notes Includes $ million advance repayment by Germany on postwar debt to the United States Excludes investment in U.S. Government securities Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-73. U.S. Government grants and credits by areas and major countries fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal years Area and country Spain Yugoslavia _ Other Europe Near East ( including Greece Turkey and United Arab Republic ) Greece Iran Jordan Lebanon ._ Turkey _ ._ __ Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) _ Net new grants ( excluding military supplies and services ) Other Africa ( excluding United Arab Republic ) ( ) Libya Tunisia ) South Asia India Pakistan Far East and Pacific Cambodia China-Taiwan Korea __ Laos _ _ _ Thailand Vietnam __. ._ _ American Republics Other international organizations and unspecified areas Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) ._ New credits M12 ) ) ) ) Italy Spain. Yugoslavia. ) ) Other Europe ( Poland ) ) ) Near East ( including Greece Turkey and United Arab Republic ) Greece Iran _ _ Israel _ Turkey ) India Pakistan ) ) South Asia ) ) Far East and Pacific See footnotes at end of table p. W ) ) Other Africa ( excluding United Arab Republic ) ._ Japan ) TABLE D-73. U.S. Government grants and credits by areas and major countries fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal years Area and country New credits Continued American Republics ) ( ' ) -__ _ Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Mexico Peru Other international organizations and unspecified areas. _ Principal repayments Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) France _ Germany United Kingdom Other Europe ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Near East ( including Greece Turkey and United Arab Republic ) __ __ Other Africa ( excluding United Arab Republic ) .._ South Asia ._ India Pakistan ( __ Far East and Pacific ) ) ) ) ) Japan ) ( American Republics Other international organizations and unspecified areas Net short-term assistance through sale of agricultural commodities4 Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) ._ Italy Spain Yugoslavia Other Europe ( Poland ) ) ) Near East ( including Greece Turkey and United Arab Republic ) ) Other Africa ( excluding United Arab Republic ) South Asia i ) ) Indonesia Japan _Korea ) ) ) _ American Republics ) See footnotes at end of table p. ) ) Far East and Pacific ) ( '. ) ) ) ) India Pakistan ) ( ) Greece Israel Turkey ( ' ) ) TABLE D-73. U.S. Government grants and credits by areas and major countries fiscal years Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal years Area and country Net military grants _ Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) _ Near East and Africa ( including Greece and Turkey ) Far East and Pacific-. American Republics Other international organizations and unspecified areas Less than $ Includes $ million mutual security program loan to European Coal and Steel Community Includes $ million Export-Import Bank loan to the United Kingdom repaid in October Gross sales ( currency claims acquired ) less currencies used by U.S. Government Includes cash contributions to the multilateral construction program of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization some part of which may be in Greece and Turkey as NATO members NOTE. Area totals include data not shown separately Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-74. United States imports of miscellaneous consumer manufactures l [ Millions of dollars ] Product JanuarySeptember Total Precious stones excluding diamonds _ Jewelry and plated ware Cutlery flatware hand tools etc Aluminum brass and bronze ware ._ Electric home appliances radios etc Sewing machines and parts Motorboats motorcycles and bicycles Soap and toilet preparations Photographic goods Scientific and professional instruments Musical instruments Dolls toys and sporting goods Firearms and parts Books maps etc Clocks watches and parts Artworks and antiques _ Leather articles footwear gloves luggage etc.Rubber articles footwear toys balls etc Nursery and greenhouse stock Fur and felt apparel Furniture and household notions Glassware mirrors etc Porcelain earthenware and china Gem diamonds _ __ Tobacco manufactures Miscellaneous goods _ Excludes manufactured foodstuffs passenger cars and wearing apparel Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-75. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions selected periods [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] September1 Total Austria Belgium- Luxembourg ( and Belgian Congo ) France ( and dependencies ) Germany _ _ _ Italy Netherlands ( and Netherlands West Indies and Surinam ) Scandinavian countries ( Sweden Norway Denmark and Finland ) ' ._ ._ Switzerland Other Sterling area ._ Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Cuba Mexico Peru Venezuela Other ._ _ Asia _ _. _ All other countries International institutions Canada.. United Kingdom Other Japan Other Continental Western Europe __ Preliminary Includes repayment to Bank of France of $ million in gold loaned by Bank to French Exchange Stabilization Fund in June NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of gold reserves of U. S. S. R. and other Eastern European countries and of international institutions ( International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund United Nations and others ) Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements ( both for its own and EPU account ) and of the Tripartite Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold are included under " other " Continental Western Europe Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-76. Price changes in international trade [ = ] i Trade sector First Third First Third First Second Third quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter ter ter ter United States foreign traded M anuf actured goods * __ Nonferrous base metals * Primary commodities Foodstuffs _ _ .__ Coffee tea cocoa Other agricultural commodities Wool Minerals __ _ Metal ores * Exports Foodstuffs Industrial materials Finished manufactures _ _ Imports for consumption Foodstuffs Industrial materials _. _ Finished manufactures _ World trade : Industrial countries : Exports ._ Other countries : Exports ..Latin America E xcluding petroleum Commodity classes : Data shown for United States foreign trade and for country groups and for manufactured goods in the world trade section of the table are unit value indexes. All others are price indexes For description of world trade indexes by commodity classes see " Methods Used in Compiling the United Nations Price Indexes for Basic Commodities in International Trade " Statistical Papers Series M No. United Nations New York The series shown for foodstuffs is the weighted average of the two commodity classes crude foodstuffs and manufactured foodstuffs. The series shown for industrial materials is the weighted average of the two commodity classes crude materials and semimanufactures Excludes trade of U. S. S. R. and Soviet bloc countries Exports ' Exports and imports Sources : Department of Commerce and United Nations U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : I960 O