JANUARY Economic Report or me President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C Price of single copy $ LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE January To the Congress of the United States : I present herewith my Economic Report as required by Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of The Report was prepared with the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers. who in turn have had the assistance of the heads of the executive departments and independent agencies directly concerned with the matters discussed. Pursuant to the requirements of the Employment Act the Report summarizes the economic developments of the year and the policy actions taken to promote balanced growth of the economy appraises the economic outlook and puts forward a number of legislative proposals designed to help achieve the purposes of the Act. The Report also reviews the performance of the economy under the Employment Act and particularly during the period of this Administration and discusses policies for the future in the light of this experience The major conclusions and recommendations of the Report are set forth below in part in the words of the Report itself As the year came to a close the Nation was producing goods and services at an annual rate of $ billion the same as in the third quarter of the year though slightly less than in the second quarter. For the year as a whole the total output of our economy in dollars of constant buying power was percent greater than in Production and employment declined in the latter part of and unemployment rose owing in large measure to an inventory adjustment. In the first quarter inventories were being built up at an annual rate of $ billion but in the fourth quarter they were being reduced at an annual rate of $ billion. It is encouraging however that the declines in production and income were moderate. And it is especially important that final demands for goods and services that is the sum of the Nation 's expenditures except those resulting in inventory change rose without interruption during the year and in the final quarter reached the level of $ billion The achievement of a reasonable equilibrium in the Nation 's international transactions continued to be a goal of our policies in The over-all deficit in the United States balance of payments last year remained close to that in each of the two preceding years but the structure of the deficit ill changed markedly. Short-term capital outflows accelerated mainly in response to a widening of the margin by which interest rates abroad exceeded those in this country. But the deficit on all other transactions diminished greatly as a result of a rapid rise in exports The underlying strength of our economy manifested in final demand for goods and services is a distinctly favorable element in appraising the economic outlook. So also is the fact that economic conditions today are free of maladjustments and imbalances which to be corrected would require prolonged contraction. Businessmen and consumers have kept their use of credit within reasonable limits and speculative excesses have been generally avoided. Inflationary pressure has been restrained. While this may have affected inventory policies and perhaps other demands for goods and services it has helped to prepare a solid foundation for a resumption of sustainable growth. Because action to maintain balance and to consolidate gains was taken in good time we can look forward provided public and private policies are favorable to a period of sound economic growth from a firm base The Federal policies needed to promote balanced growth can to a considerable extent be applied under existing administrative authority. But there are certain areas in which legislative action is needed First funds appropriated by the Congress for the fiscal year should be held within the limits of expected revenues. A budget conforming to this standard has been presented to the Congress. It makes certain suggestions for revenues to cover projected expenditures including necessary extensions of taxes that would otherwise terminate or be reduced on July ; an increase in the highway fuel tax to ^ cents per gallon to supply needed funds in the Highway Trust Fund ; the rescinding by the Congress of action taken in which would divert funds from the general fund of the Treasury for road construction ; and a rate increase to place the postal system on a self-supporting basis Second Congress should give the Secretary of the Treasury authority to raise funds in the long-term capital market when in his judgment this is in the public interest even if the cost of the funds is above ^ percent The existing ceiling remains an important impediment to the Treasury 's flexibility in achieving significant debt lengthening Third as I have pointed out to the Congress each year since legislation is needed to enable the Federal Government to give constructive assistance to areas where there is high and persistent unemployment. The character of the legislation needed is described in the Economic Report and an Administration proposal drafted to meet the standards indicated has been placed before the Congress Fourth legislative needs in the areas of health education and welfare antitrust enforcement long-term agricultural adjustment unemployment compensation and housing and community development are outlined in the Report. These are also described in the Budget Message rv Finally I recommend again that Congress amend the Employment Act of to make reasonable price stability an explicit goal of national economic policy coordinate with the goals of maximum employment production and purchasing power now stated in the Act. The amendment proposed is limited to a change in the language of the Act 's declaration of policy and would accomplish its aim without placing restrictions on the effective operation of economic markets. It would strengthen the Employment Act which as the Economic Report shows has been a useful statute under which our citizens have made notable further advances in their welfare DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER CONTENTS Page INTRODUCTION CHAPTER Economic Developments and Policies in Principal Sectors of Demand Inventories Plant and Equipment Expenditures Residential Construction Net Exports Government Expenditures Consumption and Income Employment and Unemployment Prices Agriculture Monetary and Fiscal Areas Monetary and Credit Policy Fiscal and Debt Management Policies Federal Housing and Home Financing and Aid for Highways. International Economic Developments Economic Expansion Abroad United States Payments Dejicit Policies for Reducing the Payments Dejicit International Economic Policies Outlook CHAPTER Experience Under the Employment Act of Background and Meaning of the Employment Act Adjustment from Wartime to Peacetime Economy Expansion of National Output Growth of Resources for Production Strengthening of Our Enterprise System Improvement of Personal Security and Welfare Greater Economic Stability Lessons of Experience Under the Employment Act CHAPTER Policies for the Future Government and Private Policies Maintenance of Price Stability Tax Policy Measures to Reduce Unemployment Education and Health Services International Responsibilities Statistical Information Legislative Proposals VII xi APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Some Recent Economic Developments I. Employment and Earnings II. Agriculture III. United States Foreign Trade and Payments C. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production Page LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS ( Chapter and Appendix B ) Tables Gross National Product Changes in Book Value of Manufacturing and Trade Inventories Changes in Consumer Price Index and Net Changes in Commercial Bank Holdings of Loans and Investments Changes in Selected Liquid Assets Held by the Public Federal Budget Expenditures Federal Budget Receipts World Exports B-l. Growth of the Labor Force by Employment Status B-2. Growth of the Labor Force by Sex and Age B-3. Changes in Nonagricultural Employment by Major Industry Groups October 1959-December B-4. Industrial Structure of Nonagricultural Employment and B-5. Civilian Nonagricultural Employment by Major Occupational Groups and B-6. Employees Receiving Wage Increases Under Major Labor Agreements by Size of Increase B-7. Farm Production Prices Assets and Liabilities : Selected Data and B-8. Net Farm Income of Selected Types of Commercial FamilyOperated Farms and B-9. Number of Farms by Economic Class and B-10. Number of Farms by Acreage Groups and B-l Production Assets Used in Agriculture and B-l Farmers ' Cooperative Associations and Their Membership by Type B-l Net Business Volume of Farmer Cooperative Associations Engaged in Marketing Farm Supply and Related Services VIII Tables B-14. Acreage Reserve and Conservation Reserve Programs B-15. Conservation Reserve Program Acreage Under Contracts for Future Years B-16. Total Population and Population in Low-Income Farming Areas and B-17. United States Balance of Payments B-18. United States Merchandise Exports B-19. United States Merchandise Imports B-20. Treasury Bill Rates in the United States Canada and the United Kingdom B-21. Expenditures for Foreign Economic Assistance and Other Contributions to Less Developed Countries Total B-22. Industrial Countries ' Shares of Exports of Manufactures and B-23. United States Merchandise Exports to Western Europe B-24. Measures of Demand for United States Imports Selected Years Page Charts Gross National Product Growth of Credit Personal Income Spending and Saving Corporate Profits Civilian Labor Force Employment in Nonagricultural Establishments Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing Consumer Prices Wholesale Prices Indicators of Agricultural Conditions Member Bank Reserves and Borrowings Stock Prices and Stock Market Credit Money Supply Interest Rates and Bond and Mortgage Yields Surplus or Deficit of the Federal Government. U.S. Balance of Payments U.S. Merchandise Exports and Imports IX INTRODUCTION This Economic Report is the eighth prepared by this Administration pursuant to the provisions of Section ( a ) of the Employment Act of Since the eight Reports cover a period that embraces more than half of the lifetime of the Act the present occasion seems an appropriate one for a brief survey of the performance of our economy since and an exploration of the challenges and opportunities of the years ahead Accordingly these topics are treated here as well as the required review of and the examination of issues that will more immediately concern the new President and the new Congress The first chapter in the Report reviews the outstanding economic developments of describes the policies pursued by the Federal Government during the year to help achieve the purposes proclaimed in the Employment Act and appraises the economic outlook for the next year The second chapter considers the Nation 's economic performance during the entire period since and in particular during the eight years spanned by the present Administration. In the light of this experience we can appreciate more fully the vigor of the American economy and its promise for further improvement of the welfare of our citizens. The third chapter identifies major problem areas to which attention should be directed in the future and for which effective policies and programs should be devised within our proven economic political and social framework. In addition Chapter presents proposals for the legislation needed to help achieve the purposes of the Employment Act. These include some items which were presented in last year 's economic program of the Administration and on which action has not yet been taken ; they merit renewed consideration in the current economic context It is not amiss here to mention an observation made several times in this Report : the history of the past years offers a solid basis for confidence in the continued efficacy of the American system of complementary private and public endeavor. This concept of shared responsibility for economic growth and improvement so clearly reflected in the declaration of policy of the Employment Act points the way to sound achievement in a changing domestic and international environment of the common economic purposes of all Americans XI Chapter Economic Developments and Policies in E MPLOYMENT production and income in the United States attained in levels well above those of The advances however were concentrated in the first half of the year ; in the second half production and employment declined and unemployment rose. For the year as a whole the gross national product in current prices was percent higher than in ; in constant prices the increase was percent The improvement in the first part of was an extension of the advance that had begun in the spring of ; this expansion had been aided by the fact that consumer income and outlays had fallen very little during the preceding contraction. Before mid-1958 personal income began to rise and consumers increased their spending. These developments helped to restrain and later to reverse the severe inventory liquidation that had been in progress. Subsequent impulses came from an upward turn in outlays on residential construction followed by a renewed advance in plant and equipment expenditures. Throughout Government expenditures for goods and services continued to rise fairly steadily. With a substantial Federal deficit and an easing of monetary policy the expansion of the economy proceeded vigorously supported by steadily mounting consumption Expansionary forces continued to show strength in although they were distorted by the effects of the steel strike. As prices began to rise after a year of approximate stability and more serious inflationary pressures threatened Federal Reserve authorities increased the degree of monetary and credit restraint that had been initially applied in the summer of Moreover the gap between Federal cash receipts and expenditures ( seasonally adjusted ) was being steadily reduced in accordance with the program for a balanced budget In the early part of the rise in economic activity was accelerated by the anticipation of a steel strike and by the further build-up of inventories which this tended to promote. The long strike that marked the second half of reversed this process in some measure. Inventory investment dropped markedly and employment and income declined. In response to these developments the rise in final demands the sum of the Nation 's expenditures on goods and services except those resulting in inventory change slackened during the second half of However with continued strength in the underlying expansive forces economic activity fell less drastically than might have been expected in the face of this stoppage in one of the major industries of the Nation The halting of the steel strike by a Federal court injunction in November brought an upsurge in economic activity. Steel users rushed to rebuild depleted inventories and automobile production was stepped up sharply By the end of demands that had accumulated during the strike led to widespread expectations of a strong boom and further inflationary pressures Fears of inflation however were lessened by other developments. Monetary authorities had brought credit expansion under effective control. The budget proposed for the fiscal year showed a substantial surplus The terms under which the steel strike had been halted were believed to be favorable to stable prices for steel and other products ; and the competition from abroad that was felt by a widening range of American industries also served as a restraint on prices. Inventories were restored rapidly in early and industrial capacity generally was found to be ample As progressed and as stocks approached or exceeded the volume deemed appropriate to the sales actually experienced the high rate of inventory investment declined. On the other hand expenditures for fixed investment and for consumption as well as the export balance increased In the second quarter gains in final demand outweighed the drop in inventory investment and gross national product ( GNP ) continued to advance albeit more slowly than in the first quarter ( Table and Chart ) Employment and income also showed good gains In the second half of the year expenditures on business plant and equipment as shown in the Securities and Exchange Commission Department TABLE Gross national product [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change in gross national product from preceding quarter Gross national product Period Total Final purchases Change in business inventories Total Final purchases Change in business inventories : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter ! Fourth quarter Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : DepartmentrOf Commerce ( except as noted ) CHART Gross National Product Final purchases advanced in Inventory accumula- tion was substantial early in the year but lessened thereafter and gave way to liquidation BILLK3NS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ^ GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT * * /> * & * * X ^ * FINAL PUR CHASES ~ ' ^ ^ ^ > <j < ^ _ _ CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES * x I I I I I I I960 SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS of Commerce survey began to decline reflecting adequate productive capacity diminishing profits and a slowing down in the growth of demand. The advance in consumer expenditures slackened despite a further though more moderate rise in disposable income and the rate of saving increased accordingly. Housing activity continued the decline that had begun in the second half of Inventory expenditure continued to be a contractive force as liquidation took place toward the end of the year. These negative factors outweighed the major positive elements of demand rising exports and Government purchases and GNP dropped slightly in the third quarter. In the final quarter of the year however GNP remained at its third quarter level PRINCIPAL SECTORS OF DEMAND Inventories The rapid restocking of inventories in the early part of and the subsequent reversal of this movement were the principal factors shaping the course of the economy during the year. In the first quarter manufacturers of durable goods accounted for percent of the total inventory accumulation of more than $ billion ( annual rate ) and automobile retailers accounted for another percent ( Tables and ) In the second quarter the build-up continued but the rate of accumulation was reduced to about $ billion as producers found their needs more adequately covered The steel industry in particular accumulated sizable supplies of finished steel and materials during that quarter TABLE Changes in book value of manufacturing and trade inventories ' [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change from preceding quarter Industry group First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter a Nondurable goods Manufacturing Wholesale Retail Total Durable goods Manufacturing Wholesale Retail Automotive i Change in book value of inventories at end of periods ; differs from net change in business inventories component of GNP which relates to all industries and which includes an adjustment for inventory valuation * Change from end of third quarter to end of November NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce At midyear total inventories in relation to sales were not large measured by historical standards. They were more substantial for some durable goods manufacturers and for automobile retailers and relatively less so for many producers of nondurable goods. As early as midyear there was evidence that manufacturers ' inventories of purchased materials notably steel were being reduced. Meanwhile businessmen 's holdings of finished products increased further a development which in part may not have been intended especially with regard to consumer durable goods lines. As the year progressed inventory policies in some lines of business underwent modification in response to declining sales less optimistic expectations and ample capacity of suppliers in many industries. The reduction in profits provided another incentive for more cautious inventory policies. Additional CHART Growth of Credit The growth in business loans slowed down in I960 while new issues of securities increased slightly BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I960 CHANGE IN BUSINESS LOANS AT COMMERCIAL BANKS V CORPORATE SECURITY ISSUES : NEW MONEY * / I960 There was also less demand for credit by individuals and by various levels of government BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I960 INCREASE IN CONSUMER CREDIT- ^ I960 INCREASE IN NONFARM MORTGAGE DEBT ( I-TO 4-FAMILY HOMES ) STATE AND MUNICIPAL SECURITY ISSUES- ^ I960 CHANGE IN U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES J J I960 I -y CHANGE IN AMOUNT OUTSTANDING / NET PROCEEDS I/PRINCIPAL AMOUNTS ^ EXCLUDES GUARANTEED SECURITIES SOURCES : VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE AGENCIES O contributing factors may have been the greater confidence in price stability and improving techniques of inventory control. As a result inventory reductions developed in some industries during the third quarter and became more extensive in the final quarter of the year The changes in inventory policy were reflected in the business loans of banks ( Chart ) During the early months of the year bank credit of this type increased more than seasonally but subsequently as businessmen slowed their inventory accumulation and later shifted to inventory liquidation the expansion in credit was reduced markedly. Some easing occurred in the availability of credit and in August the prime rate for bank loans was lowered from percent to 4J4 percent Plant and Equipment Expenditures Outlays for business plant and equipment as reported by the SEGCommerce survey which had started to advance in the fourth quarter of continued to rise in the first half of the most significant gain occurring in the manufacturing industries. Total outlays in the six-month period were percent higher than in the first six months of During the second half of the year however ^ these expenditures began to decline For the year as a whole they exceeded expenditures in and approached but did not quite equal the record level attained in The financing in of the larger volume of plant and equipment expenditures by corporations proceeded in an environment of generally easing capital markets. Corporations other than sales finance companies relied somewhat less heavily upon new issues of securities than in although in the aggregate offerings were expanded. With lower interest rates the volume of bond flotations rose substantially. Offerings of stocks however declined as stock prices fell. The flow of internal funds appears to have been slightly below that in because rising depreciation and amortization allowances were not fully sufficient to offset reduced profits But the expanded capital outlays were met without strain since requirements for funds to finance additions to inventories were less than in and liquid holdings of cash and Treasury obligations were used more intensively Residential Construction Expenditures on residential construction in were percent below those in The number of new starts dropped somewhat more sharply than expenditures but the effect of this reduction upon the home building industry was mitigated by the improvement in the volume of activity in additions and alterations The decline in housing activity was tempered by an increase in the availability of mortgage credit and to a much lesser extent by lowered borrowing costs. Another favorable factor was the rise in income. However the response to these stimuli was less than in Vacancy rates in rental units rose from percent in the third quarter of to percent in the third quarter of Reflecting developments in housing activity outstanding mortgage debt on to 4-family homes rose by $ billion in I960 compared with a net increase of $ billion in Net Exports The mounting favorable export balance was an expansive factor throughout After showing an excess of imports over exports of $ billion ( annual rate ) in the second quarter of the Nation 's export balance improved rapidly and by the fourth quarter of it was $ billion Exports of goods and services rose during the year while imports fell slightly ( The balance of payments is discussed in a later section of this chapter. ) Government Expenditures Government expenditures on goods and services increased throughout the year and in the final quarter they were $ billion ( annual rate ) higher than a year earlier. The rise reflected principally the steady advance in State and local expenditures following their brief decline late in which was occasioned in part by the impact of the steel strike upon public construction. Government transfer payments and interest which are not included in expenditures on goods and services rose from $ billion in the fourth quarter of to $ billion in the fourth quarter of thus making a very material contribution to final demand Federal expenditures which had reached a peacetime high of $ billion ( annual rate ) in the fourth quarter of fell to $ billion in the second quarter of Smaller inventory acquisitions by the Commodity Credit Corporation and lower expenditures for defense accounted for most of this drop. However Federal expenditures began to advance in the second half of the year owing largely to a pay increase for Government employees and rising defense spending and reached $ billion in the fourth quarter Consumption and Income Consumer expenditures on services in continued the rise which has been uninterrupted during the years since the war. However this long advance reflects in part pronounced and persistent price increases in this sector. Expenditures on nondurable goods were especially strong just prior to midyear but weakened thereafter as the rise in consumer income slackened. Outlays on consumer durable goods changed little in the first half of the year and declined in the second half. Sales of domestically produced new automobiles totaled million for the year as a whole a volume unequaled since though still below industry expectations expressed in the early months of The increase in volume however does not represent a fully proportionate gain in dollar value of sales ; for the first time a considerable part of the total at least percent consisted of lower-priced compact cars. Meanwhile, the demand for durable household goods exhibited weakness reflecting in part the decline in the number of new homes built The rise in consumer expenditures was supported by the growth of personal income to a level percent above that of ( Chart ) However aggregate consumption in did not fully keep pace with the increase in individual incomes ; consequently saving increased as a proportion of income from percent in the strike-affected second half of to percent in the second half of This increase in the rate of personal saving was another important factor contributing to the declines in the economy during the second half of the year and was reflected in the larger accumulation of liquid assets by individuals as well as in their more restricted use of credit The advance in personal income that accompanied the rise in economic activity during the early part of became less marked after the middle of the year. Labor income benefited from the rise in basic wage rates of approximately percent per year reflecting major collective bargaining settlements deferred wage increases and cost of living adjustments. However labor income was adversely affected by a decline in employment which was especially marked in the more highly paid durable goods manufacturing industries and by a lower average workweek of production workers. After the middle of the year labor income as a whole rose more slowly and then declined dropping more sharply as the year ended. Some other forms of personal income notably interest and transfer payments continued to increase during most of the year In the first half of the year consumers made fairly extensive use of instalment credit causing the total debt outstanding to expand at a substantial rate. Thereafter the marked slowing down of the rise ( seasonally adjusted ) was one of the factors that contributed to the increase in the saving rate ; for as a whole the growth in consumer credit was substantially less than in While the growth rate in automobile and certain other consumer goods paper fell off markedly from the first to the second half of the year the rate of growth in personal loans was more nearly maintained In contrast to personal income corporate profits declined early in ( Chart ) In the first quarter corporate profits before taxes were at an annual rate of $ billion compared with the record figure of $ billion in the second quarter of and by the third quarter they had dropped to $ billion. A shift from profits to other forms of income can help sustain a high level of over-all demand in the short run although over a longer period a shrinkage of profits relative to output may be expected to reduce both the means and the incentive for business investment. In the second half of however the higher saving rate largely forestalled the favorable effect that such a shift might have had through higher consumer income upon consumer buying CHART Personal Income Spending and Saving Disposable personal income rose strongly during the first half of but more moderately thereafter Since spend- ing did not keep pace personal saving tended to rise BILLIONS OF DOLLARS DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME-1/ PERCENT PERSONAL SAVING AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME I i i i I960 * PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S CHART Corporate Profits Corporate profits declined sharply after early I960 The reduction was absorbed by tax revenues and retained earnings while dividend payments were increased BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ? ; \ j I960 WITHOUT ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT After the steel industry resumed operations in November total civilian employment expanded rapidly and by December had almost recovered to its pre-strike figure seasonally adjusted of million ( Chart ) The expansion was largely in the employment of workers in durable goods producing industries ; most of the increase in employment was reflected in a drop of unemployment from million in October when the strike was still in progress to million in December During the period of recovery from the strike higher demand for labor also resulted in longer workweeks and increased overtime in durable goods industries CHART Civilian Labor Force The labor force expanded substantially in ment declined and unemployment Employ- increased during the second half of the year MILLIONS OF PERSONS * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT V < AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT ? UNEMPLOYMENT PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ) * ~ * Y E A R S OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR II I960 Civilian employment continued to expand with the increase in economic activity during the first half of ; by June the seasonally adjusted figure was million. Meanwhile the civilian labor force also increased at about the same rate so that the change in unemployment was minor For as a whole employment averaged million and the civilian labor force averaged million. These were record numbers representing gains above average levels after allowance for the inclusion of Alaska and Hawaii Total payroll employment in nonagricultural establishments expanded moderately during the first half of the year and reached million seasonally adjusted in June. Widely divergent trends appeared however in important industries. Total employment in manufacturing changed very little in the half year. Employment in durable goods industries decreased after February as work forces were sharply reduced in industries producing primary metals and transportation equipment but this decrease was largely offset by a moderate expansion in nondurable goods manufacturing. In nonmanufacturing industries employment increased without significant interruption especially in trade finance service and government Total payroll employment began to decline in August as additional manufacturing industries curtailed work forces the automobile industry shut down earlier than usual for its annual model changeover and construction firms restricted operations. In most major industry groups except finance services and government employment fell after midsummer ( Chart ) Declines in aggregate employment continued to the end of the year with the declines being particularly marked in the final months. Through December the total reduction of payroll employment from the July peak amounted to about Payroll employment in December totaled million compared with million in December The average workweek of production workers in manufacturing industries declined from hours in January to hours in April both seasonally adjusted ( Chart ) This contraction was due in part to temporary and noneconomic factors. After a recovery to hours in May the average again fell as increasing numbers of workers in manufacturing industries went on part-time schedules Unemployment seasonally adjusted declined to million in May but then rose over the remainder of the year to million or percent of the labor force in December. Insured unemployment which covers persons eligible to draw unemployment benefits increased sharply after seasonal adjustment in the second half of the year CHART Employment in Nonagricultural Establishments Manufacturing mining and transportation accounted for nearly all of the decline in payroll employment after the middle of MILLIONS OF PERSONS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL TRADE FINANCE SERVICE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES MANUFACTURING MINING AND TRANSPORTATION / GOVERNMENT CONTRACT CONSTRUCTION X SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I960 CHART Hours and Earnings in Manufacturing The workweek declined during but average hourly earnings increased slightly DOLLARS HOURS AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS ( LEFT SCALE ) AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS * ( RIGHT SCALE ) I960 Average weekly earnings declined as the workweek was reduced DOLLARS AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS IN I960 PRICES & 1i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i 1i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i i I I960 SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ^ CONSUMER PRICE INDEX USED AS DEFLATOR NOTE : DATA RELATE TO PRODUCTION WORKERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The turnover of the unemployed group remained high in ; during most months of the year from two-fifths to one-half of the total number had been seeking work for less than weeks. Nevertheless long-term unemployment the number of persons seeking work for weeks or more increased after May and in December amounted to million after seasonal adjustment compared with million in December The unemployment rate for married men also increased during the second half of the year ; for as a whole however it averaged percent of their number in the labor force about the same as in The increase in unemployment was reflected in the Department of Labor 's classification of the Nation 's major labor market areas according to adequacy of labor supply. In November major areas were classified as having " substantial labor surpluses " ( unemployment of percent or more of the labor force ) compared with in January. A large proportion of total unemployment and an even larger part of longterm unemployment remains concentrated in the major labor market areas having " substantial and persistent labor surpluses " most of which are located in the northeastern part of the country. In May before the downturn of total employment the unemployment rate in these areas averaged percent compared with percent for all the remaining areas Semiskilled unskilled and inexperienced workers were reported to be in surplus supply in nearly all sections of the country but many labor market areas continued to report shortages of professional technical secretarial clerical and skilled workers PRICES Prices in different sectors of the economy followed divergent trends in The net result of these movements was an increase in the consumer price index of percent and an unchanged level for the index of wholesale prices The increase in the consumer price index was about the same as during ( Table ) This outcome conceals however an important difference between the two years in the role of consumer goods prices both of durables and nondurables which in the past have contributed importantly to upward movements. Whereas in both of these sectors showed noticeable advances in the prices of nondurable goods excluding food rose only very moderately5 while those of durable goods declined. Food prices on the other hand which tend to move partly in response to special factors increased in while they had fallen in Prices of services advanced as they have done in earlier years ( Chart ) Investment goods prices also reflected an easing of upward pressures Prices of producer finished goods rose until September but thereafter TABLE Changes in consumer price index and Relative importance December ( percent ) Item All items Percentage change December to November December to November Commodities __ _ Food. _ Food at home... _ Commodities less food Nondurable commodities Apparel Shoes Durable commodities Cars new Cars used Durables less cars Appliances23 Services _ Rent All services less rent __ __ _ _ ______ __ _ Weights do not add to because the miscellaneous category not actually priced but imputed is omitted Comparisons are for December to December and December to September Includes household appliances radios and television sets Source : Department of Labor fluctuated within a narrow range. Since the turn of I960, construction costs have shown a similar stability Wholesale prices in general have remained steady since early ( Chart ) In the earlier part of the period there was a moderate increase in industrial prices but this was offset by lower prices of farm products and processed foods. The reverse was true in as prices of farm products and processed foods rose noticeably and industrial prices drifted down a little. However prices of certain basic items such as metals and their products electrical machinery and especially lumber declined more markedly Prices of crude industrial materials as a group fell considerably ; but at intermediate stages of processing declines in industrial prices have not been large The weakening in the upward tendency of prices reflected the combined impact of several factors. Monetary and fiscal policies served to avoid speculative excesses and pressures of demand upon capacity and helped to create attitudes on the part of businessmen and consumers favorable to price stability. As progressed evidence of ample supplies and the slackening of the economic advance strengthened these attitudes and gave rise to keener competition as well as more careful buying habits. Wage increases of only moderate amount likewise contributed to greater price stability. Average hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing adjusted for interindustry shifts which had advanced by more than percent in and gained only percent in and about the same amount in the past year. However such increases in manufacturing and industries other than agriculture viewed as part of the long-term trend in hourly wage rates are still somewhat greater than the average annual improvement in productivity in the past decade CHART Consumer Prices The rise in consumer prices was due largely to an advance in food prices and to the continuing increase in prices of services INDEX Prices of durable goods fell markedly = ALL SERVICES ' " " ^ ^ ^ " " ^ " " ~ ' " ^ " * ~ ~ ~ ' ALL ITEMS ^ FOOD ~ < ^ ^ " ^ * ^ ^ * ^ ^ ^ ~ ^ ~ * * ^ ^ ? y " " < : * N ^ NONl>URABLES ^ LEJ>S FOOD r \ ^ ^ ^ -_ ^ T ~ J ^ ^ DURABLES ) SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART Wholesale Prices The over-all wholesale price index continued steady in I960 but prices of crude industrial materials declined substantially INDEX INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES I I I I I I I I I I I I i i I I I I I I I I I i I i I I i I i i I i i I I I i i i I i i i i I I i i i i i I i i I II I960 INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS i ii i i Ii i i i i i t i i i I i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i I i i t I960 I960 FINISHED GOODS CONSUMER GOODS EXCLUDING FOOD CONSUMER FOODS I I l I l I I Il I l Il l l ll I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AGRICULTURE Agricultural output in reached a record high for the third year in succession. Output especially of field crops was stimulated by incentive price supports for several commodities the more extensive use of fertilizers and favorable weather. Production of corn and grain sorghums set new records and output of wheat and soybeans was exceeded only in Total livestock production decreased slightly as hog poultry and egg production declined early in the year in response to unsatisfactory prices prevailing toward the end of and cattle production continued the expansion phase of its typically long cycle Prices and incomes received by farmers which had declined in late improved by mid-1960 with better market conditions. Later substantial advances by the Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) on loans on wheat corn and other price-supported crops from the harvests helped to sustain income. Gross income of farm operators estimated at $ billion was $ million larger than the income. Farm production expenses changed very little as lower costs for expense items originating in the farm sector notably feed and feeder livestock all but offset the higher costs of certain other production goods and services. Tax and interest costs were substantially greater than in Farm wage rates were somewhat above those in but fewer workers were employed With their gross income slightly higher and production expenses nearly the same as in farm operators ' net income from farming in was a little greater than in ( Chart ) Realized net income which excludes inventory change rose from $ billion in to an estimated $ billion in Whether reported exclusive or inclusive of inventory change net income in was about the same as the average for the five preceding years ; but since the number of farms has decreased steadily net income per farm in was about percent higher than the average Hired farm workers living on farms received about $ billion in farm wages. Income of all farm people from nonfarm sources including in particular wages earned from part-time work off the farm was a little larger in than in rising to a record $ billion Market values of farm real estate leveled off and then receded a little during after an almost uninterrupted upward trend that started before World War II. There were moderate declines in the Corn Belt and Northern Plains and further small increases occurred in most of the Southern Mountain and Pacific States. Total farm assets at the end of amounted to $ billion percent less than a year earlier. Farm indebtedness continued to increase. By the end of the year indebtedness reached $ billion or percent of assets leaving an equity in farm investment of $ billion percent less than the equity months earlier CHART Indicators of Agricultural Conditions Incomes of farmers from farm and nonfarm sources rose slightly in Farm proprietors ' equities declined BILLIONS OF DOLLARS REALIZED GROSS FARM INCOME S TOTAL NET FARM INCOME- ^ R E A L I Z E D NET FARM INCOME- ^ NET INCOME FROM NONFARM SOURCES & J I I I I I I I I960 INDEX = PRICES PAID INTEREST TAXES AND WAGE RATES ( P A R I T Y INDEX ) PRICES RECEIVED ( ALL J FARM PRODUCTS ) | I I960 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FARM PROPRIETORS ' EQUITIES ( JANUARY I ) I I I I I J * J INCOME OF FARM OPERATORS INCLUDING GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS ^ INCOME OF ALL FARM PEOPLE SOURCE. D E P A R T M E N T OF AGRICULTURE 2O I I960 An outstanding feature of agricultural developments in was the strong expansion of exports of farm products. The volume of these exports reached a new high in the fiscal year I960 and their value at $ billion was second only to the record $ billion attained in the fiscal year Since the major export crops are given Government price support the large exports which are partly subsidized served chiefly to ease the financial burden on the Commodity Credit Corporation ; however they also helped to sustain farm income Despite extensive efforts in food distribution and other surplus removal activities billion bushels of corn billion bushels of wheat million bales of cotton and substantial quantities of several other products remained in CCC inventory or under CCC loan at the end of Accumulated investment of the Corporation in price-supported commodities amounted to $ billion MONETARY AND FISCAL AREAS Early in I960, inflationary forces were being brought under control Efforts to bring the budget into balance were meeting with success and the emerging surplus augmented by seasonal factors permitted some debt retirement. Under these circumstances the Federal Reserve authorities moved to reduce monetary restraint As the year proceeded developments increasingly called for an extension of this policy and the Federal Reserve accordingly took a variety of steps toward more positive promotion of monetary ease. At the same time pressure upon corporate profits reduced prospective tax revenues from this source. The budget surplus for the fiscal year which had been estimated at $ billion in January was revised to $ billion in the fall ; an approximate balance is now estimated. The restraining effect of the budget on the economy diminished in this period. In view of the decline in residential construction Federal housing programs were adjusted to provide additional stimulus. Advantage was taken of the possibility of accelerating the Federal highway program as well as some other Federal programs Monetary and Credit Policy As the year began interest rates on Treasury bills were just reaching a peak although net borrowed reserves had passed their high point in early August The money supply ( demand deposits and currency seasonally adjusted ) had been declining since July Demand for most forms of bank credit however began to slacken early in Business loans which reflected the strong pace of inventory accumulation were the major exception in this downturn. With the demands of the Federal Government on the financial markets also reduced interest rates eased rapidly during the early months of the year. Total O CHART Member Bank Reserves and Borrowings Pressures on bank reserves eased during Beginning in the spring total reserves rose BILLIONS OF DOLLARS u i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i BORROWINGS FROM FEDERAL RESE RVE BAN ) <S w ' \ / J. f y EXCESS RESERVES ..V..- \ ' ^ ^ ' ^ T ? ^ / " ! ^ m \ / / ../ " V * * ' " ^ x i ^ > RESERVES f * ^ A J " \ \ ( ( EXCESS RESERVES LESS W BORROWINGS ) / I960 t AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES * RESERVE REQUIREMENTS CHANGED NOTE : BEGINNING DECEMBER RESERVES INCLUDE VAULT CASH ALLOWED SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM loans and investments of commercial banks as well as total bank reserves and the money supply fell more than they normally do early in a year Through April Federal Reserve open market operations had the effect of easing the position of the banks although not on a scale sufficient to prevent a more than usual shrinkage in total reserves. By late spring net borrowed reserves of banks approached zero ( Chart ) and the rate on three-month Treasury bills dropped below percent. The demand for business loans meanwhile fell short of its increase in most recent years as the rate of inventory accumulation diminished. The demand for other loans also reflected some slackening in economic activity. These developments were further highlighted by a general decline in stock prices ( Chart ) Thus further monetary easing was clearly called for and accordingly open market operations became more aggressive. Beginning in May growing monetary ease was reflected in a greater than usual rise in total reserves of banks and after midyear the downward trend in the money supply was reversed In June the Federal Reserve Banks reduced discount rates from percent to 3JJ/2 percent and in August and early September rates were cut again CHART Stock Prices and Stock Market Credit Stock prices declined during much of I960 but rose late in the year as did stock market credit INDEX BILLIONS OF DOLLARS COMMON STOCK PRICES ( SEC ) ( LEFT SCALE ) " ^ V I960 ^ CUSTOMERS ' NET DEBIT BALANCES AND BANK LOANS TO OTHERS THAN BROKERS AND DEALERS ; END OF MONTH SOURCES : VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE AGENCIES CHART Money Supply After mid-1960 demand deposits and currency rose somewhat and time deposits expanded rapidly BILLIONS OF DOLLARS i960 DEMAND DEPOSITS AT ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS AND CURRENCY OUTSIDE BANKS ; AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES & TIME DEPOSITS AT ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS ; END OF MONTH SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM to percent. In two successive steps taken in September and December reserve requirements against demand deposits for central reserve city banks were reduced from percent to l6l/2 percent. Most important from the point of view of providing reserves all vault cash was made available for meeting reserve requirements. As a partial offset requirements for country banks were raised from percent to percent As the year progressed the expansion of loans continued to be moderate Funds supplied through Federal Reserve actions were used by banks primarily to purchase United States Government securities ; such purchases from June through December amounted to $ billion. The expansion in bank loans and investments produced only a small rise in the money supply because the resultant deposits predominantly took the form of time deposits Beginning in late October Federal Reserve purchases of United States Government securities were extended to short-term securities other than Treasury bills for the first time since The action was considered appropriate in the light of the outflow of capital stimulated in part by the sharply lower yield on short-term United States securities in comparison with the rate on equivalent securities in other countries For as a whole the money supply decreased by $ billion against a rise of $ million in Time deposits however increased much more than in the gain amounting to about $ billion ( Chart ) Bank credit rose by $ billion moderately more than in But loans rose by only $ billion against an increase of $ billion in the preceding year. The slower pace of bank lending despite the larger volume of funds available was due to the lessened demand for total credit by all major sectors of the economy. Banks therefore were able to add about $ billion to their holdings of United States Government securities thus reversing the heavy liquidation of such securities that had taken place in ( Table ) TABLE Net changes in commercial bank holdings of loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Loans and investments Loans ( excluding interbank ) and investments _ l ( ) ( ) U ( ) ( ) _ Investments U.S. Government securities Other securities _ _ Loans ( excluding interbank ) * Business Real estate _ Consumer Security _ Agricultural Nonbank financial institutions All other ( ) ( ) Structural changes in are excluded. On balance through August these changes added almost $ billion in total credit ; $ million in loans ; $ million in U.S. Government securities ; and $ million in other securities. Real estate loans increased about $ million ; business loans $ million ; consumer loans $ million ; and other loans $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Total loans are net of and individual loans are gross of valuation reserves Includes estimate of loans to nonbank financial institutions on December Excludes loans to nonbank financial institutions shown separately and is not strictly comparable with previous data Less than $ million Reported in business and " all other " loans prior to June and estimated in business and " all other " loans on December NOTE. Changes are based on amounts outstanding at end of year See Table C-41 for totals including interbank loans Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) With both an easier monetary policy and reduced demands for credit interest rates declined over the year. For United States Government bonds and municipal bonds the declines were relatively substantial ; they were less so for commercial bank loans and corporate bonds. Rates on mortgage loans declined very little ( Chart ) CHART Interest Rates and Bond and Mortgage Yields Short-term interest rates fell in after having risen sharply during PERCENT PER ANNUM AVERAGE BANK RATE ON SHORT-TERM BUSINESS LOANS I960 Long-term interest rates also declined during after increasing during most of PERCENT PER ANNUM BONO AND MORTGAGE YIELDS U.S. GOVERNMENT BONOS ( YEARS AND OVER ) I960 SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM TREASURY DEPARTMENT FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION AND MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE Total liquid assets including the money supply which had expanded at a relatively slow pace in late changed very little during the first half of I960 if account is taken of seasonal factors. There was a decline in the money supply and some reduction in marketable United States Government securities maturing within one year. As the year progressed however purchases of consumer goods lagged and personal type savings such as time deposits and savings and loan shares began to expand rapidly. Demand for these types of assets appears to have been stimulated also by more favorable returns available on them relative to those on marketable securities. As a result total liquid assets expanded in the latter part of the year ( Table ) TABLE Changes in selected liquid assets held by the public [ Billions of dollars ] Asset class Money supply ( demand deposits and currency outside banks ) Personal type savings _ Time deposits at commercial banks Deposits at mutual saving banks _ Savings and loan shares. U.S. Government savings bonds U.S. Government securities maturing within one year. I9601 * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Changes are based on amounts outstanding at end of year except changes in money supply which are based on daily averages for December Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Treasury Department ( except as noted ) The response of the financial mechanism during to Federal Reserve policies was generally typical of a period in which a policy of restraint gives way to one of ease. The easing was first reflected in reduced net borrowed reserves and sharp declines in short-term interest rates and only later in the expansion of total bank reserves bank credit and deposits Commercial banks were inclined to reduce their high indebtedness to the Federal Reserve System before employing available reserve funds to expand credit further. The low return on Treasury bills in relation to the discount rate prevailing during the late winter and spring as well as subsequently during the year probably influenced banks in these decisions The response of bank credit was also affected by the tendency for an especially large amount of excess reserves to be concentrated during the late summer and fall in country banks while other banks remained under pressure. Since country banks employ their surplus funds less actively this factor may have impeded a more rapid response of total bank credit and the money supply to Federal Reserve action. The expansion of the money supply in turn tended to lag behind credit expansion because the latter reflected primarily an increase in time deposits A somewhat analogous development was observable with respect to the major types of savings institutions including life insurance companies savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks. The larger flow of funds generally available to these institutions led to only a very gradual decline in interest rates on mortgages and the yield on corporate bonds also was slow in being reduced. The behavior of lenders of long-term funds appeared to reflect the experience of earlier periods of declining interest rates which were quickly followed by a return to higher levels Fiscal and Debt Management Policies Fiscal policy during was oriented toward maintaining over-all stability in the economy in conjunction with the more flexible operations of the monetary authorities. For the fiscal year. the Federal budget attained a surplus of $ billion. It is presently expected that the budget for the fiscal year will show a very close balance ( Chart ) The improvement in the budgetary outcome for following a deficit of $ billion in the preceding fiscal year reflected increasing revenues as a result of the expansion of the economy and to a lesser extent a reduction in Federal expenditures Expenditures in the fiscal year were $ billion lower than expenditures in the fiscal year ( Table ) while budget receipts rose by $ TABLE Federal budget expenditures [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Function ( estimated ) ( estimated ) Major national security International affairs and finance Commerce housing and space technology Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Labor and welfare Veterans services and benefits Interest General government Allowance for contingencies Deduct : Interfund transactions Total budget expenditures NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget billion. The reduction in total expenditures was made possible in part by the termination of certain expenditures incurred for antirecession purposes in the previous year as well as of some nonrecurring expenditures Expenditures were lower for housing owing to the termination of the special mortgage purchase program of the Federal National Mortgage Association authorized in and for international affairs and finance because the expenditures had included nonrecurrent increases in the United States subscription to the International Monetary Fund. Farm income support expenditures also declined considerably in CHART Surplus or Deficit of the Federal Government The Federal budget is expected to be in balance for fiscal year and to show a surplus in fiscal year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CONVENTIONAL BUDGET DEFICIT I960 I960 I960 CONSOLIDATED CASH STATEMENT NATIONAL INCOME ACCOUNTS SURPLUS DEFICIT FISCAL YEARS r ESTIMATE SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT BUREAU OF THE BUDGET AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE the fiscal year The advances to States for financing the temporary extension of unemployment benefits were discontinued and expenditures for military assistance diminished. On the other hand there were increases in some expenditures particularly those related to natural resources development research and space exploration. Interest payments on the public debt increased sharply as rates advanced during the first half of the fiscal year The sharp increase in Federal receipts in the fiscal year reflected the strong sensitivity of Federal revenues to fluctuations in the economy Of the total increase corporate income tax receipts accounted for $ billion and individual income taxes for $ billion ( Table ) TABLE Federal budget receipts [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Source Total budget receipts Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Excise taxes Employment taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs Miscellaneous receipts Deduct : Interfund transactions ( estimated ) ( estimated ) NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget For the fiscal year budget expenditures are estimated as $ billion higher than in the preceding fiscal year. Outlays for all major functions except interest payments on the public debt are expected to rise The increases are attributable in varying degree to new legislation primarily the pay raise to Federal civilian employees ; to increases in relatively uncontrollable expenditures such as grants to States for public assistance and payments for veterans ' compensation pensions and medical care ; to past commitments for such purposes as water resources projects space exploration and civilian aviation ; and to higher Congressional appropriations for defense and other programs The increase in revenues in fiscal is now estimated at $ billion substantially less than the expected increase in expenditures. Most of this rise is due to an increase estimated at $ billion in receipts from individual income taxes reflecting higher personal incomes. Corporate tax receipts however are expected to decline. Receipts from excise taxes will probably increase but a decline in all other receipts is foreseen partly because of the transfer of Federal unemployment tax receipts from general revenues to the unemployment trust fund in accordance with the Social Security Act Amendments of A number of tax revenue measures were recommended by the President last January and acted upon by the Congress. Both the corporation income tax rates and certain excise tax rates scheduled for reduction or repeal on July were extended for one year. The Congress also enacted legislation that had been recommended in order to prevent unintended and excessive deductions in the computation of depletion allowances on certain mineral products. On the other hand the Congress again failed to take action on a number of revenue recommendations but enacted certain unrecommended measures that will reduce revenues by at least $ million The change in the Federal budgetary picture between the fiscal years and is even more striking if the transactions are considered on a consolidated cash basis which includes the trust funds. Following a consolidated cash deficit of $ billion in the fiscal year there was a cash surplus of $ million in the fiscal year A cash surplus of $ billion is expected in fiscal The effect upon economic conditions of changes in the financial position of the Federal Government during the fiscal year becomes clearer when stated in terms of the national income accounts which reflect tax liabilities as they are incurred and present the Government 's activities in terms more directly related to the over-all level of economic activity. In these terms there was a surplus of $ billion ( seasonally adjusted ) in the second half of the fiscal year In recent months however the surplus has been considerably reduced. The restraining effect of the budget on the economy thus was substantially lessened in the course of At the State and local level receipts during fiscal continued their advance which over the past decade has proceeded at a faster rate than the gain in Federal revenues. State tax collections increased by $ billion more than twice their growth in This reflected both the strength in underlying economic conditions and a number of legislative changes in the base rate or collection-timing of particular major taxes These enactments were exceptionally numerous in and became effective mainly in fiscal State and local expenditures also continued to rise during the fiscal year and somewhat more than receipts. The increase was mostly in payrolls. Expenditures for new construction remained fairly stable for the fiscal year as a whole but they have been increasing recently. Long-term borrowing by State and local governments during the first half of the calendar year was about percent less than in the corresponding period of but the pace quickened in the third quarter For the calendar year the surplus in the Federal budget permitted a reduction of $ million in the public debt in contrast to the rise of $ billion in This along wit ^ i the easing in credit markets facilitated the Treasury 's management of the public debt. The Treasury 's ability to lengthen the average maturity of the outstanding debt was still limited however especially in the first half of the year by the legal 4J4 percent interest ceiling on securities of more than years ' maturity The Treasury continued to develop new techniques of debt management in order to improve the marketing of United States Government securities and to contribute toward achievement of the broader goals of economic growth and stability. A considerable amount of short-term borrowing was put on a regular basis thus minimizing the impact of refunding shortterm issues on the credit markets. The Treasury also used for the first time the provisions of a law passed in September that makes possible the exchange of securities under advance refunding without the immediate recognition of any gain or loss for Federal income tax purposes. The use of this provision a major improvement in debt management lessens the market impact of long-term debt offerings and provides an incentive for present owners of United States securities to retain them. As a result in part of advance refunding the average maturity which had been years and months in December was extended to years and months in December FEDERAL HOUSING AND HOME FINANCING AND AID FOR HIGHWAYS Further policy actions bearing on the level of economic activity were taken in the areas of housing and highways. Residential construction which had started to decline in the final quarter of was aided by several administrative measures in In February the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) announced new procedures designed to facilitate the sale of existing houses traded in on the purchase of new homes ; in April the downpayments required on FHA-insured home loans were reduced to the minimum permitted by law ; and in July the purchase of FHA-insured loans by the general public was authorized under new procedures. The Veterans Administration increased by more than $ million the amount of direct home loans made to veterans in rural areas and small communities during ; in July legislation was enacted continuing for two years both the eligibility of World War II veterans to obtain guaranteed home loans and the availability of direct home loans The Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) raised the prices paid for loans purchased through its secondary market operations as the availability of mortgage funds in private markets improved. Two price increases of l/2 point were announced the first in July and the second in August. The maximum size loan per dwelling eligible for purchase under the secondary market program was raised by FNMA from $ to $ in January ; and in October the issuance of stand-by commitments for the purchase of existing houses was authorized Interest rates charged by the Federal Home Loan Banks on advances to member institutions were lowered during the year. The latter generally took advantage of an increase in share deposits to reduce their outstand32 ing advances from the Federal Home Loan Banks coincident with a slackening in the demand for mortgage credit. In the context of the college housing program priority was given to loan applications for construction that could be commenced quickly. Administrative procedures were inaugurated in connection with urban renewal activities to aid localities in expediting the planning execution and completion of their projects After being relatively low in the early months of highway construction was increased in the second half of the year as higher revenues resulting from the one cent per gallon increase in the tax on motor fuels made possible first the avoidance of a deficit in the Highway Trust Fund in consequence of legislation passed in and thereafter the apportionment to the States of the full amounts permitted by legislation and the more rapid obligation by the States of the apportioned funds Earlier-than-usual enactment of enabling legislation made possible an acceleration of procurement contract awards and steps were taken to start at once Federal construction projects for which funds were made available at a relatively early date INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS The over-all deficit in the United States balance of payments in remained close to that in each of the two preceding years. The structure of the deficit however changed markedly ( Chart ) Short-term capital outflows accelerated mainly in response to the widening of the margin by which interest rates abroad exceeded those in this country. The deficit on all other transactions on the other hand diminished greatly as a result of a rapid rise in exports. In the first half of the year the over-all payments deficit was relatively low ; it became sharply higher in the third quarter ; and in the last quarter it appears to have declined again ( omitting one large transfer of private direct investment capital ) as the surplus on goods and services increased further and outflows of liquid capital seem to have decreased. The decline in the United States gold stock which had slowed down in the first half of the year accelerated in the second half along with the increase in the over-all payments deficit The year 's improvement in the balance on transactions other than movements of liquid capital was in part the result of high economic activity in Western Europe and Japan which stimulated exports and of the slackening of activity in the United States which tended to limit imports. This divergence of economic conditions likewise accounted for the enlarged differential between the relatively high interest rates abroad and the relatively low rates in the United States which led to outflows of liquid funds. The achievement of a reasonable equilibrium in United States international transactions on the average over a period of years continued to be a goal of this country 's policies domestic and international in CHART T6 U. S. Balance of Payments The surplus on goods and services increased sharply in I960 but the over-all payments deficit remained large as recorded and unrecorded capital outflows rose BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BALANCE ON UNREC DRDED TRANSACTIONS \ i to i i i i i OVER-ALL BALANCE ^ A I960 ' SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES * EXCLUDES $ MILLION INCREASE IN IMF SUBSCRIPTION ! /CHANGE IN U.S. GOLD HOLDINGS AND RECORDED LIQUID LIABILITIES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Economic Expansion Abroad The United States balance of payments in was heavily influenced by developments abroad. As foreign barriers to international transactions have been reduced and as Western Europe and Japan have regained their earlier positions in the world economy the links among the major economies of the free world have become much closer than in earlier years The boom that got under way abroad in continued in varying degree during in most industrial countries outside North America However during the year some slowing down was noticeable in a number of countries because of capacity limitations and scattered soft spots appeared. Some countries on the European Continent which continued to experience boom conditions nevertheless had sizable export surpluses that were not offset by long-term capital outflows. Economic activity in Canada which is the largest individual market for United States exports and which had been one of the first industrial countries to recover from the recession turned down after the first of the year Economic policies in Western Europe and Japan were in general directed toward restraining excess demand throughout I960 ; exceptions were France and Italy where mild expansionary measures ( including a reduction in the discount rate in France ) were instituted in the second half of the year Restraint was exerted mainly through monetary and credit policies and interest rates rose in a number of countries ; there were particularly sharp increases in short-term rates in the United Kingdom up to August and in Germany until October. In continental Europe the authorities of several countries were faced with the problem of dealing with inflows of funds from abroad which helped to enlarge bank liquidity. Special restrictions on such inflows were introduced during the summer in Germany and in Switzerland ( which had attracted funds despite its relatively low interest rates ) In November the German central bank reduced its discount rate in a further effort to stem the inflow. Discount rates were also reduced in Japan ( in August ) and in the United Kingdom ( in October and December ) ; the economic policies of these countries remained otherwise unchanged. Short-term market rates tended to reflect these discount rate reductions and the gap between United States short-term interest rates and those abroad was reduced in the last months of the year With the slowing down of the expansion in the industrial countries the rise of world trade also slowed down. While exports of the United States and Japan continued to rise those of other industrial countries declined somewhat in the second quarter and rose only moderately thereafter ( Table ) Exports of the nonindustrial countries in the aggregate remained at about the level reached in the second half of and many of these countries continued to be seriously affected by the price weaknesses of many primary commodities both agricultural and mineral products which became more pronounced in the second half of the year. At the same TABLE World exports [ Billions of dollars ] Country or ar a First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Seasonally adjusted annual rates World total United States All other countries Other industrial countries Continental OEEC countries United Kingdom Canada _ Japan Nonindustrial countries Unadjusted annual rates Nonindustrial countries Sterling area excluding United Kingdom Latin American Republics All other * U4.2 ! ( ) ( ) * Preliminary Excludes Soviet Area and Communist China Excludes military-aid shipments * Excludes Spain Not available Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : International Monetary Fund and Department of Commerce time however comprehensive economic stabilization programs helped to put the economies of many of the nonindustrial countries on a sounder footing and thus to assure better balanced growth. The United States continued to participate actively in international studies of the trade problems of these countries United States Payments Deficit After showing sluggishness in and the early part of United States exports staged a rapid comeback in By the third quarter merchandise exports reached an annual rate of $ billion ( seasonally adjusted ) percent above their early low and the high rate continued in October and November ( Chart ) Imports declined in the third quarter to an annual rate of less than $ billion and fell further in the closing months of the year. Much of the increase in the merchandise trade surplus reflected the high level of economic activity in Western Europe and Japan and the slowing down in this country. Exports in addition received a temporary stimulus from special demand conditions relating to jet aircraft and to cotton in the first part of the year. Export and import trends indicate that many United States manufacturers are successfully CHART U. S. Merchandise Exports and Imports The trade position improved markedly during as exports rose and imports declined slightly BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES MERCHANDISE EXPORTS ( EXCLUDING MUTUAL SECURITY PROGRAM SHIPMENTS ) I960 " BASED ON DATA FOR OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE adjusting the prices and designs of their products to meet foreign competition. ( For a more detailed discussion of United States Foreign Trade and Payments see Appendix B. ) The United States continued its generally nonrestrictive import policy in Only one restrictive action was taken under the safeguarding provisions of our trade agreements legislation and the Tariff Commission disposed of eight other cases without finding of injury. At the close of the year final decisions had not yet been taken on two cases in which the Tariff Commissioners were equally divided in their findings. The United States also announced a new set of tariffs on wool fabrics to replace a tariff quota system and extended for three years the existing quota on imports of tung oil and tung nuts. Preparations were made for United States participation in the general round of tariff negotiations to be held in under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) In contrast to the rapid improvement of the merchandise trade surplus the net deficit on service transactions in the first three quarters of changed little from the $ billion rate of both and although both payments and receipts continued to grow. Net outflows of Government loans grants and pensions private remittances and United States private long-term capital which together have ranged from $ billion to $ O billion a year since changed little in the aggregate between the first three quarters of and of Government assistance to the less developed countries retained its high priority. During the months ended September dollar disbursements under the Mutual Security Program for economic and technical assistance totaled $ billion. Of this amount $ million was disbursed by the Development Loan Fund which at the end of the period had undisbursed commitments of $ billion. Under Public Law agricultural surpluses were disposed of against local currencies to the amount of $ million and in addition grants amounting to $ million were made. The Export-Import Bank disbursed $ million in loans and committed $ million while receiving repayments of $ million. The United States also paid $ million in June on its subscription to the newly established Inter-American Development Bank and $ million in November on its subscription to the new International Development Association Flows of liquid funds shifted dramatically against the United States in This change was reflected in both recorded outflows and unrecorded transactions so-called " errors and omissions " ; for the year as a whole it appears to have offset much of the improvement in United States trade accounts. The outflow which increased after midyear as interest rate differentials widened further took various forms including short-term investments bank loans and repatriation by foreigners of liquid holdings in the United States. Some of the bank loans however were not related so much to changing money market conditions in major centers abroad as to needs of certain less developed countries for balance of payments support. Some United States and foreign funds moved into longer-term interest-bearing securities abroad particularly after the first months of the year. There also were shifts of funds invested in equities in response to changing market conditions on the two sides of the Atlantic. The flows of some funds were influenced during the summer and fall by heightened uncertainties in the political situation in some areas and in world economic conditions. Much of the year 's outflow of liquid funds went to the United Kingdom and several countries in continental Europe which hold a large proportion of their official reserves in gold and thus increased the pressure on the gold supply of the United States Short-term capital outflows enlarged the payments deficit only to the extent that these outflows were exports of short-term funds by United States residents. The repatriation by nonresidents of recorded short-term foreign funds held in the United States did not increase the recorded payments deficit but by adding to foreign official dollar balances it swelled the demand for United States gold. Outflows of United States owned short-term funds increased the payments deficit even though they were matched by a rise in United States liquid claims on other countries. Under United States balance of payments accounting the payments deficit is measured by the increase in liquid dollar liabilities and the decline in the gold stock Policies for Reducing the Payments Deficit To help speed the attainment of a reasonable equilibrium in the United States balance of payments the Administration in intensified policies instituted earlier when the recovery by the once war-devastated nations of their competitive strength had become evident. The effort centered on measures to increase United States exports and to reduce the balance of payments impact of Government military and economic programs abroad in a manner consistent with our responsibilities and long-standing policies Underlying these steps were equally important policies relating to the domestic economy. Fiscal and monetary policies had as one of their major objectives the maintenance of confidence in the dollar as a sound and reliable currency. In this connection the Administration continued to emphasize the importance of appropriate action by management and labor to insure the competitiveness of United States goods at home and abroad To support the efforts of private business in enlarging sales abroad the Federal Government with the cooperation of private business instituted early in a National Export Expansion Program a series of coordinated measures to improve and expand Government services in private industry. Measures were adopted to gain the help of existing national and local business groups to assist and encourage businessmen newly entering the export field and to strengthen contacts with business groups abroad. To place United States exporters on a more equal basis with exporters in other industrial countries the Export-Import Bank introduced a new program of guarantees of noncommercial risks for short-term credits and expanded its existing facilities for medium-term export credits and guarantees. The United States also continued to urge other countries particularly the economically and financially strong ones to eliminate remaining discriminatory restrictions on United States goods and services and to lower tariffs and other barriers to trade Toward the end of the year the United States initiated a number of coordinated measures designed to obtain substantial foreign exchange savings in its Government expenditures abroad without reducing its military strength or impairing its international commitments. Steps were formulated to reduce gradually and then limit the number of dependents abroad of Defense Department personnel particularly in the highly industrialized countries with strong currencies and to cut back Defense Department procurement of foreign goods and services and other expenditures abroad Other departments and agencies which have personnel abroad and which engage in procurement abroad were instructed to institute similar programs In addition the question of the cost of the United States troops in Germany came under discussion by the United States and German Governments. To minimize the balance of payments effects of our economic aid programs the International Cooperation Administration was instructed to place primary emphasis on financing goods and services of United States origin in all of its foreign aid activities and as far as practicable to discontinue offshore procurement in countries with strong currencies Similarly the Development Loan Fund which had adopted a similar policy in October was instructed to reduce procurement outside of the United States to the lowest possible figure In addition efforts were increased to ensure that sales under the agricultural surplus disposal and related programs do not reduce cash dollar sales of United States products. International institutions were urged to use currencies other than dollars as fully as possible and other strong countries were encouraged to permit borrowing in their capital markets by these institutions and by other borrowers where appropriate. On January the regulations that have been in force for a number of years prohibiting the holding of gold in the United States were uniformly extended to holdings of gold abroad by persons and business organizations subject to the jurisdiction of the United States International Economic Policies Most countries continued in to move toward the free and multilateral trade and payments system which has been the goal of the United States since the end of the war and for which the United States has pressed with particular vigor in the last few years. By now discrimination against United States exports has diminished very substantially ; the major remaining quantitative trade restrictions on United States exports are against agricultural products particularly in Western Europe. Foreign restrictions on capital transactions however continue to be considerable. The United States Government expects that there will be continued progress in the dismantling of restrictions on world trade and payments. In particular the great economic strength of the countries belonging to the European Economic Community and the European Free Trade Association should facilitate a significant lowering of tariff barriers during the forthcoming Geneva GATT negotiations The institutional framework of world finance was improved in through the establishment of the International Development Association and the Inter-American Development Bank. The United States announced new aid programs for Latin America and further advances were made in the area of ad hoc multilateral cooperative efforts for development most notably the Indus River Basin project The United States continued to stress the need for a strengthened determination by all the industrial countries to share in providing funds to the less developed parts of the free world. At the initiative of the United States the major industrial countries early in formed a Development Assistance Group to discuss methods for providing such aid. It is planned to incorporate the work of this group in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) the successor organization to the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( OEEC ) which is scheduled to come into existence in following ratification of its convention and which is to comprise the Western European members of the reconstituted OEEC together with Canada and the United States The objectives of this organization will be to achieve the highest sustainable economic growth in member countries to contribute to sound economic expansion in countries in the process of development and to contribute to the expansion of world trade Along with these advances the problem of shifts of short-term funds from one international center to another came to the fore during Now that freedom for international short-term capital movements has been substantially enlarged and the economies of the major countries abroad have been greatly strengthened it appears that interest rate considerations may have an increasing influence on short-term capital flows. However the international financial mechanism today seems strong and flexible enough to allow solutions to the resulting difficulties to be worked out International payments other than short-term capital movements also have continued to show an imbalance. As a result of this over-all lack of balance in world payments the substantial increases of international reserves of recent years continued to be concentrated in a small number of countries particularly in continental Europe. Originally this inflow was justified by the extremely low level of reserves of these war-devastated countries but today the reserves of most of them by and large seem ample The United States has many responsibilities in the world economy. These include keeping the dollar strong in view of its key role in international trade and payments maintaining liberal commercial relationships with other countries contributing to the defense of the free world and supplying a share of the capital resources needed by less developed countries. The United States can meet these responsibilities because of its resourceful and flexible economy and its international reserves which with an available gold stock of about $ % billion are large. But the United States can not play its part fully unless other industrialized nations pursue policies required by their positions in the world economy. This fact is now increasingly recognized. A helpful start has been made in the sharing of development costs and other burdens and in the cooperative reduction of existing payments imbalances but further efforts are needed if the international financial mechanism is to work properly and the free world 's economy is to move ahead steadily OUTLOOK As pointed out in this chapter economic activity continues high as the year begins despite the declines in production and employment that have occurred since the middle of The Nation 's total output of goods and services is below the level reached in the second quarter of but the difference in constant prices is only slightly more than percent. And the decline is less than the effect on gross national product accounts produced by inventory changes ; final demand for goods and services which is the total of expenditures in the economy exclusive of inventory adjustment has continued to move upward. It rose $ billion on an annual rate basis in the last quarter of to a total of $ billion There have been production declines in a wide range of industries but the greatest declines have been in those industries affected by inventory changes which were in part a result of the extended steel strike of Thus while total industrial production in December was percent below the January high output of iron and steel was percent lower and the decline in industries other than steel was less than percent. After midyear employment also declined as did wage and salary disbursements These tendencies became more pronounced in December and unemployment rose sharply. Total income payments to individuals which had been relatively well maintained declined in December The fact that aggregate output has been fairly steady despite the large inventory adjustment from accumulation at the annual rate of $ billion in the first quarter of to liquidation at the rate of $ billion in the fourth quarter of the year reflects the underlying strength of the current situation and is a distinctly favorable factor in the economic outlook at this time. It is also favorable to the outlook that major maladjustments which to be corrected would require prolonged contraction have not been created in the period of advance that began in or in recent months when activity has been either stable or moderately declining. Businessmen and consumers have kept their use of credit within reasonable limits and appear to have avoided commitments that might lead to significant corrective changes. Inflationary pressure has been restrained ; while this restraint may for a time have affected inventory policies and perhaps other demands for goods and services it has helped prepare a solid foundation for a resumption of sustainable growth The principal adjustment still in process is in the inventory area. Further reductions will probably occur during the early part of ; but if consumer expenditures are well maintained in the coming months as they typically have been during recent periods of business hesitancy the rate at which this inventory reduction is carried forward should soon diminish A return to inventory accumulation may take somewhat longer but stocks in some lines already appear low and even with a reduced rate of liquidation of existing holdings an increase in production would be required The export balance may continue for some time to add strength to the economy. It showed an additional increase in the final quarter of but the impulses emanating from the boom in Europe and Japan are not likely to continue indefinitely without some slackening Government outlays may be expected to rise materially during Federal budgetary expenditures proposed for the fiscal year are $ billion higher than for fiscal ; and State and local expenditures are likely to continue their rise in response to the needs of our growing population Housing expenditures which tended to level off toward the end of from a decline that began in should become an expansive factor in The volume of construction has benefited from an easier availability of credit but not substantially so far from a cheapening of its cost Recently however the flow of funds into major savings institutions has materially increased which should eventually lower borrowing costs and exert an expansive influence on all aspects of construction It is unlikely that business expenditures for fixed investment will contribute to an increase in demand and production in the immediate future Capacity is being utilized at less than optimum rates in many industries and what is of major importance the trend of corporate profits has not been favorable. Surveys of business capital investment plans and of appropriations for such investment suggest that for a while these expenditures may continue to decline moderately from the near-record levels reached in But they will rise as advances occur in other sectors of the economy and as accelerating activity in research and development creates new opportunities for enterprise Consumer outlays may be expected to increase as the factors of expansion raise personal income and especially if the prices of consumer goods remain free from inflationary pressures An increase in general economic activity should not accordingly be long delayed. It will be aided by actions already taken in areas of public policy Credit conditions have been eased materially by the Federal Reserve authorities. A number of steps have been taken by the Executive Branch to stimulate home building. And prompt legislative action on appropriations in made possible an acceleration of Federal construction and procurement generally. Highway construction was also accelerated. An increase in production to which these actions contribute may well become evident prior to a resumption of gains in employment and reductions in unemployment The outlook for the United States balance of payments has become dependent not only on changes in exports and imports but also in considerable measure upon the movement of liquid capital. In the balance of trade some further improvement may be ahead at least in the early part of Exports of manufactured products are expected to rise moderately in response partly to the strong demand in many industrial economies abroad some of which are operating close to full capacity. Greater domestic procurement under our economic aid programs should also be reflected before long in export gains. At the same time however exports of some materials for which demand was particularly strong in the middle of may continue to decline. An easing in economic activity in the industrial countries abroad would of course react unfavorably upon United States exports Merchandise imports may be expected to reflect developments in the domestic economy and to increase with a resumption of our general economic advance though perhaps with some lag. Circumstances that tended to limit imports of automobiles petroleum and foodstuffs in may continue to exert a restraining influence upon total imports in Although the measures taken to curtail United States military expenditures abroad point to a further decline in these outlays the net deficit on services is unlikely to be much reduced owing to compensating changes under other headings. Private capital transactions particularly those of a short-term character may well show considerable improvement provided inflationary developments are avoided. Direct investments abroad may be lower than in and an advance in the domestic economy may attract equity funds to the United States. Most importantly a resumption of advancing activity here may reduce the margin by which shortterm interest rates in leading foreign centers exceed those in this country Although some of the favorable factors may not continue throughout the year present prospects favor a reduction in the over-all balance of payments deficit in as a whole As expansion is resumed there is a good chance to realize more fully our economy 's potential for growth. The basis for advance has been laid in recent years in the enlargement and improvement of our productive capacity and in policies that have brought the forces of inflation under control Some temporary acceleration of growth might have been achieved if expectations of price increases had been allowed to persist and to become firmly rooted. But the unsustainable nature of such growth would now be confronting the economy with the need for far-reaching and painful correction Because action to maintain stability and balance and to consolidate gains was taken in good time the economy can now look forward provided public and private policies are favorable to a period of sound growth from a firm base Chapter Experience Under the Employment Act of T HE REVIEW of developments in our economy is extended in this chapter to the whole period covered by the Employment Act and particularly to the interval spanned by this Administration. In this connection it is appropriate to recall the background and meaning of the Employment Act and to point to some of the lessons that may be drawn from experience in administering it BACKGROUND AND MEANING OF THE EMPLOYMENT ACT From its beginning the United States economy has been organized on the basis of maximum opportunity for private competitive enterprise and the widest possible latitude for personal choice in making a living and spending one 's income. Any narrowing of the horizons for individual initiative is alien to the nature of our enterprise system ; and when controls and unusual restrictions on personal action have had to be introduced during an emergency their abandonment at the end of the temporary period of crisis has been awaited impatiently In this tradition the Nation approached cautiously the problem of Federal intervention respecting employment and the maintenance of economic activity generally. Appeals for such intervention were resisted for example during the sharp economic downturn in when occasional depressions were still regarded as inevitable and the belief that they could be significantly moderated through governmental action had not taken hold But a step taken that year was important for later developments : the President 's Conference on Unemployment was established to make studies that would increase understanding of the operation of our economy and thus help to avoid the recurrence of widespread joblessness. The work of this Conference which made its final report only shortly before the Great Depression began was reflected in the Employment Stabilization Act of which sought to provide for " advance planning and regulated construction of public works for the stabilization of industry and for aiding in the prevention of unemployment during periods of business depression. " Despite a series of countermeasures the heavy unemployment of the 's persisted until the tremendous increase in production required in World War II and the service of 115/2 million persons in the Armed Forces reduced it to a minimum and created even a degree of overemployment. With the turn in the tide of war however memory of deep depression in the 's and the expected demobilization of the Armed Forces heightened concern for the Nation 's economic future and aroused a keen interest in measures to help avoid the widespread unemployment that it was feared would result from demobilization and reduced spending on arms It was in this atmosphere of concern that the Congress turned its attention to legislative measures to cope with unemployment, should it emerge as a serious postwar problem. Congressional staff committees made comprehensive studies of the incidence and duration of unemployment and of possible methods for dealing with it. Extensive hearings were held and a bill the Full Employment Act of was introduced in Congress providing for a considerably broader attack on unemployment than the public works program envisioned in the Employment Stabilization Act of The bill failed of enactment but subsequently a revised version the Employment Act of was passed overwhelmingly with bipartisan support in both houses of the Congress At the time it was approved the Employment Act represented a major extension of our traditional concept of shared private and public responsibility for the Nation 's economic growth and improvement. It gave explicit expression to a continuing interest on the part of the Federal Government in aspects of economic life that outside the sphere of monetary policy had previously received deliberate Federal attention only in such emergency conditions as depression and war It is useful to recall the language of the Act 's declaration of policy : " The Congress declares that it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations and other essential considerations of national policy with the assistance and cooperation of industry agriculture labor and State and local governments to coordinate and utilize all its plans functions and resources for the purpose of creating and maintaining in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " Thus the Employment Act states that it shall be the policy of the Federal Government to promote conditions under which there will be afforded employment opportunities by methods that are consistent with the traditional American philosophy of individual freedom and competitive enterprise. Although the Act enlarges the area of explicit Federal concern to include the quality of our current and expected economic accomplishment it does so without diminishing the scope of private State and local responsibility. Far from seeking to centralize economic decisionmaking in the Federal Government or even to confer predominant respon- sibility for economic growth and improvement on the Federal Government the law explicitly acknowledges the multiple sources of economic strength in private individuals and groups and at the several levels of government The theme of the Act is captured in a phrase used in the Economic Report of and in the present one : " shared responsibility for economic growth and improvement. " This principle manifest in our economic life as in other aspects of the American way has carried us to the highest material wellbeing ever achieved without hobbling the human spirit and without impairing our political freedoms The framers of the Act proposed high standards of economic achievement. They wisely omitted however any requirement that economic goals be publicly stated as fixed quantitative targets although this fact gives no ground for indifference to failure to attain the best levels of production employment and income that are feasible and sustainable for any period Such a requirement could invite broad irreversible intervention by the Federal Government if the projected targets were not reached. The Act instead contemplates a framework in which the mainsprings of private individual initiative continue to function in behalf of brisk economic activity and in which the individual retains a wide freedom of choice. In our economic system the level of achievement is everyone 's responsibility and can not be guaranteed by the Federal Government acting alone It should be noted also that the Act states that the Nation 's economic objectives should be pursued with due regard to other Federal objectives and obligations which must include a statje currency and protection of the value of the dollar. The goals of economic policy furthermore are not ranked. They have to be pursued coordinately ; emphasis on one to the neglect of others would soon prove self-defeating ADJUSTMENT FROM WARTIME TO PEACETIME ECONOMY When the Employment Act was passed in our economy was making the extensive readjustments required of a Nation in transition from war to peace. A year earlier economic resources were still extensively committed to war and defense. Of the Nation 's total output of about $ billion expressed in current values roughly one-third was for military purposes ; and ^ million Americans nearly one out of every twelve in our population were in the Armed Forces. Within a year 's time the proportion of our national output devoted to defense had been cut to less than percent and million men and women had been demobilized Although this sweeping readjustment was not made without difficulty it was completed with but a small rise in unemployment and with a relatively small drop in the Nation 's output of goods and services. Sharp increases in the production of consumer goods and services a quadrupling of the rate of expenditures on home building and a great surge of investment by businessmen in new productive capacity and in the rebuilding of depleted inventories came close to offsetting the large cutback in defense output. The year in which the Employment Act was passed marks the beginning therefore of a period in which the central economic problem has been that of sustaining stable inflation-free economic growth despite still large defense and defense-related burdens. It is for this reason a good starting point from which to review the performance of our economy against the standards implicit in the Employment Act EXPANSION OF NATIONAL OUTPUT " The postwar years have witnessed an enormous expansion of the Nation 's annual output. Measured in current prices the value of goods and services produced gross national product expanded from $ billion in to more than $ billion in After adjustment of these values to eliminate the effect of price rises which were persistent and substantial during most of this period it is seen that output rose by nearly percent or at an average rate of approximately ^ percent a year. By this broad measure our economy 's rate of expansion in the period of the Employment Act has exceeded by a significant degree the rate of growth from the beginning of this century to World War II All major components of output expanded at a high rate. Business fixed investment which is largely for constructing and equipping new or improved productive facilities increased rapidly as wartime deferrals were made up and extensive modernization programs were carried out. Nearly $ billion ( in prices ) was invested for these purposes in the period equaling in real terms almost three times the investment of the previous years. The output of consumption goods and services rose more than percent. Home construction increased at a rate of about percent per year ; almost million dwelling units were completed a number equal to about half the supply of homes available when the war ended. By the end of the 15-year period the housing shortage which had been so acute when war ended had been eliminated and what is especially important for the vitality and strength of our free institutions some percent of all dwelling units are now occupied by home owners Total purchases of goods and services for use by or through government also increased markedly. Federal State and local government purchases as a total almost tripled between and ; currently they comprise almost one-fifth of the Nation 's total output. In the years since State and local expenditures for education have more than doubled ; and those for public health and sanitation for highway construction arid for general government purposes have increased almost as rapidly Although the amount of the Nation 's total output of goods and services that was directed to defense purposes remained high throughout the 15year period and especially after the proportion in was lower than in ; reflecting this the output of goods and services for civilian use increased at a higher rate than total output. Thus while total output increased from to by close to percent or at a rate of percent per year the use of goods and services for consumption which includes private expenditures on education and medical care as well as all other consumer purchases rose about percent or percent a year. Expenditures on residential construction rose more than percent or percent a year. Purchases of goods and services by State and local governments through which community needs that can not be met by private effort are traditionally satisfied rose nearly percent or percent a year more rapidly than any other single major component of national output GROWTH OF RESOURCES FOR PRODUCTION This impressive expansion of output illustrates the high and rising productive capability of our enterprise economy. Whether comparable or superior gains in real output occur in the future will depend in good part on the extent to which the resource base of our economy is maintained and strengthened through balanced growth. Therefore it is a good augury for the future that significant increases and improvements in the quality of our productive resources have been registered in recent years First our total labor force has increased at a rapid rate substantially above what was expected when the Employment Act was passed ; increases since have averaged about a year. And there has been a marked improvement in the educational background and training of the labor force. In about percent of the labor force to years of age had graduated from high school and percent were college graduates ; in the respective proportions were more than percent and percent. And in the age group to the representation of high school graduates rose during this period from percent to percent and of college graduates from percent to percent. Since increases in school enrollments and in the numbers receiving college degrees have been especially large. The proportion of all persons to years of age enrolled in school rose from percent in to percent in As would be expected educational enrollment increases were most rapid in the older age groups reflecting the national trend toward wider participation in college and postgraduate studies. Also important has been the increasingly frequent establishment of on-the-job education and training programs by business firms private trade schools and labor organizations Second as mentioned above the Nation 's stock of capital has been enlarged by substantial annual investments in new plant and in new machinery and equipment. As a result the productive capacity of our economy has been greatly increased. This was especially true in the years immediately after World War II when deficiencies that had developed during the war were made up but the rate of increase has been high also in the past eight years. Increases since World War II in the capacity for producing steel refining petroleum and manufacturing paper range from to percent and in other industries such as aluminum the growth has been even more rapid. The capacity of our transportation system has likewise been greatly expanded Third the Nation 's intangible capital has been greatly augmented through heightened activity in research and development. Total expenditures for these purposes can be estimated only very roughly but they are placed at about $ billion a year at the present time having risen sharply from about $ billion in Even though somewhat more than one-half of this cost is Government financed and much of it is oriented toward military purposes the benefits to private industry and to civilian objectives are real persistent and large Such increases in the Nation 's stock of tangible and intangible capital together with the improved skills of our working people and improved methods of business management have been reflected in substantial improvements in productivity. Although there is no clear evidence that the rate of this improvement has accelerated in the years since it appears to have been higher on the average since the end of World War I than in the years prior to The volume of output per man-hour of labor performed one measure of productivity continues on ' an upward trend though year-to-year changes remain irregular and occasionally are downward STRENGTHENING OF OUR ENTERPRISE SYSTEM The continuing vigor of the competitive 'enterprise system which Government is called upon to foster and strengthen under the Employment Act is clearly manifest in developments since The rate of formation of new businesses was especially high in the closing years of World War II and the years immediately following and it has continued high since then. Although the rate of discontinuance of businesses including the termination of enterprises by failure has tended to rise the business population has made significant gains. The number of operating businesses has risen since by nearly million reaching more than million in This rapid increase bespeaks the continuing openness of our enterprise system Two other sets of facts reflect the opportunity for entry into business for innovation and for success in business operation. First recent studies have shown no clearly defined general tendency toward greater concentration in American industry despite growth in the size of many individual concerns. While concentration has increased in some industries the opposite trend is visible in others. Second there has been a marked increase in the rate at which new products and new processes have been introduced doubtless reflecting the greatly increased accent on research and development noted above. Large companies are in a good position to conduct research and development activities on an intensive basis but small firms also play an important part in the introduction of new products and new technology drawing on their independent research and development efforts and through licensing arrangements and participation in Government contract work also on the research results of other firms. Companies of small and medium size have been aided in this connection as well as in normal business operations by the ready availability of private advisory and technical services and financing arrangements especially suited to their needs. Steps taken by Government in the last eight years to assist small businesses and in this way to strengthen our enterprise economy are described in the Third Progress Report by the Cabinet Committee on Small Business issued in December IMPROVEMENT OF PERSONAL SECURITY AND WELFARE These advances in output and productive capability have made it possible to maintain the large military forces needed for our national security to assist in the reconstruction of the war-ravaged countries of Europe and the Far East and to aid in the peaceful development of the less industrialized nations of the world. They also have made possible remarkable improvements in the material well-being culture and economic security of the American people Since the passage of the Employment Act of the population of the United States has increased nearly percent ; in the same period disposable personal income ( in prices ) has risen from $ billion to $ billion or about percent and per capita disposable income ( also in prices ) from $ to $ or percent. Since these increases in income have been percent and percent respectively Improvements in well-being are also reflected in changes in the distribution of families according to income in constant prices. Thus percent of all families had incomes of less than $ in but this proportion had dropped to percent by ; at the upper .end of the income scale families with real incomes of $ and over increased during this period from percent of the total to percent Means for protecting income and personal financial security have been greatly strengthened. The number of life insurance policy holders rose from million in to million in and million in and the amount of life insurance per family increased from $ to $ and $ Between and the number of shareowners in public corporations increased from million to million A rapid extension of private and public systems of insurance has broadened measures to provide personal security in old age and to meet emergencies caused by unemployment ill health and death. The number of workers ( including farmers and other self-employed persons ) covered by the Federal Government 's system of old-age survivors and disability insurance increased from million in to million in and to million in and the percentage of paid workers covered rose in these periods from to and The total amount paid to those eligible for benefits was $ million in $ billion in and $ billion in The number of beneficiaries which had been million in and million in was nearly million in Private insurance to meet health emergencies has also been extended and improved at a rapid rate. The number of persons covered by hospital insurance rose from million in to million in At the beginning of this period million persons were insured under private systems for the coverage of surgical expenses and million for regular medical expenses ; at the end of the period the coverage of these two types of health expenses was million and million respectively Private insurance for major medical expenses has shown the most spectacular increase from persons in to million in Finally unemployment insurance coverage under the Federal-State system rose from million persons in to million in and million in and the percentage of those employed in nonagricultural establishments who are covered increased from in and in to in Average weekly payments to those out of work were $ in ; the average for was $ and it increased to $ in GREATER ECONOMIC STABILITY Although personal security is strengthened by insurance systems both private and public it depends primarily on a high level of employment the development of job opportunities for our increasing labor force and the avoidance of sharp fluctuations in production and employment. The persistence of unemployment in some areas and the recent increase in the total allow no room for complacency but the record of the past years also shows good performance in maintaining high employment and avoiding wide swings in economic activity A large increase in jobs has been achieved since Total civilian employment rose from million in to million in and increased further to nearly million in The number of persons unemployed and the rate of unemployment were somewhat higher however in the peacetime years of the 's than in the late 's. The contractions in economic activity since the Employment Act was passed have proved to be relatively moderate when compared with earlier cyclical adjustments. For example the contraction that began in August lasted only months ; and the two previous ones beginning in December and in August were ended in and months respectively However the principal improvement in this respect lies in the fact that the declines were less severe than on most earlier occasions. Thus personal income dropped less than l/ % of percent in the contractions beginning in and contrasting with declines of percent and percent in the downturns that began in May and August respectively. Declines in employment and production were also appreciably smaller than in most earlier cyclical downturns The mildness of recent contractions relative to earlier experience reflects in part the stabilizing features of our tax system the automatic operation of governmental programs that help to sustain income when production and employment recede and a shift in the pattern of employment toward jobs that are relatively less affected by recessionary tendencies. It also reflects deliberate steps taken by the Government to offset the declines and the greater stability of business enterprises While this record presents evidence of good progress the further moderation of economic fluctuations remains a major challenge to Government and industry. In the contraction that began in August for example industrial production fell by percent and total employment by about million even though the decline in personal income was small. The best thought and most determined action are needed to find constructive ways to make further advances in reducing this persisting problem of the enterprise economy LESSONS OF EXPERIENCE UNDER THE EMPLOYMENT ACT These developments in our economy and the experience gained in administering the Employment Act teach certain lessons that must be kept in mind continually as we strive to attain our national economic objectives First although great strides have been made toward understanding and moderating the cyclical behavior of our economy difficult problems of diagnosis and prescription remain. Experts disagree on the meaning of unfolding events and action to counter adverse developments can not be finely predetermined either in kind or degree. Moreover the repercussions of countermeasures can not be accurately foretold. Experience underlines the importance of the close surveillance of economic developments that is a responsibility of the Council of Economic Advisers created by the Employment Act. It also emphasizes the need for constant review of administrative actions and legislation to determine their potential or actual impact on the growth and stability of our economy. In addition this experience shows the need for up-to-date accurate and comprehensive facts on economic developments as a basis for wise policy decisions by private groups as well as government Second a tendency for prices to rise has persisted in the period since World War II even after prices reflected the inflationary pressures generated by war and even though our resources have not always been utilized to the full. To arrest this tendency as we have largely succeeded in doing of late and to attain our national economic goals in an atmosphere of reasonably stable prices must continue to be a major objective of private and public policy. Apart from the other adverse effects of inflation its seriousness has been underlined by the growing recognition that reasonable stability of costs and prices is essential to balanced economic growth and to the maintenance of our competitive position in world markets Third competing objectives must be taken into account in economic policy and action in pursuit of any one goal must be taken with a recognition that to press it too far or too rapidly may prejudice other values that are in reach or in hand. Considerations of long-run benefit must be weighed against short-run advantage. The rate of economic growth can not be properly evaluated without regard to its composition and balance or its sustainability. On the contrary the unwholesome accompaniments of a forced too-rapid expansion may impede further growth and even induce setbacks Fourth it should be clear from the experience under the Employment Act as it is from the longer history of our country that Government action is not the principal let alone the sole determinant of the rate of economic growth. In our competitive enterprise system growth requires that productive job opportunities be created in private employment. The creation of jobs in turn requires the presence of adequate incentives to private action and the availability of private capital and other needed resources and it is heavily influenced by the state of demand prices ^ and costs and the desires arid interests of the people. The Federal Government promotes economic growth mainly by the contributions that it makes to conditions favorable to the exercise of private individual initiative and effort and by facilitating and encouraging the execution of their respective responsibilities by private individuals and groups and by State and local governments Fifth the language of the Act affords a fair degree of flexibility in its administration which our experience shows to be necessary if economic policy is to accommodate new priorities and meet new challenges. Routine diagnosis and administration have no place in economic policy for growth and stability. The policy appropriate in one situation is not necessarily suitable in a later one even when the circumstances are alike in many respects. Thus in when the economy was undergoing a contraction it was possible to execute a substantial reduction of taxes and thereby to increase the purchasing power of individuals and of business firms because governmental expenditures previously expanded as a result of the Korean conflict were being cut back. In the contraction of on the other hand different actions were called for and taken : monetary and credk policies were adjusted ; Government expenditures were maintained and in some areas increased at the same time that revenues declined and a substantial deficit was incurred ; administrative actions fostered a higher rate of home building ; the Federal-aid highway program was accelerated ; and unemployment benefits were extended Actions and policies adopted during the period of the Employment Act have not insured against economic contraction but they have proved effective in moderating setbacks. The Act has fostered a keener awareness of approaching downturns and a determination to meet them by positive action rather than by passive acceptance. And this change in attitude on the part of the Federal Government has created an atmosphere of public confidence which in itself has helped to arrest recessions before they have become cumulative downward spirals Sixth the remarkable advance achieved in the welfare of our citizens provides a basis for confidence in the future growth and improvement of our economy. From this experience it is clear that the same diffusion of power for economic decision-making which would render foolhardy the sole reliance on Federal effort to achieve the Act 's objectives assures the broad public and private cooperation needed to attain maximum practicable economic progress. While neither the public nor the private sector can guarantee the final outcome of their policies the results of their efforts can provide a basis for improving future decisions and performance. Greater public understanding of economic issues and a better appreciation of the consequences of past decisions and action help the citizens of a democracy to evaluate proposals to promote the growth and stability of the economy For the Federal Government which is the agent of all the people this evaluation may point to the need for new or revised laws. Also fulfillment of the Federal role may often be aided by positive statements of principles needed policies and goals. For the achievement of the common economic aims of a democratic society it would be as much a mistake to ignore the value of this manifestation of leadership as to rely upon it solely Psychological factors should not be overlooked in the emphasis on automatic and deliberate stabilizing and stimulating policies and actions In sum experience has proved the Employment Act to be a helpful instrument for achieving important common economic goals in a framework of free institutions. Confidence that the concepts of economic organization and action embodied in the Act will serve us well in the future has been strengthened. The Act is a living document, adaptable to changing circumstances. Though improvements might be made as suggested in the next chapter the Act even without amendment can provide a useful guide for policy and action in new and unforeseen circumstances Chapter Policies for the Future A RAPID growth of the labor force and a significant improvement in the Nation 's productivity will provide the opportunity and also a challenge to raise output in the next decade at a still higher rate than has been experienced in the years since the Employment Act was passed. Success in accelerating production and providing the needed employment opportunities will depend of course on both private and public policies. The gains made in recent years in containing inflationary pressures and stabilizing prices and in avoiding the development of other imbalances in the -economy provide a good foundation for achieving the desired rapid and sustainable economic advance. In some areas however new Government policies will be needed and existing legislative provisions will have to be strengthened It is impossible to say in advance how large the increase in the labor force will actually be but it is clear that an unusually large number of younger persons will reach working age in the next decade. Indeed the annual increase in the labor force may average as much as million during the decade compared with an annual growth of in recent years If it is assumed that in the next ten years the average unemployment rate will be equivalent to that for the past decade and that the size of the Armed Forces will remain unchanged an annual increase of million persons in the labor force would raise the number of persons in civilian employment in to more than million or percent above the present employment figure A gain of this magnitude in employment would imply a still larger advance in output as productivity continues its historic upward course Our output per man-hour is now substantially higher than that of any other industrialized economy in the world and it has tended to increase at a long-term average annual rate of percent or more. There are forces at work that could speed the actual gain in the next years. The cost pressures of our enterprise system today and the intensive competition faced in world trade provide spurs to the more rapid achievement of greater productive efficiency. Continuing high expenditures on new plant and equipment and heavy emphasis on research and development are also favorable to a marked advance in productivity Fuller realization of our Nation 's rising productivity potential could also be fostered by the elimination or reduction of arbitrary impediments of long standing. For example many rules codes and practices that restrict output and hinder the introduction of more efficient techniques deserve to be modified in the national interest while providing reasonable safeguards for workers. The reduction of deterrents to productivity is an end to which labor and management with the help of Government if necessary should work more intensively in the years ahead. The recent decision to establish a commission concerning railroad work practices has properly been hailed as a step in the right direction Although the signs are promising the rate of economic growth can not be predicted accurately since the future size of the work force the level of employment and hours of work and the rate of actual productivity advance are themselves uncertain. However if we succeed in the next years in holding unemployment rates to their average in the 's and if the long-term average rate of increase in productivity persists the growth of national output would exceed by a significant margin the rate achieved since the Employment Act was passed. A more rapid advance of productivity would yield a still higher rate of growth. This is the opportunity inherent in the present position of our economy and in its longer-term prospects GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE POLICIES In our free economy economic growth and the improvement of living standards depend not primarily on what government does but mainly on what is done by individuals and groups acting in their private capacities. In this system of shared responsibility the tempo of economic activity is especially sensitive for example to the plans and actions of large firms and powerful labor organizations whose operations are national and international in scope Government makes its basic economic contribution not through the volume of its own expenditures but by promoting conditions favorable to the exercise of individual initiative and private effort. Accordingly a dominant purpose of government at every level must be the preservation and invigoration of institutions that favor and support enterprise. In particular the Federal Government should encroach no more than necessary on the province of private action. Indeed it should expand as broadly as possible the opportunities for private decision-making ; strengthen incentives for businessmen workers savers and investors ; and promote a vigorously competitive environment in domestic and international markets. And within the area of public action the Federal Government must avoid encroachment on the province of State and local units. The expected increase in the demand for public investment and the emergence of new regional and area problems will require efforts on the part of State and local authorities and of citizens in general to render more effective the instruments of government located close to home. A proper sharing of governmental responsibility may require a strengthening of the capacity of State and local entities to meet their emerging and increasingly heavy burdens Maintenance of Price Stability In administering fiscal and monetary affairs the Federal Government makes a signal contribution to growth to the extent that it strengthens confidence in the stability of prices. The threat or experience of inflation tends to undermine thrift even apart from the inequities inflicted and the hazards raised to sustainable growth of production. A steady and ample flow of savings and a growing volume of productive investment have been crucial to the development of our economy and will be needed more than ever in the years ahead if greatly increased numbers of workers are to be supplied with adequate tools and equipment Among Government efforts to maintain a reasonably stable price level special importance must be assigned to the noninflationary conduct of Federal budgetary and fiscal affairs. Rising Government expenditures can put a direct upward pressure on costs and prices especially when employment is already high either because of their very magnitude or because they may concentrate demand on economic sectors in which personnel or supplies are relatively limited. Thus inflationary pressures can be created throughout the economy encouraging cost and price increases that do not appear directly traceable to Government action. A significantly large budgetary deficit too can impair the effectiveness of an anti-inflationary monetary and credit policy. Furthermore the example set by Government in the conduct of budgetary and fiscal matters influences public attitudes and the psychology of the marketplace The second major Government instrument for controlling inflationary tendencies is monetary policy for which the independent Federal Reserve System is responsible. Increases in credit deposits and currency are required to accommodate the rising volume of payments accompanying higher levels of production and employment even when prices are generally stable But these increases must be moderated so that they do not directly or indirectly contribute to the erosion of purchasing power The specific goals of monetary policy in particular situations and the best means for achieving them must be determined on the basis of long experience and a deep understanding of economic and financial developments at home and abroad. Experts may well differ on paramount short-term objectives methods and timing especially since a wide variety of national interests have to be taken into account ; but there should be no difference of opinion as to the unworkability of a policy of forcing interest rates to artificially low levels and keeping them there. Such a policy would be self-defeating leading eventually to unbridled inflation or to a network of direct controls of wages prices and the use of credit Another factor bearing on the maintenance of price stability for sound economic growth is the control of unit production costs a responsibility that in our free society rests primarily with private individuals and groups An important aspect of cost control is the achievement and maintenance of a proper relationship between wage and productivity changes in the economy as a whole. In general if average increases in wages and salaries are inconsistent over the long run with average improvements in productivity prices may be expected to trend upward. Wage settlements negotiated by management and labor should not preclude price reductions in parts of the economy where productivity rises especially rapidly. High wages provide a dependable source of increased economic demand only to the extent that they are justified by productivity performance. In the last analysis the only way to assure that for the economy as a whole maximum employment and maximum production also mean maximum purchasing power is to keep wage improvements generally within the range of productivity advance The prolonged shutdown of the steel industry in the latter half of emphasizes another important implication of labor-management negotiations. Failure to achieve prompt as well as reasonable and realistic settlements of outstanding differences can lead to imbalances in production rates and inventories. These imbalances and the attendant uncertainties and disappointments of expectations can have a harmful effect on economic stability and on the general level of employment. It is important for labor and management to conduct their negotiations and settle their differences in a responsible manner and thus avoid inviting new Government controls and new limitations on their initiative The maintenance of price stability is significantly affected also by Government price and income support policies for agriculture. In this area policies that would raise consumer food prices and tend to increase production costs through compensating wage adjustments must be avoided Tax Policy Taxation is another major area in which Government can contribute significantly to the speed of economic growth. A tax system must of course provide the revenues needed to cover governmental expenditures over reasonable periods though a balance is not required every year. A budgetary surplus in prosperous times helps curb inflationary pressures and a deficit during a period of recession may help reverse the downturn. More positively a selective revision of our tax structure is needed to promote incentives and to maintain the vigor of the enterprise system. But it is important that the full benefits of tax revision should not be jeopardized by the hasty improvisation of reductions in the hope of countering cyclical downturns in economic activity Opportunities for effective tax revision will be afforded more readily as tax revenues increase with the growth of the economy. Thus economic expansion at a rate comparable to that achieved in the period since would yield several billion dollars of additional receipts annually within the existing tax structure. However the full amount of these potential increases in tax revenues would not be available for new expenditure programs or tax relief inasmuch as programs undertaken pursuant to legisla- tion already enacted will require increasing outlays in the future. The large veteran population is aging and under present laws expenditures for pensions compensation and medical care may be expected to grow. The annual cost of the medical care program for the aged enacted in will take some time to reach a maximum. Many public works projects are still in the early stages of construction and their annual costs have not yet reached a peak. The civilian space program is expanding and current appropriations exceed current expenditures. Although anticipated increases in expenditures such as those just outlined may be offset by the reduction or termination of some programs a continuing upward trend in Government spending is foreseen Clearly tax relief depends not only upon the rapid growth of the private sector but also on continuing budgetary discipline ; and the chief objective of such relief with due regard to equity considerations should be the acceleration of the growth of the national product especially through the sharpening of incentives for private investment. Government must keep a constant watch over its expenditures and at the same time look for opportunities to effect tax changes that will provide both the greater means and a greater stimulus to economic growth. Many features of the tax revision enacted in were designed with this dual purpose in view Measures to Reduce Unemployment As the opening section of this chapter implies further advance toward moderating cyclical fluctuations in the volume of employment could contribute significantly to more rapid economic growth. Maintenance of reasonable price stability would give strong support to other efforts in this direction. Federal and State governments must be prepared to take positive steps to counteract or moderate the impact of declines. In addition to making prior provision for automatically cushioning economic contraction they may have to enact emergency measures if these are warranted or to incur temporary budgetary deficits Steadier and fuller employment of the labor force which presents the greatest and most complex challenge to public and private policy is a problem that has structural as well as cyclical aspects. The problem can not be resolved only by the moderation of fluctuations in economic activity as a whole ; a continual more effective matching of labor supply and demand in specific geographic areas industries and occupations is also required Such matching must be as smooth as possible in order to overcome dislocations incident to technological change the transition from agriculture to industry long-term shifts in product demand and industry location and international competition. While corrections of these conditions are found most readily in a stable and prosperous economy special remedial measures also are required. Although the Federal Government can not assume the major responsibility for such measures it can participate effectively in a joint many-sided program GO Above all well directed local efforts must be made to develop new industries in areas of relatively high and persistent unemployment and underemployment. Technical assistance is currently available from the Federal Government but legislative authority to extend and strengthen existing programs and to make available a new program of financial assistance is urgently needed The Economic Report of January pointed out that legislation to facilitate structural adjustments should meet several tests. It should be designed to stimulate and complement the efforts of local communities and citizens5 groups to help themselves promoting as much direct participation as possible on the part of private financial institutions and of State and local agencies. It should concentrate on areas in greatest need of assistance and avoid dispersing funds over wide regions with little lasting effect. It should encourage the creation of new job opportunities not merely the transfer of jobs from one part of the country to another. It should include provision for technical aid in the economic diversification of rural low-income areas and of single-industry communities as well as assistance for communities of a predominantly industrial character. And it should encourage programs of vocational training and retraining to upgrade the qualifications for new jobs of residents in areas of persistent unemployment and underemployment More general measures are needed to ease existing hardships and to limit the spread of distress to other areas not now affected. Thus greater attention must be given to the change in the pattern of employment opportunities in the direction of occupations and professions requiring higher levels of education and training. The trend away from heavy unskilled labor may be expected to continue or even quicken as our technology progresses. Therefore maximum future employment depends in part on the timeliness and success of private and public efforts to adapt our labor force by improving job counseling and placement by strengthening vocational education and training by eliminating discrimination in the labor market by raising standards of educational achievement and by increasing the number of competent teachers Education and Health Services Advances in education are of course important from more standpoints than the enhancement of employability. Along with improvements in health they raise the Nation 's productivity potential provide a key to greater individual well-being and security and add to the quality and diversity of social life Though standards and performance in the fields of education have steadily progressed much remains to be accomplished. Our educational institutions must prepare for much greater numbers of high school college and graduate students. While enrollment in public elementary schools may rise by nearly million or percent over the next eight years the number of students in public secondary schools is expected to increase by million or about percent. Furthermore the number of students attending colleges and universities now about million may increase by another million or nearly percent This growth will require a huge expansion of the Nation 's commitment to education. Primary responsibility for meeting the demand should remain with local and State governments and with private groups as the Federal Government provides important supplements. Federal financial assistance to education will reach about $ billion in and this amount does not take into account educational benefits from Federal outlays of billions of dollars a year for research and development. Our educational institutions also derive large financial benefits from the tax treatment of contributions made to them Like education health activities will provide both supports and outlets for accelerated economic advance. Basic studies of the emerging needs in these areas and of public and private roles in meeting them have been made under Government sponsorship. As the population continues to grow rapidly and living standards rise the Nation 's demands for health services will greatly expand. More than $ billion three fourths from private sources is being expended annually on health. Federal expenditures including outlays of the National Institutes of Health for medical research and training and the medical program of the Veterans Administration will amount to about $ billion in the fiscal year compared with $ billion in the current fiscal year and $ billion in fiscal ; within the total Federal expenditures for hospital construction mainly grants are estimated at $ million an increase of percent over such expenditures in the current fiscal year. Important Government action was taken last year to improve health services for needy older people but more remains to be done under private as well as public auspices. Especially increasing attention has to be directed toward augmenting the number of doctors and dentists as the population expands. A new 5-year $ million program of grants for the construction of medical and dental schools has been proposed Some improvements will be needed in Government programs of social insurance that supplement private provisions for protection against the hazards and hardships of income loss through unemployment old age disability and death. In addition to their value in alleviating personal hardships these programs have demonstrated their usefulness in helping achieve economic growth and stability. Minimum wage laws also when carefully designed and administered help safeguard wage standards for workers at the fringes of competitive labor markets and encourage the spread of more efficient productive techniques fnternation al Responsibilities Economic growth requirements must be viewed in the light of our international responsibilities as well as our constant striving for domestic im- provement. Despite the great contributions made toward the progress of the less developed countries further vast efforts are required to help raise their living standards. We hope that in the future the nations we helped in their time of critical need and which have now regained their economic strength will participate more fully in bilateral and broader joint programs of investment grants and technical aid For our part we can discharge our international obligations most effectively if we achieve sound as well as rapid economic growth. This means that public and private efforts to speed the expansion of our national product should avoid inflation aim at solution of our balance of payments difficulties maintain world confidence in the value of the dollar and strengthen our competitive position in world markets. We may expect our allies to play a major role in the common defense and in the expansion of the world economy but the principal burden of leadership in the quest for peace with justice will still be ours. To carry this burden we must be prepared to follow policies private and public that will keep our economy strong and vigorous Statistical Information In an economic and social system organized around the principle of shared responsibility a need of a technical order arises namely to make reliable statistics and other information broadly available in order to facilitate private and governmental decision-making forecasting and action The variety of our economic and social life and the very pace of change require constant re-examination expansion and revision of the body of statistical and nonstatistical information designed to meet current and anticipated needs. Consistently with the objectives of the Employment Act the Council of Economic Advisers has in statistical appendixes to the Economic Report of the President and in Economic Indicators facilitated wider access to needed economic data. The Executive Branch in general and also the Congress have participated in numerous undertakings to extend diversify and renovate the Federal contribution to the supply of published statistics and basic reports. Further improvements that will be needed include strengthening the national economic accounts particularly the development of better estimates in terms of constant dollars ; achieving more comprehensive coverage as well as speedier collection of certain key data in the balance of payments ; increasing the number of weekly series so important to the appraisal of economic conditions and outlook at critical points in the business cycle ; providing better information on inventories the importance of which was dramatically illustrated during the steel strike of and its aftermath ; enlarging available information on new orders businessmen 's and consumers ' intentions and other indicators useful in appraising the economic outlook ; and expanding the supply of regional and area information to facilitate the planning and administration of private and public activities LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS To a considerable extent the Federal policies needed to help achieve sound and rapid economic growth can be applied administratively and require no legislative action by the Congress. However there are important matters on which action is needed First total funds appropriated by the next Congress for the fiscal year should be held within the limits of expected revenues. The budget presented to the Congress conforms to this standard and at the same time makes adequate provision for needed programs. It provides for an increase of $ billion for major national security programs and an additional $ million for economic and financial assistance under the mutual security programs. It also provides for substantial increases in research and development activity and in other programs that have a significant bearing on the welfare of our citizens and on the rate and stability of economic growth : the development of natural resources assistance to areas of high and persistent unemployment the improvement of health and housing and medical care for elderly persons Second the budget for fiscal makes certain suggestions for revenues to cover these expenditures. It is recommended there that the present tax rates on corporation income and the excise taxes scheduled for reduction or termination on July be extended for another year. Unless these tax rates are extended Federal Government revenues in the fiscal year will be $ billion less than estimated and $ billion less on a full year basis To obtain additional revenues in the coming fiscal year and later years it is proposed that measures be enacted to charge users for special benefits which they derive from particular Government activities. Thus the highway fuel tax should be raised to ^ cents per gallon to provide funds in the Highway Trust Fund sufficient for construction of the interstate highway system on schedule ; and the action taken by the Congress in which would divert funds from the general fund of the Treasury to build this road svstem should be rescinded It is also recommended that Congress raise the excise tax rate on aviation gasoline from cents to % cents per gallon impose the same tax on jet fuels and retain the receipts from these taxes in the general fund to help defray the cost of the Federal airways system The request for a rate increase which will put the postal system on a selfsupporting basis apart from specified public services is renewed. It is unreasonable that the system should operate at a deficit of nearlv $ million a year. Those who use postal services should pay prices sufficient to avoid deficits on this scale Third the request is again made that the Congress give the Secretary of the Treasury authority to raise funds in the long-term capital market when in his judgment this is in the public interest even if the cost of the funds is above * percent. Some long-term borrowing may be possible under current conditions without lifting this interest-rate ceiling but the ceiling remains an important impediment to the Treasury 's flexibility in achieving significant debt lengthening Fourth the request for legislation to enable the Federal Government to assist areas that experience high and persistent unemployment is again repeated. The Administration 's proposal is drafted to meet the standards described earlier in this chapter. Eligibility requirements for assistance under the proposed new program would direct funds to localities of greatest need and avoid spreading available Federal funds too thinly over a larger number of areas Fifth it is again urged that steps be taken to promote long-term agricultural adjustment anr1 to make effective use of accumulated agricultural surpluses. Specifically the price support laws should be modified to reflect unit cost reductions resulting from increasing technological efficiency on commercial farms and thereby reduce budget expenditures for the stabilization of farm prices and support of farm income. Energetic administration of the Rural Development Program is the most promising means for assisting readjustment of that part of the farm population which has neither sufficient productive farm resources nor adequate employment opportunities off the farm. Maximum efforts should also be made to use more of our accrued agricultural surpluses in the Food-for-Peace Program Sixth Congress failed last year to pass legislation to supplement the Federal Government 's established programs for assisting education by aiding States and local communities and institutions of higher education to provide needed educational facilities. Legislative proposals which constitute a sound approach to this problem were put before the last Congress by the Administration ; they are again recommended for favorable consideration Seventh as proposed in earlier Economic Reports the Congress should enact legislation to extend coverage of the unemployment compensation system to about million additional workers most of whom are employed in firms having fewer than four employees. With appropriate action by the States to raise the level and to increase the duration of benefits this legislation would make the system more effective in helping to stabilize our economy during periods of rising unemployment and in alleviating personal hardship. The States are again urged to increase benefits to make the great majority of covered workers eligible for payments equal to at least half their regular earnings and to increase the maximum duration of benefits to weeks a year for all eligible workers who remain unemployed that long. Under our Federal-State system primary responsibility for the level and duration of benefits rests with the States ; however in periods of especially high rates of unemployment that have been prolonged the Congress should give consideration to a program which would temporarily supplement regular benefits in some such manner as was -done with good effect in Eighth to enhance the progress being made for equalizing economic opportunity for all citizens the Congress is again urged to establish a statutory commission on equal job opportunities under Government contracts and to enact legislation for carrying out the proposal of equal pay for equal work without discrimination because of sex Ninth it is again recommended that the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act be extended to several million workers not now receiving its protection and that a moderate adjustment be made in the minimum wage provided in the Act Tenth the program under which Mexican workers are brought into the United States for agricultural work terminates at the end of unless extended. Legislation to extend this program should include improvement of the present law 's provisions to ensure that employment of Mexican agricultural labor will not adversely affect the wages and employment opportunities of our own farm workers Eleventh the Congress is also urged to remedy the serious defects in the legislation enacted in to protect the interests of the Nation 's working men and women in private pension and welfare plans ; and to revise the outmoded provisions of the 8-hour laws applying to Federal and certain federally assisted construction projects Twelfth the last Congress enacted a program of Federal assistance for medical care for older persons under the regular old age assistance program and a new program of medical assistance for needy older people who are not recipients of public assistance. This voluntary program under FederalState-local auspices is sound in principle. However under the law enacted many older people will not be able to obtain needed protection to cover major hospital and medical costs incurred because of serious illness. It is recommended that the Congress give further consideration to the recommendations made last spring by the Administration Thirteenth existing programs for housing and community development are no longer experimental and their successful operation in future years will be enhanced by the repeal of statutory termination dates and the removal of limitations on authorization amounts that can more properly be regulated through the normal appropriation process. Similarly statutory maximum permissive interest rates should either be eliminated or adjusted to levels that will not bring about a restriction from time to time in the flow of investment funds. Permanency and flexibility in the basic housing programs will permit communities and industry to plan and regulate future activity without the burden of depending on and adjusting to the provisions of annual legislative enactments. To this end the present authorization limitations should be removed on the amount of mortgages that can be insured by the Federal Housing Administration ; similarly legislative limits on grants for urban renewal projects should be removed and permanent authority for annual appropriations substituted. Also the program to insure loans on home improvements should be made permanent. Present ceilings on interest rates should be eliminated or substantially raised for loans made or guaranteed by the Veterans Administration and for mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration on rental housing especially housing for the elderly and on family housing built for occupancy by members of the armed services Fourteenth suggestions made in previous years for amendment of the antitrust laws to improve the competitive quality of our economy are repeated : ( ) Firms of significant size engaged in interstate commerce and proposing to merge should be required to notify the antitrust agencies of their intention. ( ) The Federal Trade Commission should be given authority to seek a preliminary injunction in the case of mergers likely to violate the antitrust laws. ( ) The Attorney General should be given the power to issue civil investigative demands for the necessary facts when civil procedures are contemplated in antitrust cases. This last recommendation which passed the Senate in the 86th Congress would simplify and greatly speed up all such proceedings Finally the recommendation that the Congress amend the Employment Act of to make reasonable price stability an explicit goal of national economic policy is renewed. As pointed out in the Economic Report of January this goal already appears to be implied in the declared objectives of the Act but an amendment such as the one proposed would increase public awareness of the price stability problem and strengthen the Government 's hand in pursuing effective policies to help prevent inflation. The proposed amendment is limited to a change in the language of the Act 's declaration of policy and would accomplish its aim without placing restrictions on the effective operation of economic markets These proposals like others placed before the Congress by the Administration have been designed to promote the sound growth of our economy on the principles set forth in this Economic Report. They indicate routes along which we may move ahead confidently within our system of shared responsibility in a manner that fosters private competitive enterprise and recognizes the obligations of State and local government to achieve the purposes proclaimed in the Employment Act Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING I960 O Letter of Transmittal DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Annual Report for calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully RAYMOND J. SAULNIER Chairman KARL BRANDT HENRY C. WALLIGH Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The year marked the eighth in which the Council of Economic Advisers has operated under Reorganization Plan No. of It will be recalled that in the Appropriation Act for Fiscal Year the Congress provided funds sufficient for continuation of the Council only through March ; and that the Supplemental Appropriation Act approved at the end of that month provided for an Economic Adviser to the President and a small staff to perform the functions previously assigned to the Council The functions remained with the new Economic Adviser until the end of July when they were restored to the Council as reconstituted under the Reorganization Plan transmitted by the President to the Congress on June In accordance with this Plan the Council has operated during the past ] /2 years as a source of professional advice to the President and the Administration generally It is useful to recall also that the President 's message to the Congress which accompanied Reorganization Plan No. of announced the establishment of an Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability under the chairmanship of the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. This Board composed of high officials of those Federal departments and agencies having a major responsibility in economic matters was designed to enhance the effectiveness of the Council at the top policy level of the Executive Branch by providing a forum for regularly scheduled interdepartmental discussion of economic policy questions. The Board has met weekly with the Council for this purpose ; and for the past year and a half it has included in one meeting each month the heads of all major Federal lending loan insuring and loan guaranteeing agencies. These monthly meetings have given the heads of Federal credit agencies who are responsible for transacting financial business that runs into many billions of dollars annually and has a profound effect on the economy an opportunity to exchange views with senior policy officials of other Federal departments on the state of the economy and on the most effective orientation of their agencies ' policies Member agencies of the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability are presently represented by the following officials : Department of State Edwin M. Martin Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs Department of the Treasury Julian B. Baird Under Secretary Department of Agriculture True D. Morse Under Secretary Department of Commerce Philip A. Ray Under Secretary Department of Labor James T. O'Connell Under Secretary Department of Health Education and Welfare Bertha Adkins Under Secretary Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Abbot L. Mills Member of the Board Bureau of the Budget Elmer B. Staats Deputy Director Export-Import Bank of Washington Samuel C. Waugh President The White House Office Don Paarlberg Special Assistant to the President Council of Economic Advisers Raymond J. Sauhiier Chairman Council Activities As prescribed in the Employment Act of the Council continued in to analyze economic developments for the President reviewed and evaluated many different legislative proposals and administrative actions for their effect on the stability and growth of our economy made recommendations from time to time to the President for policies that would help promote high levels of employment production and purchasing power and assisted the President in the preparation of his annual Economic Report to the Congress The Chairman of the Council accompanied by the other Council members testified before the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress on the Economic Report of the President. At this Committee meeting the character and effectiveness of economic policies in were reviewed the economic prospects for were appraised and the President 's recommendations for policies to promote economic growth and price stability in were examined The Chairman accompanied by the other members of the Council also testified on S. a bill which would have amended the Employment Act to make relative stability of prices an explicit aim of Federal economic policy and on S. which would have amended the Employment Act to give the President authority to hold hearings on proposed price and wage increases and to report and make recommendations on such increases ; in the testimony the possible adverse consequences of the changes proposed in the latter bill were pointed out Participation in international meetings here and abroad continues to be an important part of the Council 's activities. In the past year two members of the Council and members of the Council 's staff took part in meetings held in Paris under the auspices of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( OEEC ) and prepared as in previous years a report for use in the OEEC 's annual review of economic conditions in the United States. All members of the Council participated in preparatory work for the new Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The Council and members of its staff received various visiting groups of economists and officials from other countries and international organizations and two members of the Council staff held a number of seminars for foreign businessmen educators students and Government officials As the law prescribes in performing these functions the Council drew heavily on the resources of the operating departments and agencies of the Federal Government and availed itself fully of the information and counsel of private individuals and groups. The Council met during the year with representatives of industrial commercial and financial concerns and with university economists representatives of agriculture industry and labor and various other groups and individuals to consider business conditions the economic outlook and policies affecting the growth and stability of our economy. Throughout the year Council staff members were in touch with experts in other Government departments and agencies and with private individuals and groups. Through its Chairman the Council reported frequently to the President on current economic developments and their implication for the achievement of the objectives of the Employment Act Council Membership The Council membership remained unchanged during the year Dr. Saulnier has served as Chairman of the Council since December He is on leave of absence from Barnard College Columbia University where he is Professor of Economics and from the National Bureau of Economic Research Dr. Brandt who has been a member of the Council since November is on leave of absence from Stanford University where he is Professor of Economic Policy and Associate Director of the Food Research Institute Dr. Wallich has served as a member of the Council since April He is on leave of absence from Yale University where he is Professor of Economics Council Staff The Council is assisted by a staff of senior economists and statisticians who are experts in their fields. Each staff member is responsible for obtaining the cooperation of other Government agencies and of business labor and other private groups in analyzing and evaluating economic developments in his assigned areas and for keeping the Council advised of current and foreseeable developments. The full-time staff members are Bernard S. Beckler Harold F. Breimyer Henry W. Briefs ( on leave from Georgetown University ) Samuel L. Brown Robert C. Colwell Peter G. Fousek ( on leave from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Frances M. James Marshall A Kaplan David W. Lusher Walter F. Stettner and Collis Stocking who is also Administrative Officer of the Council Charles A. Taff of the University of Maryland serves as a Consultant to the Council. Irving H Siegel who served as a Consultant in the preparation of this Report resigned from the Council Staff in September to join the Operations Research Office of Johns Hopkins University. Hal B. Lary resigned from the Council staff in July I960 to join the National Bureau of Economic Research as Associate Director of Research Committees and Task Forces The Council members and staff participated during the year in the work of a number of important committees and task forces within the Government. The Chairman of the Council served as a member of the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability for Economic Growth chaired by the Vice President of the United States. He also served as a member of the informal group which discussed problems of financial policy with the President ; the other members were the Secretary of the Treasury the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Special Assistant to the President with responsibilities in the economic area The Chairman of the Council regularly attended Cabinet meetings special meetings on legislative matters and meetings of the National Security Council at which economic matters were discussed. Members of the Council and its staff participated in the work of the Planning Board of the National Security Council The Chairman of the Council served as Chairman of the Cabinet Committee on Small Business was a member of the Board of the Federal National Mortgage Association represented the Council on the Civil and Defense Mobilization Board and on the President 's Special Committee on Financial Policies for Postattack Operations and served on the Interagency Task Force for Implementation of the Program for Increases in the Export Sales of the United States Dr. Brandt served as a member of the interdepartmental Committee for Rural Development Program under the chairmanship of the Under Secretary of Agriculture and as a member of the interagency work group on research and analysis of the Federal Council on Aging ; on a panel of the Annual Outlook Conference of the Department of Agriculture ; on a panel of the National Conference on Water Pollution called by the Surgeon General ; and as Chairman of an interdepartmental working party of experts on long-term economic projections to assist the Department of State in formulating the United States position on this subject in the United Nations. He also attended regularly the meetings of the Council on Foreign Economic Policy Dr. Wallich participated in the work of the National Advisory Council attended the first meeting of the Board of Governors of the Inter-American Development Bank in San Salvador and participated in the negotiations with representatives of the German Government in Bonn in November He also served as a member of the interdepartmental Committee to Coordinate Federal Urban Area Assistance Programs under the chairmanship of the Under Secretary of Commerce Publications Work In keeping with its responsibilities under the Employment Act the Council assisted the President in the preparation of his annual Economic Report to the Congress. Copies were distributed to members of the Joint Economic Committee all other members of the Congress departments and agencies of the Government representatives of the press and depository libraries throughout the country. There was a large demand for the Report. The Superintendent of Documents sold to the general public his entire supply of copies The Council prepares Economic Indicators a monthly compendium of current economic statistics published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. During the year the Council in cooperation with the staff of the Joint Economic Committee completed an extensive revision of Economic Indicators to make greater use of seasonally adjusted data and present additional information on a number of topics including unemployment and the balance of payments. Copies of Economic Indicators are distributed to all members of the Congress and to depository libraries. In addition copies of each monthly issue are sold by the Superintendent of Documents to subscribers and others The Council participated in the preparation of the Third Progress Report by the Cabinet Committee on Small Business. The Report was published and issued by the Council for the Committee Council Funds For the fiscal year the Congress appropriated $ for the Council 's activities. This total was $ less than the amount appropriated for the fiscal year Since the date of Congressional approval of the appropriation there has been an additional annual cost of $ as a result of Public Law which increased Federal employees ' salaries This amount is being included in a supplemental budget request to be presented to the Congress Appendix B SOME RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS I. Employment and Earnings II. Agriculture III. United States Foreign Trade and Payments I. Employment and Earnings Demand for labor was generally high during the first half of I960 and in the second quarter of the year total civilian employment expanded to a record seasonally adjusted figure of million. For the year as a whole employment averaged million nearly above Growth of the labor force was about as large as the increase of employment and unemployment accordingly averaged percent of the civilian labor force for the year approximately the same as in ( Table B-l ) ( For comparability with earlier years the data used here do not include the new States of Alaska and Hawaii. ) TABLE B-l. Growth of the labor force by employment status 1959-W [ Millions of persons years of age and over ] Employment status First Second Third Fourth quarter quarter quarter quarter Seasonally adjusted _ Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Total labor force Armed forces Civilian labor force Employment Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment _ NOTE. For comparability with earlier periods data for have been adjusted to exclude Alaska and Hawaii Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding ; in addition seasonally adjusted totals may differ from sum of components because totals and components have been seasonally adjusted separately Source : Department of Labor After the middle of however employment tended to decline. In the third quarter the average was million and in the fourth quarter it was million ; the December figure after allowance for seasonal influences was million. Unemployment seasonally adjusted increased from million or percent of the civilian labor force in the second quarter to million or percent of the labor force in the fourth. Hours worked in manufacturing industries declined through the year and the workweek averaged hours compared with hours in Hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing industries increased slightly during the year averaging $ in December against $ in December Average weekly earnings reflecting the reduced workweek and lower employment in the more highly paid metalworking industries tended to decline slightly in the course of the year and real weekly earnings adjusted for the change of consumer prices also were lower Basic wage rates however rose by somewhat more than percent per year as wage increases were put into effect for about million employees nearly percent of those covered by major collective bargaining agreements GROWTH OF THE LABOR FORCE The labor force expanded markedly during the first half of paralleling the increase of civilian employment. As Table B-2 indicates growth TABLE B-2. Growth of the labor force by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Net change Sex and age Total labor force _ annual average to _ ._ _ ,_ ._ _ Female years years years years years and over to _ Male years years. _ _ years years years and over annual average NOTE. For comparability with earlier years data for have been adjusted to exclude Alaska and Hawaii Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor was larger than in and moderately above the average for the past ten years Over the past decade important structural changes have taken place in the age and sex distribution of the working population and even more significant changes are to be expected in the next ten years. The proportion of women in the labor force has been increasing continuously and the average age of the working population has been rising. Of the total labor force growth of million in the decade of the 's million were women most of whom were years of age or older. A large part of this change occurred during the great expansion of employment from to when nearly million women entered the labor force but increasing participation in the labor force by women has characterized the entire decade. In I960 nearly three-fourths of the increase of the Nation 's work force consisted of women Important shifts have also occurred in recent years in the age structure of the labor force. The number of workers to years of age has declined while the number of those to years of age has remained practically unchanged. This was due to the low level of births during the 's. Workers to years old increased by million or percent from to while the number of those and older expanded by million or at a rate nearly twice that for the labor force as a whole The proportion of workers under years of age is now percent compared with percent in and the number or older is now percent compared with percent in However the number of teenage workers started to rise in as the more numerous generation of the 's began to reach working age. In about teenagers were added to the labor force compared with in the preceding year Under favorable economic conditions the rising tide of young people and high labor force participation among older women may expand the labor force by more than million over the course of the next decade This would represent the greatest numerical expansion in the history of our country. Although a larger proportion of young people are expected to be in school the number of members of the working population under may increase by million. There may be an especially great inflow of teenagers into the labor force in the middle of the decade as the large numbers born in and become the usual age of high school graduation. The number of older workers will also rise sharply. Those over may increase by * /2 million despite further declines of labor force participation by men over The highly productive group to years of age on the other hand may decline slightly and a relatively small increase of the number to is expected Thus workers under years of age and those years and over will probably account for almost percent of the total growth of the labor force between and With nearly half of the total increase in the younger group they will comprise percent of the total labor force in compared with percent in At the same time the proportion that will be to years old will decline from percent to less than percent in These impending changes constitute both an impressive challenge and a great opportunity for the maximum development and utilization of our human resources CHANGES OF EMPLOYMENT The total number of employees on nonagricultural payrolls expanded rapidly after the end of the long steel strike in November and continued to grow at a more moderate rate during the first six months of I960 reaching a record level of million seasonally adjusted by the middle of the year. Early in the year however divergent trends began to appear in various industries Employment in durable goods manufacturing turned downward in March as work forces were reduced in the transportation equipment and primary metals industries. As the year progressed work force reductions occurred in other durable goods sectors. Considered as a group durable goods manufacturing industries registered employment declines after February in nearly every month of In the manufacture of nondurable goods employment increased until June ; but after midyear declines appeared also in this sector. In the latter months of the year reductions of work forces continued in most of the major manufacturing industries. In the group of nonmanufacting industries employment continued to expand until September but moderate declines appeared during the final months of the year In December total payroll employment seasonally adjusted in nonagricultural industries amounted to million which was below the crest at midyear and about below the December figure. The decline of employment has been concentrated in manufacturing industries while there have been some offsets in other industries especially those producing services rather than goods ( Table B-3 ) Events in the labor market of are better understood in the light of the longer-term changes whicli have been taking place in the industrial and occupational structure of employment in the United States. Since the passage of the Employment Act of the growth of nonagricultural jobs has increased total employment tyy inore than million. Agricultural employment on the other hand hals continued to decline dropping from million or percent of the total in to million or ^ percent of total employment in This shrinking of employment on farms extends a long-run trend that began generations ago when the United States economy was almost exclusively agricultural. The decline has continued as more power and machinery have been introduced into agriculture in partial replacement of farm labor and as the national trend toward specialization in enterprise has lifted more procurement and marketing functions out of agriculture Nearly all of the growth of employment since World War II is accounted for by the gain in service type activities and industries including education distribution finance and business and personal services. Employment in State and local governments has increased very sharply with percent of the expansion occurring in the school systems of the country. Trade finance and other services have also afforded expanding job opportunities An interesting parallel to this trend is found within manufacturing industry where the numbers of salaried or " nonproduction " employees engaged in service functions have increased in every major industry while employment of production workers has fluctuated widely and shown a tendency to decline These areas of expanding employment have continued to grow or at least have remained relatively steady even during periods of recession. Producing TABLE B-3. Changes in nonagi ' { cultural employment by major October 1959-December industry groups [ Thousands of persons seasonally adjusted data ] October February June to to February to June December i Major industry group Total nonagricultural employment _ Manufacturing Durable goods Transportation equipment Primary metal industries Machinery ( except electrical ) Fabricated metal products Electrical machinery Instruments and related products Ordnance and accessories Stone clay and glass products Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) Furniture and fixtures Miscellaneous manufacturing industries Nondurable goods Rubber products Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Products of petroleum and coal Leather and leather products Paper and allied products Printing publishing and allied industries Textile mill products Chemicals and allied products Apparel and other finished textile products Nonmanufa'cturing Federal State and local Transportation Public utilities Finance insurance and real estate Contract construction Mining Service and miscellaneous Wholesale and retail trade Government Based on preliminary data for December NOTE. These data represent employees in nonagricultural establishments. The figures for total nonagricultural employment will therefore differ from those shown in Tables B-5 and C-17. For explanation of differences see footnote Table C-22 Figures exclude data for Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Labor services they have been relatively immune to the employment impact of the wide inventory fluctuations which have characterized postwar business cycles. Consequently the growing proportion of workers in service types of employment has strengthened the resistance of the economy to cumulative business downturns ( Table B-4 ) Analogous trends are clearly evident in the changing occupational structure of the employed labor force. " White-collar " occupations have grown in importance as manual occupations have relatively declined. The growing occupational groups have also been those in which employment has been relatively steady over the business cycle ( Table B-5 ) It is perhaps even more important that developments of recent years have resulted in a general upgrading of the level of skill in the labor force. There has been O TABLE B-4. Industrial structure of nonagi- { cultural employment and [ Thousands of persons ] Industry I9601 _ ._ __ Trade Government _ _ _ ._ Federal State and local _ Service and miscellaneous Salaried employees in manufacturing Finance insurance and real estate _ Production emplovees in manufacturing _ _ Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Mining Stable and growing as percent of total Fluctuating or declining Total nonagricultural employment Stable and growing Preliminary NOTE. These data represent employees in nonagricultural establishments. The figures for total nonagricultural employment will therefore differ from those shown in Tables B-5 and C-17 which relate to nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force. For explanation of differences see footnote Table C-22 Data exclude Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-5. Civilian nonagricultural employment by major occupational groups and [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Occupational group Total nonagricultural Stable and growing as percent of total Operatives and kindred workers Craftsmen and foremen Laborers Fluctuating or declining Clerical workers _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Service workers including private household _ Professional technical and kindred workers. _ Managers officials and proprietors except farm _ Sales workers _ _ __ Stable and growing Data for pertain to the " economically active civilian population " years of age and over and are similar but not strictly comparable to other annual data in this table Figures shown for and are averages of data for January April July and October since data prior to are available only for these months. These averages therefore will differ slightly from the annual averages shown in Table C-17 N OTE. These data represent nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force. The figures for total nonagricultural employment will therefore differ from those shown in Tables B-4 and C-22. For explanation of differences see footnote Table C-22 For comparability with earlier years data for have been adjusted to exclude Alaska and Hawaii Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor a trend away from jobs requiring heavy arduous Unskilled labor and toward those which require broad education and training. For professional and technical workers for example employment opportunities have increased dramatically. Heavy expenditures in industry as well as in educational institutions for research and development and rising demands for scientists engineers teachers and technicians have strengthened this trend. Employment of unskilled or semiskilled manual workers on the other hand has expanded very little or has actually declined and has fluctuated with the business cycle. High and rising levels of education and training required for employment in the occupations where ample job opportunities are most likely to be found emphasize the great importance of good secondary and higher educations for the large numbers of young people who are entering the labor force. These occupational and industrial trends make more difficult the problem of unemployment for unskilled and semiskilled workers in fluctuating or declining industries UNEMPLOYMENT For the year as a whole unemployment amounted to million persons or percent of the civilian labor force about the same as in This was lower than in the recession year of when unemployment reached a postwar peak of nearly percent of the labor force but higher than in the period to when it averaged a little over percent In the course of the year unemployment changed markedly. With the recovery of employment after the long steel strike unemployment declined from about million in the closing months of to million in the early part of or from about to percent of the civilian labor force seasonally adjusted. When in the second half of the year employment declined unemployment increased reaching an average of million in the third and of million in the final quarter. In December unemployment amounted to million or percent of the labor force compared with million or percent of the labor force in December The increase during the second half of the year mainly affected adult men and women reflecting job cutbacks in manufacturing and related industries The number of persons who normally work full time but for economic reasons are working only part time is a measure of one form of underemployment. In such part-time workers averaged million compared with million in and million in The rise of part-time employment in occurred mainly among factory workers and was especially marked during the late months of the year. A second group of underemployed those who work part time primarily because of inability to find full-time work averaged million in the same as in but about higher than the average in Most of these were women and teenagers in the trade and service industries Characteristics of the Unemployed The movement into and out of the unemployed group or the turnover among persons without jobs was comparatively large in Almost half of those unemployed in any month were no longer seeking work in the following month either because they had found jobs or had left the labor market. Consistent with this substantial turnover persons seeking work for less than weeks accounted for nearly half of total unemployment during This proportion was higher than in or but lower than in the years before the recession. Long-term unemployment defined as persons seeking work for weeks or more averaged about million in While this average was about the same as in it was nearly lower than in the recession year of yet almost twice as high as in Long-term unemployment was reduced during the first half of but afterward increased. In December the number of longterm unemployed amounted to million compared with in December Extended periods of unemployment are most commonly found among the following groups : older persons ; blue-collar workers generally ; non-white workers ; and workers laid off in industries manufacturing durable goods For most of the age-sex groups of the labor force rates of unemployment in did not differ much from those in considering the year as a whole. Unemployment was as usual highest among teenage workers who are likely to change jobs more frequently than older persons. The rate of unemployment among married men living with their families who account for about one-third of all unemployed persons averaged percent in about the same as in ; however this rate was increasing during the second half of the year. For non-white men the rate of unemployment averaged percent and it was as usual more than twice the rate for white male workers. Non-white workers are concentrated in unskilled and semiskilled occupations where unemployment rates are generally high. Unemployment in various occupations and industries also averaged about the same in as in Significant increases occurred however during the third and fourth quarters of in durable goods manufacturing and among the occupation groups important in this industry such as metal craftsmen semiskilled factory operatives and factory laborers In the past decade there has been little change in the ranking of occupations by rates of unemployment. Highest rates prevail among laborers followed by operatives and service workers. White-collar workers in as in the past were least affected by unemployment Trends in Major Labor Markets Less vigorous demand for labor became apparent after the spring of in most of the Nation 's major labor market areas which account for about percent of all nonagricultural wage and salary employment in the country. In January I960 labor market surveys conducted by State employment security agencies for the Department of Labor found demand and supply of labor in reasonable balance in of the major areas ; in of them unemployment ranged between and percent of the local labor force while in areas unemployment was below percent. The remaining areas had substantial labor surpluses that is unemployment rates of percent or higher for other than seasonal or temporary reasons Through the year the number of major labor markets having an unemployment rate of less than percent gradually diminished to in November of which had a rate of less than percent. At the same time the number of areas having substantial labor surpluses increased to compared with a year earlier These changes in labor markets in mainly reflect lower employment in durable goods industries. Many places with substantial labor surpluses have however had persistent problems of unemployment for many years although they are not primarily centers of durable goods production. In November major labor markets in the United States were classified as areas having " substantial and persistent labor surpluses " that is unemployment rates of percent or higher for other than temporary reasons and jobless rates substantially above the national average for extended periods of time. All but of these had had substantial labor surpluses in September before the effects of the recession. In only of the major areas were employment losses in durable goods manufacturing the cause of persistent problems of local unemployment. In the remaining areas which are all located in the northeastern part of the country longterm declines of the mining textile and apparel manufacturing and railroad equipment maintenance industries have caused chronic unemployment At mid-1960 before the downturn of total employment about percent of the unemployment in major labor markets was accounted for by areas with chronic and persistent labor surpluses although they have only percent of the labor force. At that time the average rate of unemployment in these areas was estimated at percent compared with percent for the other major areas Despite higher unemployment during the latter months of continuing shortages of professional technical clerical and skilled workers were still noted in most labor market areas. In many places available workers were not considered by employers to be qualified for existing job openings with respect to the required training experience and skill. At the same time the semiskilled the unskilled and persons without work experience were reported in surplus supply in nearly all sections of the country Trends of Insured Unemployment Insured unemployment the number of persons out of work and eligible to receive unemployment benefits declined slightly ( seasonally adjusted ) in the early months of Beginning in June however their number began to increase and in the later months of the year it was sharply higher In December the number of persons eligible for benefits averaged million compared with million in December Most of the increase over the year resulted from job cutbacks in industries manufacturing durable goods. Payments of unemployment insurance benefits increased rapidly and in December amounted to about $ million compared with $ million in December These insurance payments together with other government transfer payments and augmented by the private supplements negotiated in collective bargaining in the steel and other industries were a substantial support to labor income in HOURS OF WORK AND EARNINGS With moderately declining use of labor in many important industries and more frequent adoption of reduced weekly work schedules the average workweek of production workers in manufacturing industries tended downward in and reached hours ( seasonally adjusted ) in December compared with hours in December Reduced workweeks and less overtime together with lower employment in the more highly paid metalworking industries meant that the general average of hourly earnings in manufacturing industries increased little in despite a continued rise of basic wage rates. Average hourly earnings were $ in December compared with $ in December Average weekly earnings reflecting the reduced workweek receded slightly in the course of the year and were $ in December compared with $ in December When adjusted for the rise of consumer prices weekly earnings in manufacturing showed a slightly larger decline ; however the annual average for real weekly earnings was practically unchanged from In nonmanufacturing industries weekly earnings rose in by an average of about percent. Salaries of civilian employees of the Federal Government were increased by legislative action. For employees of the postal service the increases averaged percent ; for other employees the average increase was percent. By this action total wage and salary payments were increased by about $ million annually Lower employment and earnings in several industries stemmed the increase of labor income in the latter months of After rising by $ billion from December through June labor income was steady at an annual rate of $ billion through the third quarter of the year. During the fourth quarter it declined to $ billion in December DEVELOPMENTS IN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING Basic wage rates advanced in by somewhat more than percent about the same average rate of increase as in Wage increases including cost of living adjustments and deferred increases negotiated in earlier years were put into effect for about million employees nearly percent of those covered by major labor agreements ( Table B-6 ) TABLE B Employees receiving wage increases under major labor agreements by size of increase Item Employees receiving wage increases : Number ( millions ) Percent Percentage distribution : Total Under cents and under cents and under cents and under cents cents and over Not specified or computed _ _ _. _ g Includes cost-of-living deferred and newly negotiated wage increases received under collective bargaining situations affecting or more employees and coming to the attention of the Department of Labor Excludes construction services finance and government Preliminary In percent of employees receiving wage increases received less than cents and percent received cents to cents NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Major collective bargaining settlements were concluded in in the steel industry railroads electrical equipment manufacturing aircraft rubber textiles chemicals and other manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries. These agreements affected about million workers all but percent of whom received or were scheduled to receive wage-rate increases within months of the effective date of the contract. These negotiated wage adjustments most frequently averaged either to cents or to cents per hour. New or liberalized supplementary benefits were negotiated for percent of employees covered by agreements concluded in Health and welfare plans pensions and vacations continued to be the most frequent kinds of supplementary benefits established or improved in bargaining negotiations In addition to wage and benefit improvements negotiated in about million workers covered by major agreements received deferred wage increases cost of living adjustments or in the majority of cases both as a result of contracts signed before Typical of these dual adjustments were those in the automobile and farm equipment industries where deferred increases averaged to cents supplemented by cents more in automatic cost of living adjustments. Other industries in which deferred increases were put into effect included trucking and meatpacking ( where workers also received cost of living increases ) the cement industry and various metalworking and chemical firms. Before renegotiation of agreements in the course of the year cost of living adjustments were made in the railroad aircraft and electrical equipment industries. Cost of living escalator clauses were eliminated from important wage agreements in railroads and in electrical manufacturing and were narrowly limited in their operation in the steel and related industries. During the year the number of workers covered by labor agreements containing such clauses was reduced from million to less than million In the construction trades about percent of union wage scales were increased in a slightly smaller proportion than during the preceding three years. The average increase for all scales was about cents per hour compared with cents in and cents in and in Labor disputes were infrequent and generally of short duration in Both the number of employees involved in work stoppages and the number of man-days of idleness were very low judged by the record of the years since World War II. There was evidence of increasing recognition of the need for constructive study and resolution of the serious economic issues being raised in negotiations by rapid technological change and by competitive pressures. In the railroad industry the long-standing and complex dispute over changes in working rules was referred by agreement of the parties to a Presidential commission for study recommendations and mediatory assistance in the resolution of the issues. The commission 's study and recommendations which will not be binding upon the parties are to be completed by December Study groups and committees were also established in the steel and construction industries and by national labor and business groups II. Agriculture Agriculture in the United States consists of two parts that are becoming more and more distinct : ( ) commercial farm enterprises and ( ) noncommercial holdings many of which are little more than farm living units Each is composed of numerous types. Commercial farms vary in area under operation from small vegetable farms to very large western cattle ranches ; noncommercial units comprise backyard cow-and-garden farms. farms of retired and semiretired people part-time farms and others The distinctions between the two broad parts are real and meaningful for any attempt at weighing the economic and social problems of agriculture Commercial and noncommercial agriculture differ in economic status in the nature of their problems and in the trends they exhibit. Commercial larms outnumber the noncommercial holdings in a ratio of almost two to one ; the two groups together total roughly million units most of them family operated Commercial agriculture produces more than nine-tenths of all farm output earns the major part of all net farm income and holds most of agriculture 's proprietary assets. Aggregate statistical measures which seldom distinguish between commercial and noncommercial agriculture must therefore be interpreted as pertaining chiefly to the commercial portion Because of the differences in the economic performance of the two types of farms and their changing relative numbers a conversion of aggregate totals into averages per farm tends to be misleading Since commercial agriculture contributes so much of all market supplies of farm products and absorbs even more of the capital resources used its problems are essentially those of commodity markets. National concern with adjustment problems of underdeveloped and underemployed human resources in agriculture is associated with low income farms those in noncommercial agriculture and the smallest-sized fringe of commercial agriculture PRODUCTION AND INCOME IN The commercial part of agriculture accounted for the rapid expansion in farm output during the last few years and for the record high production in a record attained despite the reduction of the planted acreage brought about chiefly by the Conservation Reserve Program to the smallest area since While the index of livestock production dropped point to ( = ) the index of crop production rose to a new high of and caused a rise of points to in the all-products index ( Table B-7 ) TABLE B-7. Farm production prices assets and liabilities : Selected data and Item Millions of acres Planted acreage crops _ _ Index = Output _ Inputs Labor. Real estate Allother _ _ __ Crops Livestock Index = Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( all items interest taxes and wage rates ) _ _ Family living items Production items Interest _ Taxes ( real estate ) Wage rates ._ __ Billions of dollars Income of farm population from all sources Balance sheet of agriculture : Assets Real estate Other- Liabilities Proprietors ' equities. __ _ _ _ ._ _ __ Production expenses Realized net farm income Gross farm income Preliminary Includes farm wages received by farm resident workers net change in farm inventories and all income received from nonfarm sources As of December Source : Department of Agriculture During the course of the year there was relative improvement in agricultural prices and incomes. Both had declined late in to their lowest points in several years ; by December the index of prices received by farmers for all commodities had fallen to ( = ) from in the first quarter of that year. The same factors responsible for that decline ^ principally a cyclical change in output of poultry products and hogs were also responsible for the rise. As production of both decreased in early their prices improved lending strength to the average of allproduct prices ; by April the price index had risen to Small declines after April were followed by a new recovery and the index in December was again Price advances underpinned a rise in gross income in agriculture to an appreciably higher level in the second quarter of than in the second half of and first quarter of The increased income of the second quarter was sustained later by the harvest of large crops of pricesupported grains. The movement of wheat into Commodity Credit Corporation loans in the fall of was greater than a year earlier and the loan advances were an addition to gross income. For the entire year gross farm income exceeded the $ billion of by $ billion according to preliminary data Production expenses in were about the same as in Their near-stability ended a steady and marked 4-year rise and was due largely to lower prices for feed and feeder livestock. Prices of most commodities bought from nonfarm sources were as high as in or slightly higher and interest taxes and wage rates increased substantially As gross income was up and expenses of production were almost unchanged realized net income of farm operators from farming increased a little from $ billion in to $ billion ( preliminary ) in Income received from nonfarm sources which has increased to about a third of the total income of the farm population was up slightly in to a new record of $ billion. Total net income received by the farm population from all sources which also includes the $ billion of farm wages received by workers who live on farms and the net change in value of farm inventories rose to $ billion from $ billion in The previous uptrend in values of farm land came to a halt during As a consequence total assets in agriculture were reduced by percent during the year to $ billion on December Several of the factors that had sustained the previous uptrend in land values had run their course as values reached or exceeded a historical ratio to current income. Moreover rising taxes on the increased capital value and higher interest charges on new mortgages contributed to the downturn in values. Farm debts continued to rise slowly during ; yet at $ billion on December they were only percent of assets Current indebtedness in agriculture appears especially small in relation to the very sizable rise in the value of assets that has taken place during the last years. Since for instance assets in agriculture have increased three times or by $ billion. While these values include farm assets held by nonfarm landlords the larger part of the rise has accrued to operators of commercial farms. Capital gains have been one of the major elements of financial strength of commercial agriculture during the last quarter century NET INCOME OF SELECTED COMMERCIAL FARM TYPES Although reported data on total farm income unfortunately do not distinguish between commercial and noncommercial agriculture statistical series have been developed by the Department of Agriculture to describe trends in organization and income on typical commercial family-operated farms of selected types. Preliminary data presented in Table B-8 for TABLE B-8. Net farm income of selected types of commercial family-operated farmsy and [ Dollars per farm ] Type of farm Wheat farms Southern Plains Cattle ranches Inter mountain Region.. _ _ _ _ Hog-dairy farms Corn Belt Wheat-small grain-livestock farms Northern Plains Dairy farms Central Northeast Tobacco-cotton farms Coastal Plains North Carolina Peanut-cotton farms Southern Coastal Plains Cotton farms, ' Black Prairie Texas i Preliminary NOTE. Figures in this table were computed by applying reported prices to data on the organization of typical farms Source : Department of Agriculture eight of these types illustrate the wide variation between different types of farming both in size of income and in fluctuations in income from year to year. In I960, for instance net farm income for half of the eight types was higher than in ; for the other half it was lower. Bumper crops of wheat in which sold at or near support prices boosted the income of wheat farms. A moderate cyclical decline in the price of cattle reduced the income of cattle ranches from the very favorable level of the preceding two years. Recovery in prices of hogs during did not fully restore the previous year 's income to hog-dairy farms of the Corn Belt. Dairy farms of the Northeast apparently experienced a small decline in income. The stability of dairy incomes in the Northeast in comparison with the sharp variability for some other types of farm income is brought out by the data in Table B-8 It should be noted that net farm income as reported in Table B-8 includes returns on both capital and family labor. Large differences between farm types in the amount of capital invested as well as in the amount of family labor utilized account for a part of the differences in the amount of net income INCREASING IMPORTANCE OF COMMERCIAL FARMS The proportion of all farms that are operating on a commercial scale and the share of such farms in the national output of farm products are increasing. Also commercial farms are employing an increasing percentage of all persons engaged in agriculture. Hence commercial farming represents a growing part of United States agriculture as a whole. In the Census of Agriculture reported that about : million commercial farms had sales of $ or more. This number was almost the same as in and and was percent of all farms reported in Comparisons of this relative proportion with earlier censuses are complicated by a new definition of a farm introduced in the Census. In that year approximately units then in existence which would have been counted as farms according to the definition were excluded by the more restrictive new definition. If for purposes of comparison the definition is applied to the Census commercial farms with sales of $ or more would have constituted percent of all farms in a gain of percent from ( Table B-9 ) TABLE B-9. Number of farms by economic class and Percent of total farms Number of farms Economic class definition ( new definition ) i definition Percent Thousands Total farms Sales less than $ .._ Commercial _ ( ) Noncommercial ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) Sales $ and over ( commercial ) _ Sales $ to $ Sales $ to $ Sales $ and over Part-time Part-retirement Miscellaneous ( new definition ) i Percentage change in number of farms to i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i Preliminary * Based on definition * Not comparable with data for and * Not available NOTE. The number of farms in this table is as reported in the Census of Agriculture. The total is smaller than that estimated annually by the Department of Agriculture ( Table C-70 ) because of adjustments for underenumeration Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Agriculture Moreover within the million commercial farms having sales of $ or more those with sales of $ or more have increased as those with sales of less than $ have decreased. In farms were in the larger category percent more than in Those with sales of $ $ decreased by percent and those in the $ $ class decreased by percent Above-average growing conditions during contributed somewhat to the increased number of farms achieving a higher sales volume Although expenses of production have been rising gradually so that gross sales are not an exact measure of relative net income it nevertheless seems likely that more and more commercial farms have succeeded in increasing their business to a volume that improves the chances of returning a satisfactory net income to the farm family. The 10-year increase of almost twothirds in the number of farms having sales of $ or more is evidence that this is true All these data apply to commercial farms selling farm products valued at $ or more during the Census year. They omit those farms selling less than $ of products that are technically classed as commercial owing to lack of any other sizable income. This classification of farms was chosen both because farms selling less than $ of products are clearly inadequate as sources of farm income and in order to facilitate statistical comparisons between Censuses DECREASE IN NUMBER OF SMALL FARMS According to the Census of there were farms in the United States which sold less than $ worth of farm products. This number included so-called " midget " commercial farms those for which the small volume of sales of farm products nevertheless was the primary source of family income. It also included part-time and part-retirement farms. The total of was percent of all farms as enumerated according to the new definition All the farms omitted in the Census because of a more restrictive definition were small farms those with less than $ of sales. When these omissions are added in order to make comparisons with data of earlier Censuses the number of small farms becomes million a substantial reduction from the million of and million of ( Table B-9 ) These reductions in numbers of small farms doubtless reflect some amelioration of the problem of low-income farms. Progress has been made in either enlarging the production resources on small farms or in supplementing the farm income from sources off the farm. Yet also evident in recent trends is a gradual disappearance of units that have qualified as farms only by virtue of sideline " backyard " farming a time-consuming occupation yielding minimum returns to labor On the other hand the Conservation Reserve has probably shifted a number of farms of sizable acreage into the small-farms category because of the small value of products now sold from their idled acreage DECLINE IN TOTAL NUMBER OF FARMS The total number of all farms reported in the Census according to preliminary data was million. By use of the same definition as in the number in would have been reported as million compared with million in and million in ( Table B-9 ) This 10-year decrease amounts to no less than percent and occurred as noted above exclusively in small farms those selling less than $ worth of farm products per year. While a later revision of these Census data may increase the reported number of farms slightly owing particularly to the inclusion of idled Conservation Reserve farms it is unlikely that the basic changes as shown will be affected significantly INCREASE IN ACREAGE AND ASSETS OF FARMS Year by year commercial agriculture has become an increasingly technical enterprise demanding a high degree of managerial skill and requiring a larger acreage and investment base. Not only does the inventory of farm equipment and machinery on a typical farm now make it possible for each farmer to till more acres but the accompanying heavy capital investment makes a larger acreage mandatory if efficiency in operation is to be achieved. The modern commercial farm uses capital in the same manner and in larger amount per person employed as do nonfarm manufacturing enterprises Between and the number of farms in every size class below acres decreased ( Table B-10 ) The percentage reductions were greatest for the smaller farms ; the number having acres was reduced by percent and the acre group by percent. Farms above acres in size increased in number to in from in The quantity of assets other than land used in agriculture has risen substantially generally faster than have land assets. From to TABLE B-10. Number of farms by acreage groups and Percentage change Number of farms definition Size in acres i ( new definition ) i to to Thousands Total farms ___ and over _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) < ) ( ) Preliminary Based on definition Not available NOTE. The number of farms in this table is as reported in the Census of Agriculture. The total is smaller than that estimated annually by the Department of Agriculture ( Table C-70 ) because of adjustments for undeienumeration Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. Virtually all the farms excluded from the Census ( new definition ) because of more restrictive definition were smaller than acres in size Source : Department of Commerce when improvements on land raised the physical real estate assets in agriculture by percent the amount of machinery employed increased by percent. Although livestock inventories increased by only percent all other assets combined primarily crop inventories and demand deposits in banks increased by percent. Total production assets in agriculture increased by percent during the 20-year period. These are estimated quantities valued at constant ( ) prices ( Table B-l ) TABLE B-l Production assets used in agriculture and Percentage change Kind of asset to to Billions of dollars prices Total production assets _ Farm real estate Livestock Machinery and motor vehicles Other i Dollars prices Per farm Per farm worker Includes crop inventories held for livestock feed and the portion of demand deposits owned by farmers estimated as being held to meet farm production costs Based on number of farms as reported by the Department of Agriculture according to Census definition. ( See footnote Table C-70. ) Source : Department of Agriculture As the number of farms has decreased real production assets per farm have increased considerably. Valued in constant dollars assets per farm advanced percent between and Assets per farm worker increased even more : their average doubled during the years to $ in I960 valued in dollars. Valued in dollars farm assets per farm worker in averaged $ considerably more than the average investment of $ per employee in manufacturing in the same year Data on average assets per farm pertain to all farms commercial and noncommercial as reported by the Department of Agriculture according to the pre-1960 Census definition ( see Table C-70 ) ; they doubtless overstate the rate of increase but underreport the present average size of assets held on commercial farms alone FARMER COOPERATIVES IN COMMERCIAL AGRICULTURE Today 's agriculture in all its complexity particularly its commercial part rests on three kinds of supporting services. One is technical and educational ; it begins with public elementary and secondary education including vocational training and ends with the broad programs of research and education carried out by the Land Grant Colleges Agricultural Experiment Stations and the Federal-State Extension Service. The second is the assistance provided by Government in fields ranging from aid in soil conservation to regulation of markets for farm products and to certain assistance in maintaining prices and incomes of farmers The third supporting service one also essential to agriculture of the 's and 's is self-provided by agriculture the joining of individual producers in many types of cooperative associations. Farmer cooperatives designed in manifold ways for a multitude of purposes are in many respects a bridge between the technological and management demands of modern commercial agriculture and its decentralized small-unit family-farm organizational structure. As a form of business enterprise the cooperative associations perform for agriculture what is done by corporate organization in industry and commerce Farmers make wide use of cooperatives in obtaining essential services ranging from marketing of farm products to purchasing of farm supplies and including organized mortgage and production credit electric power telephone service medical service insurance irrigation and dairy herd improvement. In farmers held over million memberships in marketing cooperatives and million in farm supply associations. The banks for cooperatives in which farmers are developing substantial ownership equities served cooperatives with farmer memberships totaling more than million. Memberships and participants in rural electric cooperatives number over million ( Table B-12 ) TABLE B Farmers ' cooperative associations and their membership by type Type Marketing supply and service Marketing Purchasing ___ Miscellaneous service Number of associations Number of members or participants ( thousands ) _ ._ Federal land bank associations Production credit associations Banks for cooperatives _ _ Rural credit unions Rural electric cooperatives Rural Electrification Administration telephone cooperatives _ Rural health cooperatives._ _ Farmers ' mutual fire insurance companies Mutual irrigation companies Dairy herd improvement associations _ _ _ _ __ Dairy cattle artificial breeding associations _ l .._ _ _ _ __ _ __ i Data apply to dates ranging from to except that mutual irrigation company data are for Estimated Source : Department of Agriculture Provisions of Federal law have long granted farmer cooperatives certain exemptions from the Federal corporate income tax. Under legislation enacted in the exemptions were narrowed and tightened. To qualify a O cooperative must be farmer owned and controlled must do virtually all of its business with farmers and a major part with members and must meet several other criteria. About percent of all cooperatives currently elect to take advantage of the right to exemption In the marketing farm supply and service cooperatives did an aggregate business volume of $ billion exclusive of intercooperative sales ( Table B-13 ) The average volume of a little over $ million TABLE B-13. Net business volume of farmer cooperative associations engaged in marketing farm supply and related services Farmer cooperative associations Item Number Total business _. _ __ Net business ( millions of dollars ) ( ) ( ) Supplies purchased for patrons Feed Fertilizer Seed Petroleum products Building materials.. All other ( ) Products marketed for patrons Dairy products Grain soybeans soybean meal and oil livestock and poultry Fruits and vegetables __ Cotton and cotton products All other products _ _ _ ._ __ _ _ __ Receipts for services Preliminary data as developed by Farmer Cooperative Service Not available NOTE. Detail does not add to totals because individual cooperatives may perform multiple services Source : Department of Agriculture per cooperative however masks the diversity in size and scope of individual associations ; whereas some are small and localized others are large nationwide federations. It is estimated that for each of more than percent of all cooperatives the. annual business volume is less than $ million. Yet for each of about cooperatives the annual business exceeds $ million A number of the larger cooperatives have resulted from mergers and consolidations. Many regional or national federations of cooperatives also have been established Recently farmers have turned to cooperative action as a means of forestalling loss of management control of their farming through vertical integration. Vertical integration has increased in some sectors of agriculture such a ? the production of commercial broilers Farmers have also found cooperatives helpful in connection with the adoption of marketing agreements under agricultural price support legislation and the operations authorized by them As of January I960 farmers had slightly over $ billion invested in marketing farm supply telephone irrigation insurance and rural electric cooperatives cooperative production credit associations and the Federal land bank system ADJUSTMENT OF FARM PRODUCTION THROUGH THE CONSERVATION RESERVE PROGRAM Programs of the Federal Government to support prices of farm products are of significance chiefly to commercial farmers. Small farmers benefit from them only in proportion to the volume of produce they have to sell which invariably is small Price-support programs have been accompanied by an accumulation of huge stocks of wheat and corn and smaller quantities of cotton small feed grains tobacco and other commodities by the Federal Government despite aggressive efforts to make food available in distribution programs at home and in both distribution and sales programs abroad. In an effort to relieve the condition resulting from surpluses and the accumulation of stocks Soil Bank programs were introduced beginning in About million acres of cropland were placed in the Acreage Reserve of that year. Participation increased to million in then declined to million in the final year of the program ( Table B-14 ) The Acreage Reserve applied only tp crops subject to acreage allotments and only those farmers who complied with allotments were eligible to participate. The Conservation Reserve was originally a supplement to the Acreage Reserve and later supplanted it. The Conservation Reserve is not confined to allotment crops ; all cropland is eligible. In recent years emphasis has been placed on obtaining participation by entire farms. The leased land must be protected by adequate conservation practices for which cost-sharing payments are made available under specified conditions Participation increased to million acres on farms in The average rental per acre was $ Obligations for payments for both rental and cost-sharing practices were $ million in Since the Congress did not authorize any further increase the Conservation Reserve in will be confined to land already under contract. Because only about acres of contracts are due to expire million acres will remain under Reserve. In the absence of new authority the Reserve acreage would decline slowly until and more rapidly thereafter ( Table B-15 ) In a total of million acres of land that would otherwise have grown wheat corn and small feed grains were removed from production by the Conservation Reserve contracts. This amounted to only percent of the combined acreage of the three crops. Since the quality of land TABLE B Acreage Reserve and Conservation Reserve Programs Conservation Reserve Program Acreage Reserve Program Item 196T Thou sands Number of contracts Millions of acres Cropland acreage in the reserve Whole farms Part fanrs ( ' ) ( ' ) _ M ) ) C1 ) ) ) ) ) C1 ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ^ ( ) Cropland acreage idled : Wheat Corn Small feed grains Rice Cotton Tobacco All other crops ( ' ) ' c> ' Millions of dollars Obligated payments Rental Cost-sharing practices s ._ in conservation Not available * Acreage of crop allotments idled under Acreage Reserve : estimated acreage under Conservation Reserve Total acreage for Conservation Reserve exceeds Reserve acreage due to double-cropping and other multiple uses Less than acres Includes acreage that had intermittently been idle fallow or a failure Payments obligated for any year will be distributed during several years Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B Conservation Reserve Program acreage under contracts Jor future years ) Acreage ( millions of acres ) Year '6 NOTE. Data are for contracts in force December Source : Department of Agriculture under Conservation Reserve lease was somewhat below average the actual adjustment achieved in output was less than percent CHANGES IN LOW-INCOME FARMS On the million small farms reported in the Census ( Table B-9 ) the income earned from farming alone is low by any standard. Persons living on those farms can be divided into three groups : ( ) those of working age who receive an income from nonfarm sources that is satisfactory either of itself or when combined with the net income earned on the farm ; ( ) those past working age whose income status depends in large measure on retirement income available to them derived from social security private retirement plans or private investments ; and ( ) those of working age who depend principally for their income on the operation of units with very small economic resources This third group faces more serious economic problems than do the other two and from the standpoint of the national economy it represents a pool of human resources that is partially wasted. This group is a principal focus of the Rural Development Program. Since that program has coordinated and directed the efforts of various departments and agencies of the Federal Government in cooperation with State and local organizations toward rural betterment. In addition to five departments of the Federal Government the Small Business Administration has been particularly active in assisting development of low-income areas The primary objective of the Rural Development Program is to build up local economic resources of low-income areas and to provide job opportunities for rural people. In some low-income areas where local resources are inadequate or have not been developed sufficiently to alleviate serious underemployment or unemployment regional decreases in population are taking place. The Census of Population shows that within the national pattern of geographic shifts in distribution of the population resulting primarily from internal migration a number of localities previously designated as low income have increased their population in the last decade some at more than the national average rate others at less than the national rate. Usually these increases reflected new opportunities that developed for local employment. In other low-income localities the resident population remained constant or declined The Atlantic Coast and Piedmont regions were the main ones with aboveaverage population gains. There vigorous industrial development or expanded military installations contributed to growing local employment Regions in which the population decreased were primarily those of the upper Appalachian and the South Central areas extending from eastern Oklahoma and Texas to Mississippi The decade of the 's lowered in general the population density in the rural low-income areas relative to the rest of the country. As indicated by Table B-16 the total population of the Nation increased by per- TABLE B Total population and population in low-income farming areas and Percentage change to Population Area classification Total Nonmetropol itan Total Nonmetropolitan Millions of persons Low-income farming areas Total population. _ _ By income : Moderately low-income Substantially low -income Seriously low-income By location : Appalachian Mountain and border areas Southern Piedmont and Coastal Plains Southeastern Hilly areas Mississippi Delta Sandv Coastal Plains * Ozark-Ouachita Mountains and border Northern Lake States Northwestern New Mexico Cascade and Rocky Mountain areas. _ As of April Based on actual number of persons For description of areas see Development of Agriculture 's Human Resources A Report on Problems of 4Low-Income Farmers House Document No. 84th Congress 1st Session Plains of Arkansas Louisiana Oklahoma and Texas NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Agriculture cent from to I960 while the increase in the low-income farming areas was only percent. In the areas with serious social and economic problems the increase was a mere percent. The nonmetropolitan population of the Nation as a whole increased by percent but in all lowincome farm areas it increased only percent. In the serious problem areas the nonmetropolitan population actually decreased by percent Data in Table B-16 are broad totals developed for areas as described in a special report prepared for the 84th Congress published in Of the low-income areas for which data are presented in Table B-16 only one that surrounding the fast-growing city of Albuquerque had a total population growth during the 's that exceeded the national average rate While notable improvement made it possible for a number of areas to retain their local population during the period of high level performance of the economy there is still a problem of underemployment in many areas i.e. an excessive potential supply of labor and a need for more opportunities for employment particularly off the farm HI. United States Foreign Trade and Payments In I960 the United States merchandise trade position improved substantially. This improvement however was largely offset by increased outflows of short-term capital mainly in response to more attractive interest rates abroad. The over-all balance of payments thus showed a sizable deficit for the third consecutive year. As the capital outflow accelerated during the year the over-all deficit in the balance of payments increased from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $ billion in the last quarter of to a rate of $ billion in the third quarter of ( Table B-17 ) In the closing months of the year the deficit omitting one large transfer of private capital for direct investment abroad appears on the basis of incomplete data to have diminished somewhat. The surplus on goods and services rose further. The outflows of liquid capital which were TABLE B-17. United States balance of payments [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] 19o9 Payment or receipt United States payments First Second Third Fourth First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter1 Merchandise imports Services and military expenditures Remittances and pensions ._ _ _ Government grants and related capital outflows United States private and other Government capital out flows United States receipts ~ Merchandise exports Services and military transactions Repayments on U.S. Government loans. Foreign long-term investments in United State * ' fi Errors and omissions net receipts or payments ( ) .fi Total ( balanced by decline in United States gold holdings and increase in recorded liquid liabilities ) ( ) Preliminary Transfers of military aid are excluded both from exports and from grants Excludes $ million for increase in United States subscription to the Intern ational Monetary Fund Less than $ trillion NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce still large in October the time of the speculative flurry on the London gold market seem to have fallen off following the reductions in short-term rates in several European countries and the announcement of various measures to reduce the payments deficit which confirmed United States determination to defend the dollar The increase in the over-all deficit in the balance of payments in the second half of the year was accompanied by a rise in foreign acquisitions of gold from the United States. The drop in the United States gold stock during amounted to $ billion against $ billion in and $ billion in The reduction was moderated as was that of by the sale of $ million of gold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund designed to enlarge the income earning assets of the Fund. Despite its decrease during the year the United States gold stock of $ % billion at the end of was almost one-half of the total held by all countries of the free world IMPROVEMENT IN CURRENT ACCOUNT SURPLUS The surplus of United States transactions on goods and services improved steadily throughout By the third quarter it reached a seasonally adjusted annual rate of over $ billion a shift of more than $ billion from the sizable deficit recorded in the second quarter of The improvement occurred chiefly in the merchandise trade account ; the combined movement in service transactions remained small. Among the service receipts income on investments increased for the second consecutive year following a small decrease in On the payments side military expenditures abroad which had already fallen somewhat in declined slightly although they still were at an annual rate of about $ billion Payments on transportation and travel however continued to rise rapidly The merchandise trade surplus rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of more than $ billion by the third quarter of Except during the period of the Suez crisis the surplus had not been so large since the early postwar years when Marshall Plan aid swelled exports. For as a whole it probably exceeded $ billion far above the $ billion of Exports made the largest contribution to the improvement in the trade surplus. From an annual rate of $ billion in the first quarter of they rose to an annual rate of $ billion in the third quarter of and continued at a high rate in the fourth quarter. A higher export level had been achieved only in the Suez-crisis months of early when fuel exports were at a record annual rate about $ billion above that for The near record rate of exports in the second half of moreover was achieved despite weakness in two of our major export markets Canada and Latin America The year 's upsurge in exports covered a broad range of commodities but the sharpest increases on the whole were recorded by a variety of crude and semimanufactured materials ( Table B-18 ) Coal was an exception as import restrictions on coal continued to prevail in several countries of Western Europe. The advance in total exports was the result of a combination of circumstances : the boom in business activity in most industrial countries outside of North America ; the removal of many foreign import restrictions on United States goods ; an increase in sales of surplus farm products for foreign currencies ; and finally some improvement in our competitive position in world markets TABLE B-18. United States merchandise exports [ Millions of dollars ] January-October Commodity Annual rates Total exports excluding " special category " Cotton unmanufactured Oilseeds and crude \ 7egetable oils Rubber and manufactures Wood paper and products Textile semi- and finished manufactures Iron and steel-making raw materials Iron and steel-mill products _ _ _ _ -__ Xonferrous metals Aluminum Copper and copper-base alloys _ ___ _ _ _ _ ' Foodstuffs Grains a n d preparations _ _ Coal a n d related products Petroleum and products _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Machinery Industrial machinery Tractors parts and accessories Automobiles parts and accessories Passenger cars and chassis new _- _ _ _ _ _ _._ _ Chemicals All other including reexports.. __ Aircraft and engines NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce In addition increases from to in exports of four major categories of commodities reflected special circumstances that had depressed exports in Exports of raw cotton in were substantially larger than in when foreign purchasers awaited an increase in the United States Government export subsidy and a consequent lowering of price However the heavy volume of cotton exports in also reflected the boom abroad. Similarly aircraft shipments which had dropped in as deliveries of piston aircraft fell and production of jet aircraft was not fully under way mounted rapidly in as a result of an unusual backlog of orders for jet aircraft. In domestic stockpiling in anticipation of strikes in the steel and copper industries and small output during the strikes reduced supplies of those products available for export that year ; in I960 shipments were at a more normal level. The increase in steel and copper exports in also reflected the high economic activity in Western Europe and Japan although these exports fell off somewhat after the third quarter with the easing in demand pressures in some of these countries. In addition the rise in copper exports in was in part a byproduct of the uncertainties surrounding supplies from African and Latin American sources The impact which the business upswing abroad had on United States exports in can be gauged by the geographical distribution of the year 's export gains : three areas of the world experiencing the most pronounced industrial boom Western Europe Japan and Australia which took somewhat more than one-third of our exports in were responsible for over four-fifths of the rise in exports in the first months of the year On the other hand exports to two of our other major markets Canada and Latin America which in absorbed almost one-half of our exports TABLE B-19. United States merchandise imports [ Millions of dollars ] Commodity January-October Annual rates Tntal imports for r/vn sumption Food : Meat products Coffee Sugar Other food Automobiles except trucks new. _ Chemicals and related products _ ._ All other Excludes $ million which Is included in commodity data Includes latex Excludes pig iron and scrap Excludes office appliances and printing machinery NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce * --_ Crude rubber Wool unmanufactured _ Sawmill products Newsprint Petroleum and products Iron and steel-mill products ' Nonferrous ores and metals. Copper Textile semi- and finished manufactures Machinery Electrical Industrial declined slightly. Sales to Canada had expanded quite rapidly in but began to fall early in I960 reflecting the dip in economic activity there The small decline in total sales to Latin America in I960 compared with was due to sharp drops in shipments to Cuba and Venezuela caused by the political and foreign exchange crises in those two countries. Exports to most of the other Latin American countries rose in Changes on the import side of the trade accounts were less marked than those ori the export side. Merchandise imports edged down from late and in the third quarter of were at an annual rate ( seasonally adjusted ) of just below $ billion nearly $ billion less than a year earlier All major economic categories accounted for this decrease. In the closing months of the year total merchandise imports declined further. The year 's slight change in the import total was the result of generally small changes upward and downward in the various import categories ( Table B-19 ) Special nonrecurring factors worked in both directions. Imports of meat declined as domestic supplies of beef increased from the rather low levels obtaining in and On the other hand the steel and copper strikes led to a temporary rise in imports of these commodities in the first part of the year. Changes in other import categories reflected the easing of domestic demand ( declines in imports of some materials ) the weakness of primary commodity prices ( e.g. coffee and wool ) and the shifting competitive position of manufactures ( e.g. increases in imports of textile manufactures and the decline in automobile imports ) which is discussed below SHARP INCREASE IN CAPITAL OUTFLOWS The divergence between cyclical developments in most foreign industrial countries and in the United States which contributed to the improvement in the United States trade position in also contributed to the sizable capital outflows that increased both the deficit in the over-all balance of payments and the drain on the United States gold stock. Some of this movement of capital reflected the attractiveness in of stock market investments in a number of Western European countries compared with the United States. The greater part of it however appears to have resulted from the enlarged margin by which interest rates abroad particularly in the short-term area exceeded those in this country and some of it was probably caused by increased international political and economic tensions The combined total of net outflows of Government loans and grants of pensions and remittances and of United States private long-term investment on the other hand changed little between the first three quarters of and of While the net outflow of Government loans and grants increased somewhat because of smaller repayments ( including repayments ahead of schedule ) on United States Government loans the $ million subscription to the new Inter-American Development Bank and larger acquisitions of foreign currencies as payment for United States Govern- III ment sales of surplus agricultural commodities the net recorded outflow of private long-term United States capital declined slightly The outflow of liquid capital funds gathered force slowly in ; in the third quarter however it reached sizable proportions as interest rates declined and monetary conditions eased further in the United States while interest rate increases and monetary tightening abroad continued. Largescale movements of liquid funds between international money centers in response to interest-rate changes have taken place in other recent years ; but owing to a combination of circumstances resulting mainly from the economic recovery of industrial countries outside North America this latest movement was much greater. The revived strength of Europe 's major currencies capped with the establishment of convertibility at the close of made it possible for private European holders in greatly to increase their short-term dollar assets. Monetary tightening in Europe and easing in the United States in then led to the repatriation of sizable amounts of these funds. At the same time fear of a possible weakness of Europe 's currencies and of an inability to repatriate funds because of foreign restrictions disappeared as a deterrent to United States corporations and other investors interested in taking advantage of higher interest rates abroad Moreover United States corporations having become accustomed to investing temporarily surplus funds in United States Treasury bills and other marketable instruments rather than just in bank deposits had less hesitation than previously in purchasing higher-yielding foreign Treasury bills The resulting outflow of United States private capital in the second and third quarters of was considerably larger than in the first half of when interest-rate differentials also favored investment abroad but when the general climate was less favorable to such capital movements However in the recent period the capital that moved was primarily of a short-term type. In there had been a relatively large outflow of funds resulting from the flotation in the United States of new bond issues of foreign and international borrowers. In this type of outflow was much smaller. Both the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and various Canadian corporations provinces and municipalities which in borrowed heavily in the United States had less need to obtain funds in this country. More important perhaps long-term United States interest rates did not decline in to the levels reached in early In addition purchases of outstanding foreign bonds by United States investors in were probably motivated not only by considerations of yield but also by the expectation of capital gains since long-term interest rates abroad were thought to be headed down again Another difference between and the earlier period also related to reductions of fears about leading foreign currencies appears to have been the relative importance attained by so-called uncovered movements of funds. Investors interested in taking advantage of higher short-term yields abroad can cover themselves at the time they make the investment from the foreign exchange risk by entering a forward foreign exchange contract to sell the foreign currency that they purchase. Such covering usually involves a cost which may substantially reduce the incentive to invest short-term funds abroad. In I960 this cost was quite high for short-term investment in several countries. At the same time interest-rate differentials were frequently so large that some investors reportedly felt that the profit of uncovered movements of funds was sufficiently great to compensate for the risk of exchange losses. The fluctuations in the interest-rate incentive to invest short-term funds abroad on both a covered and an uncovered basis are indicated in Table B-20 in terms of Treasury bill rates for the United Kingdom which appears to have been a major recipient of interest arbitrage funds from the United States in I960 and for Canada toward which the incentive shifted several times TABLE E-20. Treasury bill rates in the United States Canada and the United Kingdom [ Percent per annum ; weekly averages ] 3-month Treasury bill rates Period Excess of foreign rate over United States rate Without forward cover United Kingdom Canada United Kingdom United States Canada : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ _ Fourth quarter _ _ : First quarter Second quarter April Mav June _ Third quarter July AugustSeptember Fourth quarter October November December .._ -_ _ With forward cover ! United Kingdom Canada New York foreign exchange rates received through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York NOTE. Because of significant rate fluctuations averages of weekly rates often conceal wider differentials that may exist at one particular time. The figures presented above thus are at times only an approximate indication of actual yield differentials Sources : International Monetary Fund and Federal Reserve Bank of New York Interest-rate differentials in favor of foreign countries declined somewhat toward the close of I960 and the outflow of funds appears to have diminished. While gaps in the collection of balance of payments data prevent the making of accurate estimates of many types of capital flows the outflow of liquid capital in the third quarter may have been as high as $ billion or only slightly less than the over-all payments deficit in that quarter. Some of this outflow probably was recorded in the payments category of direct investments in Europe the amount of which almost doubled between the second and third quarters of There are indications that this reflected in part increased short-term investments abroad by foreign affiliates of domestic corporations. A sizable part of the liquid capital outflow was not recorded as such because of deficiencies in the available data but it appears in the balance of payments as " unrecorded transactions. " In the third quarter of there was an outflow of almost $ million in these transactions compared with an average quarterly inflow of $ million during the preceding five years. A large part of these unrecorded movements probably occurred in response to interest-rate differentials and may include unrecorded shifts due to leads -and lags in commercial payments It is noteworthy that under the definition of the United States over-all balance of payments deficit increases in our liquid liabilities to both private and official foreign holders enlarge the deficit but increases in our liquid claims on foreigners do not reduce it ; that is outflows of short-term United States funds increase the payments deficit even though they are matched by an increase in United States liquid assets. Since these assets are privately owned and are not necessarily available to meet the country 's international obligations they are not considered the equivalent of gold. Our liquid liabilities on the other hand are potentially at least alternatives to gold as a form in which foreign countries can keep their international assets ; therefore in measuring the United States deficit their changes are included with changes in the United States gold stock It should also be pointed out that the recent large outflow under unrecorded transactions exaggerated the apparent size of the over-all payments deficit to the extent that the funds in question were foreign-owned short-term funds. If these funds had been recorded at the point in the past when they moved into the United States they would have increased the recorded deficit at that time instead of enlarging recorded receipts ; their subsequent repatriation would have been registered merely as a shift in foreign ownership mainly from private to official hands. This is of course what occurred in the case of recorded repatriation of short-term foreign funds. This repatriation did not affect the size of the total deficit but added to official dollar balances and thereby enlarged the demand for United States gold UNITED STATES PAYMENTS IN LONGER PERSPECTIVE Beginning in the United States balance of payments has been in deficit every year except In each of the last three years moreover the deficit was more than twice the average of the preceding seven deficit years. Initially the deficit was related to United States efforts to speed the recovery of the war-shattered economies of the free world and to help these countries rebuild their reserves. In the last few years however the continuation of a deficit on such a large scale could no longer be explained on those grounds It is extremely difficult to connect the deficit with any particular category of payments since the interactions of the various components of the balance of payments are very complex. By and large however the deficit has reflected the postwar economic comeback of Western Europe and Japan together with continued large expenditures for defense and foreign aid which the United States has made in discharging its international responsibilities. Since the end of the war the total of Government payments under military expenditures and nonmilitary grants and loans has changed relatively little except for a sharp rise in and a moderate decline in the early 's ; since the early postwar years an increase in military expenditures abroad has been about as large as the decline in nonmilitary grants and loans but it must be noted that the former have a greater impact on the deficit than the latter. Total United States economic assistance to foreign countries nevertheless remains large and most of it is now directed to less developed countries. United States Government expenditures on economic assistance to less developed countries during as well as United States private loans and investments in these areas are shown in Table B-21 together with such outlays by other industrial countries TABLE B-21. Expenditures for foreign economic assistance and other contributions to less developed countries total [ Billions of dollars ] Contributing countries Total Official i Private Including reparations export credits and reinvested earnings Total Official Private Total United States Belgium CanadaFrance3 Germany Italy Japan. Netherlands United Kingdom Others Official net bilateral contributions ( grants and loans including assistance through sale of farm products for foreign currencies i.e. currency claims acquired less currencies disbursed ) and net contributions to multilateral agencies Private net bilateral contributions ( private lending and investment ) and net contributions to multilateral agencies Data for France are minimum and provisional and do not include reinvested earnings Includes Austria Denmark Ireland Luxembourg. Norway Portugal Sweden and Switzerland NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Various national sources Among nongovernmental transactions net private long-term capital outflows have risen substantially since the end of the war. At the same time there has been an increase of about the same size in net earnings on services other than military transactions. Within this service total net expenditure on travel has been rising but net earnings on investments have increased by a greater amount. In the last two years net private income on investments abroad has approximately equaled private United States long- term investment abroad. The merchandise trade surplus has changed quite sharply from year to year during the postwar period and the fluctuations in the over-all payments balance have roughly paralleled these swings except in and in the last two years when capital movements also fluctuated sharply Although the increase in aggregate merchandise exports since the early postwar years has been uneven the amount of the increase has been substantial The total of almost $ billion estimated for compares with an annual average of $ billion in the first four postwar years when exports were boosted by heavy relief and aid shipments. In the whole period since the war the advance in exports has been slower than the growth of GNP but since the early 's exports have risen at about the same rate as GNP. In merchandise exports were equal to percent of GNP the same proportion as in but somewhat below the proportion of and Agricultural exports have increased somewhat less rapidly than aggregate exports since the war but in when they were at an estimated $ billion above the average they still accounted for almost one-fourth of the export total. Shipments aided by Government subsidy or Government financing including sales for foreign currencies continue to be a significant part of total agricultural exports. In the fiscal year agricultural exports within the Public Law and Mutual Security programs under which the United States donates or exchanges farm products or sells them for local currencies which find only restricted use amounted to $ billion or percent of total agricultural exports. Sales for dollars that were aided by export payments or similar programs including Government loans were another percent of the total. It must not be forgotten however that United States agricultural exports still face stringent restric tions abroad Since the first postwar years exports of finished manufactures have expanded by about the same rate as total exports and those of industrial materials at a somewhat faster rate. In finished manufactures ( excluding Mutual Security program shipments ) accounted for about percent of United States nonmilitary exports and industrial materials for about percent. Capital equipment and industrial supplies and materials products that arc very sensitive to business fluctuations abroad accounted for more than percent of total exports As was to be expected the share of the United States in world exports of manufactures has declined from the very high level in the first postwar years. Since the economic recovery of Western Europe and Japan was a major goal of United States postwar foreign economic and mutual security policies it was inevitable that with the success of these policies the countries whose exports had suffered most by the war and its aftermath would improve their position in world markets. Nevertheless despite the persistence of some restrictions against our products our share of world exports of manufactures remains above prewar ( Table B-22 ) TABLE B-22. Industrial countries'1 shares of exports of manufactures and [ Percent of total l ] Period United States United Kingdom Germany France Japan Others : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter s Second quarter Third quarter Percentages based on total exports from industrial countries of goods in Sections to of the Standard International Trade Classification ( excluding United States exports of soecial category goods ) Excludes special category goods. Goods valued at approximately $ million were removed from the list of special category goods in Prewar : all Germany ; postwar : German Federal Republic. German Federal Republic 's prewar exports were roughly two-thirds of those of the whole of Germany * Comprises Belgium-Luxembourg Canada Italy Netherlands Sweden and Switzerland Provisional NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to percent because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ; Board of Trade United Kingdom ; and National Institute of Economic and Social Research London The postwar decline of the United States share of exports of manufactures reflects in the main the fact that manufactured products are once again available from our competitors in quantities and quality. During I960 the United States share improved again despite the weakness in the Canadian and Latin American markets where we are by far the largest supplier in part because of the business upswing in Europe and Japan A variety of products but particularly metals and transport equipment which had figured so prominently in the deterioration in our relative trading position appear to have contributed to the improvement in our share. Exports of passenger cars however remained at about their level considerably below exports in earlier years. This decline in passenger car exports appears in part related to the fact that United States production has not been geared more closely to the types of cars demanded abroad although within the domestic market United States automobiles have improved their position relative to that of foreign cars The measures toward trade liberalization recently taken by a number of foreign nations undoubtedly contributed to the improved position of the United States in the market for manufactures. Exports of those consumer manufactures which were freed in from discriminatory quota restrictions abroad increased noticeably in The same appears to have been true of machinery exports. When the effects of liberalization are considered from the point of view of the geographical distribution of export gains it is seen that exports to countries that had recently reduced or lifted discrimination against United States products ( e.g. the United Kingdom ) expanded by and large more rapidly than did exports to other countries O which also experienced high economic activity but had liberalized dollar imports much earlier ( e.g. the Netherlands ) Now that much progress has been made in dismantling quota restrictions with the principal exception of agricultural products attention has focused on tariff barriers ; in this regard United States manufactures still face relatively difficult obstacles in many countries abroad. For example in the import duties on passenger cars in France were percent in Germany percent in Italy percent and in the United Kingdom percent compared with the tariff of only percent in the United States The recent performance of United States exports to Western Europe deserves special attention. Between the first three-quarters of and the first three-quarters of our shipments to that area increased by more than percent against an increase of only percent in the area 's total imports. The upturn in United States exports to Western Europe was more broadly based than the previous rise to a peak in early at the time of the Suez crisis as the commodity composition of sales to Europe indicates. Five commodities raw cotton steel scrap iron and steel-mill products copper and aircraft exports of which have fluctuated very sharply in recent years had accounted for more than percent of the rise between the first half of and of in exports to Europe ( other than fuels which were exceptionally large in and fell steeply thereafter ) In the movement in contrast these five commodities accounted for less than half of the increase ( Table B-23 ) Other exports excluding fuel to Europe rose by percent in the latter period but by only percent in the earlier one Merchandise imports have increased at a higher rate than exports since the first postwar years. However in relation to GNP imports in reTABLE B-23. United States merchandise exports to Western Europe January-June Commodity group Percentage change to to to Millions of dollars Total merchandise exports J Excluding coal and petroleum _ Excluding coal petroleum and selected commodities.1,847 Coal and petroleum Selected commodities ' Raw cotton Steel scrap Iron and steel-mill products Copper _ Aircraft Excludes military aid and military sales NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce mained below their prewar level ( Table B-24 ) Since the ratio of total merchandise imports to GNP has held very close to percent ; in when the import ratio was percent total imports reflected very large imports of automobiles and strike-induced imports of steel. Imports of SUPTABLE B Measures of demand for United States imports selected years [ Percent ] Measure of demand Imports of goods and services as percent of gross national product Merchandise imports as percent of gross national product Imports of foods and beverages as percent of personal expenditures on food Imports of nonfood consumer goods as percent of disposable income Imports of industrial supplies8and materials for production of nondurable goods as percent of nondurable goods output Imports of industrial supplies and materials for production of durable goods as percent of durable goods output 3/0 January-September Excludes military expenditures Excludes petroleum newsprint and paper base stocks Source : Department of Commerce plies and materials have shown a decline in relation to domestic output compared with prewar years. Imports of finished manufactures on the other hand have increased in relation to domestic output and expenditure and to total imports ; like the postwar reduction of the United States share in exports this was in part a natural outcome of the economic recovery abroad and was facilitated by the lowering of United States tariffs under the reciprocal trade agreement legislation even though on some products United States tariffs remain high compared with foreign tariffs Imports of some foreign products especially textile manufactures rubber and leather goods and various small electrical appliances have continued to increase particularly rapidly. But in international trade as in domestic trade comparative advantage continually shifts from one product and producer to others. For many products there are increasing signs that United States producers are successfully enlarging their efforts to hold domestic demand. The recent sharp drop in automobile imports ( after mid-1960 these were running at one-half of the rate in comparable months of ) following the introduction of " compact " cars by United States manufacturers is the most striking example In the domestic market however just as in the export field United States industries must continue their efforts to keep their products competitive. As was pointed out in Chapter the Administration has intensified its measures to support the efforts of private business to enlarge our sales abroad. The Administration has likewise undertaken vigorous measures on other fronts to help speed the achievement of a reasonable equilibrium in the United States balance of payments. This enterprise is a responsibility shared by both the public and the private sector of the economy Appendix C STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS income or expenditure : Page Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross private and government product in current and prices C-4. Gross national product or expenditure in prices * G-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product C-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups G-7. Personal consumption expenditures G-8. Gross private domestic investment G-9. National income by type of income G-10. Relation of gross national product and national income C-ll. Relation of national income and personal income G-12. Sources of personal income G-l Disposition of personal income G-l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices G-l5. Financial saving by individuals G-l Sources and uses of gross saving Employment and wages : G-l Noninstitutional population and the labor force G-l8. Employment and unemployment by age and sex G Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons G-20. Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment G-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data G Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments G-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries G Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries G Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries G-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries G-27. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices G-28. Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries Production and business activity : G-29. Industrial production indexes G Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and G-31. New construction activity G-32. New public construction activity G Housing starts and applications for financing G-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade G Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders National G-l G-2 G-3 Prices : Page C-36. Wholesale price indexes G Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing G-38. Consumer price indexes by major groups G-39. Consumer price indexes by special groups Money supply credit and finance : G-40. Money supply G-41. Loans and investments of all commercial banks G-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves G-43. Bond yields and interest rates G-44. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding G-45. Instalment credit extended and repaid G-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing C-47. Net public and private debt Government finance : C-48. U.S. Government debt by kind of obligation C-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations C-50. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt C-51. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt C Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years C-53. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public C-54. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts C-55. Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years C-56. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Corporate profits and finance : G-57. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations C-58. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class C-59. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group O60. Sources and uses of corporate funds C-61. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations C-62. State and municipal and corporate securities offered C-63. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit C-64. Business population and business failures Agriculture : C-65. Income of the farm population C-66. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio C-67. Farm production indexes C-68. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs C-69. Farm population employment and productivity C-70. Selected indicators of farming conditions C-71. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture * International statistics : Page C-72. United States balance of payments C Major U.S. Government foreign assistance by type and by area total postwar period and fiscal years C-74. United States merchandise exports and imports by economic category and G-75. United States merchandise exports and imports by area and G-76. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions and G-77. Price changes in international trade Data for Alaska and Hawaii are not included in these tables unless specifically noted NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE G-l. Gross national product or expenditure 1Q29-60 [ Billions of dollars ] Total gross national product Period Gross private domestic investment Personal consumpProNet tion New ducers ' change excon- dura- in buspendi- Total struc- ble iness tures i tion equip- invenment tories Government purchases of goods and services Net exports Federal of goods and Total Less : State and Naservtional Other Gov- local ices Total deernment fense4 sales __ I9608 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * } ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ! a Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. -Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. __ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter * See Table C-7 for major components See Table C-8 for more detail and explanation of components For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period This category corresponds closely to the major national security classification in the Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June See Table C-52 s Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices * [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Total gross national product Period Gross private domestic investment New construction Produc- Change Dura- Noners ' in busiTotal ble durable Services Total Residurable ness goods goods dential Other equip- invenTotal ( nonment tories farm ) _ _ .._ ._ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter ? See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices l Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Government purchases of goods and services Net exports of goods and services a Period ( fi ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) -_ ( ) __ _ _ _ National Total defense _ _ Federal Total Other State and local ( ' ) ( 5s ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( 5s ) ( ) ' ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter .._ ' First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter ~ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ * These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See Tables C-4 and C-5. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on change in business inventories For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U. S. Incomt and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business 195S * For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in this table. See Table C-l for Government sales in current prices See footnote Table C-l Less than $ million Not available separately Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] prices Current prices Period Total gross national product Gross private product * Gross government product Total gross national product Nonfarm Farm _ _. I960 ._ _ __ Gross government product Farm * Nonfarm Total Gross private product Total Gross national product less compensation of general government employees i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world See Survey of Current Business October for description of series and estimates in current and constant prices and implicit deflators for B Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial hi character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities See footnote Table C-2 Preliminary NoTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-4. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-60l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Tota gross national product | o EH _ I960 Gross private domestic investment * > Net exports of '55 QJ Roods and serv " ices % ii ci ! 8B gS fc PH o> JL s Sz i ^ o fi c Gross private product * T3 Government purchases of goods and services " eS < T3 & m ^ ! e Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter. _ _ Fourth quarter _ _ .'2 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter ^ Third quarter. _ _ Fourth quarter _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U. Income ani Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business See Table C-5 for implicit price deflators For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales * Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available Less than $ million NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national prodTotal uct * Period Gross private domestic investment New construction Dura- Nonble durable Services goods goods Total Producers ' Residurable dential Other equipnonment farm ._ I9602 : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE C-5. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and imports1of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Period Exports Imports Total Federal State and local _ __ _ 19fi9.. I960 ' l : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * __ _ Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U.S. Income and Output A'Supplement to the Survey of Current Business * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) O TABLE C-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Persons Disposable personal income Period Business PerPersonal sonal con- saving sump- or distion ex- saving pendi ( ) tures Gross retained earnings i Gross private domestic investment International Forexports of Excess eign Net and servicesgoods Excess of re- net of ceipts transtransor in- fers by fers or vestNet ExIm- net erment gov- exports ports ports ports ern ( ) ment ( ' ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( > ) ( ) ) ( ' ) ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ) ( ) ~ _.- I960 % ) ( Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter. __ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter. _ _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter4 ( ) ( ) See footnotes at end of table p. Ll TABLE C-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Government Receipts Period __ _ I9604 _ Expenditures Tax and nonNet re- tax receipts ceipts or accruals _ Transfers interest and sub- sidies PurTranschases Total fers of interexgoods pendi- est and tures and servsubsidies ices Surplus or Total deficit income ( ) on or reincome ceipts and product account Gross Statistical discrepancy na- tional prod- uct or ex- penditure 4k Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ _ _ Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) n ( ) Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and excess of wage accruals over disbursements For foreign net transfers by Government were negligible ; therefore for that period net export ? of 3goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest pal J by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Less than $ million Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-7. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Total personal consumption Toextal penditures Period Nondurable goods -d ll a s ! ll <a TJ To- ? <S j Services tal I gja fc * S I X3 J2 | d o> Total O | | I w I _ I9604 _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-8. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Total Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment gross plant and equipment and construction private domestic ConConinvest- Total i Equip- struc- Total * Equip- strucment tion ment tion ment Period Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Net change in Other business inventories private construc- Total Non- Farm farm tion * l -L3 ( ) l ( ) I9608 ._ __ ( ) ( ( Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter.. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter... Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter _ Items for nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment are not comparable with those shown in Table C-30 principally because the latter exclude equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense and also investment by nonprofit organizations and professional persons Total producers ' durable equipment less farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants garages miscellaneous nonresidential construction and all other private construction < Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus farm machinery and equipment and farmers ' purchases of tractors and business motor vehicles. ( See footnote ) Includes religious educational social and recreational and hospital and institutional After inventory valuation adjustment Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-9. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Total national income1 Compensation of employees Business and proCorporate profits fessional income and inventory and inventory valuation valuation adjustment In- Rentadjustment come al inof InIn- Net Income income ven- farm of Cor- ven- terest proof tory prie- pertory porate valuunin- valuTotal corpo- ation tors sons Total profits ation before adrated adtaxes justenter- justprises ment ment _ ._ _ 1960S Period _ ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First Quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter '.1 ( ) Fourth quarter _ _ _ ( ) ( s ) National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table C-10 Wages and salaries and supplements to waees and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to farm inventories during the period. Data for differ from those shown in Table C-65 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts See Table C-57 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers v Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE G-10. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Capital consumption allowances Plus : Less : Subsidies Equals : less Qross Net current Indirect business nanaBusitional tax tional surplus ness prodDepregovprod- oferntransuct Total ciation Other i uct fer charges State payment enter- Total Fed- and ments eral local prises Period Equals : StaNatisti- tional cal income discrepancy ._ _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _. _ -.'4 <-4.8 < I9603.. ( ) o Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Secon d quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ ( ) ( ) ( ) < ) : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( 5s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( > Accidental damage to fixed capital and capital outlays charged to current account Less than $ million * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Plus : CorpoExcess rate of profits ContriNational and in- butions wage acincome venfor tory social cruals over valu- insurdisation ance burseadjustments ment Period Equals : Government transfer payments to persons Net interest paid by government Dividends Business transfer payments Personal income _ _ ^ I9601 * _ ; Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter... : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * ( ) ( ' ) Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers i Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) I4O TABLE C-12. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Period Labor Proprietors ' Less : income a income Per ( wage and sonal Per- Trans- contri- NonRental Total salary income Divi- sonal fer pay- butions agriculpersonal disbursetural Busiof dends interest ments income ments for personal income and other Farm ' ness and persons social ncome * profeslabor insursional income ) ance I960 * _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter i The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table C-9 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess of awage accruals over wage disbursements Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to inventories during the period a Data for differ from those in Table C-65 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-13. Disposition of personal income Less : Equals : Personal Less : Equals : Personal Personal Disposconable Personal income taxes i personal sumption saving income expenditures Period Saving as percent of disposable personal income ( percent ) Billions of dollars _ _ _ __. _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates _ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ _. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Includes also such items as fines and penalties Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-14. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Total personal consumption expenditures ( billions of dollars ) Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Per capita disposable personal income ( dollars ) Current prices prices Current prices prices ' Current prices prices Current prices prices 1934_ -_ Period _ Per capita personal consumption expenditures ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter Estimates in current prices divided by the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditures on a base See Table C-2 for explanation Total expenditures in prices divided by population Population of the United States excluding Alaska and Hawaii ; includes armed forces abroad. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period. ( Population of United States including Alaska for was and including Alaska and Hawaii for was ) s Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers l TABLE G Financial saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ] Period _ _ I96010 : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter ___ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter __ Third quarter__Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter-10 Fourth quarter Securities Currency Savand ings Total bank shares U.S. Other Cor2 deTotal sav- gov- porate posits ings ern- and bonds ment3 other CO ( ) i ! i Pri- Nonvate ininsur- sured ance penre- sion serves * funds Gov- Less : Increase in erndebt ment insurance and Con- Secupen- Mort- sumer rities gage sion debt debt loans8 reserves8 _ i ( ) ( ) ( ) -'.2 ( ) Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified Includes shares in savings and loan associations and shares and deposits in credit unions " Other government " includes U.S. Government issues ( except savings bonds ) State and local government securities and beginning nonguaranteed Federal agency issues which are included in " corporate and other " for years prior to * Includes insured pension reserves Includes Social Security funds State and local retirement systems etc Mortgage debt to institutions on one- to-four family nonfarm dwellings Consumer debt owed to corporations largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumer goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. Policy loans on Government and private life insurance have been deducted from those items of saving s Change in bank loans made for the purpose of purchasing or carrying securities Less than $ million Preliminary NOTE. Figures beginning have been revised since the Economic Report of the President January In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce are derived as the difference between disposable personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included in Securities and Exchange Commission saving : Housing farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment net of depreciation and increase in debt. Government insurance is excluded frorrf the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see Securities and Exchange Commission Statistical Bulletin July and Survey of Current Business July The Federal Reserve Board 's flow-of-funds system of accounts includes capital investments as well as financial components of saving and covers saving of Federal State and local governments businesses financial institutions and consumers. While the Federal Reserve Board 's estimates of consumer saving in financial form are similar to the Securities and Exchange Commission estimates of individuals ' saving there are some statistical and conceptual differences in the two sets of data Revisions for in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into these estimates Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-16. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Qross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Period Total Total Personal saving Gross busi- Total ness saving Federal State and local Gross investment Statistical Gross disprivate Net for- crepTotal domes- eign in- ancy tic in- vest-1 vest- ment ment ( ) g -L7 _ _ _ _ _ I9603 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter ._ Third quarter.- Fourth quarter- : First quarter Second quarter -_ Third quarter. Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) '.3 ( ) Net exports of goods and services less foreign net transfers by Government. For net foreign investment and net exports of goods and services have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) H5 EMPLOYMENT AND WAGES TABLE G-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Total Nonin- labor Employment stitu- force Armed tional ( includ- forces * Total popuing Agri- Nonlation i armed agriTotal culforces ) i cultural tural Period Total labor force as percent as perUnem- of non- cent of ploy-2 institu- civilian tional labor ment popu- force lation Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : Unemployment Percent ( ' ) ( ) ( ) __ ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ' ) ( a ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) New definitions : _ Oil I960 ( including Alaska and Hawaii ) * ' January February March April July August September. __ _ _. October November _. December May June _ _ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE C-17. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Noninstitutional popu-J lation Period Civilian labor force Total Unemlabor Total ploylabor force as ment Employment * force Armed percent as perUnem- of non- cent of ( includ- forces ing Agri- Non- ploy- institu- civilian Total Total culagri- ment tional labor armed J forces ) tural culpopu- force lation tural Thousands of persons years of age and over New definitions : J : January * February March April May Percent Jtjne July August September October November December Seasonally adjusted * * January * February March April May June July August September October November December _ __ July August September October November Decen>bp,r : January February March April May June Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside the United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from the estimates See Note Not available Beginning January I960 monthly figures include data for Alaska and Hawaii Seasonally adjusted totals may differ from the sum of components because totals and components have been seasonally adjusted separately NOTE. Civilian labor force data beginning with May are based on a 330-area sample. For January 1954-April they are based on a 230-area sample ; for on a 68-area sample ; for on a smaller sample ; and for on sources other than direct enumeration Effective January persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and persons waiting to start new wage and salary jobs within the following days are classified as unemployed. Such persons had previously been classified as employed ( with a job but not at work ) The combined total of the groups changing classification has averaged about to a month in recent years. The small number of persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new Jobs are classified as not in the labor force instead of employed as formerly. Persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days continue to be classified as employed Beginning July monthly data are for the calendar week ending nearest the 15th of the month ; previously for week containing the 8th. Annual data are averages of monthly figures For the years estimating procedures made use of Census data ; for subsequent years Census data were used. For the effects of this chanse on the historical comparability of the data see Annual Report on the Labor Force Series P-50 No. April p. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE CMS. Employment and unemployment by age and sex [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed Total civil- ian labor Total emforce ployed years Period Unemployed years and over years years and over Total unemyears Fe- ployed FeFeMale male Male male Male Fe- Male male male years Old definitions : New definitions : Oil : January February March _ _ April May June _ July August. __ September October November December I960 : January February March April May June July August September October November December See Note Table C-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions Beginning January data for Alaska and Hawaii are included NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age/sex groups above See Note Table C-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed persons not at work by reason for not working Period Bad weather Total Industrial dispute Vacation Special groups of unemployed persons a Illness All other reasons > Tempo- New wage and salary rary layoff ' job * New definitions : ( ) CO < * ) I9607 : January February _ March April May June July August September ._ October November _ December.. : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November __ December.. Includes persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days Under the old definitions of employment and unemployment these groups were included in the " employed but not at work " category Persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of the layoff Persons scheduled to start new wage and salary jobs within days. Under the old definitions the " new job or business " group included these persons as well as persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days ( see " all other " category in this table ) and persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs ( these are now classified as " not in the labor force " ) See Note Table C-17 for explanation Not available Beginning January I960 data for Alaska and Hawaii are included NOTE. See Note Table C-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment Duration of unemployment Period Total unemployed weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : ( ) C2 ) ( ) ( ) L055 New definitions : I9604 : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter. _ __ _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter See Note Table O-17 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to months ( ) Not available Beginning January data for Alaska and Hawaii are included NOTE. See Note Table C-17 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-21. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs State programs Insured Total Cov- unem- benefits Insured ered ploypaid Initial emment ( mil- unem- claims ployploy- ( weekly lions ment ' ment i aver- of dolage ) lars ) Period Thousands Exhaustions * Weekly average thousands Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid AverTotal age ( mil- weekly Season- lions of check Unad- ally ad- dollars ) ( doljusted justed lars ) Percent I960 * : January February March April May June _ _ _ July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December .__ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes persons under the State Federal emoloyee ( UCFE ) ( effective January ) and Railroad Retirement Board ( RR ) programs ; beginning October also includes members of the armed forces covered under the program of unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ( UCX ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment comoensation for veterans October 1952January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment * Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year ' For total unemployment only Preliminary March is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined ; workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ Thousands of employees ] Total wage and salary workers Period Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining GovTransFiernCon- porta- Whole- nance Serv- ment ice tract tion sale insur- and ( Fedconand and ance miscel- eral struc- public retail and tion utili- trade real lane- State and ties estate ous local ) ( ) J ( ) J937 I960 ' ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( " ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) % Seasonally adjusted : January February _._ March April May June _ July August SeptemberOctober November. December. See footnotes at end ofjtable p. TABLE C-22. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments * Continued [ Thousands of employees ] Period Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Non- Mindura- ing ble goods TransCon- porta- Wholesale tract tion conand and struc- public retail tion utili- trade ties Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellaneous Government ( Federal State and local ) Seasonally adjusted July August September. October November. December.. : January February.- March April May June : January February. .March April May June July____ August September. October November55 December i Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( Table C-17 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. ; and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments * Beginning with data are not strictly comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division a Not available Inclading data for Alaska and Hawaii the number of wage and salary workers in was and in Monthly data seasonally adjusted for are ( in thousands ) : April July October January February May August November March June September December Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-23. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Retail trade Build- ( except Bitumiing eating Whole- nous Class I Tele- consale rail- phone coal and Non- strucdrink- trade mining roads i Total Durable durable tion goods goods ing places ) Manufacturing Period I9606 -._ -_ .__ _ __ _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May. __ June July August September. __ October November.. December : January February March _ __ April May June July August. September.. October November _ _ December ._ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Laundries ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC Group I ) Beginning September data reflect a reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives : from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for I960 are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment See Table C-26 for unadjusted average weekly hours in manufacturing Source : Department of Labor TABLE C- Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Retail Build- trade Bituing ( except Whole- minous ClassI Tele- Laun- Agrirail- phone2 dries culNon- consale coal Dura- dura- struc- eating trade and ture ' mining roads i Total ble tion drinking ble goods goods places ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) f ) C4 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ ( ) ( ) $ I960 : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June. July August September October __ November ? ___ December '_-. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ C ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ * ~ ~ ~ 75i " " " ( ) * Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ) summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis * Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods * Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April i Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for all nonsupervisory employees hi other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture TABLE C-25. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total ___ I9606 : January February March April May June __ July... August September October November December : January February March _ April May June July August September October November6 _ December $ Retail trade Build- ( except ing eating Whole- Bitumi- Class I Tele- Launconnous and railDura- Non2 sale coal dries ble durable struc- drink- trade mining roads i phone tion goods goods ing places ) $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ 119.6l ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ < ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ^ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Averages are based upon monthly data ( exclusive of switching and terminal companies ' * summarized in the M-300 report by the ICC and relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants ( ICC group I ) Beginning September data reflect a wage rate increase and reduction in the basic workweek from to hours Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives : from April to May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available Data beginning with January of year noted are not comparable with those for earlier periods Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in building construction and for nons'ipervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-26. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries All manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Period Gross Durable goods manufac- Nondurable goods manuturing industries facturing industries Average hourly earnings Average weekly hours ) ) ( i ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) : January February March _ April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June _ July August September October November December ) ) ) ) ) ) 1960S ) ) Average hourly earnings ) $ ) $ Average weekly hours ExExExExExExeludcludcludcludcludcluding Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing overoveroveroveroverovertime time time time time time Average hourly earnings ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) $ ( > ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) $ ) $ ) ) $ Not available Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period * Preliminary NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment ( in the case of hours ) and man-hours ( in the case of earnings ) See Table C-23 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices 7939-W Average spendable weekly earnings Average gross weekly earnings Period Current prices prices l Worker with no dependents Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices ! $ $ $ $ $ $ _ _ I9603 : January February March April May June _ ( < ) ( ) ( * ) _ July August. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ September October November December _. _ _ I960 * January February March April May June July August September October November December -_ _ Estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base ( using 11-month average ) Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Preliminary Not available NOTE. Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE G Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries [ Rates per employees ] Separation rates Accession rates Period Total i _ _ _ ( ) ( ) Total Quits Layoffs I New hires _ I960 : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November * _ Includes rehires and other accessions not published separately Includes discharges and miscellaneous separations not published Not available January-November average Preliminary Source : Department of Labor separately PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE C-29. Industrial production indexes [ = ] Industry groupings Manufacturing Period Total industrial production i Durable manufactures Total Total FabriTrans- Instru- Clay Furnicated porta- ments ture Mametal chinery tion and re- glass and lated and prodequip- nrod- lumber miscelucts ment laneous ucts Primary metals I9602 _ Seasonally adjusted : January February Marrh April May June July _ August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE C-29. Industrial production indexes Continued = ] Industry groupings Market groupings Manufacturing Nondurable manufactures Period Final products Consumer goods ChemMin- UtilTexical tile ing ities ap- Paper petro- Foods beverTo- parel and leum ages tal and print- and leather ing rubber and toprodprod- bacco ucts ucts Total Equip- Mament terials Auto- includTo- motive ing tal prod- defense ucts I9602 Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ Annual indexes for are respectively : and Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-30. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ BiUions of dollars ] Manufacturing Period Total i Total Transportation Dura- Non- Mining ble durable goods goods Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and other I960 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter I960 * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * * First quarter _ Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction Annual total is the sum of unadjusted quarterly expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures. See footnote * Estimates for fourth quarter and first quarter based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and Novembef The quarterly anticipations include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data NOTE. These figures do not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals and institutions and of certain outlays charged to current account This series is not available for years prior to and for to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce l62 TABLE G-31. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Period Total new construction Resi- Nonresldential building and other construction dential Total i building ( nonComTotal mercial * Indus- Public Other farm ) trial utility Public construction 10f >30 ) m ) &5 t _._ New series : I9605 Seasonally adjusted annual rates ( New series ) : January February March April May Tune July \ ugust September October November December : January February March April May _ __ June July August September October November s8 December Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas well drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product. ( See Table C-l. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Farm institutional and all other * New series beginning January not comparable with prior data. In addition to major differences between old and new series data for Alaska and Hawaii are included beginning January For details see Construction Activity C Bureau of the Census August Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-32. -New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Total new public construction Federal Period State All and public sources Direct Federal local aid Major types of new public construction Sewer Conand Hoswater servapital tion High- Educa- and and way tional institu- miscel- and detional laneous veloppublic ment service Military facilities All other public _ J958 I9604--... For expenditures classified by ownership combine " Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Includes nonresidential building other than educational and hospital and institutional ( industrial commercial public administration social anu recreational and miscellaneous ) public residential buildings and publicly owned parks and playgrounds memorials etc Beginning with data include estimates for Alaska and Hawaii. Comparability with earlier data is not seriously affected since these two States accounted for less than one-half of one percent of total new public construction in * Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C Housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Total housing starts ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm housing starts Period Total private Private and public i Total private and public ! Private Total Government programs FHA : January February March April May June _ July August _ _ _ _ September October __ November December I960 ' January February _ _ March April May June _ July August September October November t December '_..._ ( ) ( ) New series VA Total farm and nonfarm Proposed home construction * VA FHA apNon- appli- praisal farm cations requests Private housing starts seasonally adjusted annual rates ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) New series 1,5S8 1,S56 1>044 Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in total private and public starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Units in mortgage applications for new home construction FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency * Not available e In addition to major differences between old and new series arising from revisions in sources and methods new series includes data for Alaska and Hawaii. For details see Housing Starts C20-11 ( Supplement ) Bureau of the Census May Preliminary : December and year estimated by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) Veterans Administration ( VA ) and Housing and Home Finance Agency ( except as noted ) TABLE G-34. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in billions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Period Sales Inven- Ratio * Sales Inven- Ratio * Sales Inven- Ratio * Sales Inven- Ratio * tories tories tories3 tories I960 Seasonally adjusted July August September. October November. December.. : January February. March April May June. _ _ _ U8.1 July August September _ _ October November86 _ December : January February. _ _ March April May June The series beginning in are not comparable with the previous years because of changes in definition for the wholesale series. Beginning in the estimates of retail sales and inventories are based on a new method of estimation adopted by the Bureau of the Census Monthly average shown for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period * Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Preliminary Beginning January I960 retail sales include data for Alaska and Hawaii NOTE. For a description of the series and their comparability see Survey of Current Business September and November January and June for retail and August for manufacturing and wholesale The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-35. Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders [ Billions of dollars ] Inventories J Sales i New orders l Durable goods Nondurable goods industries industries Dura- Nonble durable goods goods PurTotal Purindus- indus- chased Goods Fin- chased Goods Fintries matetries in ished mate- in ished rials process goods rials process goods Period Unfilled Dura- Non- orders ble durable ( unadgoods goods justindus- indus- ed ) ' tries tries _ I960 < _ Seasonally adjusted : January February ___ March April May _ June July August SeptemberOctober November. _ December. _ : January February. __ March April May June July August September ._ October November Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period s End of period * Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. See Table C-34 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE C-36. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods All commodities Period Farm products Processed foods Total Textile products and apparel Chemi- Rubber Lumber cals and and and rubber wood allied prodprodproducts ucts ucts ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I9603 : January February March April May June _ _ July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November3 December __ ._ See footnotes at end of table p TABLE C-36. Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( continued ) FurniMetals Machin- ture and and ery and other metal motive houseprodprodhold ucts ucts durables Hides skins leather and leather products Fuel power and lighting materials ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( l ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( J ) Period _ _ _ Pulp paper and allied products ( ) Non- Tobacco metal- manu- Miscellic factures laneous minerand prodals bottled ucts ( struc- beverages tural ) : January February March April May June July August September. _ October November.. December : January __ February March April May _ June July August _. _ September. _ October November.. Decembers. This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January Data beginning January represent the revised sample and weighting pattern. Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index Not available a Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components l Crude materials All commodities Period Materials and components for manufacturing Food- Nonstuffs food maTotal and terials Fuel feedstuffs except fuel Total Materials for Total food manufacturing Materials for nondurable manufacturing Materials and Ma- Com- compoterials po- nents for nents for dufor conrable manu- strucmanu- factur- tion factur- ing ing _ : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December * See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE C-37. Wholesale price indexest by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Period Producer Total Total Other nonFoods durable goods Du- finished goods rable goods InterConmediate sumer Crude materials finished mate- supplies goods exrials a and com- cluding ponents foods 1955_._ I9604 : January February March April Jnnp July August September __ October November __ December _ _ ._ _._ May June July August September October .__ November.-. --December : January February March April May Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Preliminary NOTE. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector and their relative importance see Monthly Labor Review December and Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes ( BLS Bulletin No. ) Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Consumer price indexes ^ by major groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Housing All items Food _ Period _- -._ -_ __ _ .__ .__ _._ Total Kent ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ] Read- Other Ap- Trans- Medi- Per- ing and goods cal parel porta- care sonal recrea- and tion care tion services ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) I960 * January February March April May June July August September October November December __. ._ I960 * January February March April May June July August September October November _ Not available January-November average Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-39. Consumer price indexes by special groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Commodities Period All items All items less food Services All Commodities less food items All less All shel- com- Food ter modiNon- servDura- dura- ices All ties bles bles Rent All services less rent I960 * : January February March April. May June I960 ' January February March April May June _ July August September October November _ _ 71i4 July August September October November December : i January-November average Source : Department of Labor MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE C-40. Money supply [ Averages of daily figures billions of dollars ] Money supply Period Seasonally adjusted Total Currency Demand outside deposbanks its Deposits at member banks ( unadjusted ) Unadjusted Total Currency Demand outside depos- Demand banks its Time U.S Government : December : December : December : : : : : December December December December December : : : : : December December December December... December : December _ _ : January February March April May June-. July August September. __ October November. _ _ December : January February March April May June July August September. __ October November. December s _ _ i Demand deposits at all commercial banks ^ member and nonmember ) a Member banks are all national banks and those State banks which have taken membership in the Federal Reserve System Preliminary NOTE. These are the new series as published in Federal Reserve Bulletin October Between January and August the series were expanded to include data for all banks in Alaska and Hawaii Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] Total loans and investments End of period June June * June June June June _ _ _ __ _ 1960s ' January February ._ March April May June July August September October November _December I960 * January _ February March __ April May _ June July August September October November December -_ _ __ Loans Total Investments Business loans ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total U.S. GovOther ernment obligations securities End-of-year figures ( except ) are for call dates. Other data ( including those for December ) are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net i.e. after deduction of valuation reserves. Includes commercial and industrial agricultural security real estate bank consumer and other loans Beginning with data are shown gross of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks * Figures in this table .are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Therefore they do not agree with figures in Table C-49 which are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U.S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Beginning June business loans exclude loans to financial institutions s Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Between January and August this series was expanded to include data for all banks in Alaska and Hawaii Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-42. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Period Total U. S Member bank Government se- borrowcurities ings Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) : December _ : : : : : December December December _ _ December December U,850 i i : : : : : December December _ December _._ December December : : : * : December December December December December : : : : December December _ _ December.- _ December December : : * : December December December December. _ December : * : : * December December December. _ December _ _ December : December. : January February March.. April May June.. _ July August September October November December : January February March April May. June July. August September October November December _ _ _ i Data from March through April are for licensed banks only * Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System I76 TABLE C-43. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Government securities Period Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) 3-month Treas- month Taxable Aaa ury bonds bills i issues Common stock yields stocks Baa ( Moody 's ) Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on Prime Fedshorteral comterm Remer- serve bank cial loans paper Bank to busidis4-6 count nessselected months rate cities ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fl ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) s ( ) ( ) M.OO M.OO : January February .March April May .June July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table p. 4.i7 TABLE C-43. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Common stock yields 3-month stocks Treas- month Taxable Aaa Baa ( Moody 's ) bonds ury bills i issues U.S. Government securities Period : January February March April May June Average rate on Prime short- comterm merbank cial loans paper to busi4-6 nessselected months cities : January February March April May June -_ July August September October November December July August September October November December Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Federal Reserve Bank discount rate ^ Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) s First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March 154years Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less Series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial institutions NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation I7 TABLE G Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of period Total Total Other Autoconmobile sumer paper goods paper Noninstalment credit Repair Perand modern- sonal ization loans loans Total Charge acOther counts ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) __ _- I960 _ I960 ' * January February March April _ _ _ May June _ July August September October November December _ : January February March April May June July August _ September October November. December * __ ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods and secured by the items purchased Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit < Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin December Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August respectively Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Total Period Other consumer Repair and modernization goods paper loans Automobile paper Extended Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Repaid Extended Personal loans Repaid Extended Repaid ,3S8 Unadjusted * January February March April May June July August September. October _November December I960 ' January February March _ __ April May June July August September October November l December Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August September October November December ; January February March April May June July August _ September October November December .._ Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. See also Table C-44 Series revised beginning January For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin December Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August respectively. Therefore the difference between extensions and repayments for January and August and for the year does not equal the net change in credit outstanding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-46. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties to 4-family houses All properties End of period Government underwritten Total Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Multifamily and comCon- mercial venproptional i erties Farm properties I9603 ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter C _ _- _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter I960- First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ Derived figures Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Preliminary ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations ( except as noted ) TABLE C-47. Net public and private debt 1929-60l [ Billions of dollars ] Private Individual and noncorporate Corporate Fed- State and eral local Nonfarm End of period * Total Gov- governernment ment ' Total ComTotal Long- Short- Total Farm ' merterm term Mort- cial ConTotal gage and sumer financial * " _ t Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see Survey of Current Business October * Data for State and local government debt are for June Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Revisions beginning in the consumer credit data of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into this series Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and Interstate C ommerce Commission ( except as noted ) l82 GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE C-48. U.S. Government debt by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Gross public debt and guaranteed issues i End of period _ : January _ February. __ March April May June July. August September.. October November December : January February _ _ _ March April May June July August September October November ._ December _ ._ Marketable public issues Nonmarketable public issues Shortterm issues United States savings bonds Treasury bonds Treasury tax and savings notes < ) ( ) ( ) < * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fl ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Investment bonds Special issues * O.f 7.C O.C S ( C C t J J ( f f J t ( * ' ( ( A ( * : ( < J ( 44.J < 44.J Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Series A bonds and beginning April Series B convertible bonds Issued to U.S.Government investment accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Less than $ million The last series of Treasury savings notes matured in April Source : Treasury Department TABLE C-49. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations [ Par values,1 billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of period _ ^ _ ___ 19608J959 : January February March April May June- _ ^ July August September _ _ October November December : January February March April May June July .__ August September October November December * __ _ Held by others Held by U.S GovMutual ernsavings State Total ment Com- banks Other and invest- Total Federal mercial and in- corpora- local IndividReserve ment banks banks3 surance tions * govern- uals accomments counts panies Miscellaneous investors ? i United States savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value * Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table C-41 which are based on book values and relate only ta banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies * Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts f Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund and the International Development Association in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U.S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE C-50. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class Amount outstanding Within year End of period Ito5 years years Average length to to 20and years years over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Years Months July August _ September October -_ N< " Vfvmhp.r December I960 * January February March April May June _- __ __ July August September October November December ~ I960 * January February M arch April May June NOTE. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which are classified to earliest call date Source : Treasury Department O TABLE C-51. Federal budget receipts and expenditures ana the public debt ^ [ Millions of dollars ] Net budget receipts Period Budget expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Public debt at end 2of year Fiscal year : ._ New basis _ _ * 1Q62 Gross receipts less refunds of receipts and transfers of tax receipts to the old-age and survivors insurance trust fund the disability insurance trust fund the railroad retirement account and the highway trust fund Excludes guaranteed obligations ; therefore differs from total shown in Tables C-48 and C-49. The change in the public debt from year to year reflects not only the budget surplus or deficit but also changes in the Treasury 's cash balances the effect of certain trust fund transactions and direct borrowing from the public by certain Government enterprises Beginning with fiscal year net budget receipts and budget expenditures have been adjusted to exclude certain interfund transactions. The change does not affect the budget surplus or deficit. ( Figures for calendar years have not yet been adjusted to exclude interfund transactions and therefore are not shown in this table. ) * Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget TABLE C-52. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by Junction fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Budget receipts by source Fiscal year Total Budget expenditures by function Indi- CorpoAll vidual ration Excise other income income taxes retaxes taxes ceipts J Veterans ' servnaTotal ices tional and security benefits Major AgriculAll ture and Inter- other agriest expendculturitures al resources Budget surplus or deficit ( ) I960.1951_ _ _ _ _ _ 1960__ * * _ Includes employment taxes estate and gift taxes customs revenues and miscellaneous receipts. See also footnote Includes expenditures for international affairs and finance ( including defense support under the mutual security program ) labor and welfare natural resources commerce housing and space technology and general government ; also includes adjustment to daily Treasury statement ( for actuals ) and allowance for contingencies ( for estimates ) See also footnote Beginning with net budget receipts and budget expenditures have been adjusted to exclude certain interfund transactions. The adjustment was made in the totals and the " all other " categories. The change does not affect the budget surplus or deficit * Estimate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget TABLE C-53. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Federal Total State and local * Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments ( ) Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments ( ) Cash receipts Cash payments ( ) ( ) Period Fiscal year : _ <_ < _._ Calendar year : _ _ __- ( ) Excess of receipts or of payments ( ) For derivation of Federal cash receipts and payments see Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June and Table C-55 * Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts. Cash receipts consist of personal tax and nontax receipts indirect business tax and nontax accruals and corporate tax accruals adjusted to a collection basis. Cash payments are total expenditures less Federal grants-in-aid and less contributions for social insurance. ( Federal grants-in-aid are therefore excluded from State and local receipts and payments and included only in Federal payments. ) See Table C-54 Less than $ million Estimate Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-54. Government receipts and expenditures as shown in the national income accounts [ Calendar years billions of dollars ] Receipts or expenditures I960 SecFirst ond half half SecFirst ond half half SecFirst ond half half Seasonally adjusted annual rates Total government Receipts Expenditures Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) Federal Government * Receipts Personal tax and nontax receipts _ Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance E xpenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments To persons.. Foreign ( net ) Grants-in-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) State and local governments Receipts Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Contributions for social insurance Federal grants-in-aid E xpenditures Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments Net interest paid Less : Current surplus of Government enterprises Excess of receipts or of expenditures ( ) t CO Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Approximation for the year as a whole. See footnote Table C-57 Not available < These accounts like the cash budget include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike both the conventional budget and the cash statement they exclude certain capital and lending transactions. In general they do not use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services ; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans financed by banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ] ] 7iscal yean5 Receipts or expenditures RECEIPTS Budget receipts Less * Intragovernmental transactions Receipts from exercise of monetary authority Plus : Trust fund receipts _ _ Equals : Federal receipts from the public ( consolidated cash receipts ) Less : Adjustment for agency coverage : District of Columbia revenues Plus : Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Federal Government contributions to : Employee retirement funds _ _ __ Veterans ' life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Interest dividends and other earnings Adjustments for timing : Excess of taxes included in national income accounts over cash collections : Personal _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Corporate profits Other Miscellaneous Less : Adjustments for capital transactions : Realization upon loans and investments Proceeds from sale of Government propertyRecoveries and refunds __ _ Equals : Receipts national income accounts o o g __ g g o g o \ g o o EXPENDITURES Budget expenditures _ _ Less ' IntraejovemTnental transactions Accrued interest and other noncash expenditures ( net ) Plus : Trust fund expenditures _ _ Government-sponsored enterprise expenditures ( net ) __ _ Equals : Federal payments to the public ( consolidated cash expenditures ) Less : Adjustment for agency coverage : District of Columbia expenditures _ Plus : Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Federal Government contributions to : Employee rp-tireTH6int funds Veterans ' life insurance funds Federal Government employee contributions to employee retirement funds Interest received and proceeds of Government sales Adjustments for timing : Accrued interest on savings bonds and Treasury bills Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed non-recourse loans ( net change ) Increase in clearing account.. _ _ Miscellaneous Less : Adjustments for capital transactions : Loans and other adjustments : Federal National Mortgage Association secondary market operations Other Purchase of land and existing assets Trusts and deposit fund expenditures Redemption of International Monetary Fund notes Equals : Expenditures national income accounts NOTE. See also Table C-51 Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE C-57. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations 7929-W [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Manufacturing Period All Industries Durable Total goods industries Nondurable goods industries ( ' ) ( ) Transportation communication and public utilities ^ _ Corporate profits after taxes Corpo- Corporate rate tax All profits liabilDivibefore other dend Undisindus- taxes ity i Total pay- tributed tries ments profits ^ ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. ._ Fourth quarter_ : First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter_ : First quarter... Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter a ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers * Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; they do not derive from nor imply specific estimates for the quarters. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-56. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years ^ [ Millions of dollars ] Revenues by source Fiscal year Expenditures by function ReveSales nue and Indi- Corpo- from All Propration Fed- other Total erty gross vidual net re- income income eral revetaxes ceipts taxes taxes Gov- nue erntaxes ment EduTotal cation High- Public All wel- other * ways fare s Fiscal years not the same for all governments Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between governments in these categories are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and community redevelopment local recreation general control interest on general debt and other and unallocable expenditures Includes data for Alaska NOTE. Data are not available for intervening years See Table C-47 for net debt of State and local governments Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census1 ) TABLE C-58. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class Asset size class ( millions of dollars ) Period All asset sizes Under to ItolO to and over Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter- _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ _ : First quarter Second quarter- __ Third quarter Fourth quarter- _ _ BASED ON SIC * : First quarter Second quarter- _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter- _ _ : First quarter Second quarter ___ Third quarter Fourth quarter. __ : First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Profits per dollar of sales cents Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ _ BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter i Standard Industrial Classification NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For details concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U.S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-59. Relation of prof ts after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Durable goods industries Period All private manufacturing corporations Lumber and Furwood niture prod- and ucts fix ( except tures furniture ) PriStone mary clay iron and and glass steel prod- inucts dustries P ri n- mary nonferrous metal industries MaFab- chinricated ery ( exmetal cept prod- elecucts trical ) MisEleccellatrical MoIn- neous ma- tor Other stru- manchin- vehi- trans- ments ufacery cles porta- and turequip- and tion re- ing ment equip- equip- lated ( inand ment prod- cludsup- ment ucts ing plies ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent BASED ON SIC ' : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter.. BASED ON SIC ' : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter. __ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter.... Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter. Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. Fourth quarter. BASED ON SIC ' : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter ._ : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter., Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE G-59. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Period Food and kindred products To- Texbacco tile man- mill ufac- prodtures ucts ProdPrintucts of ing petroand ChemApleum par el Paper pub- icals Petro- and Rub- Leather and and and allied lish- and leum coal ber ing allied refin- ( exrelated prod- ( exprod- leather prod- ucts cept prod- ing cept ucts products ucts petronews- ucts leum parefinpers ) ing ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate } to stockholders ' equity percent BASED ON SIC * : First Quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter BASED ON SIC ' : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter BASED ON SIC : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter i Standard Industrial Classification NOTE Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U.S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-60. Sources and uses of corporate funds 1949-60l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Total uses S ? Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( book value ) Customer net receivables Cash and U.S. Government securities. ( ) Other assets Total sources Internal sources Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation and amortization allowances External sources ( ) ( ) IS Federal income tax liability- Other liabilities Bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) Excludes banks and insurance companies jPreliin nary estimates Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately <6 Less than $ million Preliminary estimate by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE G-61. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations 1939-60l [ Billions of dollars ] Current liabilities Current assets End of period 2a 'fl-w | jl .w CQ : P Si ^ a " ! lS II * jjj ! x & ) s 8t> If jy I * < a &w * ' > 3S > i | li j | Net working capital T3 O c3 " * * * 1Q57 : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter All United States corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Year-end data through are based on Statistics of Income ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually ali corporations in the United States. Statistics of Income data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compile ! from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. As more complete information becomes available estimates are revised a Receivables from and payables to U.S. Qovernment do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Qovernment. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Qovernment advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books Includes marketable securities other than U.S. Qovernment NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-62. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash State and municiProposed uses of net proceeds Gross proceeds ' pal securities offered New money for cash Retire- Other ( prinCom- Pre- Bonds cipal Total mon ferred and Total Plant Work- ment purof seand amounts ) stock stock notes ing Total equip- capi- curities poses tal ment Period I960 * : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions sales of investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as offerings under employeepurchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation Preliminary NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission The Commercial and Financial Chronicle and The Bond Buyer TABLE C-63. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit Common stock Common price/ stock prices earnings index ratio1957-59 = industrials ( Standard ( SEC ) i & Poor 's ) Period Stock market credit Customer credit ( excluding U.S Government securities ) Total Net debit balances Bank loans to brokers and Bank loans dealers to " others " Millions of dollars I960 -_ _ _- _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January __ February March April May June July August September _ _ October November December -_ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Based on stocks Based on stocks for and stocks beginning Ratio is obtained by dividing the stock price index as of the end of the period by the seasonally adjusted annual rate of earnings for the quarter then ending As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U.S. Government obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period < Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. From through June loans for purchasing or carrying U.S. Government securities were reported separately only by New York and Chicago banks Accordingly for that period any loans for purchasing or carrying such securities at other reporting banks are included. Series also revised beginning July March and July Data are for last Wednesday of period. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin August ' Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Series revised beginning July January July and July Data are for last Wednesday of period. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin August Not available Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange TABLE C-64. Business population and business failures Period Operating businesses and business turnover ( thousands of firms ) DisOper- New conating busi- tinbusi- ness- ued nesses es s businesses Business failures New business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate * CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO CO Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size Liability size class class Total $ Total Under $ Under and and $ over $ over Number of failures CO ( ) CO CO CO CO CO CO May June July August September October November December I960 * January February. March April May June July August September October.... November December 6S.4 Excludes firms in the fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he has either an established place of business or at least one paid employee. Series revised beginning Data through are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June Beginning data are for beginning of period. Quarterly data shown here are seasonally adjusted Total for period Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc i Failure rate per listed enterprises. Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Not available Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Beginning January data for Hawaii are included. Total for including Hawaii is Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc _ _ I960 : January February. March April CO ( ) ( ) CO ( ) CO CO ( ) CO CO CO ( ) CO CO CO CO CO ( ) AGRICULTURE TABLE C-65. Income of the farm population Income received by tota farm population Period Income received by farm operators from farming Realized gross From agricultural sources From nonagriculsources tural Totals Farm sources Total ' wages From all Net income per farm including net inventory change Net Proall Cash duc- ExInsources re- tion clud- cludper ing ing net ceipts experson from penses inven- inven- Cur- rent prices martory tory keting change change * prices Billions of dollars ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( L fl ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) In- come from Dollars ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Net income of farm operators from farming ( including net inventory change ) and farm wages as shown Farm wages received by farm resident- workers Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms Includes net change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at the average price for the year. Data prior to differ from farm proprietors ' income shown in Tables C-9 and C-12 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department of Commerce Based on estimated number of farms as reported by the Department of Agriculture according to Census definition ( see footnote Table C-70 ) ' Income in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base ? Based on farm population as defined in Census of Population. See footnote Table C-69 s Not available * Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-66. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio T929-60 [ = ] Prices received by farmers Livestock and products Crops Period All farm prod- All Food ucts i crops i grains Feed grains and hay Feed Total grains OilCot- To- bearton bacco ing crops All live- Meat Dairy Poulstock ani- prod- try and and prod- mals ucts eggs ucts i '122 e e _ : January February. March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE C-66. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Continued [ = ] Prices paid by farmers All Commodities and services items interest Production items taxes Famand All ily wage items living All Motor Farm Ferrates maitems produc- Feed vetition ( parity hicles chin- lizer index ) items ! ery Period : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December Includes items not shown separately Interest payable per acre on farm real " I52 ~ estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted * Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments * Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture Interest2 Parity Wage Taxes 3rates4 ratio G10 6S2 ~ ~ ~ ~ 6S1 " ~ ~ S ~ TABLE G-67. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Livestock and products Farm Oil Period outPoulput i Total Feed Hay Food Vege- Fruits Cot- To- bear- TotaP Meat Dairy try and and ani- prod- and grains forage grains tables nuts ton bacco ing mals ucts eggs crops ._ _ Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately * Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-68. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs Cropland harvested ( millions of acres ) Year Total Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Livestock breeding Exclusive of units use for ( 1947feed for = horses ) and mules Manhours of farm work ( billions ) Mecal chaniTotal Farm labor Farm real estate3 power and ma- Fertilizer and lime chinery Feed seed and live- Miscelstock laneous purchases * -_ -._ I9608 ( ) ( ) ( fl ) Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Animal units of breeding livestock excluding horses and mules Includes buildings and improvements on land * Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers ' purchases Preliminary Not available Source : Department of Agriculture ( ) TABLE G-69. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April ) i Farm employment Net ( thousands ) * migration to and Period Per from Num- As per- farms cent of Family Hired unit ber total ( thou- Total workers workers of ( thou- poputotal sands ) lation sands ) input Farm output LiveCrop stock proproduc- duction Per man-hour tion per per breedacre ing Liveunit Total Crops stock Index = ( ) ( fi ) ( ) ( ) Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms both urban and rural regardless of occupation according to concept in " us e prior to Total population of United States as of July excluding Alaska and Hawaii ; includes armed forces abroad Net change for year beginning in April estimated by Department of Agriculture. For and subsequent years includes inductions and enlistments into the armed forces and persons returning from the armed forces. For all years includes persons who have not moved but who are in and out of the farm popu lation because agricultural operations have begun or have ceased en the place where they are living Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Agricultural Marketing Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table O-17 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected. For further explanation see monthly report on Farm Labor September Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Not available ' Preliminary Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce TABLE C-70. Selected indicators of farming conditions Value of production assets ( dollars ) Number of farms ( thousands ) Year Current prices prices Per Per Per Per farmfarmfarm worker farm rworker ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Investment during year in farm plant and equipment ( millions of dollars ) Gross Real Foreestate closure debt as rate per percent of value ( percent ) farms Nets Percent of all farms having central station electrical service ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Number of farms as estimated by the Department of Agriculture according to the Census defini tion with adjustment for Census underenumeration. The number of farms as reported by the Census for and is found in Table B-9. For further explanation of the difference between the two series see Census of Agriculture Volume II Farm real estate less value of dwellings ; livestock ; crops held for feed ; machinery ; farm share of value of 8automobiles ; and demand deposits used for production. Data are for January Gross investment less depreciation and other capital consumption * Data are for January Data are for year ending March of the year following that indicated Data are for June except for Census of Agriculture years : ( January ) ( April ) ( January ) and ( April ) Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-71. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets HouseMahold chinReal furTotal estate ery Live- and Crops i nishings stock motor and vehiequipcles ment Beginning of period ProReal DeposInvest- Total estate Other prietors ' its U.S. ment debt detit equiand savings in coties cur- bonds operarency tives ._ ___ _ Financial assets ( ) Includes all crops held on farms for whatever purpose and crops held off farms as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Estimated valuation for plus purchases minus depreciation since then Not available * Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE C-72. United States balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Type of transaction JanuarySeptember Recorded transactions other than changes in monetary gold stock and in liquid liabilities : Imports of goods and services : Total. _ United States payments : Total Merchandise adjusted- _. _ _ Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services Military expenditures Income on investments : Private _ Government Government grants Remittances and pensions United States capital net : Total ] Unilateral transfers net : Total Private net : Total. .Direct investments net New issues Redemptions Other long-term net Short-term net Government net : Total Long-term capital outflow.. Repfiymfvpts Short-term net Exports of goods and services : Total. __ United States receipts : TotaL Merchandise adjusted Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services Military transactions Income on investments : Direct investments Other private Government __ Foreign long-term investments in the United States net Balance on recorded transactions [ net receipts or net payments ( ) ] ._ Unrecorded transactions errors and omissions [ net receipts or net payments ( ) ] Increase in liquid liabilities to foreign countries and international institutions United States gold sales or purchases ( ) Excludes transfers of goods and services under military grant programs Excludes $ million for increase in United States subscription to the International Monetary Fund of which $ million was paid in gold and $ million in non-interest-bearing notes Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C Major U.S. Government foreign assistance by type and by area total postwar period and f seal years [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Period Total net Total postwar ! __ Investment in four international financial institutions Total postwar ! __ I960 Total Western Near East Europe ( including ( excluding Greece and Greece Turkey ) and and South Turkey ) Asia .l ( ) ( ) 1i Net grants of military supplies and services Total postwar J g Other aid net Total postwar l I960 .l ( ) ( ) ( ) Under assistance programs net Total postwar * Net grants ( less conversions ) Total postwar * Net credits ( including conversions ) Total postwar * Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) * Total postwar l I960 _.- InternaFar East American tional organizaand Repub- tions and Pacific lics unspecified areas Other Africa ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) .l .l .l .l ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) .l ( ) ( ) Fiscal years Inter-American Development Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Finance Corporation and International Monetary Fund s Less than $ million < Other assistance ( net ) represents the transfer of United States farm products in exchange for foreign currencies less the U.S. Government 's disbursements of the currencies as grants credit or for purchases Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G United States merchandise exports and imports by economic category 194Q and [ Millions of dollars ] Category JanuarySeptember Domestic exports : Total _ Industrial supplies and materials Cotton tobacco and other agricultural _Nonagricultural industrial materials Capital equipment Machinery and related items Commercial t r a n s p o r t a t i o n equipment Special category Agricultural Nonagricultural Food and drugs Agricultural foodstuffs Nonagricultural foodstuffs Drugs and medicinals _. Consumer goods nonfood Government military sales and unclassified General imports : Total Industrial supplies and materials Petroleum and products Newsprint and paper base stocks Materials associated with nondurable goods output Selected building materials ( excluding metals ) All other industrial supplies and materials ( associated mainly with durable goods output ) Food and beverages Materials associated with farm production Consumer goods nonfood Capital equipment ( including agricultural machinery ) All other and unclassified Excludes military aid shipments of supplies and equipment under the Mutual Security Program ; in excludes military shipments under the Greek-Turkey and the China military aid programs Excludes Government military cash sales Total adjusted to exclude $ million of the value reported by economic category Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-75. United States merchandise exports and imports by area and [ Millions of dollars ] January-October Area Exports ( including reexports ) : Total * Canada Other Western Hemisphere. Western Europe Other Europe Asia Oceania Africa 3,6C9 General imports : Total Canada Other Western Hemisphere. Western Europe Other Europe Asia Oceania Africa Excludes special category items Total adjusted to exclude $ million of the value reported by * Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-76. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international institutions and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country September i Total Continental Western Europe _ _ _. _ Austria _ _ Belgium France _ _ Germany __ Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Sweden Norway Denmark and Finland ) Switzerland Other United Kingdom Canada Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile. ._ Colombia Cuba Mexico Peru.. Uruguay Venezuela Other Asia Japan Other _ ._ _ _ _ _ All other countries International institutions Preliminary Includes latest available figure ( July ) for gold reserves NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries with the exception of gold reserves of U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Communist China and of international institutions ( International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund United Nations and others ) Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements and the European Payments Union/European Fund and the Tripartite Commission for Restitution of Monetary Gold are included under " other " Continental Western Europe Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-77. Price changes in international trade [ = ] i Area or commodity class First quarter Third quarter First quarter Second Third quar- quarter ter Area : Developed areas : Exports Terms of trade Underdeveloped areas : Exports Terms of trade Q4 Latin America : Exports Terms of trade Latin America excluding petroleum : Exports Terms of trade Commodity class : Manufactured goods Nonferrous base metals Primary commodities ' Total Excluding crude petroleum Foodstuffs Coffee tea cocoa Cereals Other agricultural commodities Pats oils oilseeds Textiles Wool Minerals Metal ores Data shown for area groups and for manufactured goods are unit value indexes. All others are price indexes Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports * Manufactured goods indexes are for exports. Primary commodities indexes are for exports and imports combined NOTE. Data exclude trade of Soviet area and Communist China Source : United Nations U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE :