ECONOMIC ] OF THE PRi Transmitted to the less January Togftfctfef With THE ANNIJAL REPORT COUNCIL OF ^ O N O M I C ADVISERS 8H-1464 1M Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Price $ LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL T H E WHITE HOUSE Washington B.C. January The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress as required under the Employment Act of In preparing this Report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers who in turn have had the assistance of members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this Report I am transmitting the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers which was prepared in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully III CONTENTS ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Page PROGRESS IN GOALS OF ECONOMIC POLICY Our Our Our Our Goal Goal Goal Goal of Full and Sustained Prosperity Without Inflation of Economic Growth of Equal Opportunity of Basic Balance in International Payments POLICIES FOR Prospects for Budgetary Policy Monetary and Credit Policies Balance of Payments Prices and Wages MEASURES FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY A Program for Sustained Prosperity Strengthening the Financial System Strengthening Our Manpower Base Strengthening Our Tax System ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * Introduction CHAPTER TOWARD FULL RECOVERY PART I : OBJECTIVES PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS PART II : POLICIES FOR MAXIMUM EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION APPENDIX : PROGRAM FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND GROWTH CHAPTER ECONOMIC GROWTH CHAPTER T H E BALANCE OF INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS CHAPTER PRICE BEHAVIOR IN A FREE AND GROWING ECONOMY. APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : I report to you under the provisions of the Employment Act of at a time when the economy has regained its momentum ; the economy is responding to the Federal Government 's efforts under the Act " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power ; " the economy is again moving toward the central objective of the Act to afford " useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work. " My first Economic Report is an appropriate occasion to re-emphasize my dedication to the principles of the Employment Act. As a declaration of national purpose and as a recognition of Federal responsibility the Act has few parallels in the Nation 's history. In passing the Act by heavy bipartisan majorities the Congress registered the consensus of the American people that this Nation will not countenance the suffering frustration and injustice of unemployment or let the vast potential of the world 's leading economy run to waste in idle manpower silent machinery and empty plants The framers of the Employment Act were wise to choose the promotion of " maximum employment production and purchasing power " as the keystone of national economic policy. They were confident that these objectives can be effectively promoted " in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare. " They knew that our pursuit of maximum employment and production would be tempered with compassion with justice and with a concern for the future. But they knew also that the other standards we set for our economy are easier to meet when it is operating at capacity. A full employment economy provides opportunities for useful and satisfying work. It rewards enterprise with profit. It generates saving for the future and transforms it into productive investment. It opens doors for the unskilled and underprivileged and closes them against want and frustration. The conquest of unemployment is not the sole end of economic policy but it is surely an indispensable beginning The record of the economy since is a vast improvement over the prolonged mass unemployment of the 's. The Employment Act itself deserves no small part of the credit. Under the mandate and procedures of the Act both Congress and the Executive have kept the health of the national economy and the economic policies of the Government under constant review. And the national commitment to high employment has enabled business firms and consumers to act and to plan without fear of another great depression Though the postwar record is free of major depression it is marred by four recessions. In the past fifteen years the economy has spent a total of seven years regaining previous peaks of industrial production In two months out of three percent or more of those able willing and seeking to work have been unable to find jobs. We must do better in the 's To combat future recessions to keep them short and shallow if they occur I urge adoption of a three-part program for sustained prosperity which will ( ) provide stand-by power subject to congressional veto for temporary income tax reductions ( ) set up a stand-by program of public capital improvements and ( ) strengthen the unemployment insurance system These three measures will enable the Government to counter swings in business activity more promptly and more powerfully than ever before They will give new and concrete meaning to the declaration of policy made in the Employment Act. They will constitute the greatest step forward in public policy for economic stability since the Act itself As the Employment Act prescribes I shall in this Report review " economic conditions " in the United States in and " current and foreseeable economic trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power ; " set forth " the levels of employment production and purchasing power obtaining in the United States and such levels needed to carry out the policy " of the Act ; and present my economic program and legislative recommendations for PROGRESS IN Last January the economy was in the grip of recession. Nearly percent of the labor force was unemployed. Almost one-fifth of manufacturing capacity lay idle. Actual output was running $ billion ( annual rate ) short of the economy 's great potential. These figures reflected not only the setback of but the incomplete recovery from the recession of The task before us was to recover not from one but from two recessions At the same time gold was leaving the country at a rate of more than $ million a month. In the three previous years the Nation had run a total deficit of $ billion in its basic international accounts These large and persistent deficits had weakened confidence in the dollar In my message to the Congress on February I stated that this Administration 's " realistic aims for are to reverse the downtrend in our economy to narrow the gap of unused potential to abate the waste and misery of unemployment and at the same time to maintain reasonable stability of the price level. " In a message on the balance of payments on February I added a fifth aim to restore confidence in the dollar and to reduce the deficit in international payments These five aims for have been achieved : ( ) The downtrend was reversed. Gross national product ( GNP ) grew from $ billion ( annual rate ) in the first quarter to a record rate of $ billion in the last quarter. In July industrial production regained its previous peak and by the end of the year it showed a total rise of percent ( ) These gains brought into productive use nearly half the plant capacity which was idle at the beginning of the year. The growth of GNP narrowed the over-all gap of unused potential from an estimated percent to percent ( ) Unemployment dropped from to percent of the labor force. The number of areas of substantial labor surplus declined from in March to in December ( ) Price stability has been maintained during the recovery. Since February wholesale prices have fallen slightly and consumer prices have risen only one-half of percent ( ) Confidence in the dollar has been restored. Our gold losses were cut from $ billion in to less than $ billion in The deficit in in our basic international transactions was about onethird as large as in The " Program To Restore Momentum to the American Economy " which I proposed to the Congress on February resulted in prompt legislation to extend unemployment insurance benefits on a temporary basis ; make Federal aid available through the States to dependent children of the unemployed ; liberalize social security benefits ; promote homebuilding under the Housing Act of ; raise the minimum wage and extend it to more workers ; provide Federal aid under the Area Redevelopment Act to revitalize the economies of areas with large and persistent unemployment Prompt executive action was taken to accelerate Federal purchases and procurement highway fund distributions tax refunds and veterans ' life insurance dividends. The Administration raised farm price supports expanded the food distribution program and established eight pilot food stamp programs Monetary and credit policies responded to the dual demands of economic recovery and the balance of payments. On the one hand the Federal Reserve System maintained general monetary ease ; Federal Reserve open market operations complemented by Treasury management of the public debt and of government investment accounts assured an ample supply of credit which served to counter upward pressures on long-term interest rates ; reduction of FHA ceiling rates supported by FNMA mortgage purchases eased mortgage credit and stimulated homebuilding ; and the Small Business Administration made its credit more widely available at lower cost. On the other hand both monetary and debt management policies countered downward pressures on short-term rates with a view to checking the outflow of funds to money markets abroad The Federal Budget played its proper role as a powerful instrument for promoting economic recovery. The measures to relieve distress and restore economic momentum expanded purchasing power early in the year. Subsequently major increases in expenditure for national security and space programs became necessary. In a fully employed economy these increases would have required new tax revenues to match But I did not recommend tax increases at this point because they would have cut into private purchasing power and retarded recovery The increase of GNP $ billion ( annual rate ) from the first to the fourth quarter reflected increased purchases of goods and services by consumers business and governments : Consumers accounted for nearly half. As household incomes rose consumer expenditure expanded by $ billion Residential construction and business expenditures for fixed investment responded promptly to the recovery and to favorable credit conditions. By the end of the year they had risen by $ billion Business stopped liquidating inventories and started rebuilding them This shift which occurred early in the year and helped get recovery off to a flying start added $ billion to the demand for goods and services by the fourth quarter Federal State and local government purchases rose by $ billion Although exports were somewhat higher in the fourth quarter than in the first the rise in imports in response to recovery lowered net exports by $ billion Labor business and farm incomes rose as the economy recovered Wages and salaries increased by $ billion ( annual rate ) from the first quarter to the fourth. Corporate profits after taxes recovered sharply receiving about percent of the gains in GNP. With the help of new programs farm operators5 net income from farming increased from $ billion in to $ billion in and net income per farm rose by $ The after-tax incomes of American consumers increased by $ billion or $ per capita during the year. Since consumer prices rose by only one-half of percent these gains in income were almost entirely gains in real purchasing power One million jobs were added by nonagricultural establishments during the expansion. But employment did not keep pace with production and income. Productivity rose rapidly as capacity was more fully and efficiently utilized. And more workers on part-time jobs were able to work full time The record of demonstrated again the resiliency of the U.S economy with well-timed support from government policy. Business responded to the expansion of purchasing power by producing more goods and services not by raising prices. Indeed the record of price stability in three quarters of expansion was better than in the three preceding quarters of recession. The rates of advance of production and income compared favorably with the two preceding periods of expansion. Production grew rapidly without straining capacity or encountering bottlenecks As ended actual output was still $ to $ billion short of potential and unemployment was far too high. But much of the industrial manpower machinery and plant that lay idle a year ago had been drawn back into productive use. And the momentum of the recovery should carry the economy further toward full employment and full production in GOALS OF ECONOMIC POLICY Though we may take satisfaction with our progress to date we dare not rest content. The unfinished business of economic policy includes ( ) the achievement of full employment and sustained prosperity without inflation ( ) the acceleration of economic growth ( ) the extension of equality of opportunity and ( ) the restoration of balance of pay- merits equilibrium. Economic policy thus confronts a demanding assignment but one which can and will be met within the framework of a free economy Our Goal of Full and Sustained Prosperity Without Inflation Recovery has carried the economy only part of the way to the goal of " maximum production employment and purchasing power. " The standing challenge of the Employment Act is not merely to do better but to do our best the " maximum. " Attainment of that maximum in would mean a GNP of approximately $ billion wages and salaries of over $ billion and corporate profits of as much as $ billion all in prices. The material gains are themselves staggering but they are less important than the new sense of purpose and the new opportunities for improvement of American life that could be realized by " maximum " use of the productive capacity now lying idle and the capacity yet to be created Involuntary unemployment is the most dramatic sign and disheartening consequence of underutilization of productive capacity. It translates into human terms what may otherwise seem merely an abstract statistic. We can not afford to settle for any prescribed level of unemployment. But for working purposes we view a percent unemployment rate as a temporary target. It can be achieved in if appropriate fiscal monetary and other policies are used. The achievable rate can be lowered still further by effective policies to help the labor force acquire the skills and mobility appropriate to a changing economy. We must also continue the cooperative effort begun with the Area Redevelopment Act of to bring industry to depressed areas and jobs to displaced workers. Ultimately we must reduce unemployment to the minimum compatible with the functioning of a free economy We must seek full recovery without endangering the price stability of the last years. The experience of the past year has shown that expansion without inflation is possible. With cooperation from labor and management I am confident that we can go on to write a record of full employment without inflation The task of economic stabilization does not end with the achievement of full recovery. There remains the problem of keeping the economy from straying too far above or below the path of steady high employment. One way lies inflation and the other way lies recession. Flexible and vigilant fiscal and monetary policies will allow us to hold the narrow middle course Our Goal of Economic Growth While we move toward full and sustained use of today 's productive capacity we must expand our potential for tomorrow. Our postwar economic growth though a step ahead of our record for the last halfcentury has been slowing down. We have not in recent years maintained the to / percent growth rate which characterized the early postwar period. We should not settle for less than the achievement of a long-term growth rate matching the early postwar record. Increasing our growth rate to * / % percent a year lies within the range of our capabilities during the 's. It will lay the groundwork for meeting both our domestic needs and our world responsibilities In November of last year we joined with our fellow members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in setting a common target for economic growth. Together we pledged ourselves to adopt national and international policies aimed at increasing the combined output of the Atlantic Community by percent between and The nations of the West are encouraged and enlivened by America 's determination to make its full contribution to this joint effort We can do our share. In the mid-1960 's the children born in and after will be arriving at working age. The resulting rapid growth in our labor force offers us an opportunity not a burden provided that we deliver not only the jobs but also the research the training and the capital investment to endow our new workers with high and rising productivity as they enter economic life Our Goal of Equal Opportunity Increasingly in our lifetime American prosperity has been widely shared and it must continue so. The spread of primary secondary and higher education the wider availability of medical services and the improved postwar performance of our economy have bettered the economic status of the poorest families and individuals But prosperity has not wiped out poverty. In million families and individuals had personal incomes lower than $ In part our failure to overcome poverty is a consequence of our failure to operate the economy at potential. The incidence of unemployment is always uneven and increases in unemployment tend to inflict the greatest income loss on those least able to afford it. But there is a claim on our conscience from others whose poverty is barely touched by cyclical improvements in general economic activity. To an increasing extent the poorest families in America are those headed by women the elderly nonwhites migratory workers and the physically or mentally handicapped people who are shortchanged even in time of prosperity Last year 's increase in the minimum wage is evidence of our concern for the welfare of our low-income fellow citizens. Other legislative proposals now pending will be particularly effective in improving the lot of the least fortunate. These include ( ) health insurance for the aged financed through the social security system ( ) Federal aid for training and retraining our unemployed and underemployed workers ( ) the permanent strengthening of our unemployment compensation system and ( ) substantial revision in our public welfare and assistance program stressing rehabilitation services which help to restore families to independence Public education has been the great bulwark of equality of opportunity in our democracy for more than a century. Our schools have been a major means of preventing early handicaps from hardening into permanent ignorance and poverty. There can be no better investment in equity and democracy and no better instrument for economic growth. For this reason I urge action by the Congress to provide Federal aid for more adequate public school facilities higher teachers ' salaries and better quality in education. I urge early completion of congressional action on the bill to authorize loans for construction of college academic facilities and to provide scholarships for able students who need help. The talent of our youth is a resource which must not be wasted Finally I shall soon propose to the Congress an intensive program to reduce adult illiteracy a handicap which too many of our fellow citizens suffer because of inadequate educational opportunities in the past Our Goal of Basic Balance in International Payments Persistent international payments deficits and gold outflows have made the balance of payments a critical problem of economic policy. We must attain a balance in our international transactions which permits us to meet heavy obligations abroad for the security and development of the free world without continued depletion of our gold reserves or excessive accumulation of short-term dollar liabilities to foreigners. Simultaneously we must continue to reduce barriers to international trade and to increase the flow of resources from developed to developing countries To increase our exports is a task of highest priority and one which gives heightened significance to the maintenance of price stability and the rapid increase of productivity at home POLICIES FOR Prospects for The Nation will make further economic progress in Broad advances are in prospect for the private economy. The gains already achieved have set the stage for further new records in output employment personal income and profits. Rising household incomes brighten the outlook for further increases in consumer buying particularly of durable goods. Business firms will need larger inventories to support higher sales and improved profits and expanded markets will lead to rising capital outlays. The outlays of Federal State and local governments will continue to increase as we work for peace and progress In the first half of we may therefore expect vigorous expansion in production and incomes with GNP increasing to a range of $ billion in the second quarter employment continuing to rise and the unemployment rate falling further In the second half of business investment in plant and equipment should pick up speed and help maintain the momentum of progress toward full employment and toward future economic growth. Rising output should push factory operating rates closer to capacity and raise profits still further above previous records. To these incentives for capital expenditures will be added Treasury liberalization of depreciation guidelines and if the Congress acts favorably the percent tax credit for machinery and equipment outlays For as a whole GNP is expected to rise approximately $ billion above the $ billion level of This would be another giant stride toward a fully employed economy. The record of past recoveries and of the U.S. economy 's enormous and growing potential indicates that this is a gain we can achieve. In the perspective of our commitments both to our own expanding population and to the world it is a gain we need to achieve Budgetary Policy Prosperity shrinks budgetary deficits as recessions create them Budget revenues are expected to rise percent between the fiscal years and ; revenues rose ^ percent between and in the previous upswing. Such sensitivity of budget revenues to business activity is desirable because it moderates swings in private purchasing power I have submitted to the Congress a Budget which will balance in fiscal as prosperity generates sharply rising tax revenues. The Budget O-62-2 is appropriately paced to the expected rate of economic expansion. It will give less stimulus to business activity as private demand for goods and services grows stronger and shoulders more of the responsibility for continued gains. But the shift will be moderate and gradual. We have learned from the disappointing experience that an abrupt and excessively large swing in the Budget can drain the vigor from the private economy and halt its progress especially if a restrictive monetary policy is followed simultaneously. This will not be repeated. Budget outlays will rise by $ ^ billion from fiscal to fiscal whereas they fell by more than that amount from fiscal to fiscal The Budget starts from a much smaller deficit and will move to a moderate surplus as the recovery strengthens With support from increased government expenditures and other government policies the momentum of the recovery is expected to raise GNP to $ billion for as a whole. Prompt enactment of the proposed tax credit for investment would give the economy further strength. Economic expansion at the expected pace will yield $ billion in Budget revenues in fiscal to cover $ billion in Budget expenditures. If private demands for goods and services should prove to be weaker in than now anticipated less private purchasing power will flow into taxes and Budget revenues will fall short of the $ billion figure. If private demands are stronger tax receipts will rise further and Budget revenues will exceed expectations A surplus of $ billion in fiscal is expected in the national income accounts budget a budget constructed to measure the direct impact of Federal expenditures and receipts on the flow of total spending. The surplus would be several billion dollars higher if the economy were operating steadily at a level high enough to hold unemployment to percent Either surplus prospective or potential is both a challenge and an opportunity. A government surplus is a form of saving an excess of income over expenditure. Like any other form of saving it releases labor and other productive resources which can be used to create new investment goods plant equipment or houses. If investment demand is not strong enough to use the resources and labor they will be wasted in unemployment and idle capacity and the surplus itself will not be realized But if the necessary investment demand is present the surplus will make possible the acceleration of economic growth by enlarging the future productive power of the economy. The Government is seeking to help American industry to meet this challenge and seize this opportunity through such measures as the percent investment tax credit and revisions of depreciation guidelines We face with optimism but not complacency. If private demand shows unexpected strength public policy must and will act to avert the dangers of rising prices. If demand falls short of current expectations more expansionary policies will be pursued. In vigilance and flexibility must be the guardians of economic optimism Monetary and Credit Policies Monetary credit and debt management policies can also help to assure that productive outlets exist for the funds that the American people save from prosperity incomes. The balance foreseen in the Budget for fiscal year and the surplus which would arise at full employment both indicate that fiscal policy is assuming a large share of the burden of forestalling inflationary excesses of demand. With monetary and related policies relieved of a substantial part of this burden they can more effectively be used to assure a flow of investment funds which will transform the economy 's present capacity to save into future capacity to produce At the same time monetary and debt management policies must continue to protect the balance of international payments against outflows of short-term capital. As in domestic expansion and the balance of payments confront these policies with a dual task requiring continued ingenuity in technique and flexibility in emphasis Balance of Payments The program launched last year to reduce our payments deficit and maintain confidence in the dollar will I am sure show further results in I am hopeful that the target of reasonable equilibrium in our international payments can be achieved within the next two years ; but this will require a determined effort on the part of all of us government business and labor. This effort must proceed on a number of fronts Export expansion. An increase in the U.S. trade surplus is of the first importance. If we are to meet our international responsibilities we must increase exports more rapidly than the increase in imports which accompanies our economic growth Our efforts to raise exports urgently require that we negotiate a reduction in the tariff of the European Common Market. I shall shortly transmit to the Congress a special message elaborating the details of the proposed Trade Expansion Act of and explaining why I believe that a new trade policy initiative is imperative this year To encourage American businessmen to become more export-minded we have inaugurated a new export insurance program under the leadership of the Export-Import Bank and we have stepped up our export promotion drive by improving the commercial services abroad of the U.S Government establishing trade centers abroad planning trade fairs improving the trade mission program and working with business firms on export opportunities through field offices of the Department of Commerce and the Small Business Administration. Foreign travel to the United States which returns dollars to our shores is now being promoted through the first Federal agency ever created for this purpose Prices and productivity. Our export drive will founder if we can not keep our prices competitive in world markets. Though our recent price performance has been excellent the improving economic climate of will test anew the statesmanship of our business and labor leaders I believe that they will pass the test ; our Nation today possesses a new understanding of the vital link between our level of prices and our balance of payments In the long run the competitive position of U.S. industry depends on a sustained and rapid advance in productivity. In this the interests of economic recovery long-run growth and the strength of the dollar coincide. Modernization and expansion of our industrial plant will accelerate the advance of productivity Foreign investment. To place controls over the flow of private American capital abroad would be contrary to our traditions and our economic interests. But neither is there justification for special tax incentives which stimulate the flow of U.S. investment to countries now strong and economically developed and I again urge the elimination of these special incentives The new foreign trade program which I am proposing to the Congress will help to reduce another artificial incentive to U.S. firms to invest abroad. The European Common Market has attracted American capital partly because American businessmen fear that they will be unable to compete in the growing European market unless they build plants behind the common tariff wall. We must negotiate down the barriers to trade between the two great continental markets so that the exports of our industry and agriculture can have full opportunity to compete in Europe Governmental expenditures abroad. Military expenditures form by far the greater part of our governmental outlays abroad. We are discussing with certain of our European allies the extent to which they can increase their own military procurement from the United States to offset our dollar expenditures there. As a result the net cost to our balance of payments is expected to be reduced during the coming year in spite of increased deployment of forces abroad because of the Berlin situation To curtail our foreign aid programs in order to strengthen our balance of payments would be to sacrifice more than we gain. But we can cut back on the foreign currency costs of our aid programs and thus reduce the burden on our balance of payments. A large percentage of our foreign aid is already spent for procurement in the United States ; this proportion will rise as our tightened procurement procedures become increasingly effective We have sought to induce other advanced countries to undertake a larger share of the foreign aid effort. We will continue our efforts through the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to obtain a higher level of economic assistance by other industrial nations to the less developed countries Short-term capital movements. Outflows of volatile short-term funds added to the pressures on the dollar in Our policies in have diminished the dangers of disruptive movements of short-term capital For the first time in a generation the Treasury is helping to stabilize the dollar by operations in the international exchange markets. The Federal Reserve and the Treasury in administering their monetary policy and debt management responsibilities have sought to meet the needs of domestic recovery in ways which would not lead to outflows of short-term capital During the past year we have consulted periodically with our principal financial partners both bilaterally and within the framework of the OECD. These consultations have led to close cooperation among fiscal and monetary authorities in a common effort to prevent disruptive currency movements Strengthening the international monetary system. The International Monetary Fund is playing an increasingly important role in preserving international monetary stability. The reserve strength behind the dollar includes our drawing rights on the Fund of which $ billion is automatically available under current practices of the Fund. An additional $ billion could become available under Fund policies insofar as the Fund has available resources in gold and usable foreign currencies Recently the Fund has diversified its use of currencies in meeting drawings by member countries relying less heavily on dollars and more heavily on the currencies of countries with payments surpluses. However the Fund 's regular holdings of the currencies of some important l industrial countries are not adequate to meet potential demands for them In a message to the Congress last February I said : " We must now in cooperation with other lending countries begin to consider ways in which international monetary institutions especially the International Monetary Fund can be strengthened and more effectively utilized both in furnishing needed increases in reserves and in providing the flexibility required to support a healthy and growing world economy. " We have now taken an important step in this direction. Agreement has been reached among ten of the major industrial countries to lend to the Fund specified amounts of their currencies when necessary to cope with or forestall pressures which may impair the international monetary system. These stand-by facilities of $ billion will be a major defense against international monetary speculation and will powerfully reinforce the effectiveness of the Fund. They will provide resources to make our drawing rights in the Fund effective should we need to use them. Moreover the U.S. stand-by commitment of $ billion will augment the resources potentially available through the Fund to other participants in the agreement when our balance of payments and reserve positions are strong. I shall shortly submit a request to Congress for appropriate enabling legislation Prices and Wages Prices and production need not travel together. A number of foreign countries have experienced both rapid growth and stable prices in recent years. We ourselves in enjoyed a stable price level during a brisk economic recovery While rising prices will not necessarily accompany the expansion we expect in neither can we rely on chance to keep our price level stable. Creeping inflation in the years weakened our international competitive position. We can not afford to allow a repetition of that experience We do not foresee in a level of demand for goods and services which will strain the economy 's capacity to produce. Neither is it likely that many industries will find themselves pressing against their capacity ceilings. Inflationary pressures from these sources should not be a problem But in those sectors where both companies and unions possess substantial market power the interplay of price and wage decisions could set off a movement toward a higher price level. If this were to occur the whole Nation would be the victim I do not believe that American business or labor will allow this to happen. All of us have learned a great deal from the economic events of the past years. Among both businessmen and workers there is growing recognition that the road to higher real profits and higher real wages is the road of increased productivity. When better plant and equipment enable the labor force to produce more in the same number of hours there is more to share among all the contributors to the productive process and this can happen with no increase in prices. Gains achieved in this manner endure while gains achieved in one turn of the price-wage spiral vanish on the next The Nation must rely on the good sense and public spirit of our business and labor leaders to hold the line on the price level in If labor leaders in our major industries will accept the productivity benchmark as a guide to wage objectives and if management in these industries will practice equivalent restraint in their price decisions the year ahead will be a brilliant chapter in the record of the responsible exercise of freedom M E A S U R E S FOR A STRONGER ECONOMY The final section of my Report is a summary of my recommendations for legislative action ( ) to strengthen our defenses against recession ( ) to strengthen our financial system ( ) to strengthen our manpower base and ( ) to strengthen our tax system A Program for Sustained Prosperity Recurrent recessions have thrown the postwar American economy off stride at a time when the economies of other major industrial countries have moved steadily ahead. To improve our future performance I urge the Congress to join with me in erecting a defense-in-depth against future recessions. The basic elements of this defense are ( ) Presidential stand-by authority for prompt temporary income tax reductions ( ) Presidential stand-by authority for capital improvements expenditures and ( ) a permanent strengthening of the unemployment compensation system. These three measures parallel important proposals of the Commission on Money and Credit whose further recommendations are treated under the next heading In our free enterprise economy fluctuations in business and consumer spending will of course always occur. But this need not doom us to an alternation of lean years and fat. The business cycle does not have the inevitability of the calendar. The Government can time its fiscal transactions to offset and to dampen fluctuations in the private economy Our fiscal system and budget policy already contribute to economic stability to a much greater degree than before the war. But the time is ripe and the need apparent to equip the Government to act more promptly more flexibly and more forcefully to stabilize the economy to carry out more effectively its charge under the Employment Act Stand-by tax reduction authority. First I recommend the enactment of stand-by authority under which the President subject to veto by the Congress could make prompt temporary reductions in the rates of the individual income tax to combat recessions as follows : ( ) Before proposing a temporary tax reduction the President must make a rinding that such action is required to meet the objectives of the Employment Act ( ) Upon such rinding the President would submit to Congress a proposed temporary uniform reduction in all individual income tax rates. The proposed temporary rates may not be more than percentage points lower than the rates permanently established by the Congress ( ) This change would take effect days after submission unless rejected by a joint resolution of the Congress ( ) It would remain in effect for months subject to revision or renewal by the same process or extension by a joint resolution of the Congress ( ) If the Congress were not in session a Presidentially proposed tax adjustment would automatically take effect but would terminate days after the Congress reconvened. Extension would require a new proposal by the President which would be subject to congressional veto A temporary reduction of individual income tax rates across the board can be a powerful safeguard against recession. It would reduce the annual rate of tax collections by $ billion per percentage point or a maximum of $ billion $ billion per point or a $ 5-billion maximum for six months at present levels of income. These figures should be measured against the costs they are designed to forestall : the tens of billions of potential output that run to waste in recession ; the pain and frustration of the millions whom recessions throw out of work ; the Budget deficits of $ billion in fiscal or $ billion this year The proposed partial tax suspension would launch a prompt counterattack on the cumulative forces of recession. It would be reflected immediately in lower withholding deductions and higher take-home pay for millions of Americans. Markets for consumer goods and services would promptly feel the stimulative influence of the tax suspension It would offer strong support to the economy for a timely interval while preserving the revenue-raising powers of our tax system in prosperity and the wise traditional procedures of the Congress for making permanent revisions and reforms in the system. I am not asking the Congress to delegate its power to levy taxes but to authorize a temporary and emergency suspension of taxes by the President subject to the checkrein of Congressional veto in situations where time is of the essence Stand-by capital improvements authority. Second I recommend that the Congress provide stand-by authority to the President to accelerate and initiate up to $ billion of appropriately timed capital improvements when unemployment is rising as follows : ( ) The President would be authorized to initiate the program within two months after the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate ( a ) had risen in at least three out of four months ( or in four out of six months ) and ( b ) had risen to a level at least one percentage point higher than its level four months ( or six months ) earlier ( ) Before invoking this authority the President must make a finding that current and prospective economic developments require such action to achieve the objectives of the Employment Act ( ) Upon such finding the President would be authorized to commit ( a ) up to $ million in the acceleration of direct Federal expenditures previously authorized by the Congress ( b ) up to $ million for grants-in-aid to State and local governments ( c ) up to $ million in loans to States and localities which would otherwise be unable to meet their share of project costs and ( d ) up to $ million additional to be distributed among the above three categories as he might deem appropriate ( ) The authority to initiate new projects under the capital improvements program would terminate automatically within months unless extended by the Congress but the program could be terminated at any time by the President ( ) Grants-in-aid would be made under rules prescribed by the President to assure that assisted projects ( a ) were of high priority ( b ) represented a net addition to existing State and local expenditures and ( c ) could be started and completed quickly ( ) Expenditures on Federal projects previously authorized by the Congress would include resource conservation and various Federal public works including construction repair and modernization of public buildings ( ) After the program had terminated the authority would not again be available to the President for six months The above criteria would have permitted Presidential authority to be invoked in the early stages of each of the four postwar recessions within four months after the decline had begun. Furthermore no false signals would have been given. Were a false signal to occur for example because of a strike the authority which is discretionary need not be invoked The first impact of the accelerated orders contracts and outlays under the program would be felt within one to two months after the authority was invoked. The major force of the program would be spent well before private demand again pressed hard on the economy 's capacity to produce. With the indicated safeguards this program would make a major contribution to business activity consumer purchasing power and employment in a recession by utilizing for sound public investment resources that would otherwise have gone to waste Unemployment compensation. Third I again urge the Congress to strengthen permanently our Federal-State system of unemployment insurance. My specific recommendations include ( ) Extension of the benefit period by as much as weeks for workers with at least three years of experience in covered employment ; ( ) Similar extension of the benefit period when unemployment is widespread for workers with less than three years of experience in covered employment. This provision could be put into effect by Presidential proclamation when insured unemployment reaches percent and the number of benefit exhaustions over a threemonth period reaches percent of covered employment ; ( ) Incentives for the States to provide increased benefits so that the great majority of covered workers will be eligible for weekly benefits equal to at least half of their average weekly wage ; ( ) Extension of coverage to more than three million additional workers ; ( ) Improved financing of the program by an increase in the wage base for the payroll tax from $ to $ ; ( ) Reinsurance grants to States experiencing high unemployment insurance costs ; ( ) Provisions which permit claimants to attend approved training or retraining courses without adverse effect on eligibility for benefits Wider coverage extended benefit periods and increased benefit amounts will help society discharge its obligation to individual unemployed workers. And by maintaining more adequately their incomes and purchasing power these measures will also buttress the economy 's built-in defenses against recession. Temporary extensions of unemployment compensation benefits have been voted by the Congress during the last two recessions. It is time now for permanent legislation to bring this well-tested stabilizer more smoothly into operation when economic activity declines In combination these three measures will enable Federal fiscal policy to respond firmly flexibly and swiftly to oncoming recessions Working together on this bold program the Congress and the Executive can make an unprecedented contribution to economic stability one that will richly reward us in fuller employment and more sustained growth and thus in greater human well-being and greater national strength Strengthening the Financial System Proposals of the Commission on Money and Credit. The Report of the Commission on Money and Credit published last year raises important issues of public policy relating to ( ) the objectives and machinery of Government for economic stabilization and growth ( ) Federal direct lending and credit guarantee programs and ( ) the structure and regulation of private financial institutions and markets The Commission 's Report represents the results of thorough analysis and deliberation by a private group of leading citizens representative of business labor finance agriculture and the professions. The Commission 's findings and recommendations deserve careful consideration by the Congress the Executive and the public consideration which should result in legislative and executive actions to strengthen government policy under the Employment Act and to improve the financial system of the United States. The subjects covered by the Commission can for the purposes of discussion and action in the Government usefully be divided into four categories ( ) To strengthen the instruments of policy for economic stabilization the Commission recommends permanent improvement of unemployment compensation flexibility in government capital expenditures and flexibility in adjusting the basic Federal individual income tax rate. These key proposals are reflected in the three-part antirecession program just described ( ) In its comprehensive new look at existing financial legislation the Commission concludes that the following financial restrictions no longer serve the purposes originally intended and unnecessarily complicate or obstruct other government policies : the ceiling on the public debt the ceiling on permissible interest rates on U.S. Treasury bonds and the required gold reserve against Federal Reserve notes and deposits. I am sure that the Congress will wish to examine carefully the Commission 's recommendations on these points ( ) The Commission re-examines the structure of the Federal Reserve System and its relationship to other arms of the Federal Government. The desirability of proposed changes in the structure which has evolved over the years can be determined only after extensive consideration by the Congress and by the public There are two reforms of clear merit on which there appears to be sufficiently general agreement to proceed at once and which are of direct concern to the President in the exercise of his responsibility to appoint the members and officers of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The first is to give adequate recognition in the simple matter of salaries to the important responsibilities of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The United States is behind other countries in the status accorded by this concrete symbol to the leadership of its " central bank " and I urge that the Congress take corrective action The second is to revise the terms of the officers and members of the Board so that a new President will be able to nominate a Chairman of his choice for a term of four years coterminous with his own. This change has the concurrence of the present Chairman of the Board of Governors. The current situation under which the four-year term of the Chairman is not synchronized with the Presidential term appears to be accidental and inadvertent Provision should be made now for smooth transition to new arrangements to take effect in I suggest that on the expiration of the present term of the Chairman in April the next term expire on January In order that starting in the President may have a free choice when he begins his own term it is also necessary to provide that the terms of members of the Board which now begin and end on January of even years begin and end in odd years. This change can be accomplished very easily by extending the terms of present members by one year ( ) Several of the Commission 's recommendations require careful appraisal by the affected agencies in the Executive Branch as a basis for future legislative recommendations : ( a ) Banks and other private financial institutions : The Commission proposes significant changes in the scope and nature of government regulations concerning reserves portfolios interest rates and competition. I shall ask an interagency working group in the Executive Branch to examine the complex issues raised by these proposals. This interagency group will keep in close touch with the relevant committees of the Congress which will no doubt wish to study these issues simultaneously ( b ) Federal lending and loan guarantee programs : It is clearly time for a thorough review of both their general impact on the economy and their effectiveness for the special purposes for which they were established. Again the Commission 's Report has performed a valuable service in illuminating basic problems. One important question is the appropriate role with account taken of both effectiveness and budgetary cost of direct Federal lending loan guarantees and interest sharing. I shall ask a second interagency group in the Executive Branch to examine these programs ( c ) Corporate pension funds and other private retirement programs : It is time for a reappraisal of legislation governing these programs. They have become in recent years a major custodian of individual savings and an important source of funds for capital markets. The amendment to the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act which I recommend below will be an important step toward insuring fidelity in the administration of these Plans. But there is also need for a review of rules governing the investment policies of these funds and the effects on equity and efficiency of the tax privileges accorded them. I shall ask a third working group of relevant Departments and agencies to recommend needed actions in this field taking into account the findings of the Commission as well as other studies and proposals A revision of silver policy. Silver a sick metal in the 's is today an important raw material for which industrial demand is expanding steadily. It is uneconomic for the U.S. Government to lock up large quantities of useful silver in the sterile form of currency reserves Neither is any constructive purpose served by requiring that the Treasury maintain a floor under the price of silver. Silver should eventually be demonetized except for its use in coins ( ) As a first step in freeing silver from government control the Secretary of the Treasury at my direction suspended sales of silver on November This order amounted to the withdrawal of a price ceiling on silver which had been maintained by Treasury sales at a fixed price ( ) The next step should be the withdrawal of the Treasury 's price floor under domestically produced silver. Accordingly I recommend repeal of the Acts relating to silver of June July and July ; this step will free the Treasury from any future obligation to support the price of silver ( ) I also recommend the repeal of the special percent tax on transfers of interest in silver ; this step will foster orderly price movements by encouraging the development of a futures market in silver ( ) Finally I recommend that the Federal Reserve System be authorized to issue Federal Reserve notes in denominations of $ ; this will make possible the gradual withdrawal from circulation of $ and $ silver certificates and the use of the silver thus released for coinage purposes Strengthening Our Manpower Base The labor force of the United States is its most valuable productive resource. Measures which enhance the skills and adaptability of the working population contribute to the over-all productivity of the economy. Several legislative proposals to serve these ends have already been put before the Congress ( ) I urge speedy passage of the proposed Manpower Development and Training Act. A growing and changing economy demands a labor force whose skills adapt readily to the requirements of new technology When adaptation is slow and occupational lines rigid individuals and society alike are the losers. Individuals take their loss in the form of prolonged unemployment or sharply reduced earning power. Society 's loss is measured in foregone output. These are losses we need not suffer A few hundred dollars invested in training or retraining an unemployed or underemployed worker can increase his productivity to society by a multiple of that investment quite apart from the immeasurable return to the worker in regaining a sense of purpose and hope. Both compassion and dollars-and-cents reasoning speak for this legislation ( ) For the same reasons I urge enactment of the Youth Employment Opportunities Act. This bill provides three types of pilot programs to give young people employment opportunities which would enable them to acquire much-needed skills. These programs include training employment in public service jobs with public and private nonprofit agencies and the establishment of Youth Corps Conservation Camps. In the current decade young men and women will be entering the labor force in rapidly growing numbers. They will expect and they deserve opportunities to acquire skills and to do useful work. The price of failure is frustration and disillusion among our youth. This price we are resolved not to pay ( ) I have already made my recommendations for improvement of the Federal-State unemployment compensation system ( ) I am asking the Congress for more funds to increase the effectiveness of the U.S. Employment Service. This important agency has already strengthened its operations improving its staff and placement services particularly in the largest urban centers and concentrating on labor market problems of nationwide significance especially those connected with technological displacement of adult workers and the employment of youth. But the matching of jobs and workers is especially difficult and especially important in a rapidly changing economy and more can be done. When unfilled jobs and qualified unemployed workers coexist but do not make contact because the flow of job information is not sufficiently free the employer the worker and the country lose. I urge the Congress to reduce that loss in the most effective way by revitalizing further the agency charged with disseminating information about job opportunities and willing workers ( ) I ask for enactment of the pending proposal to amend the Welfare and Pension Plans Disclosure Act so as ( a ) to provide adequate penalties for embezzlement and ( b ) to vest authority in a responsible Federal agency to enforce the statute by issuing binding regulations prescribing uniform reporting forms and investigating violations Almost million people rely on some welfare and pension plan for part or all of present or future income. These plans are a major support of the economic security of the American people. We are derelict if we do not provide adequate administrative and enforcement provisions to protect the tremendous financial interest of participants in these funds Strengthening Our Tax System The tax system of the United States has consequences far beyond the simple raising of revenue. The tax laws are a vital part of the economic environment ; their effects may be equitable or inequitable ; they create incentives which may help or handicap the national interest. We can not safely ignore these important effects in the comforting illusion that what already exists is perfect. We must scrutinize our tax system carefully to insure that its provisions contribute to the broad goals of full employment growth and equity My legislative proposals in the tax field are directly related to these goals and the corollary need for improvement in the balance of payments In particular I urge the earliest possible enactment of the tax proposals now before the House Committee on Ways and Means. The centerpiece of these proposals is the percent tax credit against tax for gross investment in depreciable machinery and equipment. The credit should be retroactive to January The tax credit increases the profitability of productive investment by reducing the net cost of acquiring new equipment. It will stimulate investment in capacity expansion and modernization contribute to the growth of our productivity and output and increase the competitiveness of American exports in world markets The tax credit for investment is in part self-financing. The stimulus it provides to new investment will have favorable effects on the level of economic activity during the year and this will in turn add to Federal revenues. My other proposals for tax reform are designed to improve the equity and efficiency of the tax system and will offset the remaining net revenue loss : ( ) Extension of the withholding principle to dividend and interest income ; ( ) Repeal of the $ dividend exclusion and the percent dividend credit ; ( ) Revision of the tax treatment of business deductions for entertainment gifts and other expenses to stop abuses of " expenseaccount living " ; ( ) Elimination of the special tax preference for capital gains from the sale of depreciable property real and personal ; ( ) Removal of unwarranted preferences ( a ) to cooperatives ( b ) to mutual fire and casualty insurance companies and ( c ) to mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations ; and ( ) Revision of the tax treatment of foreign income to remove defects and inequities in the law. Removal of the unwarranted incentive to the export of capital will be consistent with the efficient distribution of capital resources in the world and will aid our balance of payments position. Tax deferral privileges should be limited to profits earned in less developed countries and opportunities for " tax haven " operations should be eliminated In addition I recommend that the corporate income tax and certain excise taxes again be extended at present levels for another year beyond June except that the structure of taxes and user charges in the transportation field be altered as proposed in my Budget Message In considering tax revision in the United States we must not limit ourselves simply to Federal taxation. Our States counties and municipalities collect nearly half as much tax revenue as the Federal Government. There is great potential for equity or inequity for incentive or disincentive in their highly diverse tax systems. In addition the effectiveness of Federal tax policies can be enhanced by harmonious coordination with State and local fiscal systems. There is wide latitude for improvements in the coordination of tax systems and in operations with intergovernmental implications. In this effort the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations is performing a valuable service I urge careful study of its recommendations at all levels of government Later this year I shall present to the Congress a major program of tax reform. This broad program will re-examine tax rates and the definition of the income tax base. It will be aimed at the simplification of our tax structure the equal treatment of equally situated persons and the strengthening of incentives for individual effort and for productive investment The momentum of our economy has been restored. This momentum must be maintained if the full potential of our free economy is to be released in the service of the Nation and the world. In this Report I have proposed a program to sustain our prosperity and accelerate our growth in short to realize our economic potential. In this undertaking I ask the support of the Congress and the American people ~ O-62-3 THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully WALTER W. HELLER Chairman ^ ^ KERMIT GORDON JAMES TOBIN CONTENTS Page Introduction CHAPTER TOWARD FULL RECOVERY PART I : OBJECTIVES PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS The Objective of Maximum Employment Reasons for Concern Over Unemployment Full Employment as the Objective of Stabilization Policy Full Employment and Structural Unemployment Full Production Productive Potential Plant and Equipment Capacity Progress in The Situation at the Beginning of the Year Recovery During the Year Outlook for Survey of Major Categories of Expenditure Prospects for Full Employment PART II : TION POLICIES FOR MAXIMUM EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUC68 Economic Stabilization The Postwar Record Achieving Greater Stability The Federal Budget and Economic Stability The President 's Recommendations Budget Policy The National Income Accounts Budget The Full Employment Surplus The Budget in Federal Fiscal Activity in Budget Policy for Fiscal Monetary and Credit Policies and Economic Stability Monetary Policy and Debt Management Federal Credit Programs Monetary Expansion and Recovery Improving the Mobility of Resources Labor Market Policies Resource Use in Agriculture APPENDIX : PROGRAM FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND GROWTH A. Executive and Administrative Actions B. Legislative Recommendations and Actions Page CHAPTER ECONOMIC GROWTH Growth : Problem or Opportunity Goals for the Current Decade Investment in Human Resources Education Health Eliminating Racial Discrimination Investment in Technological Progress Research and Development More Effective Use of Existing Technology Investment in Plant and Equipment Investment as a Source of Growth Policies to Encourage Investment Investment in Natural Resources The Historical Record Implications for Public Policy Water Resources Agricultural Land Investment in Public Services Investment in Housing Conclusion CHAPTER THE BALANCE OF INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS The United States in the World Economy Objectives of U.S. Foreign Economic Policy The United States as Trader Investor and Banker Recent Developments Affecting the U.S. Payments Position. Policies To Improve the U.S. Payments Position Basic Accounts Short-Term Capital Account Measures To Strengthen the World Monetary System CHAPTER PRICE BEHAVIOR IN A FREE AND GROWING ECONOMY. The Objectives The Present Situation Price Developments in Perspective Wage and Cost Developments in Perspective The Outlook for Prices Policies Affecting Price Behavior The Setting Policies To Foster Market Competition Guideposts for Noninflationary Wage and Price Behavior APPENDIXES A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production LIST OF TABLES AND CHARTS Tables page Weekly Earnings in Selected Industries and Unemployment Insurance Benefits Allocation of Estimated $ Billion Gap Between Potential and Actual Gross National Product Employment Output and Productivity Actual and Illustrative Changes in Output Income and Employment over the Three Quarters of the Recession Changes in Output Income and Employment over Three Quarters of Expansion Hypothetical Timing of Proposed Capital Improvements Program in Four Postwar Business Cycles Major Differences Among Three Concepts of the Federal Budget Principal Federal Reserve Monetary Actions Funds Raised in Money and Capital Markets by Type of Instrument Output Population Labor Input and Productivity Growth of Gross National Product per Man-Year Selected Countries Output Population Labor Input and Productivity Actual and Illustrative Research and Development Expenditures and Funds for Industrial Research and Development by Source and Industry Growth in Business Potential Capital-Labor and Output-Labor Ratios Ratios of Indexes of Raw Materials Prices to Index of Finished Products Prices United States Balance of International Payments International Investment and Gold Position of the United States and United States Balance of International Payments Changes in Compensation and Productivity in All Private Nonagricultural Industries and in Manufacturing Industries to Changes in Average Hourly Earnings and Employment of Production Workers in Selected Industries September to September Changes in Average Hourly Earnings and Hourly Compensation in Manufacturing Industries to Tables Median Hourly Wage Increases Negotiated or Effective in Major Collective Bargaining Situations Employees Affected by Major Collective Bargaining Negotiations by Wage Change Relation of Employee Compensation Profits and Capital Consumption Allowances to Sales : All Private Corporations Annual Rates of Growth of Output per Man-Hour to Charts Measures of Unemployment Gross National Product Actual and Potential and Unemployment Rate Capacity Utilization and Corporate Profits Real Gross National Product in Four Postwar Recoveries Employment Production and Income in Four Postwar Recoveries Effect of Level of Economic Activity on Federal Surplus or Deficit Federal Surplus or Deficit : Actual and Full Employment Estimate ( National Income Accounts Basis ) Interest Rates in Three Business Cycles Output Employment and Productivity Indexes of Business Output Capital Stock and Man-Hours. Balance of Trade and Payments Changes in U.S. Gold Stock and Liquid Liabilities to Foreigners Price Developments Indexes of Output per Man-Hour INTRODUCTION The Report of the Council of Economic Advisers is a document directed toward economic problems and national economic policy. It is written in keen awareness that the ultimate goals of the Nation are human goals and that economics is merely instrumental to the making of a better life for all Americans. Involuntary unemployment is a sign of economic waste but the fundamental evil of unemployment is that it is an affront to human dignity. Expenditures on better education and better health are investments in future capacity to produce ; but even if they were not they would be intrinsically desirable because ignorance and illness bar the way to happiness and security for many of our citizens. Social security and welfare benefits help to limit the depth of recessions but their more important function is to protect human beings from hunger and despair. Statistical tables are to the economist what test tube and microscope are to the scientist the tools of the trade ; but for the one as for the other the ultimate dedication is to the quality of human life The Employment Act of is a historic affirmation of the responsibility of the Federal Government " to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The Act commits the Federal Government to seek to create and to maintain an economic environment in which " there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including selfemployment for those able willing and seeking to work. " These goals as the Act recognizes must be sought within the broad framework of U.S political and economic institutions free competitive enterprise and the Federal system of government. And they must be sought by means consistent with other national needs obligations and objectives The people of this Nation aided by an immense and fertile land by rich stores of minerals and other gifts of nature and by technologies and tools which lighten the work of man and multiply its fruits can produce vast quantities of the goods and services human beings want. The Employment Act 's broad goal of maximum employment production and purchasing power implies first of all that the vast productive capacity of the Nation should be used and not permitted to lie idle or run to waste And second it implies that this capacity itself should be raised to enable each new generation to advance to higher standards of well-being The first of these objectives maximum use of our existing productive resources is the topic of Chapter One requirement is to maintain aggregate demand for goods and services at but not above levels sufficient to buy the goods and services the economy is capable of producing. Since inadequate demand has in recent years been a major cause of unemploy- ment and excess capacity expansion of demand has been and remains a principal task of government policy. But expansion of demand is not the whole answer. The functioning of markets for labor and for its products can be improved in ways which will bring into effective use a greater proportion of the Nation 's productive resources. Government policy can play a role here too. These two aspects of the current economic situation and the relevance of current and proposed policies are discussed in Chapter The second objective to accelerate the growth of the productive powers of the United States is the subject of Chapter The United States has joined its partners in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) in setting " as a collective target the attainment during the decade from to of a growth in real gross national product of percent for the Member countries taken together. " This growth in production in Europe and North America is intended to lead both to an increase in standards of living in the industrial countries and to " a significant increase in aid to less developed countries. " The OECD declaration underscores the fact that free nations must pursue their economic objectives in concert. U.S. policy under the Employment Act must take full account of our international economic transactions. Chapter therefore examines the U.S. balance of payments and the external position of the dollar particularly as they are related to domestic economic developments and policies The necessity of moving toward balance in U.S. international accounts has given price stability new and compelling importance as a requirement of economic policy for recovery and growth. An appropriate and responsive structure of relative prices is equally important to bring resources into full and efficient use and to guide the growing productive capacity of the economy to serve the Nation 's changing needs. Competition and mobility of resources by contributing to the efficiency and flexibility of the price structure will at the same time weaken upward pressures on the price level which sometimes accompany and endanger high employment. Chapter is a discussion of recent current and prospective developments and policies affecting the course of prices in the United States Full utilization of manpower and other productive resources faster growth in capacity to produce balance of payments equilibrium and price stability these are necessarily the tasks of U.S. economic policy today Significant progress has been made toward achieving all of them in In many important respects they are complementary ; especially in the long run measures which advance one task advance the others. But in other respects they are difficult to reconcile ; measures useful for one purpose may be harmful for another. As perhaps never before the complexity and the importance of the tasks facing the U.S. economy in this decade challenge the wisdom and vision of Government and of all sectors of the private economy Chapter Toward Full Recovery PART I : OBJECTIVES PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS T HE U.S. ECONOMY made substantial advances in toward the goals of the Employment Act : " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " Total production rose to a record rate of $ billion a year in the fourth quarter $ billion above the level at the beginning of the year. Unemployment which had been close to percent of the labor force ever since December fell sharply toward the end of ; the rate was percent in December. The annual rate of income after taxes of the American people rose from $ per capita in the first quarter to $ per capita in the last quarter of These gains in disposable income were almost entirely real gains in purchasing power. Prices were virtually stable during the year ; the consumer index rose only percent between December and November As the year ended the economy was advancing vigorously Government fiscal and monetary policies contributed strongly to the favorable economic developments of the past year. Although the downswing probably would have ended early in in any case the impressive pace of the economic expansion must be attributed in large measure to government actions. A summary of the Administration 's program in to promote economic recovery is given in the Appendix to this chapter In spite of the significant gains of the economy at the turn of the year still fell short of the standards set forth in the Employment Act. Too many persons " able willing and seeking to work " were unable to find " useful employment opportunities. " Even at record levels national production had not yet reached its potential at full employment ; and the purchasing power of the American people the command over goods and services represented by their incomes was still too low The prospect for is a continuation of the favorable trend of Whether the current expansion is sufficiently strong and durable to carry the economy to " maximum employment production and purchasing power " no one can now foretell with certainty. Current and proposed government actions will continue to give strong support to economic expansion. If these are coupled with continued strength in the private economy the current expansion would reduce unemployment to percent of the labor force by mid-1963. But given the inevitable uncertainties government policy must be alert and flexible ready to promote the achieve- ment of full recovery within the coming fiscal year and to counteract developments which might threaten its attainment. The President has made important proposals to increase the effectiveness and flexibility of government fiscal policy ; these are discussed at length in Part II of this chapter Part I of this chapter discusses first the current implications of the objectives of the Employment Act : " maximum employment " as a guide to the fiscal and monetary policies of Government and to other public and private policies of equal ultimate importance ; and the potential production and purchasing power of the American economy at levels of employment which full recovery can achieve. Next it describes the progress of the economy in toward these objectives and the outlook for continued advance in Part II of the chapter discusses government policies for full recovery and maximum employment with special emphasis on the Administration 's policies in and its programs under way or proposed for the coming year T H E OBJECTIVE OF MAXIMUM EMPLOYMENT Reasons for Concern over Unemployment The great depression led this Nation and most other nations of the free world to assume national responsibility for the human tragedy and economic waste of involuntary unemployment. Unemployment had previously been regarded as almost solely the personal responsibility of the individual ; now it came to be acknowledged as a charge on the conscience of the Nation. The mass unemployment of the 's led to new understanding : that to be unemployed is not to be unemployable ; that job opportunities for individual workers depend on national economic circumstances beyond their control There are three principal reasons why involuntary unemployment is a national concern : ( ) the human obligation to prevent and to relieve economic distress ( ) the basic principle of a free economy that an individual should be able to choose freely how to use his time whether to work for pay or not and ( ) the economic waste of leaving productive resources idle Preventing economic distress. First a wealthy nation can not in good conscience permit its citizens to be inadequately nourished clothed or housed ; its sick to be denied medical care ; or its young to be deprived of schooling. Unemployment insurance and public assistance are recognitions of this social obligation. But they are not substitutes for the opportunity to earn income from useful employment. For the breadwinner and his family unemployment means a reduction in living standards. Only about three-fifths of the unemployed in were receiving unemployment insurance benefits. Even those who were insured generally found weekly benefits a pale shadow of their lost wages. When the unemployment insurance program was inaugurated in the late 's the goal was to provide benefits equal to about half of previous earnings. As Table indicates benefits now do not meet this standard. The Administration has proposed permanent legislation to strengthen the unemployment insurance system in this and other respects T A B L E Weekly earnings in selected industries and unemployment insurance benefits Item Weekly average Unemployment insurance benefits all industries ! Weekly earnings selected industries : Retail trade Manufacturing Telephone communication Wholesale trade Bituminous coal mining Class I railroads Contract construction For State programs only ; see Table B-23 Gross earnings for production workers or nonsupervisory employees ; see Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor For all too many unemployment has not been simply an uncomfortable interlude between jobs but a catastrophe of long duration ; almost one-third of those unemployed in December had been out of work for or more weeks and one-sixth had been unemployed for at least weeks. Family savings vanish when unemployment is prolonged Unemployment is not a perfect measure of the incidence of economic distress. Failure to find work does not entail poverty for some unemployed persons : women whose husbands have good jobs young people who can fall back on well-to-do parents older people who have assured livelihoods from property incomes or annuities people who earn an adequate annual income from work at a seasonal occupation during part of a year. On the other hand there are many causes of economic distress other than unemployment. Some persons though employed suffer from reduced and inadequate incomes resulting from failure to obtain more than part-time or occasional work or to earn decent returns from long hours of self-employment on the farm or in the shop. Other individuals are not regarded as unemployed simply because discouraged by a lack of suitable opportunities they have abandoned the search for jobs. Included in this group are individuals with personal disabilities who can find jobs only when labor markets are tight Nevertheless changes in unemployment are indicative of changes in the over-all magnitude of economic distress. The same conditions of general prosperity which lead to lower unemployment figures also lead to lower rates of involuntary part-time idleness to better rewards from selfemployment and to more job opportunities for persons on the fringes of the labor force. While effective measures to provide adequate job opportunities will not solve all problems of economic distress they will solve a substantial share of them. And without successful policy against general unemployment other attacks on poverty and insecurity stand little chance of success Assuring free choice. The second reason for national concern over unemployment is the basic principle of a free economy embodied in the Employment Act that " useful employment opportunities " be afforded " for those able willing and seeking to work. " A free society abhors forced idleness as well as forced labor. This principle does not apply a means or needs test for job-seekers. It acknowledges that mature individuals should be able to choose for themselves how they spend their time as between gainful employment housework leisure and education. Involuntary unemployment can destroy morale and freedom of choice whether or not the individual is in economic need. Americans want to work. Neither welfare programs nor personal means can erase the frustration of the individual who is forced to conclude that society does not need or want his contribution. The general preference for gainful work over unemployment however well compensated is demonstrated by the low levels of unemployment in areas with buoyant labor markets in occupations with ample job opportunities and in the population at large during years of prosperity Avoiding economic waste. Finally excessive unemployment is a waste of productive resources. When these resources are left idle the useful goods and services they could have produced are forever lost to the Nation. These losses would be enormously wasteful at any time. They are dangerous in a decade when the economy must not only meet compelling domestic needs but underwrite the defense of freedom throughout the world. In coupling maximum production and purchasing power with maximum employment the Employment Act recognizes the losses of national output and real income associated with unemployment. An estimate of these losses in present circumstances is attempted below. Changes in the unemployment rate are roughly indicative of changes in the " gap " between realized and potential production. The same measures of policy which will lower unemployment will also raise national output closer to capacity to produce. The national economic losses associated with unemployment are of course quite independent of the individual circumstances of the unemployed. If housewives elderly persons and teen-agers on vacation from school are eager and able to produce useful goods and services it is foolish and wasteful for the Nation to forego their contributions Measures of unemployment. The global measure of unemployment as a percentage of the civilian labor force provided monthly by the Current Population Survey and published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics is the best single measure of the economic distress the frustration of free choice and the economic waste associated with unemployment. But there are other measures of independent interest. Four of these measures along with the global rate are shown in Chart : ( ) The unemployment rate among experienced wage and salary workers those who have already held at least one job. This measure excludes the self-employed and new entrants to the labor force. ( ) The unemployment rate among married men living with their wives. This measure relates to individuals whose commitment to the labor force is permanent and necessary to the support of their families. It does not cover all individuals with such a commitment and conceptually it is inappropriate both as a measure of economic waste and as an indicator of involuntary unemployment among persons " able willing and seeking to work. " ( ) A full-time equivalent measure which ( a ) adds to the wholly unemployed the full-time equivalent of work lost by involuntary part-time employment and ( b ) subtracts the self-employed from both the labor force and civilian employment on the grounds that they are not subject to the risk of unemployment. This concept has merit as a measure of economic waste and of imbalance in markets for hired labor. ( ) The number of CHART Measures of Unemployment PERCENT UNEMPLOYED SEASONALLY ADJUSTED I960 J/UNEMPLOYED PLUS | FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT OF PART-TIME EMPLOYED AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE.EXCLUDES SELF-EMPLOYED AND UNPAID FAMILY WORKERS 2/PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE IN GROUP ^ /MARRIED MEN LIVING WITH THEIR WIVES i/PERSONS UNEMPLOYED WEEKS OR MORE AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS O-62-4 long-term unemployed those who have been jobless for more than weeks as a percentage of the labor force. This rate is an important measure of the financial and social distress caused by the concentration of prolonged unemployment on a small fraction of the labor force The differences among these measures reveal more clearly than any single measure the anatomy of unemployment. But they show no systematic tendency to widen or narrow. If due allowance is made for volatility in month-to-month movements all five measures tell the same story about changes in economic conditions Full Employment as the Objective of Stabilization Policy The goal of the Employment Act is " maximum employment " or to put it the other way round minimum unemployment. Ideally all persons able willing and seeking to work should be continuously employed. Involuntary unemployment is an individual and social evil. No one would prefer for its own sake a higher rate of unemployment to a lower one. But zero unemployment is unattainable. A more meaningful figure is needed to give content to the realistic and forceful declaration of policy in the Employment Act. A feasible interim goal must reflect a balancing of employment and production objectives with other considerations of national policy within the limits set by the existing characteristics of the economy Such a goal is set forth in the discussion which follows. We must not forget however that any practical unemployment goal is only a temporary compromise and its attainment must never be an occasion for relaxation but rather an incentive to search out ways to achieve a still lower rate The partial conflict which exists between minimum unemployment and certain other national objectives and which imposes the necessity of striking a balance between them results mainly from the fact that these other objectives are served by stability of the general price level. Given the existing structure of the economy and the nature of the processes by which prices and wages are determined a serious attempt to push unemployment close to zero would produce a high rate of price inflation. The result would be a weakening of the competitive position of U.S. products in world markets an arbitrary redistribution of real income and wealth and a threat of even more serious consequences if expectations of further inflation should become dominant Happily however the conflict between the goals served by price stability and the goal of minimum unemployment is only partial. Stabilization policy policy to influence the level of aggregate demand can strike a balance between them which largely avoids the consequences of a failure in either direction. Furthermore the degree of conflict can be diminished by private and public policies which improve the functioning of labor and product markets There are various possible causes of unemployment on the one hand and of inflationary pressure on the other. These causes may be grouped into ( ) those related to aggregate demand and ( ) those related to the structure and functioning of markets. It is necessary to distinguish carefully between these two groups of causes in setting an appropriate target for stabilization policy The relation of aggregate demand and of structural causes to unemplovment may be briefly described as follows : ( ) The total effective demand for goods and services by consumers businesses and governments may be insufficient to employ all the persons seeking work at existing wage rates ( ) Workers may be idle while vacancies are unfilled. This may arise because the workers live too far away from the available jobs are not qualified for them or simply are unaware of their existence. In a dynamic economy there will always be workers between jobs some seeking new positions out of preference some displaced by economic and technological change New entrants to the labor force will similarly be unemployed while locating jobs suitable to their qualifications and preferences. The length of " frictional " unemployment for any one worker and the size of the pool of frictionally unemployed depend on how smoothly the labor market functions how well the skills experience and qualifications of workers match the specifications of available jobs how ready workers are to change residence and occupation how adequate are facilities for training and retraining and how rapidly displacements resulting from economic change are occurring. Structural unemployment may be regarded as an extreme form of frictional unemployment. It occurs when inability or failure to make the necessary adjustments concentrates unemployment of long duration on displaced workers in particular areas and occupations while elsewhere jobs are seeking workers of quite different qualifications Similarly aggregate demand and the structure of markets are related to the price level as follows : ( ) Inflation may result from excessive aggregate demand. Demands for goods and services by consumers businesses and governments may add to a total which exceeds the amount that the economy can supply Prices will be bid up in all markets and as business firms try to expand output in order to seize the profit opportunities presented increases in wages and in costs of materials will follow. The resulting rise in incomes will reinforce and renew the process. In less extreme circumstances aggregate demand may press hard upon but not exceed the economy 's productive capacity. Increases in prices and wages may occur nevertheless reflecting the need to obtain additional output by using labor and capital more intensively by making greater use of overtime labor by attracting workers from great distances by making employment attractive to persons formerly not in the labor force and by making use of obsolescent capacity and inefficient production techniques ( ) Upward pressure on prices may originate in those sectors of the economy where competitive forces are weak and large corporations and unions have a considerable degree of discretion in setting prices and wages ( This discretion and the public interest in its responsible exercise are discussed in Chapter ) There are two ways in which wage and price decisions in these sectors may put upward pressure on the general price level First prices may be increased when demand is not strong in the aggregate or even in the specific industries involved. Because the prices of these industries affect costs elsewhere increases in their prices tend to spread throughout the economy. Second prices in these sectors may remain constant in the face of declining demand although they rise in times of increasing demand. The result in the long run is an upward drift in prices in these industries which again tends to be transmitted to the whole economy Expansion of aggregate demand is clearly the specific remedy for unemployment caused by a deficiency of aggregate demand. Excessive aggregate demand however is a source of inflationary pressure. Consequently the target for stabilization policy is to eliminate the unemployment which results from inadequate aggregate demand without creating a demand-induced inflation. A situation in which this is achieved can appropriately be described as one of " full employment " in the sense that further expansion of expenditure for goods and services and for labor to produce them would be met by only minor increases in employment and output and by major increases in prices and wages. Correspondingly expansion of demand beyond full employment levels would involve a major sacrifice of the objectives served by price stability and only a minor gain with respect to the goal of maximum employment The selection of a particular target for stabilization policy does not commit policy to an unchangeable definition of the rate of unemployment corresponding to full employment. Circumstances may alter the responsiveness of the unemployment rate and the price level to the volume of aggregate demand. Current experience must therefore be the guide In the existing economic circumstances an unemployment rate of about percent is a reasonable and prudent full employment target for stabilization policy. If we move firmly to reduce the impact of structural unemployment we will be able to move the unemployment target steadily from percent to successively lower rates The recent history of the U.S. economy contains no evidence that labor and commodity markets are in general excessively " tight " at percent unemployment. Neither does it suggest that stabilization policy alone could press unemployment significantly below percent without creating substantial upward pressure on prices When unemployment was about percent as in before the steel strike and in the first half of the economy showed many independent symptoms of slack notably the substantial underutilization of plant and equipment capacity. The wholesale price index fell at a rate of percent 4e a year in the months April 1959-July ; and at the consumer level prices of commodities other than food rose at a rate of only percent The economy last experienced percent unemployment in the period May 1955-August when the unemployment rate fluctuated between percent and percent ( seasonally adjusted ) During this period prices and wages rose at a rate which impaired the competitiveness of some U.S products in world markets. However there is good reason to believe that upward pressures of this magnitude are not a permanent and systematic feature of our economy when it is operating in the neighborhood of percent unemployment. The boom was concentrated in durable manufactured goods notably automobiles ( in ) machinery and equipment and primary metals. The uneven nature of the expansion undoubtedly accentuated the wage and price pressures of those years Moreover the review of the present price outlook in Chapter points to a recent strengthening in the forces making for price stability. The experience of is nevertheless sobering and experience at higher levels of activity will be needed to indicate whether stabilization policy can now undertake a more ambitious assignment than percent unemployment There is no precise unemployment rate at which expansion of aggregate demand suddenly ceases to affect employment and begins to affect solely the general price level. The distinction between aggregate demand effects and structural effects is a matter of degree both for employment and for the general price level. Sufficiently high levels of aggregate demand can and have in the past cut deeply into frictional and structural unemployment. When vacancies are numerous the time required to find an attractive job is reduced. When there are vacancies everywhere no one needs to travel far to find a job. And when no applicant for a job meets its exact specifications the specifications may well be adjusted. Similarly the degree of inflationary pressure arising from discretionary price and wage setting is not independent of the general strength of demand. Presumably this pressure could be entirely eliminated by sufficient weakness in aggregate demand if that were the sole objective of stabilization policy But while stabilization policy would not be an ineffective cure for either one or the other of these economic ailments it would be an extremely expensive cure. On the one hand attempting to reduce frictional and structural unemployment by a highly inflationary expansion of demand would court disaster in our balance of payments position. On the other hand an attempt to restrict aggregate demand so severely as to eliminate all risk of an increase in the general price level might well involve keeping the economy far below full employment. This would mean sacrifice rather than achievement of both of the major goals that price stability serves : Equity would be sacrificed because the economy as a whole and the unemployed in particular would suffer as a result of the manner in which a few individuals and groups exercise their economic power. Eventually the balance of payments would also be weakened : under conditions of prolonged unemployment and excess capacity the investment needed to keep our exports competitive in quality and cost would be unlikely to occur The percent interim goal refers to the global measure of unemployment as a percentage of the civilian labor force. An objective stated in terms of any of the other measures of unemployment discussed above would have the same implications for stabilization policy for the various measures tell the same story with respect to the degree of over-all tightness in the economy. The particular numerical statement of the goal must of course change with the unemployment concept used. For example percent in terms of the global measure is roughly equivalent to a rate of ^ percent among married men living with their wives ; the latter figure though lower is at least as serious as the former in its implications for the human consequences of unemployment. Corresponding figures for the other measures of unemployment are % percent among experienced wage and salary workers * percent for the full-time equivalent concept and if the percent global rate is long sustained a two-thirds of one percent rate of long-term unemployment Unemployment of percent is a modest goal but it must be emphasized that it is a goal which should be achievable by stabilization policy alone Other policy measures referred to in the next section and discussed in detail in Part II of this chapter will help to reduce the goal attainable in the future below the percent figure. Meanwhile the policies of business and labor no less than those of Government will in large measure determine whether the percent figure can be achieved and perhaps bettered in the current recovery without unacceptable inflationary pressures Full Employment and Structural Unemployment One way to raise the attainable level of full employment is to reduce frictional and structural unemployment by improving the mobility of labor and the efficiency of labor markets. The amount of frictional and structural unemployment varies from country to country and from time to time within any one country. It has sometimes been suggested that though a 4-percent unemployment rate was once achievable in the United States with adequate levels of demand it is no longer a feasible goal because of increasing technological displacement of workers rapid obsolescence of skills intractable pockets of depression and greater numbers of young people swelling the labor force. Careful analyses at the Council and elsewhere notably in a recent report by the staff of the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress lend no support to the view that frictional and structural unemployment is a rising proportion of the labor force. It would be wholly wrong however to conclude that improvement in the structure of the labor market is not both possible and of high importance 4s The displacement of labor through changes in technology consumer tastes and the geographic distribution of industry is an inevitable part of the growth of a free and progressive economy. But the level of unemployment corresponding to any given pace of progress depends on the smoothness with which markets function. The size of the pool of unemployed workers like the size of a pool of water is determined jointly by the flow into it and the flow out of it. The flow into it depends on the rate at which workers leave jobs or are displaced and on the rate at which new workers enter the labor force without jobs. The flow out depends on the speed with which the unemployed can transfer to jobs vacated by retirement and to other skills other industries and other areas where jobs are available in expanding sectors of the economy Economic policy can reduce the size of the pool by providing opportunities for vocational training and retraining by improving the flow of information about job opportunities by facilitating the relocation of displaced workers by acting to reduce and eliminate discriminatory hiring practices and by assisting in the rehabilitation of depressed areas through the renovation of public facilities and the attraction of viable industry. Administration policies and proposals to attain these ends are discussed in Part II of the present chapter The benefits to the United States from the pursuit of such policies are great. In their absence many of our citizens become in a real sense victims of progress ; they are condemned to prolonged periods of unemployment which benefit no one and inflict an unjust penalty on an arbitrarily selected few. In their absence we can expect resistance to technological progress from those who would be harmed by it without prospect of reward The returns from such policies do not come instantaneously. For that reason we should undertake them now even while unemployment and excess capacity are widespread. There is still time to reap the benefits of the reduction of structural unemployment during the current recovery. But these policies are no substitute for an adequate level of demand. Experience tells us that the pull of expanding job opportunities is a vitally necessary condition for the success of policies to assure a better functioning labor market FULL PRODUCTION Productive Potential The Economic Report is required by the Employment Act to set forth " the levels of employment production and purchasing power obtaining in the United States and such levels needed to carry out the policy " of the Act. In accordance with the obligation to set forth the levels of production needed to carry out the objectives of the Act the Council has made the following estimates : ( ) In the first quarter of a gap of $ billion ( prices annual rate ) existed between actual gross national product ( GNP ) and the output obtainable at full employment. ( ) By the last quarter of the year recovery had narrowed this gap to about $ billion ( ) For as a whole production averaged $ billion below potential ( ) The production potential for the year is estimated at $ billion ( in prices ) Estimates of this kind can not of course be precise. But they are essential in order to specify within reasonable margins of error a current measure of " maximum production " linked to " maximum employment. " They indicate clearly that this Nation can achieve a huge bonus of output and income by making full use of its resources The level of unemployment is a barometer of economic waste. Each percentage point of progress toward percent in the unemployment rate has meant a gain of roughly percent in total output in postwar periods of expansion The sources of potential gains in output accompanying full employment are given in Table which shows the gain in output that each source could TABLE Allocation of estimated $ billion gap between potential and actual gross nationa product [ Billions of dollars ] Associated increment of output Source Total Lower unemployment Larger labor force in response to greater demand Longer hours of work per man associated with higher utilization Greater productivity per man-hour associated with higher utilization. Source : Council of Economic Advisers have contributed if aggregate demand in had been sufficient to reduce unemployment to percent of the labor force. Thefiguresincorporate evidence from postwar relationships among labor input productivity and output. An unemployment rate of percent instead of percent for would in itself have increased the number of jobs by percent of actual employment. But it would have raised production by much more about percent. The reason that improved employment conditions yield magnified gains in output is that in addition to putting the jobless back to work they have a number of other favorable effects on output Higher output would have accompanied lower unemployment in the following manner : ( ) Actual unemployment in was million persons. Given the actual labor force of million persons million of the unemployed would have been at work at an unemployment rate of percent ( ) At full employment the labor force would probably have been considerably higher in and production would have been correspondingly increased. Participation in the labor force is encouraged by greater availability of job opportunities. In recent years of slack activity the actual labor force has been abnormally low relative to the number of persons of working age ( ) Furthermore a brisker pace of economic activity is accompanied by a higher average number of hours a week worked by those employed Part-time jobs are converted into full-time employment and overtime work increases in private nonfarm industry ( ) Because of these three factors less unemployment larger labor force and longer hours of work labor input at full employment in would have exceeded actual labor input by more than 4J/2 percent the equivalent of billion man-hours. The added man-hours could have increased production by $ billion at existing rates of productivity ( ) The higher productivity that accompanies fuller use of resources would have meant still more output. In recessions business firms can not cut back their labor force as fast as their output falls. Clerical help and sales and supervisory personnel are essentially " overhead. " Moreover while firms can and do lay off production workers they do so only with reluctance preferring both to maintain morale and to avoid the expense of hiring and training new labor when business activity recovers. Recessions thus produce on-the-job underemployment which is reflected in depressed levels of productivity. In movements toward full employment recession losses in productivity are regained. At full employment productivity in would according to past evidence have been to percent higher than it actually was. This gain is equivalent to a $ to $ billion increment of GNP. The table shows a $ billion figure near the middle of the range bringing the total estimated gain from all sources to $ billion These calculations receive further support from an alternative approach Evidence on the relationship between output and unemployment suggests that actual GNP in mid-1955 when the unemployment rate was close to percent was equal to potential output. The trend rate of growth of GNP adjusted for changes in unemployment levels has averaged about 3l/2 percent in the post-Korean period. Thus the path of potential GNP can be represented by a / percent trend from actual GNP in mid-1955 ( Chart ) The value of the trend exceeds actual output by $ billion which is equal to the sum of the components described above The distance between potential and actual GNP was narrowed by $ billion from the first to last quarter of as output increased by $ billion ( prices ) Among the four factors listed above the first two reduction in unemployment and increase in the labor force contributed less to the gain in production than past experience would have suggested Of the other two factors hours of work in nonfarm industries expanded roughly in accord with past behavior ; but man-hour productivity achieved an exceptional gain probably above percent in the three quarters of expansion. As a result the l1/ ^ percent increase in total production was achieved with a very small increase in employment : nonfarm employment increased by about 11/2 percent but this rise was partially offset by a decline CHART Gross National Product Actual and Potential and Unemployment Rate BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * ( Ratio scale ) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES ' \ '''c POTENTIAL ^ A r _ / GAP y ACTUAL i i i i i i i i i ' ' i i i i i i i i i ! I960 PERCENT PERCENT | _J GNP GAP AS PERCENT OF POTENTIAL ( Left scale ) UNEMPLOYMENT RATE ^ ARight scale ) I M I M I I M I I I960 * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J/3J4 % TREND LINE THROUGH MIDDLE OF i/UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE ; SEASONALLY ADJUSTED NOTE : A B AND C REPRESENT GNP IN MIDDLE OF ASSUMING UNEMPLOYMENT RATE OF % % AND % RESPECTIVELY SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS in agricultural employment. It is primarily because latent productivity was exploited so effectively that unemployment remained high The estimated gap of $ billion or percent between potential and actual output in the fourth quarter of reflected principally a shortfall in persons employed. At the end of the year there was room for a slight further rise in average weekly hours worked. The impressive gains in productivity during the year brought output per man-hour at the year-end close to the full employment level indicated by past experience. Nevertheless further gains in productivity as a result of fuller utilization of existing capacity may still be ahead. In any case further additions to output during the coming year are expected to require larger increases in employment than in The unemployment rate will fall in the coming year if and only if production continues to rise in relation to the economy 's potential. The prospects for are discussed later in this chapter A full-utilization economy in would provide nearly million civilian jobs and generate an estimated $ billion GNP ( prices ) These figures million more jobs and nearly $ billion more output than levels suggest the magnitude of the opportunity and challenge we face To help visualize this challenge more concretely Table presents an illustrative pattern of employment productivity and output for the full year consistent with percent unemployment TABLE Employment output and productivity actual and illustrative Employment ( millions of persons ) Sector actual Total economy Agricultural Private nonagriculturaL.General government ' Addendum : Civilian employment Unemployment illustrative ^ Output ( billions of dollars prices ) actual illustrative i Output per employed person ( dollars ) actual illustrative Illustrative pattern projected at percent unemployment ; Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers by Council of Economic Advisers Includes military Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor ( except as noted ) Plant and Equipment Capacity Periods of slack and recession in economic activity lead to idle machines as well as idle men. Only once since at the trough of the recession was there more excess plant and equipment capacity in U.S. industry than at the start of While increases in output during the past year have led to fuller use of capital facilities begins with considerable room for expanded output from existing plant and equipment enough room to permit achievement of the full employment goal. This excess capacity is available to be tapped on demand. It is easier to expand employment at stable prices when tools are already available for new jobholders. Otherwise capital might act as a bottleneck obstructing the flow of increased demand for goods into improved employment opportunities for labor While unused capital is a reserve source of supply it dampens the vigor of demand. Although much of investment is undertaken primarily for replacement and modernization investment for expansion of capacity is important to aggregate demand as well as to economic growth. Inducements to expand plant and equipment are stronger when present facilities are fully utilized. The rate at which existing capacity is utilized also influences the ability of firms to finance investment out of retained earnings Unused tools are a drag on profits. They yield no return and they impose overhead costs for maintenance and depreciation The reliability of measures of productive capacity and capital stock is severely limited by both conceptual and statistical difficulties. But an increasing amount of quantitative evidence is becoming available. Carefully used it can be very helpful in arriving at the needed qualitative judgments about productive capacity. Two series of data on capital utilization from to date are presented in Chart One measures the ratio of actual output to capacity output for all manufacturing industry The other shows the output-capital ratio : the ratio of the value of total ouput to the value of the stock of plant and equipment both expressed in prices covering all private domestic business except residential housing. Although the two measures are derived by substantially different methods they move together very closely offering encouraging evidence of their general validity as measures of capital utilization A number of significant points are evident from the chart : ( ) Measures of capital utilization like unemployment rates indicate the persistence of slack in the economy over the past five years. Even during the expansion of operating rates and the ratios of output to the stock of capital remained considerably below their levels ( ) Recessions are clearly marked by excess capacity in plant and equipment. Capital was most underutilized at the trough ; the low point of early lies about midway between the rates and those of the recession. Because capacity grew slowly in excess capacity in early was smaller than in even though unemployment was just as large ( ) Output gains must match the growth of plant and equipment capacity in order to maintain rates of capital utilization. Periods of slow advance in production like and lead to declining rates of utilization CHART Capacity Utilization and Corporate Profits PERCENT o o BUSINESS OUTPUT AS PERCENT OF PRIVATE STOCK OF CAPITAL ( 0/K ) RATE OF CAPACITY UTILIZATION MANUFACTURING ( CU ) 0/K CU GP/GNP NP/GNP CORPORATE PROFITS CORPORATE INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT AND CORPORATE ! CAPITAL CONSUMPTION ALLOWANCES " AS PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( GP/GNP ) CORPORATE PROFITS AND INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT AS PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( NP/GNP ) I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I1 I I I960 SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS ( BASED ON DATA OF DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ) ( ) Considerable excess capacity remains in the economy despite the rapid rise of utilization rates during While there is no clear benchmark of full utilization of capital the operating rates and output-capital ratios attained in late can serve as a reasonable indication. If GNP had been at its estimated potential level in the last quarter of capital utilization rates would have been approximately at the levels attained in late Existing excess capacity in plant and equipment is thus compatible with full employment of the labor force ( ) Levels of capital utilization have a potent influence on corporate profits. The share of corporate profits in GNP moves closely with the measures of capital utilization although it swings somewhat earlier. Corporate depreciation allowances have increased rapidly and " gross profits " net profits and inventory valuation adjustment plus capital consumption allowances have been maintained during the period. But net profits have declined as a fraction of GNP in recent years ; the combination of unrelenting overheads and depressed levels of output can fully account for this " squeeze. " As corporate capacity is put to fuller use profits benefit from larger margins as well as expanded sales PROGRESS IN The Situation at the Beginning of the Year As began economic activity was far below its full employment level and production and income continued to contract through February By most measures of the decline in economic activity the recession was the mildest in the postwar period. But the peak reached in May had followed a year of very slow advance in output and ended the shortest expansion in the postwar period. At the peak unemployment and excess capacity were higher than at any prior postwar peak. Unemployment rates were higher during the recession than during the slumps of and ; in this respect the recession was almost as severe as that of The rate of use of existing facilities in late and early was not conducive to substantial further increases in business fixed investment nor were monetary conditions encouraging. Although there was a brief interlude in the first quarter of when investment demand rose sharply this buoyancy was to a large extent a temporary aftermath of the steel strike of As orders sales and profits proved disappointing investment in both fixed capital and inventories was cut back During this period government fiscal programs gave little support to aggregate demand. Total Federal expenditures on income-and-product account showed little change between mid-1959 and mid-1960 as Federal purchases of goods and services actually declined. In January Federal social insurance taxes were increased by about $ billion a year Indeed the sharp change in the relationship between Federal Government receipts and expenditures was perhaps the most important factor in choking off the recovery The recession followed the same pattern as previous postwar downswings With activity weakening purchases of goods were cut back throughout the private economy. Inventory investment as usual displayed the largest decline among major components of GNP ( Table ) The decline of inventories as well as of other major categories of expenditure was concentrated in durable goods. Correspondingly a decline of percent in durable goods manufacturing accounted for most of the fall in industrial production from May to February Unemployment which had been percent ( seasonally adjusted ) of the civilian labor force in May rose to percent in February Once the contraction began it was certainly moderated and perhaps shortened by a rise in outlays at all levels of government. The automatic stabilizers in the Federal fiscal system contributed to the stability of personal consumption expenditure during the recession as transfer payments rose T A B L E Changes in output income and employment over the three quarters of the recession [ Seasonally adjusted ] Cyclical trough : First quarter Cyclical peak : Second quarter Item Change peak to trough Billions of dollars annual rates Output ( prices ) : Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment : Fixed investment Residential nonfarm construction. ._ Other construction Producers ' durable equipment State and local Federal Change in business inventories Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Income ( current prices ) : Disposable personal income Corporate profits after taxes Millions of persons Employment : Total civilian employment Employment in nonagricultural establishmentsPrivate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding See Tables B-2 B-ll B-15 B-19 and B-24 Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor by $ billion and personal taxes fell by $ billion ( annual rates ) to offset much of the fall in private wages and salaries resulting from lower employment Recovery During the Year By the end of production and income had improved markedly and most economic indicators had surpassed their peaks. In the final quarter of GNP measured in constant prices was * /2 percent higher than in the first quarter and about percent above the peak attained in the second quarter of ( Tables and ) The only major category of expenditure that was lower than in the second quarter of was expenditure for producers ' durable equipment. Industrial production in December exceeded its low point of February by percent and was percent above the previous peak attained in January The increase of $ billion ( current prices annual rate ) in GNP from the first to last quarters of distributed substantial gains in income widely through the economy. Personal income grew by $ billion. Wage and salary disbursements expanded by $ billion and accounted for T A B L E Changes in output income and employment over three quarters of expansion [ Seasonally adjusted ] Item First quarter ( cyclical trough ) Fourth quarter i Change trough to fourth quarter Billions of dollars annual rates Output ( prices ) : Gross national productPersonal consumption expendituresGross private domestic investment : Fixed investment Residential nonfarm construction Other construction Producers ' durable equipment Change in business inventories. Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services. Federal State and local- Income ( current prices ) : Disposable personal income. Corporate profits after taxes. Millions of persons EmploymentTotal civilian employment Employment in nonagricultural establishments. Private Preliminary estimates of output and income by Council of Economic Advisers Third quarter data and change from first to third quarter NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources ; Department of Commerce and Department of Labor ( except as noted ) most of the gain in personal income. Incomes from dividends and business ownership also rose. Farm operators ' net income from farming increased from $ billion in to $ billion in and net income per farm rose by nearly $ Disposable personal income ( after taxes ) grew by $ billion over the three quarters of expansion adding $ to average per capita spendable income The effect of rising output is strikingly shown in the $ billion increase nearly percent in the annual rate of corporate profits after taxes from the first to the third quarter. By all indications corporate profits rose further in the fourth quarter and probably exceeded $ billion before taxes and $ billion after taxes Higher private incomes meant larger tax liabilities : Federal receipts in the income-and-product budget rose by about $ billion ( annual rate ) in the three quarters of expansion and the yield of State and local taxes grew by $ billion The recovery was .paced by a prompt and sharp reversal in inventory investment the volatile inventories of manufacturers of durable goods ac- counting for a major share of the movement. During recessions output falls below final sales as some orders are filled out of excessive stocks. The end of inventory liquidation in itself raises production to the level of sales And rising sales and orders in a period of economic recovery encourage the accumulation of stocks creating further gains in production. In this characteristic switch from liquidation to accumulation occurred very promptly only one month after the trough in over-all activity and was a major factor in the $ billion expansion of GNP in the second quarter Incentives for restocking did not arise wholly independently ; they were provided in large part by evidence of a strengthening in final purchases i.e. expenditures for GNP other than for inventory accumulation A key element in the rise of final demand was the increase in expenditures at all levels of government. The upward trend of State and local government purchases continued unabated. The promotion of economic recovery was a major aim of Federal budget policy in Scheduled obligations and expenditures were speeded up in the numerous ways listed in Part II and the Appendix to this chapter. Additional outlays came from new Administration programs some to assist individuals and areas hit by economic recession and others to meet national needs of high priority Furthermore in the spring and summer of when overriding national security requirements led to increased expenditures for defense and space activities the existence of unutilized manpower and capital ruled against an increase in tax rates. A careful appraisal of the direct and indirect effects of increased Federal activity indicates that it was a major force probably the principal driving force of the recovery of Investment in nonresidential construction and producers ' durable equipment taken together rose at an annual rate of $ billion ( prices ) from the first to the last quarter of both responding to and contributing to the expansion ( Table ) With improving rates of utilization of capacity larger corporate profits and readily available credit business fixed investment began to rise in the second quarter of In contrast business capital outlays had continued to decline during two quarters of rising total output in both and Residential nonfarm construction which had fallen since mid-1959 picked up in the early months of and continued to rise through the year. Although the rate of new family formation has been relatively low and vacancy rates have continued to rise steadily increasing disposable incomes and favorable financial and liquidity conditions have stimulated home building. Through much of and well into individuals continued to increase their volume of liquid assets. Funds for conventional FHA and VA mortgages were readily available ; mortgage yields declined moderately throughout the recession and into the summer of and remained fairly stable the rest of the year The favorable financial environment for business investment and residential construction reflected the monetary and credit policies of the Government. These policies have facilitated the flow of funds into investment and have contributed to a stability of interest rates unusual for a year of recovery Exports in the fourth quarter were $ billion ( annual rate ) higher than in the first quarter. But outlays on imports partly to rebuild inventories rose by $ billion reducing net exports by $ billion. Net exports is the one component of GNP which tends to fall as business activity improves cyclically Consumer outlays accounted for somewhat less than half the increase in GNP from the first to the fourth quarter. Until the closing months of the year consumer spending did not quite keep pace with disposable income The ratio of personal saving to personal disposable income rose from percent in the first quarter to percent in the third. In the fourth quarter however consumption did keep pace with income and expanded by $ billion ( current prices annual rate ) Demand for new automobiles sparked a rise in the fourth quarter of $ billion ( annual rate ) in outlays for consumer durable goods which finally surpassed the peak that had been reached in the second quarter of The gains in production income and employment during in comparison with previous expansions are shown in Charts and Chart displays the rise of GNP from its lowest quarter in each recession. In CHART Real Gross National Product in Four Postwar Recoveries GNP TROUGH = 100-1/ I I \ ^ ^ I QUARTERS AFTER GNP TROUGH 1/ I/BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA I/TROUGH QUARTERS FOR GNP WERE II TJ I AND I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS 6o < CHART Employment Production and Income in Four Postwar Recoveries PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE CYCLICAL TROUGH = EMPLOYMENT IN NONAGRICULTURAL ESTABLISHMENTS UNEMPLOYMENT RATE I I I I I I I I I I I x \ I I I MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL TROUGH PERSONAL INCOME INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION v CYCLICAL TROUGH = CYCLICAL TROUGH = I I I I I II I I I II MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL TROUGH * ' " L * / MO ? / / &<r A ' in n I MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL TROUGH MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL TROUGH NOTE : INDEXES AND RATE BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 6i the three previous cycles the trough quarter for GNP came before the month of the cyclical trough. In the cyclical trough in February was in the middle of the quarter of lowest GNP. In Chart the reference point for all series is the cyclical trough month. These differences in timing must be taken into account in comparisons of recoveries. There are also differences in the composition of output : for example the upswing was more heavily concentrated in industrial production than the current recovery On the whole increases in production and income during the present expansion of economic activity compare favorably with the two preceding periods of expansion. However these gains were not matched by equal improvements in employment and unemployment. As noted above one of the principal reasons was that productivity gains during exceeded those of earlier expansions. The year ended with unemployment at percent of the civilian labor force ( seasonally adjusted ) In summary real output rose during the recovery at an annual rate of percent. The gap between actual output and estimated potential has been narrowed by $ billion in three quarters ; labor and capital have been more efficiently utilized ; and widespread gains in income have been secured. The Nation has adjusted smoothly and easily to the marked change of pace : no evidence of strain can be found no bottlenecks have developed no excessive backlogs of orders have appeared. And prices have been exceptionally stable as Chapter makes clear. Although the economy at the end of was still short of full employment the experience during the/year was gratifying and reassuring on many counts. And it demonstrated the ability of the economy to advance efficiently at a rapid pace when the underlying strength of private demand is reinforced by appropriate Federal fiscal and monetary policies OUTLOOK FOR The Employment Act of requires an estimate of " current and foreseeable trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power. " Although the difficulties and risks of economic forecasting are well known neither government nor private enterprise can conduct its affairs develop its policies and make its decisions without economic projections without making the best estimates that economic and statistical tools permit of the economic framework within which it will have to operate in the future. For example it would be impossible to formulate either Federal or State budgets without projections of future levels of income and business activity and the tax revenues they will produce. In the Budget Message GNP for is projected at $ billion ( current prices ) a rise of nearly $ billion or almost 9J/2 percent over A somewhat higher figure is likely if the Congress enacts promptly the Administration 's proposed tax credit for investment. This section presents with full recognition of the margins of error inherent in economic projections the appraisal of the economic outlook underlying the budget The momentum of the current recovery will carry the economy to new records in production income and employment during In the closing months of private demand was rising briskly. The resulting gains in consumer incomes profits business inventory requirements and orders for durable goods will generate further increases in spending and business activity in the coming months. Broad advances in the private economy will be reinforced by a continued upward trend in Federal State and local government outlays The favorable prospects for private demand together with current economic programs and proposals of the Administration point to a strong and sustained expansion. The percentage gain in GNP ( current prices ) in over the level can realistically be expected to match the increases of ^ 2-9J/2 percent in and Those two years like were the first full years of recovery from recession Expansion in GNP in is expected to be somewhat more moderate than the annual rate of percent ( current prices ) attained over the past three quarters. But it is anticipated that output will continue to catch up with potential reducing slack and unemployment. Substantial increases are expected in all major categories of expenditure. The expected total increase is made up very roughly of the following parts : one-half consumer outlays ; one-fifth each government purchases and private fixed investment ; and one-tenth additions to inventories Survey of Major Categories of Expenditure The rationale for this appraisal of the outlook may be indicated by a brief survey of the key components of GNP Consumption. The ratio of total consumer expenditure to personal disposable income percent in is expected to rise slightly in The proportion of income spent on nondurable goods and services typically declines during expansion and this year will probably fall below the percent recorded in In prosperous periods consumers devote a larger share of their incomes to increasing their wealth. But at the same time they show a preference for accumulating wealth in the form of consumer durable goods. The current strong liquid position of households is likely to moderate their desire for additional liquidity and to reinforce demands for durable goods this year. The brisk sales of automobiles in the fourth quarter of also point in this direction. An increase in expenditures for durables from percent of disposable income in to some 12J/2 percent approaching the proportions recorded in and will probably outweigh the slight decline to be expected in the fraction devoted to nondurables and services Measured absolutely rather than as shares of disposable income all components of consumer expenditure seem headed upward in Per- sonal disposable income is likely to grow substantially. It will probably advance at a somewhat slower rate than GNP for the following reasons : ( ) Corporate profits rise sharply in cyclical upswings and dividend payments lag behind. ( ) Government transfer payments to individuals are held down when unemployment declines. ( ) Collections from progressive personal income taxes rise somewhat faster than personal incomes. But disposable income will still absorb more than half of the dollar gains in GNP and consumer expenditure will account for about half of the total increment in expenditure. Consumption is now about percent of GNP ; no economic expansion can go far without support from consumers and every expansion provides substantial income gains for households. A rise of $ billion in GNP for would be accompanied by an increase of about $ in consumption per capita permitting significant advances in standards of living Government. State and local governments can be expected to add about $ billion a quarter to their purchases of goods and services continuing their steady upward trend. Federal purchases of goods and services will rise during but more slowly than over the past year. The average increase during the course of seems likely to be $ billion a quarter compared with $ billion in New Federal obligations which have some effect on business activity before the outlays they foreshadow are expected to rise by $ billion in the year starting next July after a rise of $ 12/2 billion in the current fiscal year Inventories. Inventory-sales ratios have declined markedly during this expansion as is usual in the first year of an upswing. The ratio of inventories to GNP fell by about percent over the last three quarters of More rapid accumulation is to be expected and welcomed in the near future. Analysis supported by prior cyclical experience suggests that inventories will soon begin catching up with total output. If they were to rise at a quarterly rate of percent inventory investment would attain an annual rate of more than $ billion some time in The threat of a midyear steel strike may produce added stockpiling this spring. In the absence of a prolonged strike the main effect would be on the pattern of activity during the year with the second quarter stronger and the third quarter correspondingly weaker. Although the yearend levels and the full year totals might not be seriously affected this abnormal factor in inventory behavior would increase the difficulties of appraising the real strength of the economy. A long strike of course could seriously imperil the prospects for continued vigorous expansion Quite apart from the steel situation inventory investment is likely to reach its peak before the end of and can not be expected to be a significant expansionary factor in the latter half of this year Residential construction. With the aid of continued credit ease and increased household incomes residential construction ended with a rate of activity $ billion above the average for the year. Further mod- erate gains are likely in part from additions and alterations and in part from new housing starts. Industry and government specialists have predicted housing starts of million in Mortgage availability will influence housing demand considerably. If funds remain readily available gains in household incomes are likely to strengthen the demand for new homes Business fixed investment. As Chart shows rates of capital utilization have been more favorable to investment demand in the last year than in Business outlays for durable equipment and nonresidential construction have risen more promptly and more vigorously to date than in the comparable stage of the preceding expansion. Incentives to invest for modernization and replacement purposes are also favorable. Furthermore business fixed investment is volatile ; in peacetime expansions it usually rises as a fraction of GNP. Even the weak expansion of produced a percent increase in capital outlays from their low in the third quarter of to their peak in the second quarter of The same performance in the current expansion would mean a rise of $ billion from the last quarter of to the last quarter of And the major determinants of investment corporate liquidity and profit rates capacity measures conditions in financial markets point to more strength than in the last expansion. It seems probable that capital outlays in will surpass their performance Prospects for plant and equipment investment are difficult to assess quantitatively. Recent surveys suggest that businessmen have not yet planned any major expansion of productive facilities. But improved economic conditions have consistently led to substantial upward revisions of plans Whether business fixed investment as a share of GNP percent in will approach the and figure of percent or even substantially surpass the figure of percent can not be foretold. Much depends on the extent to which excess capacity declines over the next few quarters and on the willingness of businessmen to count on continued prosperity Capital outlays will also be significantly influenced by the state of financial markets. The financing of investment will be facilitated by the rising flow of internal funds from retained earnings and depreciation allowances. But corporate investment is almost certain to exceed corporate saving in Corporations as a whole have strengthened their liquidity position in part by long-term financing ahead of investment needs in Nevertheless they will probably require substantial net external financing this year involving an increase in the security holdings of households and financial institutions Monetary policy can facilitate this external financing An important stimulus to capital outlays would be provided by enactment of the proposed tax credit of percent on expenditures for new durable equipment. This measure would raise significantly the after-tax return on new investment. Enactment of the tax credit will help assure sufficient strength in this central component of demand at the crucial stage of the recovery Another favorable factor for the later stage of recovery is the planned revision by the Treasury of guideline schedules of depreciation on plant and equipment. The revision will incorporate available current information about the economic lives of capital goods and the effects of technological change on obsolescence In capital outlays amounting to more than percent of potential and actual GNP led to an annual rate of growth of slightly less than percent in the business capital stock. Because total output did not grow at an equal pace after excess capacity developed and capital outlays were sharply reduced in the recession. The excess capacity that emerged is more accurately attributed to underbuying than to overbuilding If purchases by consumers and government had been sufficient to keep the economy fully employed rates of capital utilization would not have fallen Business firms would have had sustained incentives to enlarge their productive facilities at the rate of nearly percent a year. Better performance in maintaining full use of resources could justify business fixed investment amounting to percent or more of the Nation 's output Prospects for Full Employment This appraisal of the prospects for production and income implies an unemployment rate of percent or somewhat lower at the end of but not as low as percent The achievement of percent unemployment by mid-1963 requires a gain of about percent in GNP ( in constant prices ) over the coming year and a half. This pace of advance would permit smooth and efficient adjustments avoiding bottlenecks that might generate serious upward pressures on prices. It would also allow a gradual transition toward the rates of expansion that must be expected when full utilization is restored and output can no longer rise more rapidly than productive potential. A continued upward movement for more than two years with an over-all gain of percent in real GNP would represent a very strong expansion But a less ambitious rate of recovery to full employment would prolong the waste of unused resources without gaining appreciably greater assurance of stable prices While this rate of expansion seems feasible in the light of the prospects for private demand and Administration policies designed to promote expansion at a desirable pace any appraisal of the economic outlook must take into account a wide range of possible outcomes. Weakening of consumer demand or lack of investment enthusiasm by business firms could endanger the prospective gains of and slow down the expansion. Because of the growth in the labor force and productivity could achieve new highs in output and even in employment without any reduction in the currently excessive rate of unemployment. Large and continuing gains are needed to bring output up to the economy 's potential and to reduce unemployment to percent of the labor force for the first time since An expansion that slows down prematurely is less likely to be lasting. A slowdown or even an expected slowdown in the growth of sales can diminish incentives to enlarge productive capacity and inventories. A decline in capital spending and inventory accumulation can convert a slowdown into a downturn. For this reason prospects for a lasting expansion rest heavily on the vigor of the upswing over the next few quarters The buildup of inventories that is expected in the near future will contribute substantially to household incomes and to the strength of consumer demand. But by late continued advance will depend heavily on the ability of fixed investment outlays to replace inventories as a key expansionary force. If the expansion is vigorous earlier in the year utilization rates will be favorable to investment demand in late and therefore to the continuation of the expansion itself On the other hand private demand can rise too fast or too far. Too rapid an expansion may strain the adjustment mechanisms of the economy In a dynamic economy patterns of output and employment change from one cycle to the next. It takes time to re-employ the jobless and to return efficiently to full utilization of capacity. Hence a very rapid expansion of demand might involve price increases bottlenecks and inefficiencies that could be avoided in a more gradual rise to the same levels. The current expansion has an enviable record to date : with a percent annual rate of increase of real output it has substantially narrowed the gap between actual and potential output ; at the same time the movements of prices inventories and orders show none of the symptoms of strain that would be associated with excessive speed. If demand for consumer durable goods and business capital formation were quickly to attain the same strength relative to incomes as in reasonable speed limits might be violated. In that events full employment might be achieved sooner but policy might have to contend with excess demands and inflationary pressures Still another challenge to policy might come from unexpected behavior of unemployment relative to output. Given continued growth of potential output along the / percent trend discussed earlier the achievement of full employment in mid-1963 would be associated with GNP of $ billion in prices. Deviations from historical trends in the size of the labor force average hours of work and man-hour productivity can alter the relationship between output and unemployment. Full utilization of resources may correspond to a somewhat higher or somewhat lower GNP In particular the effects of measures ( discussed in Chapter ) to increase the rate of growth of productivity while adding to investment demand during the expansion may raise the productive potential output of the economy above its current trend as early as Stabilization policy has contributed significantly to the gratifying progress of and to the favorable prospects for Policy will continue to promote progress toward full employment remaining alert to unforeseen developments which might throw the economy off course. The flexibility in existing policy instruments can be used to good advantage as it was in Furthermore Administration proposals now before the Congress would greatly enhance the ability of stabilization policy to counter threats of oncoming recession with speed and vigor. The record of stabilization policy in and its tasks for are discussed in the remaining part of this chapter PART II : POLICIES FOR MAXIMUM EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION In Part I of this chapter the progress of the economy in and the prospect for further progress in were reviewed in terms of the objectives of maximum employment production and purchasing power Part II describes more fully and specifically how government policy can does and will promote progress toward these goals. Two major kinds of government policy are involved : measures for economic stabilization which influence the total volume of spending ; and measures to reduce structural unemployment and underemployment by better mutual adaptation between available jobs and available workers ECONOMIC STABILIZATION Insufficient demand means unemployment idle capacity and lost production. Excessive demand means inflation general increases in prices and money incomes bringing forth little or no gains in output and real income. The objective of stabilization policies is to minimize these deviations i.e. to keep over-all demand in step with the basic production potential of the economy Stabilization does not mean a mere leveling off of peaks and troughs in production and employment. It does not mean trying to hold overall demand for goods and services stable. It means minimizing deviations from a rising trend not from an unchanging average. In a growing economy demand must grow in order to maintain full employment of labor and full utilization of capacity at stable prices. The economy is not performing satisfactorily unless it is almost continuously setting new records of production income and employment. Indeed unless production grows as fast as its potential unemployment and idle capacity will also grow And when the economy starts from a position well below potential output must for a time grow even faster than potential to achieve full utilization The Postwar Record Despite the recessions of recent years and the inflationary excesses of the early postwar years the postwar record of economic stabilization is incomparably better than the prewar. The economy fluctuated violently in and operated disastrously far below potential from to The level of GNP in constant prices was not exceeded except briefly in until The difference between the percent unemployment of ) and the percent rate years earlier is a dramatic measure of the growth of the labor force and productivity even during depression. Since the war the economy 's detours from the path of full employment growth have been shorter in both time and distance. There have been four recessions but none of them has gotten out of hand as did the decline of All of the declines have been reversed within months before unemployment reached percent of the labor force. For this improved performance there are several reasons First the war and preceding depression left business firms and households starved for goods. Further wartime earnings coupled with scarcities of civilian goods rationing and price control saturated business firms and consumers with liquid assets. For these legacies of depression and war the economy paid a price in the inflations of and with delayed effects throughout the past decade Second the structure of the economy was reformed after in ways which substantially increased its resistance to economic fluctuations The manner in which government tax revenues and income maintenance programs serve as automatic or " built-in " economic stabilizers is described below. The New Deal strengthened and reformed the Nation 's banking and financial system with the help of new governmental credit institutions deposit insurance and loan and guarantee programs. These have virtually eliminated the possibility that economic declines will be aggravated by bank failures foreclosures and epidemic illiquidity Third there is a significantly improved understanding of the manner in which government fiscal and monetary tools can be used to promote economic stability. Under the Employment Act and the climate of opinion which it symbolizes the Government has been expected to assume and has assumed greater responsibility for economic stabilization Finally businessmen and consumers no longer regard prolonged and deep depression as a serious possibility. They generally expect recessions to end quickly ; they anticipate a long-term upward trend in the economy ; and they spend and invest accordingly. This stability of expectations is in part the result of stability achieved in fact and reflects general understanding of the structural changes which have contributed toi it. But expectations of stability are also a cause of stability nothing succeeds like success Achieving Greater Stability While our postwar performance is a great advance over that of prewar years it is still far from satisfactory. We have had no great depression but we have had four recessions. Even the relatively short and mild recessions of the postwar period have been costly. In the last decade the Nation has lost an estimated $ billion of GNP ( in prices ) by operating the economy below potential. Industrial production has been below its previous peak nearly half the time since There is general agreement that economic fluctuations in the United States are intensified by if not always caused by a rhythm in inventory investment alternating between periods in which stocks are accumulating at an excessively high rate and periods in which they are being liquidated But it is not beyond hope that stabilization measures both automatic and discretionary can be strengthened in force and improved in timing so as to compensate for inventory swings better than has been true in the past If this is done the swings themselves will be dampened The possible gains from improved economic stabilization are impressive Losses of production employment and consumption will be cut. More saving and investment will be realized contributing steadily to the longrun growth of production potential. Business consumer and labor decisions will allocate resources more efficiently when they respond less to cyclical prospects and more to long-run developments. There will be less need and less justification for restrictive practices which are now designed to provide sheltered positions in markets periodically hit by recession It is true that an economy operating steadily at a high level of employment with only limited excess plant capacity is more subject to the risks of price increases than an economy with heavy unemployment and large unused capacity. However the dampening of economic fluctuations may itself help to counter this tendency. Cyclical fluctuations have been exerting a " ratchet effect " on prices ; costs and prices have been relatively inflexible downward in recessions but have been responsive to increases in demand during recoveries. Cyclical swings in total spending also tend to be accompanied by sharp and transitory shifts in the composition of spending. Because prices and costs respond more readily to upswings than to downswings these rapid changes in the composition of demand impart an upward bias to the whole price level. These sources of upward price bias will tend to be reduced as a more even pace of advance is achieved To capitalize on the potential gains of stabilization requires skillful use of all economic policy particularly budgetary and monetary policy T H E FEDERAL BUDGET AND ECONOMIC STABILITY Federal expenditures and taxes affect total employment and production by influencing the total volume of spending for goods and services. Direct Federal purchases of goods and services are themselves part of total demand for national output. In addition the Federal Government makes " transfer payments " to individuals for which no current services are rendered in return. Examples are social security and unemployment insurance benefits and veterans compensation and pension benefits. Both purchases of goods and services and transfer payments add to private incomes and thereby stimulate consumption and investment. Federal taxes on the other hand reduce disposable personal and business incomes and restrain private spending By increasing the flow of spending additional Federal outlays with tax rates unchanged have expansionary effects on the economy. Whether an expansion in spending ^ government or private leads mainly to more output or mainly to higher prices depends on the degree of slack in the economy. Under conditions of widespread unemployment and excess capacity businessmen respond to higher demand by increasing production ; under conditions of full employment prices rise instead. In the slack economy of for example additional demand from both private and public sources was readily converted into increased production Built into the Federal fiscal system are several automatic defenses against recession and inflation. Given the tax rates tax revenues move up and down with economic activity since most taxes are levied on private incomes or sales. Indeed tax revenues change proportionally more than GNP Furthermore certain Federal expenditures such as unemployment compensation payments are automatically affected by the state of the economy Economic fluctuations therefore result in substantial changes in Federal expenditures and revenues even when basic expenditure programs and tax rates remain unchanged. With the present system of tax rates and unemployment compensation payments a one-dollar reduction in GNP means a reduction in Federal tax receipts and an increase in transfer payments totaling about cents. Therefore private incomes after Federal taxes fall by only cents for each reduction of one dollar in GNP. For this reason any initial decline in spending and output is transmitted with diminished force to other sectors of the economy These automatic or built-in stabilizers moderate the severity of cyclical swings in the economy. If the forces causing a downturn in economic activity are weak and transient the automatic stabilizers cushion the severity of the decline and give the basic recuperative powers in the private economy a better opportunity to produce a prompt and full recovery But if the forces causing the downturn are strong and persistent the built-in stabilizers may not suffice to prevent a large and prolonged recession. Furthermore they are blindly symmetrical in their effects. When economic activity quickens after a slump the rise in Federal revenues begins immediately and slows the recovery in employment and incomes For these reasons the task of economic stabilization can not be left entirely to built-in stabilizers. Discretionary budget policy e.g. changes in tax rates or expenditure programs is indispensable sometimes to reinforce sometimes to offset the effects of the stabilizers To be effective discretionary .budget policy should be flexible. In order to promote economic stability the Government should be able to change quickly tax rates or expenditure programs and equally able to reverse its actions as circumstances change. Failure to arrest quickly a downturn in income production and employment may shake the faith of firms and households in prompt recovery and thereby lead to a cumulative decline. Delay in countering inflationary pressures may permit the development of a self-propelling speculative boom with disruptive consequences to the domestic economy and the balance of payments. If moderate fiscal action can be taken quickly and can be speedily reversed when circumstances warrant the dangers of overstimulating or overrestricting the economy are much smaller than if fiscal responses are sluggish and difficult to reverse Fiscal policy can be made a more flexible and more powerful tool of economic stabilization by means that do not change the basic structure and level of taxation or the long-run size and composition of Federal expenditure programs. Changes in the basic structure and level of taxation should be made by the Congress with full deliberation in the light of the many relevant considerations including the long-run revenue needs of the Government equity among individuals and groups and the effects of various taxes on economic efficiency and growth. Similarly changes in the magnitude and content of government expenditures should represent the considered judgment of the people and the Congress on national priorities For purposes of economic stabilization all that is needed of tax policy is temporary variation in the general level of tax rates within the existing structure and all that is required of government outlays is timing of certain expenditures so that they bolster employment and purchasing power when the economy needs stimulus and taper off as it approaches full employment. In both cases the form of action required for purposes of stabilization and the procedure for taking timely action can be agreed upon in advance The President 's Recommendations The President has recommended a three-part program for economic stabilization. Its enactment would be the most significant step forward in policy for economic stabilization since the Employment Act itself. These three measures parallel recommendations of the Commission on Money and Credit a private group of leading citizens representing diverse economic interests and viewpoints Stand-by capital improvements authority. Under the first measure the Congress would give the President stand-by authority to initiate at a time of rising unemployment up to $ billion of public investments. More specifically the program of accelerated capital improvements could be initiated by the President within two months after the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate ( a ) had risen in at least three out of four months ( or in four out of six months ) and ( b ) had risen to a level at least one percentage point higher than its level four months ( or six months ) earlier. Before invoking this authority the President would be required to make a rinding that current and prospective economic developments require such action to achieve the objectives of the Employment Act Under the program the President would be authorized to commit up to ( ) $ million for direct Federal expenditures ( ) $ million for grants-in-aid to State and local governments ( ) $ million in loans to such States and localities as would otherwise be unable to meet their share of project costs and ( ) a further $ million to be distributed among the above three categories as he might deem appropriate. Once initiated the program could be terminated at any time by the President The program is designed to permit the timely initiation and execution of capital improvement projects which are desirable in their own right To insure that the projects are appropriately timed several important safeguards are incorporated in the proposal. An expanded capital improvements program initiated by the President under this authority would automatically be terminated within months after initiation unless extended by the Congress. Once a program had been terminated a new program under this authorization could not be initiated by the President for months. With respect to grant-in-aid expenditures the President would be required to prescribe rules to assure that assisted projects were of high priority were a net addition to existing State and local expenditures and were of the type which could be started quickly and carried speedily to conclusion. Under existing legislation Federal advances are provided to aid State and local governments to plan projects which would meet these specifications To insure that the projects are desirable on their own merits the proposal would limit direct Federal expenditures to projects and programs previously authorized by the Congress. Appropriate projects would include resource conservation ( e.g. reforestation reseeding of range lands timber stand improvement ) and various Federal public works including construction repair or modernization of Federal buildings. Examples of projects for which State and local governments could receive grants are hospitals airports schools waste treatment facilities street repairs and improvements water angl sewer systems and deferred maintenance and improvement of public buildings The unemployment criteria for triggering the accelerated capital expenditures program are rigorous enough to prevent untimely or premature activation but not so restrictive as to delay the effects of the program until late in the recovery period. The criteria for initiation of the program would have been met in the early stages of each of the four postwar recessions. Furthermore no false signals would have been given Even if the criteria were to give a false signal in the future for example if unemployment were to rise because of a major strike the President simply need not invoke the authority Table shows the dates at which the unemployment criteria would first have been met in each recession of the past decade the date of the previous peak the date of the low point of the recession and the date at which the economy subsequently returned to full employment. In every case Presidential authority could have been invoked within four months after the previous cyclical peak and well before the trough of the recession. The first impact of orders contracts and expenditures under the program would have been felt within one or two months after the authority was invoked TABLE Hypothetical timing of proposed capital improvements program in four postwar business cycles Business cycle peak Unemployment criteria met * Business cycle trough Subsequent achievement of full employment November March October October July November August July July November April ( ) May August February ( ) Criteria are met in any month in which the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate ( a ) had risen in at least three out of four months ( or in four out of six months ) and ( b ) had risen to a level at least one percentage point higher than its level four months ( or six months ) earlier. Program could be initiated within two months after criteria are met The date at which the economy returned to the neighborhood of a percent unemployment rate l u l l employment has not been achieved since the beginning of the recession Source : Council of Economic Advisers The major impact of the program would occur when a stimulus is needed to arrest economic decline or support recovery. It would not be delayed until private demands are already pressing hard on the economy 's capacity to produce. Table indicates that a quick-starting fast-moving capital expenditures program begun in the early stages of recession could have been terminated before the economy returned to full employment Stand-by tax reduction authority. The second recommendation is to establish a procedure for making quickly a temporary across-the-board reduction in the individual income tax rate. Such a reduction would be a speedy and powerful method of augmenting purchasing power throughout the Nation Specifically the President would be given stand-by authority subject to congressional veto to reduce temporarily all individual income tax rates in accordance with the following procedure : ( ) Before proposing a temporary tax reduction the President must make a finding that such action is required to meet the stabilization objectives of the Employment Act ( ) Upon such finding the President would submit to Congress a proposed temporary uniform reduction in all individual income tax rates. The proposed temporary rates may not be more than percentage points lower than the rates permanently established by the Congress ( ) This change would take effect days after submission unless rejected by a joint resolution of the Congress ( ) It would remain in effect for months unless revised or renewed by the same process or extended by a joint resolution of the Congress ( ) If the Congress were not in session a Presidentially proposed tax adjustment would automatically take effect but would terminate days after the Congress reconvened. Extension would require a new proposal to the Congress which would be subject to congressional veto An across-the-board variation in the basic individual income tax rate can be a potent stabilization measure. At the current level of taxable income a reduction of percentage point in the tax schedule would add about $ billion at annual rates to disposable personal income and a full point reduction would increase disposable income by $ billion. Since nearly three-quarters of the individual income tax is collected through payroll deductions the rate reduction would have an immediate effect upon incomes available to consumers. Payments of taxes on estimated declarations would also be reduced raising still further the current flow of consumer incomes Higher consumer incomes mean higher consumer spending. The resultant expansion in output and employment by the consumer goods industries and their suppliers would increase the incomes of those already employed and create jobs for many of the unemployed Policy to reverse recession or speed recovery often calls for a temporary boost in private purchasing power. Permanent reduction in tax rates could give the economy as strong or stronger a stimulus but at the possible sacrifice of tax revenues which would be most desirable after the economy returned to full employment. Private demands are weak in periods of recession and slack but a large part of their weakness results from recession and slack themselves. Once full employment has been restored with the help of the temporary tax reduction as well as other measures private demands will be stronger simply because capacity operation is itself a powerful stimulus. At that time the private economy no longer needs the fiscal stimulus which is appropriate to reverse a decline or support a recovery. In that case a return to permanent tax rates may be desirable in order to provide room in a non-inflationary full employment economy for defense outlays and other continuing government programs of high priority. Indeed a Federal surplus normally to be expected at full employment will provide saving to finance private investments stimulated by capacity operations and prosperity profits. Under the proposal a tax adjustment can be speedily invoked to ( $ meet the temporary requirements of economic stabilization without permanently sacrificing revenues needed at a later date Improvement of the unemployment compensation system. The third major recommendation is to strengthen the Federal-State unemployment compensation system. The proposed legislation will make the unemployment insurance system more effective in meeting its two objectives. Individual workers will be more secure against the risks of unemployment. The economy will be more secure against the risks of sharp declines in purchasing power As pointed out in Part I of this chapter unemployment benefits are now generally smaller relative to earnings than the percent envisaged when the system was first inaugurated a generation ago. Furthermore it has been necessary during the last two recessions to enact temporary legislation to extend the period of unemployment compensation for the large numbers of workers who had exhausted their benefit rights. To insure that experienced workers who suffer long-term unemployment during periods of prosperity will receive the same benefits as during recessions the Administration has proposed a permanent Federal program under which the period of unemployment compensation would be extended by as much as weeks for workers who have had at least three years ' experience in insured work The proposal also provides when unemployment is widespread a Federal program extending the period of benefits for all insured workers including those who do not qualify for the permanent program of extended benefits because they have had less than three years of experience in insured work This extension could be put into effect upon proclamation by the President when insured unemployment has reached percent and the number of benefit exhaustions in a three-month period has reached percent of insured employment. In these periods regular benefits are exhausted by large numbers of workers and particularly by workers who have only limited experience in insured employment To raise the percentage of wages compensated by unemployment insurance and to accomplish other needed reforms the following recommendations ' are made : ( ) an additional three million workers should be covered ; ( ) States should be required to meet higher standards with respect to the amount of weekly benefits ; ( ) States which have experienced heavy insured unemployment should receive reinsurance grants ; ( ) a State may not deny compensation to claimants undergoing approved training Since the unemployment compensation system is an insurance program designed to be self-financing increased benefits must be matched by increased contributions. The proposal would increase the taxable wage base from $ a year to $ and make permanent the temporary increase adopted in which raised the net Federal unemployment tax from percent to percent These three recommendations together constitute a far-reaching innovation in discretionary fiscal policy. At the same time they are moderate proposals carefully defining and limiting the authority which they confer They will go a long way toward providing the flexibility in fiscal policy which is essential if the Nation is to make prosperity the rule and not the exception in its economic life. In the past years the Nation has undergone three recessions. In the / years since full employment has not once been attained. While some fluctuations in business and consumer spending will always occur nothing in our free enterprise economy condemns us to repeat this recent experience. Prudent innovations in the tools of fiscal policy and careful use of both new and old tools can greatly improve the stability of our economy in the years ahead BUDGET POLICY The Federal budget has influenced economic activity in recent years in two ways : through the workings of the built-in stabilizers and through discretionary changes in the budget program. It is not easy to separate these two influences. In order to do so it is necessary first to view Federal fiscal transactions in the same accounting framework used to describe the whole economy. The national income accounts budget is a way of measuring and classifying Federal transactions which accords with the national income and product accounts for the economy. Second it is convenient to have a numerical measure of the expansionary or restrictive impact of a budget program on the economy. The full employment surplus is such a measure. This section discusses these two somewhat unfamiliar but highly useful tools and then applies them in an analysis of recent and prospective budget policies The National Income Accounts Budget The effects of Federal receipts and expenditures on the income stream are most accurately represented when the budget is viewed in the framework of the national income accounts. These accounts present a consistent record and classification of the major flows of output and income for the entire economy including the transactions of the Federal Government There are three major differences between the Federal budget as it is conventionally presented ( the so-called " administrative budget " ) and the accounts of the Federal sector as they appear in the national income. The major differences between these two budgets and between both of them and the consolidated cash budget are schematically summarized in Table There are other less significant differences among the budgets such as the treatment of intragovernmental transactions First the national income accounts budget like the consolidated cash budget includes the transactions of the trust funds which amount currently to about $ billion per year and have a significant impact on the economy. Highway grants-in-aid unemployment compensation payments and social security benefits are examples of trust fund transactions. Because T A B L E Major differences among three concepts of the Federal budget Budget concept Item Timing of receipts Administrative Consolidated cash National income accounts Accruals Collections.. _ Collections. Treatment of net loans and other credit transactions Included Included Excluded Treatment of trust fund transactions Excluded Included Included Source : Council of Economic Advisers the traditional budget or administrative budget is primarily an instrument of management and control of those Federal activities which operate through regular congressional appropriations it excludes the trust funds which have their own legal sources of revenue Second transactions between government and business are so far as possible recorded in the national income accounts budget when liabilities are incurred rather than when cash changes hands. This adjustment in timing affects both government purchases and taxes shifting them to the point in time at which they are likely to have their principal impact on private spending decisions. The choice of an accrual rather than a cash basis for timing is particularly important for the highly volatile corporate income tax. Since these taxes are normally paid more than six months after the liabilities are incurred payments of corporate income taxes as recorded in the administrative budget run substantially below accruals in a period of rising economic activity. For fiscal year this difference is estimated at about $ billion Finally unlike the administrative budget the national income accounts budget omits government transactions in financial assets and already existing assets. The largest omission is the volume of loans extended by the Federal Government. This volume is estimated at $ billion net of repayments in fiscal year While these loans have important effects on economic activity they are properly viewed as an aspect not of fiscal policy but of monetary and credit policy and are so discussed later in this chapter Borrowers from the Federal Government like borrowers from private financial institutions acquire cash by incurring debts. They add thereby to their liquidity but not directly to their incomes The Full Employment Surplus As pointed out earlier in this chapter the magnitude of the surplus or deficit in the budget depends both on the budget program and on the state of the economy. The budget program fixes both tax rates and expenditure programs. The revenues actually yielded by most taxes and the actual expenditures under certain programs like unemployment compensation vary automatically with economic activity v To interpret the economic significance of a given budget it is therefore essential to distinguish the automatic changes in revenues and expenditures from the discretionary changes which occur when the Government varies tax rates or changes expenditure programs. The discussion that follows runs in terms of the national income accounts budget In Chart this twofold aspect of fiscal policy is portrayed for the fiscal years and Since tax revenues and some expenditures depend on the level of economic activity there is a whole range of possible surpluses and deficits associated with a given budget program. The particular surplus or deficit in fact realized will depend on the level of economic activity. On the horizontal scale Chart shows the ratio of actual GNP to the economy 's potential labeled the " utilization rate. " On the vertical scale the chart shows the Federal budget surplus or deficit as a percentage of potential GNP CHART Effect of Level of Economic Activity on Federal Surplus or Deficit HYPOTHETICAL FULL EMPLOYMENT ACTUAL BUDGET ESTIMATE B -I UTILIZATION RATE i / A C T U A L GNP AS PERCENT OF POTENTIAL GNP SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The line labeled " fiscal program " represents a calculation of the budget surplus or deficit which would have occurred at various levels of economic activity given the Federal expenditure programs and the tax rates of that year. For the reasons explained earlier the same budget program may yield a high surplus at full employment and a low surplus or a deficit at low levels of economic activity. The actual budget position in fiscal year a surplus of $ billion or percent of potential GNP is shown at point A ; this accompanied a level of GNP percent below potential. Had full employment been achieved that year however the same basic budget program would have yielded a surplus of about $ billion or nearly percent of gross national product ( point F in the chart ) The line labeled " program " similarly shows the relationship between economic activity and the surplus or deficit for the budget program of ; the expected deficit is shown at point B and the full employment surplus at point G It is the height of the line in Chart which reflects the basic budget program ; the actual surplus or deficit depends both on the height of the program line and the level of economic activity. In other words discretionary fiscal policy by changing the level of Government expenditures or tax rates shifts the whole program line up or down. The automatic stabilizing effects of a given budget program are reflected in the chart by movements along a given line accompanying changes in economic activity One convenient method of comparing alternative budget programs which separates automatic from discretionary changes in surplus and deficits is to calculate the surplus or deficit of each alternative program at a fixed level of economic activity. As a convention this calculation is made on the assumption of full employment. In Chart the points F and G mark the full employment surplus in the budget programs of fiscal years and respectively. The statement " the fiscal budget had a larger full employment surplus as a fraction of potential GNP than the budget " is a convenient shorthand summary of the fact that the budget line was below the line yielding smaller surpluses or larger deficits at any comparable level of activity The full employment surplus rises through time if tax rates and expenditure programs remain unchanged. Because potential GNP grows the volume of tax revenues yielded by a fully employed economy rises when tax rates remain unchanged. Full employment revenues under existing tax laws are growing by about $ billion a year. With unchanged discretionary expenditures a budget line drawn on Chart would shift upward each year by about percent of potential GNP The full employment surplus is a measure of the restrictive or expansionary impact of a budget program on over-all demand. Generally speaking one budget program is more expansionary than another if it has a smaller full employment surplus. One budget program might have the smaller full employment surplus because it embodies greater Federal purchases of goods and services in relation to potential GNP. By the same 8o token it leaves a smaller share of full employment output for private purchase. This means that full employment is easier to maintain under the budget program with the smaller surplus because less private demand is required It also means that inflation is more difficult to avoid because there are fewer goods and services to meet private demand should it prove strong. Alternatively one budget program might have a smaller full employment surplus than a second because it involves either lower tax rates or larger transfer payment programs. In that event private after-tax incomes are larger at full employment for the first budget program than for the second. As a result private demand would be stronger under the first program If the full employment surplus is too large relative to the strength of private demand economic activity falls short of potential. Correspondingly the budget surplus actually realized falls short of the full employment surplus ; indeed a deficit may occur. If the full employment surplus is too small total demand exceeds the capacity of economy and causes inflation But whether a given full employment surplus is too large or too small depends on other government policies as well as on economic circumstances affecting the general strength of private demand. If the full employment surplus is too large more expansionary monetary and credit policies may strengthen private demand sufficiently to permit full employment to be realized. Changes in tax structure stimulating demand while leaving the yield of the tax system unchanged might have the same effect Similarly restrictive changes in other government policies can offset the expansionary influence of a low full employment surplus A mixture of policies involving ( ) a budget program with a relatively high full employment surplus and ( ) monetary ease and tax incentives stimulating enough private investment to maintain full employment has favorable consequences for economic growth discussed in Chapter The Budget in The analysis of the budget program in terms of the full employment surplus points to a probable major cause of the incomplete and short-lived nature of the expansion. The most restrictive fiscal program of recent years was the program of Its full employment surplus exceeded any from to date. Estimates of the full employment surplus by half years are shown in Chart The full employment surplus declined sharply as a result of higher expenditures during the recession until it reached an estimated $ billion in the second half of Thereafter it rose gradually through most of but then increased sharply to about $ ^ billion in Thus whereas the Federal budget contributed to stability during the contraction phase of the cycle and during the first year of the expansion it was altered abruptly in the direction of restraint late in at a time when high employment had not yet been achieved 8i CHART Federal Surplus or Deficit : Actual and Full Employment Estimate ( Nafional Income Accounts Basis ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * FULL EMPLOYMENT ESTIMATE ACTUAL l / _ SURPLUS III i 7ZZ i I DEFICIT [ I I I I I960 CALENDAR I I YEARS * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ; DATA ARE FOR HALF-YEARS J/ESTIMATED BEGINNING SECOND HALF SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE BUREAU OF THE BUDGET AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Federal Fiscal Activity in Immediately upon taking office the new Administration moved vigorously to use the fiscal powers of the Federal Government to help bring about economic recovery. Federal procurement was accelerated by Presidential directive early in February and tax refunds were also expedited. A listing of Administration stabilization policies during is provided in the Appendix to this chapter. Changes in transfer programs added about $ billion to the combined total of transfer payments for fiscal years and The Veterans Administration advanced the payment of $ million of veterans ' life insurance dividends into the first quarter of calendar year and then made an extra dividend payment of $ million at midyear The Congress promptly adopted a number of measures requested by the President. A Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act was adopted providing for extension of exhausted benefits and giving the Administration time to develop a comprehensive program for permanent improvement in unemployment compensation. Social security benefits were increased effective in August and aid was extended to children dependent on unemployed persons. Transfer payments represent a major element of flexibility in Federal expenditures. While transfer programs like any Federal outlays ought to stand on their merits the precise timing of worthwhile new programs properly depends on economic conditions The objectives of economic stabilization in argued strongly for speeding the introduction of programs like improvements in social security scheduled to be adopted later Other Federal outlays increased in to meet specific national needs Federal grants to States and localities for urban renewal area redevelopment highways and public assistance increased. Direct payments to farmers were increased as a result of participation in the feed grains program The largest increases in expenditures came in the areas of defense and space exploration. These programs were expanded for reasons of national security not for economic stabilization. However stabilization objectives ruled against any increases in tax rates to finance these new expenditures During the estimated full employment surplus declined significantly from an annual rate of $ 12/2 billion in the second half of to $ ^ billion in the second half of As shown in Chart the actual surplus or deficit has been substantially different from its full employment counterpart. Since private incomes declined during late and into the actual budget position shifted from a surplus of $ billion in the second half of to a deficit of $ billion in the first half of Then as the economy began to recover the deficit in the national income accounts shrank to $ billion in the second half of the year. The rising deficit in the early part of was due both to a shift downward in its budget program line ( as discretionary budget outlays were increased ) and to a movement to the left along the new line ( as private incomes and Federal tax receipts declined ) The Federal national income accounts budget appropriately showed its largest deficit early in when the economy was near the trough of recession. Since then the deficit has been steadily declining in spite of rising expenditures and a surplus is expected in the first half of The administrative and cash deficits show a different time pattern with deficits rising in the fiscal year primarily because tax collections lag behind tax liabilities The fiscal actions taken during the past year reflect the Administration 's philosophy that the budget is a positive instrument for economic stabilization. According to the original January budget estimates expenditures on national income-and-product account were expected to reach a level of $ billion in fiscal year Present estimates which incorporate all of the changes made by executive and legislative action indicate that these expenditures will amount to more than $ billion. This increase in expenditures is itself responsible for a rise in the gross national product that can be estimated conservatively at $ billion Budget Policy for Fiscal The balanced administrative budget proposed for fiscal year projects an increase over the current fiscal year of nearly $ billion in Federal outlays on income-and-product account. Because of the $ billion a year increase in social insurance taxes effective January the full employment surplus rises in the first half of But it remains considerably below the level of ( Chart ) Fiscal policy will be less restrictive than it was in the late stages of the last recovery. The budgetary program yielding a surplus on income-and-product account of $ billion reflects the reasonable expectation that percent unemployment will be reached by the end of the fiscal year. The feasibility of this objective and the outlook for the economy have been appraised in detail in Part I above. Obviously the strength of private demand over the next months can not now be assessed with precision. Any plans covering the uncertain future are necessarily risky. A less expansionary budget with a larger full employment surplus would provide added assurance of price stability but only at the cost of increased dangers of an incomplete recovery. A more expansionary budget would on the other hand improve the outlook for maximum production and employment but increase the risks of rising prices The risks of an incomplete recovery on the one hand or of rising prices on the other are fortunately reduced by the automatic stabilizing characteristics of the budget. If private demand proves excessively bouyant the added revenues can be expected to enlarge the surplus in the budget thereby moderating inflationary pressures. Conversely any shortfall in private demand will likewise be partially countered by a shortfall in tax revenues In addition discretionary policy will remain flexible. First monetary policy can be used flexibly. The Federal Reserve can attune its policies to the pattern of output employment and prices as it unfolds during the months ahead. Second as the experience of demonstrated the budget itself is a flexible tool which can be adjusted during the course of a fiscal year by varying the timing of outlays and by legislative action. Finally the President 's stabilization proposals described earlier in this chapter would if adopted significantly strengthen the government 's ability to act swiftly and energetically in meeting unforeseen economic developments MONETARY AND CREDIT POLICIES AND ECONOMIC STABILITY The second major instrument of the Government for economic stabilization is monetary and credit policy interpreted in the broadest sense to encompass all governmental actions affecting the liquidity of the economy and the availability and cost of credit. Here the Federal Government has broad and inescapable responsibilities stemming basically from the sovereign right of Congress " to coin money regulate the value thereof. " The Government 's influence is exercised in several ways principally through Federal Reserve control of the total volume of bank reserves but also through Treasury management of the public debt and through the administration of a variety of government lending and credit guarantee programs These powers can significantly affect the flow of funds into business investment capital expenditures of State and local governments residential construction and purchases of consumer durable goods. Monetary and credit policies can be flexible responding at short notice to changes in economic circumstances and prospects In an important sense the private economy of the United States contains automatic or " built-in " monetary stabilizers. Unless the Government acts to make compensating changes in the monetary base expansion of general economic activity accompanied by increased demands for liquid balances and for investment funds will tend to tighten interest rates and restrict the availability of credit. Similarly a recession of business activity will normally lead to lower rates easier terms and less stringent rationing by lenders. Like fiscal stabilizers the. monetary stabilizers are often useful built-in defenses against recessions or against inflationary excesses of demand. But these defenses may not be strong enough. Being automatic stabilizers they can only moderate unfavorable developments ; they can not prevent or reverse them. And at other times unless the monetary authorities offset their effects they can operate counter to basic policy objectives braking expansions short of full employment. Discretionary policy is essential sometimes to reinforce sometimes to mitigate or overcome the monetary consequences of short-run fluctuations of economic activity. In addition discretionary policy must provide the base for expanding liquidity and credit in line with the growing production potential of the economy For these reasons the Federal Reserve System is continuously making and executing discretionary monetary policy The proper degree of general " tightness " or " easiness " of monetary policy and the techniques by which the various governmental authorities can appropriately seek to achieve it depend on the state of the domestic economy on the fiscal policies of the Government and on the international economic position. When the economy is in recession or beset by high unemployment and excess capacity monetary policy should clearly be expansionary. How expansionary it should be depends very much upon the extent of the stimulus that the government budget is and will be giving to over-all demand. When demand is threatening to outrun the economy 's production potential monetary policy should be restrictive. How restrictive it should be depends again upon how much of the job of containing inflation is assumed by fiscal policy. There is in principle a variety of mixtures of fiscal and monetary policies which can accomplish a given stabilization objective. Choice among them depends upon other objectives and constraints. The relation of this choice to economic growth was noted above ; the stabilization of demand at full employment levels by a budget surplus compensated by an expansionary monetary policy is favorable to growth. On the other hand monetary policy may in some circumstances be constrained by the balance of payments. If low interest rates encourage foreign borrowing in the United States and a large outflow of funds seeking higher yields abroad monetary policy may have to be more restrictive than domestic economic objectives alone would dictate. The first line of defense is to try to adapt the techniques of monetary control so that policy can serve both masters at once. Even so difficult decisions of balance between conflicting objectives may sometimes be unavoidable Monetary Policy and Debt Management At the beginning of monetary policy was restrictive and interest rates were generally at postwar peaks. Despite bullish expectations about the economy interest rates soon began a slow decline that lasted seven or eight months aided by a gradual reversal of Federal Reserve policy ( Table ) beginning in March and furthered by the recession starting in May However the Federal Reserve 's anti-recession policy for the first time since the early 's was constrained by a serious balance of payments situation. Through its choice of expansionary monetary techniques the Federal Reserve sought to avoid adding to the already large outflow of shortterm capital. The 3-month Treasury bill rate did not fall below percent Long-term interest rates declined from their peaks but remained considerably above their previous cyclical troughs ( Chart ) This was a matter of serious concern because of the importance of long-term interest rates for business capital investment residential construction and State and local governmental spending on public facilities. And neither the money supply nor long-term private financing responded as promptly as in previous periods of monetary ease The new Administration faced in January both economic recession and a crisis of confidence in the dollar that threatened to limit sharply the use of expansionary monetary policy for economic recovery and growth The Administration 's forthright attack on the balance of payments problem restored confidence in the dollar. The resulting reduction in the discount on the dollar in the forward markets for foreign exchange eliminated any significant advantage in sending short-term funds abroad and helped to make it possible for monetary policy to support domestic expansion The ability of monetary policy to support economic expansion at home without stimulating outflows of short-term funds was simultaneously enhanced by new Federal Reserve open market techniques and by Treasurey debt management policies. In his Economic Message of February the President had emphasized the importance of " increasing the flow of credit into the capital markets at declining long-term rates of interest to promote domestic recovery " while " checking declines in the short-term rates that directly affect the balance of payments. " The Federal Reserve sold short- CHART Interest Rates in Three Business Cycles PERCENT PER ANNUM YIELDS CORPORATE Aaa BOND ( MOODY1 S ) \ P P ^ " \ P u tuininiiitt ^ " ttUlUUlUl I | | I FHA MORTGAGE YIELDS P y -P mJ Dntl " " ui.ummIO m * n iHItIIIIHUfI ^ ^ /. I I I I MONTH TREASURY BILL RATE _ ( NEW ISSUES ) P P \ \ P ' inn \ \ ' ^ \ ' * \ \ I I I I MONTHS FROM CYCLICAL TROUGH NOTE : DATA ARE PLOTTED FROM CYCLICAL PEAK ( P ) TO MONTHS AFTER CYCLICAL TROUGH ( T ) SOURCES : MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM t i l l T A B L E Principal Federal Reserve monetary actions Date Action : March Federal Reserve open market operations modified so as to ex ^ rt moderately less restraint on bank reserve positions than in earlier months. Effect was to allow reduction in net borrowed reserves May.. Open market operations modified to provide reserves for moderate expansion of bank credit and money supply June-- Discount rates reduced from percent to 3M percent July... Margin requirements reduced from percent to percent August Authorized member banks to count about $ million of vault cash as required reserves. Reduced reserve requirements against demand deposits at central reserve city banks from percent to 17V3 percent effective September releasing about $ million of reserves AugustSeptember October NovemberDecember.. : January-early February.. FebruaryDecember. December Discount rates reduced from percent to percent. Open market operations modified to suggest a positive attitude toward increasing the availability of reserves Purchased short-term U.S. Government securities other than Treasury bills for first time since to minimize downward pressure on 3-month bill rate thus keeping bill rate more competitive internationally Authorized member banks to count all vault cash in meeting reserve requirements reduced reserve requirements against demand deposits at central reserve city banks from ^ percent to 16H percent raised requirements for country banks from percent to percent. Net effect of actions was to release about $ billion of reserves Open market operations aimed at maintaining ease in member bank reserve positions with seasonal increases in. reserve funds about offset by gold outflow and other factors draining reserves On February began providing reserves through purchases of longer-term U.S. Government securities while selling short-term Government securities at times.1 Expansion in money supply became more rapid later in the year with monetary ease being maintained throughout the year Board of Governors announced increase in maximum rates payable on savings and other time deposits effective January The action was taken to promote competition for savings and to encourage retention of foreign funds by member banks and thus moderate pressures on this country 's balance of payments Treasury also purchased very long-term U.S. Government securities for Government investment accounts In his Economic Message of February President Kennedy had announced that the Federal Reserve and Treasury were developing techniques to help keep long-term rates down while holding short-term rates at internationally competitive levels Source : Council of Economic Advisers term securities while the Treasury further increased the outstanding supply through new cash offerings. On February the Federal Reserve announced a new policy of providing bank reserves through purchases of U.S Government securities of longer maturities particularly in the to 6-year range. Its purchases of U.S. Government securities of maturity of more than year amounted to $ billion in The Treasury in administering the investment portfolios of various government investment and trust accounts made substantial purchases of securities of maturities of more than years. Aided by these actions long-term bond rates declined until May and rose only moderately thereafter in the face of an economic recovery that had begun in February Through substantial net purchases of U.S. Government securities the Federal Reserve increased member bank reserves in by about $ billion. As a result banks steadily expanded their loans and investments ; the increase during the year was considerably more than in and about the same as in the peacetime record year Persistently expecting an uptrend in market interest rates banks maintained lending rates in the face of generally weak demands for short-term loans and added $ billion to their holdings of U.S. Government securities. However the expansion of bank holdings of Government securities made more funds available on the open market. And the high level of bank holdings of short-term government securities combined with abundant free reserves put pressure on banks to expand business loans and to lend directly in the capital markets. As monetary ease persisted and expectations of rising interest rates subsided banks stepped up purchases of State and local securities and expanded mortgage lending. The percent increase in total bank deposits and currency during fell just short of the peacetime record although public preference for time deposits held the increase in the money supply ( demand deposits and currency ) to about percent The liquidity of the economy was also increased by changes in the composition and level of the Federal debt held outside the Federal Reserve and the Treasury. Open market and debt management operations added substantially to the supply of U.S. Government securities maturing within year. The volume of less liquid securities maturing within to years declined. The volume of outstanding securities greater than years in maturity remained the same. The average maturity of that part of the debt held outside the Federal Reserve and U.S. Government investment accounts declined from months to months. The average maturity of the total marketable public debt changed little in Two advance refundings designed to have a minimal impact on over-all liquidity helped to offset shortening as a result of mere passage of time Federal Reserve and Treasury debt operations provided the basic liquidity necessary for economic expansion. Individuals in addition to increasing their deposits in commercial banks stepped up their accumulation of claims on such financial intermediaries as savings and loan associations mutual savings banks and life insurance companies while cutting down their purchases of securities on the open market. This behavior was in part a response to the high level of interest and dividend rates paid by financial intermediaries relative to yields of high-grade open market securities. Liquid assets held by the public defined to include the money supply savings deposits and shares U.S. Savings bonds and short-term U.S. Government securities grew by percent in paralleling the rise in GNP. Financial intermediaries used the funds which flowed into them from the public to extend credit by acquiring mortgages bonds and other loans and securities. In this way their operations both increased the liquidity of individuals and made more long-term credit available The total volume of mortgage corporate and State and local long-term financing rose sharply to what appears to be a new record ( Table ) TABLE Funds raised in money and capital markets by type of instrument [ Billions of dollars ] Type of instrument TotaL Federal obligations 2_ Short-term s_ Long-term 4_ Private Short-term Business bank loans Consumer credit Other Long-term State and local securities Corporate securities Other securities Mortgages Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Excludes consumer-held savings bonds and notes issued to international organizations ; includes nonguaranteed securities issued by Federal agencies Direct marketable issues maturing in one year or less Includes direct Treasury issues maturing after one year and all nonguaranteed securities Investment company share issues and foreign security issues NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) Corporations borrowed unusually heavily in long-term capital markets but added in the aggregate almost as much to their financial assets of a generally liquid character as to their financial liabilities. Monetary ease in facilitating this financing laid the financial groundwork for expanded corporate capital spending in the future Because of the expansion in liquidity and in the supply of credit through financial institutions interest rates were relatively stable during in sharp contrast to the previous upswing ( Chart ) The rate of 3-month Treasury bills fluctuated within the narrow range of ^ and } percent during most of the year rising somewhat above this range toward the close Most long-term rates declined through May and thereafter increased by only a small amount. Rates on home mortgages which are more sticky than most other rates continued to fall until midyear and then remained fairly stable. Thus has demonstrated that interest rates do not have to rise sharply in cyclical recoveries. Their movement is not governed by immutable natural law. It depends upon all economic circumstances and governmental policies affecting the supply of funds and the demand for them The behavior of interest rates during the year may also have signaled the ending of the upward trend in rates from the low levels at which they were pegged prior to the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord of While this trend was in part an adjustment to the profitability of investment in capital goods it also reflected the spread of inflationary expectations. Recent stability in industrial and consumer prices may however diminish in- flationary psychology so that inflation premiums would gradually be shaken out of the interest rate structure The climate for equity financing was also favorable during Common stock prices rose by about percent anticipating in part a recovery of corporate profits and the average dividend yield on stocks fell below percent Federal Credit Programs The Administration sought to make credit readily available at liberal terms through programs of Federal lending and Federal insurance and guarantee of private lending. Important steps were taken to stimulate housing construction. Early in the year the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) reduced the maximum permissible rate on insured mortgages in two steps from % to 5J4 percent. The Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) supported these reductions by its secondary market operations in mortgages raising both its purchase and selling prices repeatedly. Up to midyear sales of mortgages by FNMA exceeded purchases but after midyear its operations added to the supply of funds available for mortgages. The Federal Home Loan Bank Board and the regional Banks liberalized regulations and reduced interest rates on advances in order to stimulate mortgage lending by savings and loan associations For the longer run the Housing Act of expanded or liberalized many existing credit programs and initiated hew ones. A new FHA insurance program was set up for middle-income housing with FNMA also prepared to purchase these mortgages under its special assistance programs Maturities up to years in some cases up to years were authorized for FHA-insured mortgages and insurable loan-to-value ratios were increased A new FHA program for insurance of long-term home improvement loans was instituted. FNMA made the new home improvement loans eligible for purchase under its secondary market operations and when used to finance rehabilitation of homes in urban renewal areas the new loans are eligible for purchase by FNMA under its special assistance program FNMA also was authorized to make short-term loans secured by federally underwritten mortgages. Funds were provided for loans for public facilities college housing farm housing housing for the elderly and FNMA special assistance. The capital grant authority for urban renewal was increased by $ billion Other Federal credit programs contributed to making credit more generally available at liberal terms in In particular the Small Business Administration reduced the interest rate on loans made in areas of substantial unemployment and instituted a simplified program to expand bank participation in small business loans Federal credit programs will support economic expansion during the coming fiscal year. New commitments are expected to rise to record levels Direct loans and mortgage purchases ( including trust fund purchases ) will O-62-7 approach $ billion $ billion more than anticipated collections on outstanding loans. New commitments to guarantee or insure private loans will for the first time reach $ billion Monetary Expansion and Recovery As the economy advances toward full employment it will need more liquidity. Throughout the postwar period and particularly in the three previous economic recoveries the growth in liquidity has fallen considerably short of the growth in GNP. The economy had to work off the excess liquidity inherited from the war interest rates were generally rising and expectations of higher prices were spreading. These factors worked to reduce the liquidity requirements of the economy relative to GNP. And the growth in nonmonetary liquid assets diminished even more the needed growth in the money supply ( bank deposits and currency ) Business firms government units and individuals learned to their advantage how to minimize holdings of cash For each percent rise in GNP in the three past economic recoveries commercial bank deposits and currency increased by only about one-third of percent while liquid assets more broadly measured increased by about two-fifths to three-fifths of percent. If these relationships should hold in the current economic recovery and if gross national product rises to full employment levels by the middle of an increase of more than percent from the trough in the first quarter of commercial bank deposits and currency would grow over the same period by percent and liquid assets by percent In the current recovery however the factors that served to limit liquidity requirements in the earlier recoveries may well be less important. In particular interest rates may appropriately be more stable for reasons already explained. Thus these estimates of needed liquidity are probably conservative. The appropriate expansion of liquidity will depend upon the strength of private demands on the tightness of fiscal policy and on the balance of payments position IMPROVING THE MOBILITY OF RESOURCES Maximum employment and production depend not only on the success of stabilization policy in maintaining demand at appropriate levels but also on the mobility of labor and other productive resources in response to changes in demand and cost. If frictional and structural unemployment can be diminished demand can be pressed further before encountering bottlenecks and price increases. Thus measures to improve the mobility of resources enable stabilization policy to aim at and to attain higher levels of employment and production. Such measures are a basic part of the Administration 's economic program Labor Market Policies Changes in technology and tastes are constantly altering the pattern of demand for labor in our economy. New industries appear and expand while old ones decline ; job opportunities multiply in one region and disappear in another ; new skills are required as old ones become obsolete The more rapidly an economy grows and changes the greater the flux in its labor markets A high level of over-all demand is a prerequisite for the efficient allocation of labor resources in a dynamic economy. It furnishes the most important single incentive for economically desirable labor mobility the magnetic attraction of available job openings. However a high level of demand will not by itself ensure the best possible degree of occupational industrial and geographic labor mobility for it will not eliminate some important impediments to the desirable response of labor to job opportunities. Certain features of seniority pension and other benefit rights may serve to hold labor in industries and areas experiencing declining demand. Lack of knowledge of job openings and lack of the skills required to fill them constitute important barriers to labor mobility and the high cost of moving is an insurmountable obstacle to the migration of many low-income families to areas of expanding employment. It is in the best interest of the economy as well as of the individuals involved that these impediments be reduced and that every wage earner be in a position to select the most favorable alternative from the widest possible range of employment opportunities Employment exchange. Letting employers know about available workers and telling workers about available jobs are difficult administrative and technical problems in a labor market as complex as ours. Yet doing this well can significantly reduce the number and size of labor shortages and help eliminate pockets of unemployment and underemployment A major effort has begun to improve the United States Employment Service so that it can do a better job in matching job vacancies with people The staff has been substantially expanded particularly in the metropolitan areas where most workers and jobs are concentrated. This staff will need most importantly to emphasize improvement in the quality of its counseling and placement work. The flow of information about jobs should be made nationwide through more extensive exchanges of job information among the State agencies. Also since the performance of the important labor exchange function should not suffer from the tremendous administrative problems of administering unemployment compensation these two activities should be separated where the volume of work permits As the United States Employment Service succeeds in improving its services more people will use it. The larger the number of employers and workers using the Employment Service the more complete will be the knowledge of the labor market available to each of them. A greatly strengthened United States Employment Service will facilitate an expanded rate of economic growth and contribute to the effectiveness of such specific government programs as Area Redevelopment Rural Redevelopment and the proposed programs for Trade Assistance and Manpower Development and Training Training : The economic need for facilitating labor mobility through education and training programs is evidenced by the simultaneous existence of very low unemployment rates in various skilled technical and professional occupations and relatively high unemployment among the less skilled groups Programs for education and training should be directed particularly toward new entrants into the labor force and the training of adults for positions of increased productivity and income. Racial discrimination in training, as well as in hiring must be eliminated. It is wrong that is reason enough and it is also an enormous waste of human talent The Administration is proposing a program to provide useful employment and training for young people through three pilot programs financed in whole or in part by the Federal Government. These programs provide for on-the-job training public service employment and training and employment training and educational opportunities through service in a Youth Conservation Corps. Special training programs for young people are contemplated ; such programs are urgently needed in urban slum areas Some of these programs for the training of youth should help directly and indirectly to stimulate and guide the flow of migration from the farm ; in April percent of the entire farm population and percent of the nonwhite farm population were under age Lack of education certainly does not imply lack of aptitude and widened educational opportunities enable individuals to improve their employment opportunities as well as the quality of their lives. The Administration 's program for aid to States and educational institutions in extending and improving adult literacy programs is an important step toward reducing structural unemployment The Administration 's key proposal for manpower development and training provides for the establishment of programs for selection placement and on-the-job training and for improvement of State training facilities. Although intended primarily for the unemployed and underemployed these programs would also be open to other qualified persons desiring to improve their skills or to acquire new skills Compensation for workers participating in a training program is essential. At present many individuals are confronted with the hard choice between compensation without training and training without compensation ; the necessity for this choice should be eliminated. Unemployed workers in most States are still disqualified from receiving unemployment insurance benefits if they participate in education and training programs Moreover workers receiving benefits are required to be continuously available for job placement. Compensation for training would make it financially possible for an unemployed individual to complete a full course of training or retraining. Under the proposed program allowances would be provided for certain trainees not receiving unemployment compensation benefits. Thus a large part of the cost of trainee compensation under the program would be offset by reductions in unemployment compensation payments and various other public assistance expenditures A major feature of the proposal is the provision for government studies on a national and local basis to determine the future requirements of the economy for various occupations and skills to anticipate prospective manpower shortages and to assure that workers are trained for occupations where opportunities will exist Resource Use in Agriculture The agricultural population has long been a major source of manpower for U.S. industry. Many more children are born and raised on farms than will be needed to produce the Nation 's food and fiber. They must be educated trained and guided to nonagricultural employment. Many adults now earn substandard incomes in farming. They are not in a technical sense structurally unemployed but their distress is nevertheless a symptom of structural maladjustment. Programs of the kind just discussed to facilitate labor mobility and training can and should help many of these individuals to find new employment During the first two decades of this century there was serious question whether agriculture could with the closing of the land frontier continue to meet the food and fiber demands of a growing national economy. The rate of growth in farm output was declining and food and fiber prices were rising relative to other wholesale prices. The resulting public concern led to ( ) increased emphasis on conservation and resource investment and ( ) increased allocation of public funds for research and education designed to speed progress in agricultural technology By the mid-1920 's agricultural productivity was rising and farm employment declining. The full implications of rapid technological progress in agriculture were however obscured by the depression and by the Second World War and the Korean conflict. During the depression the catastrophic decline in demand for farm products was the compelling problem and policy was directed to protecting farm prices and incomes from its consequences. During the war and the Korean conflict government programs were designed to encourage increases in output and to protect farmers from the effects of price reductions when emergency demands disappeared During the 's the full effects of the programs set in motion early in the century began to be felt. The demand for farm output rose only slightly faster than the population. Rapid gains in productivity put farm prices and incomes under increasing downward pressure. Farm programs designed for depression and war were continued in order to hold at least part of the social gains from increasing agricultural productivity within the agricultural sector. Farmers also responded by leaving agriculture at the most rapid rate in history. Use of labor declined by almost one-third while output increased by more than one-fourth between and By it was clear that agriculture 's relationship to the general economy had undergone a fundamental change in several respects. Agriculture can without question meet any foreseeable demands for food and fiber placed upon it. In it required million farm workers to feed a Nation of million people. By the population had increased to million and farm employment had fallen to million. The effects of fluctuations in national economic activity on the demand for farm output have been damped by built-in floors under consumer spending and by continuation of the emergency farm programs. Nevertheless the stability and growth of the national economy are still of great importance to the farm population. Failure to maintain full employment limits the ability of industry to absorb farm workers displaced by advancing technology During periods of peak economic activity migration has been above percent of the farm population. During recessions in the last decade the migration rate out of agriculture has fallen considerably. Thus the problem of agricultural labor mobility is very largely a question of the availability of nonagricultural job opportunities. If job opportunities are available the general manpower policies discussed above can facilitate the necessary migration and ease the human problems of adjustment Caught between the pressures of a slowly rising demand for farm products rising productivity in agriculture and limitations on nonfarm employment opportunities total farm income and farm income per capita or per farm family have lagged behind incomes in the rest of the economy. The commodity programs have protected farm incomes from even greater declines but at considerable budgetary expense and at some cost in delaying adjustment of patterns of resource use in agriculture. In farm incomes were increased and a significant start was made toward reduction of costs of surplus accumulation storage and disposal Objectives of agricultural policy as it develops in the future should encompass both ( ) continuation of agriculture 's historic role as a major contributor to national economic growth and ( ) equitable distribution of gains in agricultural productivity between farmers and consumers. Achievement of these two objectives will require continued rapid transfers of labor from the farm to the nonfarm sector and reduction in resources devoted to the production storage and disposition of surplus production Appendix P R O G R A M FOR E C O N O M I C RECOVERY AND GROWTH When the new Administration took office on January it moved with speed and vigor to deal with the recession that had begun in May At his press conference of February the President announced a series of administrative actions. He followed this with a comprehensive " Program to Restore Momentum to the American Economy " delivered before the Congress on February Legislative requests some of them directed toward the immediate situation others toward future recovery and growth were laid before the Congress in this speech and in a series of messages during the year The following is a list of the actions taken during to foster economic recovery and growth. Included also are measures ( other than defense and foreign aid ) which though primarily directed to other purposes contributed significantly to growth A. EXECUTIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS Accelerated Procurement and Construction The President directed Federal agencies to accelerate procurement and construction planned for the rest of fiscal year under existing funds Post Office Construction It was announced that post office construction originally scheduled for implementation over months would be compressed into months ( March to the end of the calendar year ) Although changes were made in this directive before the end of the calendar year there was a substantial acceleration during the first half of in the provision of new offices. Projects for post offices were concentrated in areas of high unemployment Federal-Aid Highways School and Other Construction On February the President made available $ million of Federal-aid highway funds scheduled for release in the fourth quarter of fiscal Quarterly apportionments for the first and second quarters of fiscal were also released ahead of schedule in May and August. On February the President urged State Governors to speed the spending of $ billion in Federal aid for highways schools hospitals and waste treatment facilities Accelerated Tax Refunds Taxpayers who were eligible for refunds were requested to file returns early to speed refund payments. In the first three months of individual income tax refunds totaled about $ billion percent more than in Veterans Life Insurance Dividends On February the President announced that he had directed the Veterans Administration to advance the payment of veterans life insurance dividends. The total payable $ million over the entire calendar year was made available in the first quarter. In addition a special dividend payment of $ million was made in late June and in July Price Supports and Farm Storage Payments Price supports were raised on corn cotton butterfat and milk soybeans and most other price-supported commodities for the crop year On February the President directed the Department of Agriculture to speed payments to farmers for storage of crops under price support loans The payments advanced to early March amounted to about $ million Food Distribution In his first executive order the President on January directed the Secretary of Agriculture to expand the free food distribution program for needy families in areas of chronic unemployment. On January the Secretary of Agriculture announced that through additional purchases of protein foods the Government would increase the variety of surplus foods being distributed. As a result of these actions the annual rate of distribution was raised from about $ million to more than $ million Food Stamp Program On February the President announced the establishment of six area projects for operation of a pilot " food stamp " distribution program. This was subsequently expanded to eight areas Farm Loans On February the Department of Agriculture announced that pursuant to a White House directive it was making available an additional $ million for housing loans to low-income farmers. On February the Department announced that the Farmers Home Administration would release an additional $ million for operating loans for farmers. Lending activity of the Farmers Home Administration for rural area development was accelerated Rural Electrification Administration During the year the Rural Electrification Administration intensified its activity in the field of rural area development Monetary Policy and Debt Management As the President announced in his February message the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department worked " to further the complementary effectiveness of debt management and monetary policy. " During the year their policies were directed toward fostering domestic economic recovery by providing the base for needed bank credit and monetary expansion and by encouraging the flow of savings and credit into long-term investment channels. The Federal Reserve provided bank reserves through purchases of securities of more than year. The Treasury Department has been buying long-term U.S. Government securities for the trust fund accounts. At the same time both monetary and debt management policies countered downward pressure on short-term rates with a view to checking the outflow of funds from this country to money markets abroad Housing Actions On February the President announced a speeding up of the initiation of projects already approved ( including the commitment of available college housing funds ahead of schedule ) On February the maximum permissible interest rate on insured home loans of the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) was reduced from % percent to / percent and on May to % percent The Community Facilities Administration reduced rates on new loans and broadened the program to include certain communities and projects previously excluded Purchase and sales prices for federally underwritten mortgages under Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) secondary market operations were raised in a series of steps. After the middle of purchases of mortgages by FNMA under secondary market operations exceeded sales The Federal Home Loan Bank Board liberalized terms under which Federal savings and loan associations can make mortgage loans ; broadened the powers of insured associations to engage in participation loans ; allowed member associations to borrow an amount up to 17/2 percent of withdrawable accounts from Federal Home Loan Banks in contrast to the former 12j/s> percent ( this action was taken in two steps ) ; caused Federal Home Loan Banks to reduce interest rates on advances to members ; and instituted a new program of intermediate advances by Federal Home Loan Banks On February the Urban Renewal Administration requested local public agencies to accelerate urban renewal activities On July FHA eliminated the continuing service charge formerly permitted for home mortgages of $ or less Small Business Administration Loans On April the Small Business Administration ( SBA ) announced a decrease from l/i percent to percent in the interest rate on loans to small businesses in areas of substantial unemployment and a liberalization of size standards. The Agency also reduced from 5-5J/ ^ percent to percent the interest rate on loans to State and local development companies in such areas. In August it instituted a simplified bank loan participation plan designed to achieve expanded commercial bank participation in small business loans Government Procurement in Areas of Substantial Unemployment On February the President announced that he was directing the Secretary of Defense Secretary of Labor and the General Services Administration to take steps to improve the mechanism for channeling Federal contracts to firms both in areas of substantial unemployment and in areas of substantial and persistent unemployment. Accordingly the Federal Procurement Regulations have been amended ( ) to provide procedures for the setting aside of appropriate procurements for award to firms which will perform a substantial proportion of the contracts in areas of substantial unemployment and areas of substantial and persistent unemployment ( ) to assure that concerns in such areas are afforded an equitable opportunity to compete for subcontracts under government prime contracts and ( ) to clarify and strengthen the preference for firms in such areas in procurements where equal low bids are received. Similar instructions have been issued in the Armed Services Procurement Regulation United States Employment Service ( USES ) On February the President directed the Secretary of Labor to expand and improve services to jobless applicants registered with the USES. Placement services especially in metropolitan areas have been realigned to meet the needs of workers and employers in all occupations. The Bureau of Employment Security and affiliated State agencies have increased program emphasis on job development for the unemployed and testing counseling and placement activities for young people out of school and out of work Manpower Retraining In anticipation of passage of the proposed manpower development and training act the Secretary of Labor on November requested all States to develop plans for immediate implementation of the law. In addition the Department of Labor and the Department of Health Education and Welfare have coordinated plans for effectively carrying out their responsibilities under the act Export-Import Bank The Export-Import Bank announced two new programs which make available export credit guarantees insurance and financing for semifinished and consumer durable goods and export credit insurance for consumer goods. The first of these makes available export credit insurance covering both political and credit risks on short-term and medium-term credit sales which will be issued through a private association of insurance companies The second program consists of guarantees issued to financial institutions and Bank participation with financial institutions which finance exporters ' medium-term credit sales on a nonrecourse basis. Both programs are de- ioo signed to enable the exporter to apply for assistance directly to his local commercial bank or insurance broker B. LEGISLATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS AND ACTIONS Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation The President requested the Congress to increase temporarily the period during which unemployment insurance benefits might be paid. The Congress enacted this proposal. The legislation establishes on a self-supporting basis a temporary program of extended unemployment compensation to persons who have exhausted their benefits under State and Federal laws It provides for agreements with States to pay temporary extended unemployment benefits for any worker who exhausts his State benefits between June and March equal to percent of the amount received in State unemployment benefits or times his weekly benefit amount. The increases in benefits are being financed by an increase of percent in the unemployment tax rate for the calendar years and In addition the Congress authorized a temporary self-supporting program of extended railroad unemployment insurance to workers who have exhausted normal benefits under the Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act Unemployment Compensation The President on June proposed major changes in the FederalState unemployment compensation system. The Administration bill introduced in the First Session of the 87th Congress would extend the scope of the system by increasing coverage to include over three million more workers ; increase benefits so that a great majority of eligible claimants would receive a weekly benefit equal to at least one-half of their average weekly wage ; establish a permanent Federal program of additional compensation for unemployed workers who have exhausted their regular benefits ; and improve the financing of the program by increasing the wage base on which the unemployment tax is based from $ to $ In addition the measure includes equalization grants to States with high unemployment costs and a provision precluding denial of unemployment compensation to claimants who are attending approved training or retraining courses The Congress took no action on the Administration bill in Aid to Dependent Children The Congress was requested to extend the program of aid to dependent children by providing benefits to children who are needy because of the unemployment of their parents. A bill was passed by the Congress and signed by the President on May It is estimated that expenditures of about $ million in fiscal are being made under this program IOI Social Security Liberalization The President proposed legislation to improve the old age survivors and disability insurance and public assistance programs. Such legislation was passed by the Congress and approved by the President on June to provide among other things increased minimum social security benefits an earlier retirement age for men and increased benefits for widows. To meet the increased benefit costs the Federal Insurance Contribution Act taxes were increased effective January by one-eighth of percent each on employers and employees Manpower Retraining The President proposed a manpower development and training program providing for counseling training relocation assistance and vocational education. The Administration 's bill provides for retraining unemployed persons who can not reasonably be expected to secure full-time employment without retraining and for upgrading the skills of other members of the work force. It also provides for continuing review and assessment of the Nation 's manpower requirements for appropriate methods of testing counseling and selecting workers for training for determining the skills in which they should be trained for referral of workers for training for placement services after completion of training and for financial assistance during the training period for those unemployed workers who can not undertake a training program without it The Senate approved a manpower retraining bill and a bill was reported out by the House Education and Labor Committee. The House Rules Committee postponed giving a rule for debate on the bill until Youth Employment Opportunities The President recommended the enactment of a Youth Employment Opportunities bill. The proposal includes on-the-job training programs conducted in cooperation with both private and public groups public service employment programs established in cooperation with State and local public and nonprofit agencies and a Youth Conservation Corps which would perform conservation and related work pursuant to agreements with State and Federal conservation agencies Both Senate and House Committees reported out bills on the subject in but no further action was taken Minimum Wage The President signed the Fair Labor Standards Act Amendments on May extending coverage to approximately million additional workers and increasing the minimum wage to $ an hour over a period of time The amendments represent the first Congressional action on extension of coverage since the Act was passed in Area Redevelopment The Administration proposal to aid areas with substantial and persistent unemployment was enacted and signed by the President on May The Area Redevelopment Act provides loans to commercial and industrial enterprises loans and grants for community facilities and urban renewal all designed to increase employment opportunities in these areas. In addition the Act provides for the training and retraining of unemployed and underemployed residents of these areas and for the payment of retraining subsistence benefits while in training In redevelopment areas and Indian Reservations prepared and submitted plans for their over-all economic development. Of these plans covering redevelopment areas and Indian Reservations had been given provisional approval by the end of the year. Eleven projects involving industrial loans grants and loans for public facilities and technical assistance contracts were approved. Sixty-six more were under active consideration at the end of the year Occupational training programs for unemployed and underemployed persons were initiated in October under the provisions of the Area Redevelopment Act. As of January training projects in redevelopment areas located in different States had been approved. These projects provided for the training of workers in courses of instruction. Fifty training proposals from as many areas are under active consideration and an additional are in various stages of preparation in local communities Housing A Presidential message sent to the Congress on March included the following proposals : a 4-year commitment of $ billion for urban renewal ; long-term low-interest loans for nonprofit limited dividend rental and cooperative housing for moderate income families financed by special assistance from FNMA ; expanded public housing and housing for the elderly ; authority for FHA to insure long-term home improvement loans ; additional aid for urban planning community facilities and housing research ; an extension of the FHA insurance program for middle-income families to permit in certain cases a 40-year maximum mortgage period to remove the downpayment requirement and to make other changes to ease housing credit The Housing Act of incorporating the substance of these proposals was approved on June The veterans home loan program was extended by legislation approved on July Feed Grains Program The President signed an emergency feed grains bill on March It authorized the Secretary of Agriculture to make payments to growers on crops to reduce acreage and output and to increase support prices for feed grains. Advance payments were begun shortly after the bill was signed Agriculture The President sent to the Congress an omnibus farm bill on March A bill signed into law on August extended and liberalized lending programs of the Farmers Home Administration extended the emergency feed grains program to crops authorized a program of payments to producers for reducing wheat acreage in extended the special milk program and the National Wool Act for years extended the program for the sale of surplus commodities for foreign currency for years and authorized marketing orders for additional commodities Federal-Aid Highways The President in a message sent to the Congress on February recommended increased taxes and a schedule of authorizations which would permit completion of the Interstate System in and an expansion of other Federal-aid highway programs. The Federal-Aid Highway Act of approved on June provides increased authorization and revenues required to permit completion of the Interstate System by while maintaining the pay-as-you-build principle Natural Resources A Presidential message sent to the Congress on February included a program calling for increased aid for waste treatment facilities and air pollution expansion of the saline water program accelerated forest planting access roads to public forests purchase of shoreline areas for park sites and a 10-year program of grants to the States for planning comprehensive water development projects. On July the President signed a bill almost doubling grants for water pollution control and strengthening federal authority to seek abatement of pollution. On September an extension of the saline water program for years was approved with an authorization of $ million. To carry out the President 's forestry program appropriations for the Forest Service were substantially increased with particular emphasis on the expanded reforestation program acceleration of recreational facility development and strengthening protection against forest fires Authorization for the Cape Cod National Seashore was signed into law on August In the Housing Act of approved on June partial grants to localities in an aggregate amount of $ million were authorized for the acquisition of land for permanent open space in or near urban areas Airport Aid Administration bills authorizing construction grants of $ million a year for years were introduced in both the Senate and the House. A bill signed on September authorized the extension of Federal construction grants to airports for years. A 2-year grant of $ million was included in the final money bill approved on September Aid to Education The President sent a special message on education to the Congress on February It included recommendations concerning elementary and secondary schools and higher education Elementary and secondary schools : The President recommended that the Congress authorize a 3-year program for school construction and teachers ' salaries. The total cost would be $ billion. The Senate passed a school aid program but the House Rules Committee tabled the proposal Higher education : Legislation was proposed to provide more than $ billion in assistance to higher education. The proposals included the extension and expansion of the low-interest loan program for college housing facilities ; authorization of a new 5-year program under which $ million would be loaned each year for the construction of academic facilities ; authorization of a program of 4-year undergraduate scholarships ; expanded student loans and fellowships through the National Defense Education Act The Administration supported legislation to provide matching grants for establishment of educational television stations and for State surveys of the need for such stations. The Senate passed a bill to authorize aid for establishment of such stations and the House reported a bill out of Committee which was substantially the same as the program submitted As part of the Housing Bill signed on June the college housing fund was increased from $ billion to $ billion in four steps by July The National Defense Education Act was extended for two years on October continuing the previous $ million annual authorization for student loans Health Programs A Presidential message sent to the Congress on February included the following proposals : ( ) Increased grants for the construction of nursing homes ; grants to States for community health programs and project grants to develop new methods of out-of-hospital care ; increased project grants for research into uses of medical facilities including grants for the construction of experimental and demonstration facilities ; ( ) A 10-year program of matching grants for the construction expansion and restoration of medical and dental schools with an authorization of $ million a year and an anticipated first-year appropriation of $ million ; ( ) Authorization of Federal grants to schools for scholarships for medical and dental students ; ( ) Increased appropriations for existing maternal and child welfare programs ; ( ) Increased vocational rehabilitation grants ; ( ) An extended and expanded program of matching grants for the construction of research facilities and increased appropriations for the medical research and training programs of the National Institutes of Health The community health services and facilities bill approved on September increased from $ million to $ million the annual authorization for grants to States for public health services ( with particular attention to community health service programs ) ; authorized an additional $ million a year for project grants to develop new methods of out-of-hospital care ; raised from $ million to $ million the annual authorization for grants to build public or nonprofit nursing homes ; and increased from $ million to $ million the authorization for research into uses of medical facilities ( including construction of experimental facilities ) Medical Care for the Aged The President recommended a health insurance program for those of age or over who are eligible for Social Security benefits. The insurance would be financed by an increase in Social Security payroll taxes. Hospital and home health service benefits would begin October Nursing home service benefits would begin July Action by the Congress was postponed Tax Recommendations Among his tax recommendations the President asked for the enactment of an investment tax credit as an incentive for the modernization and expansion of private plant and equipment. He also recommended withholding taxes on interest and dividends and a series of measures to eliminate defects and inequities. This tax program would involve no net loss in revenue. On August the House Ways and Means Committee announced that it was postponing further action until Special Insurance Dividend for Korean Conflict Veterans On September the President approved a measure authorizing a onetime special dividend on the otherwise nonparticipating insurance issued to veterans of the Korean conflict. The dividend declaration amounted to $ million of which approximately $ million was disbursed to eligible policyholders by the end of calendar year Small Business Administration ( SBA ) Legislative action during liberalized the Small Business Investment Program and expanded and strengthened the activities of the Small Business Administration. Additional private capital was attracted into small business investment corporations by amendment of the Small Business Investment Act which increased the maximum amount of Government participation in a single corporation from the previous limit of $ to $ The ability of the SBA to lend to State and local development corporations was also increased. Amendment of the Small Business Act provided for the development of a program to assure small business participation in subcontracts relating to government procurement and broadened the authority for research and counseling services for small business Chapter Economic Growth pASTER ECONOMIC GROWTH in the United States requires above all an expansion of demand to take up existing slack and to match future increases in capacity. Unless demand is adequate to buy potential output accelerating the growth of potential is neither an urgent problem nor a promising possibility. Full utilization will itself contribute to growth of capacity. Saving and investment to increase capacity and improve productivity flourish in prosperity and wane when the economy is slack Reduction of economic fluctuations lessens the risks associated with innovation and investment and diminishes the resistance to technological change A full employment economy can achieve more rapid growth than an economy alternating between boom and recession ; for that reason effective stabilization policy is the first step toward a policy for economic growth But stabilization policy is not enough. A sustained improvement in the growth rate requires also a concerted effort private and public to speed the increase of potential output. Chapter has analyzed the current problem of underutilization. In this chapter the emphasis is on the growth of potential output The growth of the U.S. economy results primarily from decisions taken by individuals families and firms. However all levels of government Federal State and local have a role in the promotion of economic growth It is no part of that role to force on unwilling households and business firms any particular rate of growth in their own individual activities. But if as a Nation we desire a higher rate of growth there are two consequences for government policy. First in those areas of economic activity traditionally allotted to some level of government public expenditures must provide services which contribute to the growth of potential output and which satisfy the needs that accompany increasing income and wealth Second public policy notably in the fields of taxation education training welfare and the control of money and credit inevitably stimulates or retards the growth potential of the private economy even if no such result is consciously intended. Accelerated economic growth requires coordinated policy at all levels of government to facilitate the increase of productivity and the expansion of capacity. No change is implied in the historic division of responsibility between public bodies and private citizens GROWTH : PROBLEM OR OPPORTUNITY The sources of growth of potential output often present themselves as " problems. " A rapidly expanding labor force provides new workers to man factories and perform services and opens new opportunities for investment to equip them. But it accentuates simultaneously the " problem " of assuring useful jobs at satisfactory wages for an ever-growing number of job seekers. Rapid technological progress increases productivity releasing labor and other resources for new uses. But it creates simultaneously the " problem " of displaced workers declining industries and depressed areas. The problems and the opportunities are opposite sides of the same coin. A commitment to accelerated growth is at the same time a commitment to solve even more such problems. The challenge is to find solutions which do not limit the economy 's capacity to grow This is what is meant by saying that there are " growing pains " associated with economic progress. They are not new. Nor are they insoluble if the expansion of demand creates new opportunities for labor and capital as old ones disappear. An adequate level of demand though not itself the solution to structural problems is a necessary precondition to the solution The most pressing of the social problems resulting from rapid industrial progress is the creation of islands of obsolete capacity and unwanted skills It is inequitable to inflict the costs of progress on an arbitrarily selected few when the benefits are widely shared. It is more than inequitable it is selfdefeating to invite resistance to progress pools of idleness low productivity and poverty. The need for specific policies to restore the earning power of displaced workers and the vitality of depressed regions has already been emphasized in connection with the objectives of the Employment Act itself That need is intensified with the acceptance of accelerated economic growth as a goal of national policy Faster economic growth incurs costs and imposes responsibilities. It must if it is worth undertaking confer even larger benefits. Potential output has been growing on the average at percent annually since the turn of the century and at about percent since the end of the second World War though since the rate has slowed to percent. Yet there are sound reasons for wanting even faster growth in the future ( ) unsatisfied needs at home and ( ) threats to freedom abroad ( ) Per capita disposable personal income measured in dollars has been increasing since at about percent a year ; it surpassed $ a year in the last quarter of Nevertheless about percent of all families and unrelated persons have less than $ of money income per person and are now below the level that the average American achieved a quarter-century ago A high rate of economic growth today will enable increasing millions to enjoy better lives tomorrow. Only a limited imagination can fail to see opportunities for providing more fully both such basic needs as food clothing and shelter and the amenities of civilized life education medical care travel and recreation In many though not all contexts growth in per capita production will reduce the number of persons with low incomes. Poverty in the United States is disproportionately concentrated among the aged the nonwhite the poorly educated marginal farmers and families without a male breadwinner. The disadvantaged fare better in a buoyantly growing economy But for some the remedy lies in welfare or insurance payments coupled with substantially improved services and retraining to restore them to self-sufficiency. In the longer run the provision of good education and adequate health services for the children of these families is essential to break the degrading cycle of dependency Other unfilled needs lie in the field of public or mixed public and private expenditures. The renewal of cities the reconstruction of transportation facilities the improvement of education at all levels the provision of new facilities for the arts the expansion of medical care facilities the conservation and expansion of our national parks and forests all these things need more resources than we now devote to them. Economic growth will help create those resources ( ) The leadership of the free world imposes heavy economic burdens on the United States. The primary responsibility for maintaining the military security of the free world falls on us. Although we hope that world tensions will slacken we must be prepared if they do not. If the threat rises in intensity we must increase our defense capabilities to meet that threat. The future needs of defense are uncertain but imperative ; the larger and more efficient our economy the more readily will we be able to shoulder larger military burdens if we must Our responsibility is no less in the global battle against poverty ignorance and disease. The less developed nations need our capital and technique They also need a further demonstration of the ability of a free economy to grow to prosper and to use its enhanced resources wisely The foreign * trade policy of the United States should be formulated with regard for the obvious fact that a more satisfactory rate of economic growth can be achieved here and abroad if producers are stimulated to efficiency by active participation in international trade. A liberal trade policy works to this end by providing increased market opportunities abroad for U.S. products while promoting the efficient utilization of resources through the invigorating effects of foreign competition whether encountered in our home markets or in the markets of other countries GOALS FOR THE CURRENT DECADE Goals if they are to be useful should be neither too easy nor too difficult To set a goal that would have been achieved anyway serves no useful purpose. To set a goal that is obviously impossible of achievement invites a no loss of confidence and perhaps failure to achieve what is possible. A good target is one that can be met but not without effort This general limitation sets only a range of growth targets for the United States in the 's. It is no easy matter to say exactly how fast an economy can grow or to obtain consensus on how fast it should grow. Some of the benefits of growth have already been discussed. The costs of growth are the diversion of resources from the satisfaction of current needs to those uses which will yield increased output in the future and the strain on our institutions and social fabric which this diversion might entail Ultimately a democratic society achieves one rate of growth rather than another through the freely made economic and political decisions of its citizens. The task of economic analysis is to show what the choices are what alternative choices will cost and what benefits they may yield The basic determinants of a society 's productive capacity in any year are as follows : ( ) The number of people available for employment the number of hours they wish to work their incentives and motivations and their health general education occupational desires and vocational skills ; ( ) The stock of new and old plant and equipment and its composition by age type and location ; ( ) The terms on which the economy has access to natural resources whether through domestic production or imports ; ( ) The level of technology covering the range from managerial and organizational competence to scientific engineering and mechanical understanding ; ( ) The efficiency with which resources domestic and foreign are allocated to different economic ends and the extent of monopolistic or other barriers to the movement of labor and capital from low-productivity to high-productivity uses These basic determinants interact in complex ways. For example advanced machinery is of little use without skilled labor to operate it ; advanced technology often requires capital equipment to embody it Next year 's productive capacity will exceed this year 's to the extent that the basic determinants can be expanded and improved. Success in achieving a higher rate of growth in the future depends on our willingness to spend current resources to expand our production potential and by our skill and luck in spending them effectively The record of economic growth in the United States does not suggest that the average growth rate realized in the past is an immutable natural constant leaving no scope for growth-stimulating policies. The rate of growth of output has varied from one span of years to another depending on specific economic circumstances ( Chart ) There was one prolonged period of stagnation the decade of the 's when potential output grew at less than the average long-term rate and realized output grew more slowly still. Again there have been periods when poten- III CHART Output Employment and Productivity BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( Ratio scale ) _ GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES / r f V M M / MM \ i i MM M M | M | II M M M M | MILLIONS OF PERSONS ( Ratio scale ) _ TOTAL EMPLOYMENT J / / / ir II M * M II II II M * * * * M M M * M M | M M * * DOLLARS ( Ratio scale ) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT PER EMPLOYED PERSON IN PRICES V- m M A L 1L J I _ L M LM HI | JA M M _J L M i l _l LLX J / C I V I L I A N EMPLOYMENT PLUS ARMED FORCES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS tial output expanded more rapidly than the past average. The postwar years have been such a period of accelerated growth. Even including the years since during which growth was sluggish real gross national product ( GNP ) in this postwar period has increased at an average annual rate of percent. Had potential output been realized in I960 as it was in the realized growth rate would have been percent a year Table shows for the period the increases in realized and potential GNP population labor force employment man-hours GNP per person and productivity. Approximately four-fifths of the annual increase in potential GNP during the period is explained by increases in output per man-hour and one-fifth by increases in total man-hours worked. The increase in output per man-hour is of course the resultant of improvements in the quality of the labor force the quantity and quality of capital the level of technology and still other factors TABLE Output population labor input and productivity Percentage change per year Unit Item to to to Output : Gross national product- Billions of dollars prices Potential gross national product _-doPopulation Millions of persons Millions of persons do Labor input : Labor force Employment Potential employment Man-hours Potential man-hours 5_ GNP per capita Billions of man-hours do Dollars prices Dollars prices -do- Productivity : GNP per worker. Potential GNP per worker GNP per man-hour Potential GNP per man-hour do do do Data include Alaska and Hawaii Same as actual in ; in and calculated from percent trend line through mid-1955 Includes armed forces Assumes percent unemployment rate for all periods with no adjustment for cyclical movement of the labor force Same as actual in ; in and assumes percent unemployment rate and corrects for decline in hours induced by recession Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers But consideration of the years as a unit masks significant differences within the period. There was a substantial slowing down in,the growth of potential output between the first and the second part of this period. From to potential GNP grew at a rate of percent a year and from to at a rate of percent. Since the labor force grew at a rate of percent a year in both periods and average hours worked fell somewhat more slowly after than before the slower rate of growth that has taken place since is explained by a decline in the rate of increase of productivity. This decline resulted in part from a more slowly rising trend of productivity within nonmanufacturing industry and in part from a shift usual in slack periods from manufacturing to nonmanufacturing in the composition of economic activity Further evidence that modern industrial economies are not helpless prisoners of past long-term trends is to be found in Table which shows that the major countries of Western Europe and Japan as well have recently exceeded their own long-term performances TABLE Growth of gross national product per man-year selected countries [ Percent per year ] Country Japan Italy Germany France __ Canada Denmark United Kingdom _ Netherlands Norway Sweden United States. _ L.9 L.8 __ ? NOTE. Gross national product at constant prices was used wherever available. See National Institute Economic Feview No. July pp. and for data and description of sources of materials used Source : National Institute of Economic and Social Research On June President Kennedy stated that a growth rate of percent yearly is " well within our capability. " On November the United States joined with the other member nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in setting as a target the attainment of a percent ( percent a year ) increase in their combined national product during the decade from to The ability of the United States to meet and even to exceed this target is the best guarantee of success for the OECD. A high rate of growth of potential output will not be reached immediately. The policies to achieve it even if adopted now will not bear fruit at once and it will not be achieved without effort. But in the second half of the decade with the help of a rapidly growing labor force it should be possible to exceed a growth rate of percent annually and to achieve an average rate of growth of potential output of percent between and If this growth is achieved and if in addition is a year of percent unemployment actual GNP will grow at an average annual rate of percent ( Table ) The difference between this figure and percent reflects the current shortfall of actual output from potential output. Such a rate of growth of total GNP would mean an annual increase of GNP per person in the population of percent nearly double the rate achieved during TABLE Output population labor input and productivity actual and illustrative Item Unit illustrative Percentage change per year Output : Gross national product Billions of dollars prices. do Potential gross national product _ Population.. Millions of persons. Labor input : Labor force Employment Potential employment Man-hours Potential man-hours ONP per capita .do _do. ..doBillions of man-hours do Dollars prices. Productivity : GNP per worker Potential GNP per worker. ..do. .do. GNP per man-hour Potential GNP per man-hour- .do. .do. Potential series for based on the following assumptions : GNP calculated from percent trend line through mid-1955 ; employment percent unemployment rate ; man-hours percent unemployment rate and correction for decline in hours induced by recession Illustrative figures for based on the following assumptions : Potential GNP growth rate of percent per year from to with actual and potential being the same in ; population fertility levels continue to ; labor force participation rate of percent of noninstitutional population years of age and over ; employment percent unemployment rate ; man-hours continuation of previous trend Includes armed forces NOTE. Data includes Alaska and Hawaii Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers the period. It is this figure which most nearly measures the gain to society from accelerated economic growth. If by we succeed in achieving an unemployment rate below percent even further increases in output will become possible. To a first approximation each point decline in the unemployment rate would add about $ billion to GNP and about to the annual rate of growth Table is in no sense a prediction of what will actually occur. It shows what would be required to move up to and beyond a percent growth rate giving us a rate of growth of potential for the full decade averaging percent a year. Demographic factors lay the foundation for a significant acceleration of potential output. If labor force projections are realized and if past trends in hours worked per man year continue available labor input will increase during the 's at more than one and one-half times its rate of growth during the period. With this increase in labor input it is a matter of arithmetic that a percent yearly increase in man-hour productivity would be needed if the annual rate of growth of potential GNP is to average percent over the decade The required growth of output per man-hour was surpassed in the period but since performance has fallen below what is required The vigorous growth of the early postwar period benefited from the possi- bility of renewing a capital stock which had aged during the depression and war years of low investment. Making good this backlog of investment demand brought with it the quick realization of latent technological progress. Simple continuation of recent trends will not be sufficient to repeat that performance. The rest of this chapter suggests the kind of effort in education technological development capital formation and other areas that may be required to do so. In particular unless technical progress brings an unexpected increase in the productivity of capital a major rise in capital investment will be needed The population upsurge which began in the 's together with the expected decline in death rates will give us a rapid increase in the population of working age. Adult women are expected to enter the labor force in increasing proportions ; but because a larger fraction of our youth will remain in school and because the trend toward earlier retirement among male workers is likely to continue over-all labor force participation rates are expected to remain steady. The resultant of these factors should be a labor force in of a little more than million an annual rate of increase of percent in this decade compared with the distinctly lower rate of percent from to If percent of the labor force is unemployed in total employment will come to million. A reduction in the unemployment rate to percent would add over to employment The calculations of Table assume that the average number of hours worked a year will continue to decline at the same rate as in the past. This reduction in the intensity of work has been going on for a long time. It will continue both because our citizens choose to enjoy some part of their increased productivity in the form of longer vacations and perhaps a shorter workweek and because much of the increase in the labor force will consist of part-time workers by preference notably young people still in school and women with family responsibilities. Full employment will however eliminate one possible cause of a decline in average hours ; when unemployment rates are high as they are at present pressure builds up for a reduction in the workweek. This pressure motivated by a desire to share the limited volume of employment is to be sharply distinguished from the desire for increased leisure reflected in the long-run decline in average annual hours The second of these is to be honored ; the first should be met by expanded employment opportunities. Variations in the number of hours worked like variations in participation rates also respond to economic forces in other ways. The lure of job opportunities in a growing and prospering economy may attract even more than the expected number of people into the labor force and may induce some to abandon part-time for full-time work. On the other hand it is also possible that full employment at the rising wage and salary levels permitted by rising productivity will lead some secondary wage earners to withdraw from the labor force and others to retire at an earlier age n6 The beneficial effects of labor force growth do not occur automatically. Productivity is preserved and increased primarily through acts of investment : investment in the improvement of human resources in the creation of new technical and managerial knowledge in the development of natural resources and in the formation of physical capital. In the case of investment in human capital and in research and development the link between expenditure and yield is difficult to measure but there can be little doubt that the return is substantial. In regard to investment in plant and equipment and the development of natural resources there is more statistical evidence available. No one of these investments can make its full contribution to the objective of accelerated growth without the others. Each of them is necessary ; there is good reason to believe that together they can be sufficient if vigorously pursued INVESTMENT IN HUMAN RESOURCES Increased production is not an end in itself but only a means of providing increased real income for all to share. As indicated earlier this is one of the reasons that more rapid growth is a desirable social goal. High levels of education and health equality of opportunity these are among the valid measures of a society 's performance. They are desirable in their own right In addition they have an economic dimension. They are among the foundations of growth as well as among its benefits Americans have long spoken of foregoing consumption today in order to invest in their children 's education and thus in a better tomorrow For an economy just as for an individual the use of the word invest in this connection is clearly justified since it is precisely the sacrifice of consumption in the present to make possible a more abundant future that constitutes the common characteristic of all forms of investment. That devoting resources to education and health is in part an act of investment in human capital explains why programs in the area of education and health are economic growth programs. This kind of investment has a long and remarkable history. Rough estimates which take into account differences in the length of the school year and in school attendance suggest that the stock of equivalent school years in the labor force rose more than sixfold between and The annual rate of growth of the stock of education was more than percent or about twice the rate of growth of the labor force itself Failure to pursue vigorous educational and health policies and programs leads to smaller increases in output in the long run ; it is also associated with higher expenditures in the short run. If we fail to invest sufficiently in medical research we lose not only what stricken individuals might have produced had they been well but also the use of the resources and funds currently devoted to their care. Failure to invest sufficiently in education means that we will lose the additional output that would be possible with a better educated labor force ; it may also mean the perpetuation of social problems necessitating public expenditures. Recognition of the costs of inadequate investment in social welfare is one of the reasons for the Administration 's concern to strengthen family services in the public welfare field It is a waste of resources to restrict health and education to those who can afford them. Moreover in addition to each person 's interest in his own health and education there is a public interest in everybody 's health and education. The well-being of each citizen contributes to the well-being of others. As a result we have organized programs to help the population to obtain a quality education to require attendance in schools to help ourselves and others to obtain needed medical care to require that certain medical precautions such as vaccinations be taken by everyone Education Estimates made by private scholars suggest that about one-half of the growth in output in the United States in the last years has resulted from factors other than increases in physical capital and man-hours worked Education is one of the " other factors. " Even without allowance for the impact of education on invention and innovation its contribution appears to account for between one-fourth and one-half of that part of the increase of output between and not accounted for by the increased inputs of capital and labor. Education is of vital importance in preparing the skilled labor force demanded by new investment and new technology Education 's contribution to output is reflected by the well-documented fact that income a measure of each individual 's contribution to production tends to rise with educational attainment. Of course not all differences in money income are the result of education. Differences in native ability as well as parental economic and social status are also reflected Nevertheless a substantial proportion of the increase in income at increasing ^ levels of education may be attributed to that education In $ billion ( percent of GNP in current prices ) was spent for all schools at all levels of education. In expenditures had risen to about $ billion ( percent of GNP ) In turn in percent of the population years old graduated from high school. By this was true for percent. Similarly in higher education the number of earned degrees conferred rose from in to in Though significant progress has been made substantial opportunities and needs for investment in education still exist. There is a pressing need to improve curricula and teaching methods make education more readily available to students of merit by reduction of financial barriers expand facilities and staff to meet rising enrollments improve the quality and productivity of our teaching staffs and increase their salaries and narrow the gap in opportunities available to students in different parts of our country. These problems must be met and met quickly at all levels of government and at all levels of education if our standards of education are to keep abreast of our needs n8 The program of the Administration includes specific proposals designed to meet urgent needs in the field of education : increased funds for scholarships ; assistance to institutions of higher education for the construction of facilities ; aid to the States for assistance to public elementary and secondary schools ; and a program to improve the quality of elementary and secondary education through curriculum research demonstration projects teacher training institutes and special project grants Work of this last kind has been begun with the support of the National Science Foundation in supplementary training of teachers of science and mathematics especially in high schools and in the development of new courses in physics mathematics chemistry and biology. Similar support has been given by the U.S. Office of Education for improvement in courses in English and modern foreign languages ; it should be extended to the other major academic fields Student opportunities. Of each pupils who entered the fifth grade in entered high school in graduated from high school in and entered college in the fall of Thus percent of the original students did not graduate from high school and half of those graduating from high school did not enter college. Many of these withdrawals are by children of better than average intelligence It is generally agreed that improvement of teaching and expansion of guidance and counseling services will help to reduce the drop-out rate Efforts to eliminate this waste of human resources have already begun but more are needed Financial barriers to secondary education come chiefly from a pressing need for immediate income for the family. At the college level the financial problem arises both from the direct costs of attending college and the income foregone. The Office of Education estimates that in the school year the average direct costs of attending public colleges are about $ a year and of attending private colleges $ These costs have risen rapidly in recent years and they are expected to continue to rise They are significant obstacles for large parts of our population. The Administration proposal for assistance to higher education would authorize 4-year scholarship aid for capable students in need of financial assistance Personnel and facilities. Enrollments in elementary and secondary schools rose from million pupils in to million in Enrollment in is expected to be million. In million students were enrolled in institutions of higher education and by the figure had risen to million. The projected enrollment is million. Rising enrollments have necessitated substantial expansion of personnel and facilities. Further expansion is required if quality is not to deteriorate Our educational system thus confronts unprecedented challenges. To accommodate doubled enrollments by outlays for college facilities must be more than doubled ; total expenditures must rise two-to-threefold Needs at the below-college level about the same in dollar terms must also be met lest the foundations of the educational system be eroded. The price of failure will be the irrevocable loss of valuable talent However urgent the need for additional facilities and for the rehabilitation and replacement of existing facilities the personnel problem is especially acute because of the time required to train teachers. Among beginning teachers in public elementary and secondary schools in percent lacked a standard certificate a bachelor 's degree or both. Demand for new teachers and for replacement of those leaving the profession will be very high. It can be met only by the training of new teachers accompanied by programs to increase the productivity and quality of experienced teachers Teachers ' salaries at all levels must continue their recent rise if good teachers are to be attracted into and retained in the profession of educating the Nation 's youth. Other programs for expansion of the educational system can not succeed unless the rewards to teaching are increased State differences. In a highly mobile and interdependent society the lack of educational opportunities is not simply a matter of concern to some States ; it is of concern to the Nation. The support that the different States ( and different areas within States ) give to education varies substantially Such support depends not only on the commitment that the population has to education but also on the resources of the State and the number of children seeking a public education. As a consequence some States with low per student expenditures for education have educational budgets that as a percentage of personal income are far above the national average. Increased Federal support for education as outlined in the President 's proposals is essential to eliminate these imbalances as well as provide for programs to meet the national responsibilities that transcend State and local boundaries. Ultimately the effectiveness of our democracy rests on an educated and informed citizenry Health U.S. economic growth in the twentieth century has been associated with better health of the population as a whole as well as an increase in per capita expenditures on health and medical care. Public and private expenditures on health care increased from $ billion or percent of GNP in to $ billion or percent of GNP in This has been accompanied by a sharp increase in life expectancy and a reduction in death rates from communicable diseases At the same time that economic growth has contributed to an improvement in the health of our people better health has contributed to economic growth. Better health makes possible an increase in the size of the labor force and in the effectiveness of effort on the job Further improvements in health would yield significant economic as well as human benefits. On an average day in million employed persons percent of civilian employment were absent from work be- cause of illness or accident. The days of work lost because of illness far exceeded the days of work lost because of industrial disputes ; in fiscal year I960 " currently employed " persons lost a total of million days from work as a result of illness or injury while the loss from industrial disputes in totaled million days The costs of ill health have traditionally been calculated as the money spent for the prevention and treatment of accident and disease. The waste of human resources and the consequent loss of production is an important additional cost about which not enough is known. Where facts are available as in the related area of vocational rehabilitation the relationship between costs and benefits is impressive. In at an average cost of $ per rehabilitant under Federal-State programs median wages of rehabilitated persons were raised from $ a year at acceptance to $ at closure a difference of $ in the first year after rehabilitation Public support for medical research the most basic of investments in better health has been growing. In fiscal year total expenditures will exceed a billion dollars of which percent is supported by the Federal Government. Further expansion of research activities where funds can be wisely spent and where qualified research personnel exist is desirable both for humanitarian and economic reasons. Much of the necessary research is carried on by doctors of medicine. More rapid expansion of the number of physicians is required to insure that patient care needs teaching needs and research needs can all be met. This will be true even if needed improvements are made in the organization and financing of medical care Increased demands for medical services stemming in part from new discoveries and in part from growth in population and changes in age and income structure already mean unfilled internships and residencies in hospitals. The full medical needs of the country are not being met in many fields including public health and preventive medicine. The Administration has presented a program to authorize Federal grants for the construction of medical dental osteopathic and public health teaching facilities project grants to plan for new facilities and improved educational programs and scholarship aid to students. The importance of maintaining and improving the health of the Nation makes the enactment of this program a matter of great urgency Eliminating Racial Discrimination Racial discrimination is a national disgrace. In this respect above all others practice in the United States is a standing affront to professions of democratic principle. Discrimination inflicts immeasurable human and social costs on a large number of our citizens. In addition and this is why it deserves particular mention in this Report it inflicts an economic loss on the country Discriminatory practices in education training employment and union membership impede the development and utilization of human resources They reduce the efficiency and slow the growth of the economy at the same time that they alter and alter inequitably the distribution of the fruits of economic progress Although significant reductions in discriminatory barriers have been accomplished in recent years important problems remain. Many nonwhite families are trapped in a vicious circle : Job discrimination and lack of education limit their employment opportunities and result in low and unstable incomes ; low incomes combined with direct discriminations reduce attainable levels of health and skill and thus limit occupational choice and income in the future ; limited job opportunities result in limited availability of vocational education and apprenticeship training. Unless action is taken today 's training practices affecting tomorrow 's employment possibilities will help to perpetuate inequitable employment patterns Our economy loses when individuals who are capable of acquiring skills are denied opportunities for training and are forced into the ranks of the unskilled and when individuals with education skill and training face discriminatory hiring practices that result in their employment in low productivity jobs Discrimination is reflected in the distribution of income and in disparities in the levels of education attained by white and nonwhite groups. Nonwhite families had a median money income of $ in Although this represents a remarkable advance over the figure of $ for ( in prices ) the magnitude of the problem still remaining is indicated by the fact that in the median income for white families was $ In percent of white but percent of nonwhite families had money incomes of less than $ while percent of white but only percent of nonwhite families had money incomes of $ and over In percent of the nonwhite population years of age and over was illiterate ; by this percentage had dropped to with declines registered in every age group. The figure was however considerably higher than the percent illiterate in the white population. Equally disturbing is the fact that in the nonwhite population the percentage of illiterates was higher for each age and sex group than the comparable percentage for the white population. While the median school * years completed for the nonwhite population years of age and over had risen from in to in the median for the total population was in The unemployment rate in December was percent for white males and percent for white females but percent for nonwhite males and percent for nonwhite females. Nonwhite workers made up less than percent of the labor force but accounted for percent of the total unemployed and percent of those unemployed weeks or more Economic growth will be furthered by the adoption of nondiscriminatory policies and practices to insure that all Americans may develop their abilities to the fullest extent and that these abilities will be used. The Depart- merit of Justice the President 's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunities and the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights are already acting vigorously. They should be joined in the campaign by all parts of our population and all units of government business and labor INVESTMENT IN TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS Technological knowledge sets limits on the productivity of labor and capital. As the frontiers of technology are pushed ahead industrial practice and productivity follow sometimes pressing close on the best that is known sometimes lagging behind with the gap varying from industry to industry and from firm to firm. A stimulus to economic growth can come either from increasing the rate at which the frontiers are advancing or from bringing the technology actually in use closer to the frontiers Research and Development The advance of technological knowledge depends on the amount and effectiveness of the human and material resources devoted to research and development. The limited data available suggest that within industries and between industries there is a positive correlation between research effort and productivity growth. However some of the most important developments affecting the productivity of a firm or industry may originate from research done by equipment and material suppliers or from basic research done by government and the universities. The benefits of research activity are often widely shared Expenditures on research and development in totaled about $ billion as shown in Table In the total was probably in the neighborhood of $ billion nearly three times the expenditures in and almost a third as large as business expenditures on fixed capital. After rough allowance for rising costs the volume of research and development performed has approximately doubled since Between TABLE Research and development expenditures and [ Billions of dollars ] Type of research financing and performance Total expenditures By source of funds : Federal Government Industry Universities and other nonprofit institutions..- By performer : Federal Government Industry Universities and other nonprofit institutions By type of research : Basic research Applied research and development l Based on reports by performers Includes research centers administered by organizations in this sector under contract with Fedora agencies Source : National Science Foundation O and I960 research and development as a percentage of GNP in current prices doubled from percent to percent Research and development cover a wide range of activities aimed at increasing the stock of scientific and technical knowledge. As we move from basic research to applied research and to development the goals become more closely defined in terms of specific practical objectives the predictability of the results increases and the benefits become less diffuse More than percent of research and development spending is for applied research and development most of it for development. Slightly less than percent is for basic research Approximately three-fourths of the Nation 's total research and development effort is performed by industry and over half of this is financed by the Federal Government. Profit considerations naturally lead private firms to concentrate on developing and improving marketable products. Even here supplementary government support can pay off handsomely. Estimates suggest that hybrid corn research of which perhaps one-third was publicly supported yielded a substantial return to society over and above the returns to farmers and seed producers Less than one-third of all basic research is done by industry. Government the universities and other nonprofit institutions although doing only one-fourth of total research do most of the Nation 's basic research Such research seldom results directly or immediately in new products and processes. But in the long run basic research is the key to important advances in technology. Fundamental inventions like the transistor an outgrowth of basic research in solid-state physics may revolutionize large sectors of industry and have a tremendous ultimate effect on productivity Although research and development spending is increasing rapidly in most industries more than percent of industrial research is performed by two industry groups the aircraft and parts industry and the electrical equipment and communications industry as shown in Table This heavy concentration of industrial research reflects primarily the concentration of defense contracts Industrial research is also heavily concentrated in large firms. In firms employing more than persons accounted for percent of total industrial research spending significantly more than the share of these firms in manufacturing employment The Federal Government plays a much larger role in financing than in performing research. It is estimated that in the Government paid for about two-thirds of the total national research effort including in addition to work done in government laboratories almost percent of the research undertaken in industry-run laboratories and over percent of the research done by universities. About percent of government research and development spending is accounted for by the Department of Defense. The Atomic Energy Commission and National Aeronautics and Space Administration together account for nearly percent T A B L E Funds for industrial research and development by source and industry Funds for research and development Industry Amount ( millions of dollars ) Percentage change from Total Total Food and kindred products Paper and allied products Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining and extraction Rubber products Stone clay and glass products __ Primary metals Fabricated metal products Machinery Electrical equipment and communication. Motor vehicles and other transportation equipment Aircraft and parts Professional and scientific instruments Other industries Federal Government Company Total Federal Government Company Research and development funds as percent of net sales Data apply to all manufacturing industries and to the communication and crude petroleum and extraction nonmanufacturing industries Percent change not computed for an industry where the amount in the base period was less than $ million Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : National Science Foundation In addition to its direct contributions to research and development spending the Federal Government has stimulated private research and development activity. The science information services of the National Science Foundation the Atomic Energy Commission the Office of Technical Services of the Department of Commerce and other government agencies contribute to the over-all efficiency of national research and development Federal tax law encourages research and development by making such costs fully deductible in the year they are incurred. The Small Business Act encourages spending on research and development including cooperative research by small companies. Moreover the Federal Government makes an important contribution to the training of future research scientists and engineers through its support of education and basic research in the universities Strengthening research and development. During the 's the number of professional scientists and engineers in the United States increased at an annual rate of approximately percent. Total resources allocated to research and development grew at an even faster rate because a rising proportion of all scientists and engineers were engaged in research and because supporting personnel equipment and material per research scientist increased. During the 's these trends will continue but one limit to growth will be the supply of scientists and engineers in certain fields Future investment in research will be limited largely by the quantity and quality of earlier investment in education Overemphasis on current research and development activity should not be permitted to erode the underlying educational base. Just as research is investment for the economy education is investment for research The needs for educational expansion stressed earlier in this chapter include urgent requirements for laboratories laboratory equipment and other science teaching facilities A greater share of research and development resources and talent should be devoted to basic research and to prototype development and experimentation in fields which promise major advances in civilian technology. Military research helped to create such important discoveries as isotope medicine the computer and the jet engine. The important impact on civilian technology of these offspring of military research suggests that high returns might be achieved if sights were set higher in nonmilitary research. Since the risks of basic research and experimental development are very great and since the rewards for success are not confined to single firms or even industries there is a case for public support to attract additional resources into this work In a number of industries firms which are highly efficient in production and marketing may be too small to undertake an efficient research and development program. In others a research tradition is lacking or research is discouraged because the benefits tend to diffuse beyond the market grasp of individual firms. In agriculture all these conditions are present and the high returns to society from government support of research suggest that comparable programs to increase research in certain manufacturing industries might be highly desirable An Administration bill to create an Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology has passed the Senate and is now pending before the House. Its enactment would be an important step in fulfilling the Government 's responsibilities in this area. The competence and experience of the National Bureau of Standards could well be used in support of a program to fill the gaps in the national industrial research effort More Effective Use of Existing Technology ( ) In some industries there are legal obstacles to technical change The housing construction codes of many localities provide a prominent example. In principle these codes protect the public from shoddy construction ; in practice they often prevent the use of new materials designs and techniques which are superior to the old and a lack of uniformity among codes in different localities discourages mass production of certain prefabricated housing components. With respect to construction codes in particular the Housing and Home Finance Agency should continue to encourage the adoption of performance standards for codes and should strengthen its programs of testing and evaluation ( ) American labor has a remarkable record of acceptance of new technology ; but understandable resistance to the displacement of labor by new equipment has occasionally developed when opportunities for retraining and re-employment were not clearly visible. The Federal Government can help considerably first by pursuing effective policies to maintain full employment and second by expanding and improving its programs in job training and retraining ( ) The process of technological change would be smoother if society knew better how to reap the rewards and reduce the costs. Research in the social behavioral and managerial sciences can lead to more efficient use of resources and to quicker grasp of the opportunities afforded by technological progress. Improved understanding may in time yield ways to ease the burdens of adjustment. Strengthening of research in these auxiliary fields is needed to gain maximum benefit from research which creates new technology ( ) Innovation is facilitated by a flow of information about new technical developments. Since many firms especially small ones are not in a position to follow new technological developments closely the Government can play a useful role by providing business with relevant information and analysis. These service functions of the Department of Commerce and the Small Business Administration should be substantially strengthened The success of the Federal-State Extension Service in speeding the diffusion of agricultural technology serves to illustrate how effective such programs can be ( ) The Panel on Civilian Technology composed of a group of distinguished scientists engineers businessmen and economists has been brought together under the joint auspices of the office of the President 's Special Assistant for Science and Technology the Department of Commerce and the Council of Economic Advisers. The panel is examining opportunities for stimulating civilian research and development as well as for more effective use of existing technology. It has begun to address itself particularly to those sectors of our economy where major social and economic benefits could be expected to accrue from technological advances ( ) By eliminating monopolistic and collusive barriers to the entry of new business and by maintaining the spur of competition to innovation and the utilization of technology antitrust enforcement tends to create conditions which encourage economic growth. ( See Chapter ) INVESTMENT IN PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Between the resourcefulness of the labor force and the ideas of the laboratory on one side and the satisfaction of consumption needs on the other the indissoluble link is the economy 's stock of plant and machinery. Our own history and the experience of other industrial countries alike demonstrate the connection between physical investment and growth of productive capacity. Without investment in new and renewed plant and equipment skills and inventions remain preconditions of growth ; with it they become ingredients Investment as a Source of Growth Investment in fixed capital leads to increased capacity both by equipping new members of the labor force with capital up to existing standards and by providing greater amounts for all workers. Since the stock of privately owned plant and equipment ( in constant prices ) has grown relative to private man-hours worked by nearly percent ( Chart ) and by nearly percent relative to the private labor force. Nearly all of the latter increase has taken place during the postwar period. Between and the rate of investment was sufficient only to provide enough capital although more modern capital to keep pace with a growing labor supply. No increase in capital per worker occurred. Since the rate of growth in the ratio of capital stock to labor supply has been approximately percent a year but there is a perceptible difference between the growth records of the first and second halves of the postwar period From to the amount of capital per worker increased by percent a year ; in contrast the annual increase from to averaged only percent CHART Indexes of Business Output Capital Stock and Man-Hours INDEX = ( Ratio scale ) BUSINESS OUTPUT / _ ^ _ ^ w f BUSINESS STOCK OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT ^ H | f i n " * * \ s ^ PRIVATE M N-HOURSWORKE D A I I I I t i i i i l l i i l i I I I / INDEXES BASED ON DATA IN CONSTANT PRICES. SEE TABLE FOR DEFINITIONS SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS ( BASED ON DATA FROM VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE SOURCES ) I I960 The importance of investment in the growth process is suggested by the parallel movement of the growth of potential output per man and the growth of capital per man ( Table ) Both ratios grew more rapidly after than before and more rapidly between and than subsequently. In general the experience since supports the belief that the more rapidly the capital stock grows relative to the labor force the greater will be the growth in potential output per worker provided that other necessary conditions are met TABLE Growth in business potential capital-labor and output-labor ratios [ Percent per year ] to Item Capital stock per worker i Output per worker to to to Business capital stock is built up from private purchases of plant and equipment with allowance for retirements ; excludes religious educational hospital other institutional and farm residential construction Business output is gross national product minus product originating in general government government enterprises households and institutions the rest of the world and services of existing houses NOTE. Details of series are available upon request Source : Council of Economic Advisers Though there was no increase in capital per worker between and there was a slow increase in productivity which must be attributed to technical progress and to improvement in the quality of both labor and capital. When as in subsequent years investment was more rapid there was an accompanying acceleration of productivity gains. These gains were not simply the result of the separate contributions of the advance of knowledge the improved skills of the working population and the rise in capital per worker but came in large part from the interaction of all three Investment in new equipment serves as a vehicle for technological improvements and is perhaps the most important way in which laboratory discoveries become incorporated in the production process. Without their embodiment in ne.w equipment many new ideas would lie fallow. Conversely the impact of a dollar 's investment on the quality of the capital stock depends on how rapidly increases in knowledge have taken place. This interaction between investment and technological change permits each worker to have not only more tools but better tools as well The slower rate of growth of the capital stock in recent years provides one explanation for the accompanying slower growth of labor productivity and potential output. The proportion of output devoted to investment and the rate of growth of the capital stock itself are measures of the diversion of current resources to the creation of future capacity. During the period expenditures on business fixed investment averaged percent of GNP and the stock grew at an annual rate of percent ( valued in prices ) In the period percent of GNP was invested and the capital stock grew at an annual rate of percent. The ratio of investment to potential GNP is even more relevant ; in this case the ratios are percent and percent for the two periods. This difference of percent in the fraction of potential GNP invested represents nearly $ billion of additional capital Policies to Encourage Investment ( ) Adequate levels of demand. The single most important stimulant to investment is the maintenance of full utilization of capacity. The historical record shows that when output falls below its potential the rate of growth of the capital stock declines. Expected profit from investment is strongly influenced by the expected demand for the output that the new capital will help produce even if the investment is meant largely for cost reduction rather than capacity expansion. Estimates of future demand are colored by the experience of the present and the recent past. During periods of economic slack estimates of future demand are relatively pessimistic and many projects are foregone which would appear profitable under conditions of high demand There is a tendency to think of profitable investment opportunities for the whole economy as exhaustible : the more of them that are used up in any one year the fewer remain. There may be some validity to this view for a single industry which can mistakenly expand its capacity beyond the possibilities of future market demand. But for the entire economy what appears as unavoidable excess capacity is in fact avoidable deficiency of demand There are and always will be unsatisfied wants for a higher standard of living though the demand for any particular product may perhaps be satiated The investment boom of did not make inevitable the excess capacity that has ruled since then. Instead it created an opportunity for higher levels of production in later years had the demand been forthcoming. The opportunity was lost ; even before the cyclical peak in the third quarter of the growth of demand slowed down and excess capacity began to emerge It is true that with any given level of technology a higher rate of investment can occur only through the acceptance of investment opportunities of lower profitability. But appropriate tax and monetary measures can make even these investments sufficiently attractive. And technical progress can have the same effect. To equip a more rapidly growing labor force also demands a larger volume of investment relative to potential GNP. Fortunately if actual output is held close to a rising potential output faster labor force growth will open opportunities for additions to plant and equipment which would be economically unattractive if the labor supply situation were tighter. Thus a higher ratio of investment to output can be more easily maintained. When excess capacity already exists however profitability is low for that reason alone and the growing labor force appears as a threat instead of the stimulus to investment it really is In addition to serving as an indicator of future profits the level of aggregate demand through its impact on current profits plays an important role in providing finance for investment. The importance of the level of economic activity in determining profits is indicated in Chart which shows that net and gross profits as a percentage of GNP fluctuate very closely with the rate of capacity utilization. A policy that sustains nearcapacity operations goes beyond strengthening the profitability of investment ; it insures an ample supply of low-cost internal funds which itself encourages investment ( ) Monetary and credit policy. The open market operations of the Federal Reserve and the debt-management operations of the Treasury exert a powerful influence on supply conditions in credit markets. If economic growth were the only end to be served the sole object of monetary and credit policy would be to assure an adequate flow of funds to finance the needed capital formation at interest rates appropriate to the basic profitability of investment. This was pointed out by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in March in a statement to the Joint Economic Committee : " As I have said many times in the past before this Committee and others I am in favor of interest rates being as low as possible without stimulating inflation because low rates can help to foster capital expenditures that in turn promote economic growth. " Use of monetary techniques for growth purposes must of course be limited by the demands placed on them by other national objectives. In the present situation for example monetary policy has a role to play in the attainment of recovery from recession and in the restoration of balance of payments equilibrium. Policies for growth and recovery are complementary since any policy that stimulates investment will simultaneously stimulate aggregate demand. This situation however will not always prevail. When excessive demand threatens inflation stability and growth goals will tend to push monetary policy in opposite directions. At such times the importance of economic growth would suggest the major use of other measures principally budgetary surpluses to achieve stability. For when demand is strong enough to generate pressure on existing capacity and only then rapid growth requires that enough resources be withheld from other uses to make a sustained high rate of investment possible without inflation. Under these circumstances a surplus in the Federal budget plays the constructive role of adding to national saving and making resources available for investment. The role of a policy of monetary ease at full employment is then to insure that the resources freed by a tight fiscal policy are indeed used for investment and not wasted in unemployment The current balance of payments problem puts additional constraints # on the use of monetary policy to promote recovery and growth. The techniques developed by the Federal Reserve to meet the new situation have already been discussed in Chapter Part II ( ) Tax policy. Every tax system is the product of particular needs and economic conditions ; no tax system can be neutral in its effects on the ways in which households and business firms earn and spend their incomes. If faster economic growth is desired revision of the tax structure is called for to permit a higher rate of investment once full use of resources is achieved The Administration 's program encompasses two complementary approaches to this objective. The first is an investment tax credit equal to percent of investment in eligible machinery and equipment ; the second is revision of the guidelines for the tax lives of properties subject to depreciation The investment credit will stimulate investment } >y reducing the net cost of acquiring depreciable assets thus increasing expected profitability The increase will vary inversely with the expected life of the asset. For an asset with a service life of years and an after-tax yield of percent before the credit the investment credit will increase the expected rate of return by about one-third. The increase in net yield will be greater for less durable equipment and smaller for more durable equipment Investment decisions are also influenced by the availability of funds The investment tax credit will increase by some $ billion the flow of cash available for investment under conditions anticipated for Since the credit applies only to newly acquired assets the entire incentive effect is concentrated on the profitability of new capital and no revenue is lost in raising the profitability of assets already held by business firms. It is an efficient way of encouraging re-equipment and modernization of productive facilities as well as the expansion of capacity. The credit will thus help to accelerate economic growth and improve our competitive position It will also increase the attractiveness of investment at home relative to direct investment abroad. In both ways the credit will help to ease our balance of payments problem Revision of tax lives for depreciable property is desirable as a matter of equity to reflect more accurately the influence of obsolescence on economic lives of capital assets. Present guidelines were established years ago on the basis of replacement practices of the depressed prewar years. Depreciation designed to reflect the loss in value of plant and equipment over time is a function not alone of " wear and tear " but also of technological progress changes in the relative costs of economic inputs competitive conditions and consumer tastes and demand. Through its favorable effects on cash flows expected rates of return and risk liberalized depreciation will tend to stimulate investment The investment tax credit coupled with liberalized depreciation will provide a strong and lasting stimulus to the high rate of investment that is a major requirement for accelerated economic growth. Together they will provide incentives to invest comparable to those available in the rapidly growing industrial nations of the free world Attention to Federal income tax adjustments to stimulate investment must not be allowed to obscure the role of State and local tax policies and practices in economic growth. The tax collections of these governments are nearly half as large as Federal collections. In fiscal year I960 they increased by more than percent or $ billion The power to tax under this governmental system is shared by thousands of separate jurisdictions. Improved coordination among them will improve economic efficiency. Identical tax sources are frequently utilized by two three and even four layers of government without appropriate cooperation. Taxing authorities occasionally use their powers in ways that capriciously affect decisions concerning the location of plants and disrupt normal competition. The result may be a misallocation of resources and economic loss The Congress has recognized the need for better intergovernmental coordination. It has provided for the creation of the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations to foster " the fullest cooperation and coordination of activities between the levels of government. " The Advisory Commission composed of representatives of the executive and legislative branches of all levels of government has already made important recommendations for the coordination of local taxes by the States and for improved tax coordination and cooperation between Federal and State governments INVESTMENT IN NATURAL RESOURCES Economic growth is not simply a matter of growth in the size and skills of the labor force in the quantity and quality of capital goods and in the productivity of the processes by which these inputs are combined. It is equally a matter of turning more and more of the earth 's endowment of natural wealth soil sunlight air water minerals plant and animal life to the purposes of man. America 's position has generally been one of natural plenty but we can not complacently assume that the abundance of the past will also characterize the future But neither is there any reason to suppose that resource limitations will in the foreseeable future place serious limits on the growth of the economy Technological change substitution of abundant and cheap raw materials for scarce and expensive ones investment in improved resource management and conservation and increased reliance on imports all provide important offsets to the effects of increasing scarcity on the real cost of obtaining resource inputs. Taken together these factors tend to keep the economy growing along the path of least resistance so far as its resource requirements are concerned. If the various offsets to increasing scarcity are not fully effective resources can be obtained by digging and drilling deeper utilizing lower grade deposits constructing dams and better waste treatment facilities and other measures involving higher costs. But the necessity to devote more labor and capital to these tasks would constitute a drag on the economy tending to cancel some of the efforts we make to stimulate growth Indeed taking the economy as a whole it is equivalent to a decline in productivity The Historical Record A rough judgment as to the probable consequences of continued depletion of resources in the future can be derived by examining the record of the past. The long-term trend of raw materials prices relative to the prices of finished products is a useful though by no means ideal indicator of the effectiveness of the offsets to natural scarcity TABLE Ratios of indexes of raw materials prices to index offinishedproducts prices [ = ] Minerals All raw materials Period Forest Agricultural products products Total Metals Fuels Other Connonstruction metallic materials minerals Annual average : _ _. Excludes fishery and wildlife products for which adequate price data are not available Excludes gold NOTE. Figures for earlier years especially prior to are less reliable than those for later years Annual index for each group has been divided by the over-all finished products index Source : Department of Commerce ( based on data including finished products price index to be published by the Bureau of the Census in the forthcoming report Raw Materials in the United States Economy Working Paper No. ) Table shows the movements of price indexes for all raw materials and for broad subgroups relative to an index of prices of finished products From to the last period for which data are available the over-all index increased by 25j/s> percent an average rate of increase just over percent per year. The most striking feature of the table however is not this slow but visible trend toward increasing costs as our resource endowment has been exploited more intensively but the varying patterns of price movement shown by different commodities and by the same commodity at different times * The outstanding example of a strong upward price trend is forest products. Even in forestry however there are prelim- inary indications that productivity gains are beginning to offset the effects of scarcity on prices. The index for all minerals has risen slightly less than that for all raw materials and the subgroups of the minerals index show divergent movements. A considerably larger increase in the minerals index would undoubtedly have occurred if the opportunities of international trade had not been available. This is particularly true of the metals subgroup where net imports accounted for percent of apparent consumption of metallic ores in The index for agricultural products shows the effects of the great depression the second World War and its aftermath and the accelerated improvement of agricultural productivity in the 's. The last is largely responsible for the decline of the over-all index from its peak It is reasonable to expect that improvements in agricultural productivity will continue to exert a substantial downward pressure on the over-all index in the future Implications for Public Policy The lessons to be drawn from this review of past trends are these : First it is likely that increasing resource scarcity has had only a negligible retarding effect on economic growth during the present century. Rising real costs of obtaining some resources have been largely compensated by declining costs of obtaining others. Second the historical record does not indicate that more rapid economic growth will simply result in our " running out of resources " more quickly. On the contrary past investments have permitted resources to be extracted more efficiently and used more efficiently Public policy has contributed to this success by limitation of economic waste the development and adoption of improved methods in agriculture forestry and other fields the unified development of river valleys and a variety of other measures. Finally the opportunity to obtain raw materials from abroad has been important in the past and will be increasingly important in the future Preventing resource scarcity from being a drag on economic growth is by no means the only objective of policy in this field. Particularly for water forest and scenic resources an important objective is the provision of aesthetic and recreational benefits which are not reflected in aggregate measures of economic activity because they do not pass through the market place. The difficulty of determining objective standards by which such benefits can be weighed is obviously not a valid reason for neglecting them Water Resources There is wide agreement that one of the most serious resource problems facing the United States at present and in the immediate future is the development of water resources. The use of water has been increasing rapidly as a result of population growth higher living standards increasing urbanization rapid growth of industries that are heavy users of water increases in the amount of land under irrigation and other factors. In the Eastern United States and the Pacific Northwest the problem presented by these trends can be met for the next few decades by an adequate and appropriately timed program of investment in ( ) multiple purpose water resource development which in addition to other benefits permits the collection and storage of water for use as needed and ( ) facilities for treatment of industrial and municipal wastes. In some of the dry regions of the West however the opportunities for further development of water resources will be exhausted within the next two decades. Barring major scientific breakthroughs the continued economic development of these regions will soon come to depend upon how effectively an almost fixed supply of water is used to satisfy the most important of the various industrial agricultural and municipal needs for water It is certain that additional investment to increase the quantity and to improve the quality of the supplies of water will be a major part of any solution to the problem. Pollution control in particular will require major investment expenditures in the coming decades. The enactment last year of the Administration 's proposal for an expanded program of grants under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and extension of Federal authority to seek abatement of pollution of navigable waters were important steps forward. But the fact that water resources in some regions of the country will soon be close to fully developed calls attention to a consideration that is relevant to water resources policy for the country as a whole : investment in development of existing water supplies is not a complete solution to the problem of water scarcity nor is it necessarily the economically desirable solution under every particular set of circumstances. A variety of offsets to increasing scarcity are available and each has a role to play. In particular additional research and development in methods of conserving and augmenting water supplies including desalinization weather modification reduction of evaporation losses cheaper and more effective waste treatment and more efficient use of water in industry and agriculture may produce high returns Since expensive investments must be undertaken to increase the quantity and quality of water supplies it is appropriate that the costs be reflected in prices charged industrial and agricultural users. To treat a costly commodity as if it were free only encourages excessive use. There is evidence that significant reductions in water withdrawals could be achieved in many important water using activities and that they can be expected to occur if proper deterrents are provided. The burdens of scarcity on the economy can not be entirely eliminated by using scarce capital to augment the supply of scarce water. But the burden can be minimized by a proper balance between investments in increased supply on the one hand and price increases to eliminate inefficient use on the other Agricultural Land The problem of agricultural land stands in sharp contrast to the problem of water resources. Whereas in the latter the problems requiring attention are those posed by increasing scarcity in the former they are problems of adjusting to abundance Agriculture is the major source of downward pressure on the price index for all raw materials and land is in ample supply. There are approximately million acres of land suitable for cultivation in the United States at present but only about million are actually used for crops or pasture Present indications are that only slightly more than million acres of cropland ( including cropland pastured and idle ) will be in use by to produce agricultural products The major land resource investments required during the next several decades will therefore involve the conservation and protection of remaining farmland and the transfer of land to nonagricultural use rather than bringing more land into agricultural production. There are currently close to million acres of land used for cropland which are subject to severe erosion hazard or otherwise not suitable for cultivation over the long run. Much of this land could be transferred to provide products or services such as forestry and recreation for which the demand is rising At the same time about million of the million acres of good land now in pasture or forest could be converted to cropland The Department of Agriculture currently has plans for a long-range land use adjustment program. This program has three major facets : transfer of cropland to grass ; transfer of cropland to forest ; and greater emphasis on wildlife and recreational development in the small watershed programs As the program develops it will be possible for supply management to place less emphasis on temporary diversion of acreage from the production of specific crops The present problems of U.S. agriculture which reflect in part the fact that the pace of technological progress in agriculture exceeds the rate of growth in demand for farm products should not blind us to the important lessons to be drawn from the record. When strong policy measures are taken well in advance technological progress affords an escape from increasing scarcity. Indeed it is technology that largely determines which portions of the environment are regarded as resources and which are not Research not only makes possible the more effective use of existing resources as in the case of agriculture but may create important new ones. The record of agriculture also illustrates however the long lag between the decision to act and the appearance of the benefits. Careful and continuing analysis of present and future resource needs coupled with readiness to act when the indications of potential difficulties become persuasive is the best hope for success in meeting the resource requirements of rapid economic growth INVESTMENT IN PUBLIC SERVICES Accelerated economic growth will require increased public investment just as it will require increased private investment. Without additional plant and equipment governments at all levels will be unable to meet the increased demands for public services that arise both as a consequence of measures taken to stimulate growth and as a consequence of growth itself If a high and rising educational level of the labor force is sought as a means to speed economic growth additional investment in school and college buildings furnishings and laboratory equipment will be required. Demands for transportation of both people and goods will increase as a result of economic growth ; meeting these demands will require additional investment in urban public transportation systems airports roads and highways Failure to make adequate investments in the physical basis of public services inevitably retards economic growth. In some cases the connection is fairly easy to trace ; inadequate investment in highways will bring an increase in congestion with consequent declines in the productivity of trucks and truck drivers and rising transportation costs. In other cases the process by which a shortage of basic public services tends to retard the growth of output is less obvious but no less real ; education is an important example. As has been noted above an inadequate effort to solve the water pollution problem will be paid for in higher costs of obtaining water of adequate quality unless it is paid for by a decline in the health of the population and decreased productivity in water-using industrial processes Inadequacy of public services also has effects on economic welfare that are not reflected in aggregate economic statistics. Commuters are well aware of the sacrifice of time that results from inadequate urban transportation systems. The sacrifice of recreational opportunities resulting from failure to make sufficient provisions for public parks as cities expand is another example The task of meeting the transportation recreation education housing and other needs of growing metropolitan areas poses a major challenge to our existing forms of political organization at the State and local level Public facilities serving the needs of individual political jurisdictions within an urban area are often less efficient than they would be if they had been designed for all or a large part of the area. For example lack of effective and well coordinated land use planning and zoning regulation has resulted in locational patterns of residential commercial and industrial developments that intensify transportation problems. Improved planning and coordination can increase the efficiency of public services and make cities better places in which to live. Progress can be achieved through continued Federal assistance to States and local bodies for the planning of urban area development comprehensive urban renewal programs within cities public improvement programs and specific public improvements Although the Federal Government is making an important contribution to the solution of problems whose significance extends beyond the boundaries of political units at lower levels it must be remembered that civil government is basically a State and local responsibility. About percent of spending for civil government in for education highways water supply sanitation public health police and fire protection etc. actually took place at the State and local level with only about percent of these local expenditures financed by Federal aid. State and local governments account for more than percent of public civilian employment and for two-thirds of nonmilitary government payrolls. Their activities are a major factor in the economy As a Nation we have surely not erred on the side of excessive public investment in recent years. Major sources of demand for public services have expanded sharply : for example the number of automobiles and trucks has grown more rapidly than GNP and the extent of urbanization has increased Nevertheless new nondefense public construction as a fraction of GNP was essentially unchanged in the 's from its level in the 's. It must also be noted that a substantial backlog of unsatisfied needs for schools highways and other public facilities was carried over into the decade of the 's from the second World War probably a much greater backlog than was carried into the 1920Js from the first Although these historical comparisons throw an interesting light on the changing role of the public sector in the U.S. economy they do not provide firm standards for the future division of responsibility between the public and private sectors. That issue can not be settled by the invocation of historical ratios any more than it should be settled by abstract argument If our economy is to use its productive resources in reasonable accordance with a consensus as to national priorities we must face the question of public versus private expenditures pragmatically in terms of intrinsic merits and costs not in terms of fixed preconceptions INVESTMENT IN HOUSING The higher standard of living made possible by economic growth results from increased output of a wide variety of goods and services. Among these is one item which by virtue of its economic importance its great influence on the general quality of life and the unique character of the capital investment required to expand its supply deserves special attention in a discussion of economic growth. This item is housing The value of the current services supplied by the Nation 's residential structures the total of rents paid plus the imputed rental value of owneroccupied dwellings accounted for percent of personal consumption expenditures in or percent of GNP. Another percent of GNP was accounted for by residential nonfarm construction the total expenditures on replacing improving and adding to the nonfarm portion of the stock of residential structures. That stock itself represents roughly 621876O-62-10 one-fourth of our national wealth about twice the share accounted for by producers ' durable equipment These figures are in part a statistical image of the importance of the basic human need for shelter. To a greater extent however they reflect the fact that better housing is among the most important benefits that economic progress can confer. A dwelling that provides adequate protection against the elements may nevertheless be a serious hazard to the mental and physical health of its occupants if it is overcrowded lacking in hot and cold running water or plumbing facilities or structurally unsound A better home provides a healthier safer and more comfortable living environment ; it affords greater opportunities for recreation aesthetic enjoyment and peace and quiet Few if any Americans actually lack a roof over their heads. But about one-fifth of the Nation 's housing units are classified as " dilapidated " or else lack one or more of the basic plumbing facilities. Like the poverty that it reflects substandard housing is a burden borne to a disproportionate extent by a few groups in the society ; the aged the nonwhite the poorly educated and families without a male breadwinner. The burden is perhaps most regrettable when it renders ineffective the measures society takes to promote equality of opportunity. The child who has no decent place in which to study can hardly take full advantage of the free education that is provided to him The elimination of substandard housing and the provision of a decent home in a suitable environment for all American families is an important objective of public policy in the housing field. The public interest has been deemed to extend also to the promotion of home ownership. Through the mortgage insurance and mortgage guaranty operations of the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and the Veterans Administration ( VA ) and the secondary market operations of the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) the Government facilitates homebuilding and the flow of private capital into home loans by providing insurance against the risk of default and making mortgage loans a more liquid investment for financial institutions. In addition FNMA assists in the financing of certain special types of home mortgages as authorized by the Congress and directed by the President. Public housing amounted to just over percent of all nonfarm housing starts between and These various activities played a major role in the substantial progress toward better housing for the Nation that was made during the 's Whereas in percent of occupied housing units were owneroccupied percent were owner-occupied in Nonfarm housing starts exceeded the increase in the number of nonfarm households by roughly percent for the decade providing a margin for replacement of housing units demolished by public and private improvement programs for improvement of average quality and to accommodate housing needs arising from migration and mobility of the American people. In recent years about percent of sales of new nonfarm housing units have been under the FHA or VA programs A sharp rise in the rate of household formation will occur in the latter part of this decade reflecting the high birth rates of the middle and late 's. It is all the more important therefore that substantial progress in improving the average quality of the Nation 's housing be made in the early part of the decade when the need to increase its quantity will be less urgent. The enactment in the last session of Congress of the Administration-sponsored Housing Act of was a major step toward meeting the Nation 's housing needs. In addition to extending and expanding existing programs for public housing housing for the elderly college housing and farm housing the Act provides for major new programs of FHA-insured loans to finance construction and rehabilitation of housing for moderate income families and long-term FHA-insured home repair loans. These new types of loans are eligible for purchase by FNMA. Other important provisions make Federal assistance available to States and localities for various measures in the field of urban affairs including planning loans and demonstration grants for mass transportation projects and acquisition of land for permanent open-space uses such as parks. Additional funds were authorized to finance the construction of community facilities Finally a series of provisions make additional assistance available for households and businesses displaced by urban renewal programs or other government actions Rapid economic growth should bring the national goal of decent housing and a suitable living environment for every American family well within reach during the present decade. Estimates prepared for the Council of Economic Advisers by the Housing and Home Finance Agency indicate that no American households need occupy a dilapidated structure by This could be achieved with about the present ratio of residential construction expenditures to GNP provided that GNP itself grows at approximately the rate discussed earlier in this chapter. This estimate includes an allowance for expenditures on additions and alterations based on extrapolation of the trend but this allowance is probably not adequate to make possible the elimination of housing that is deficient for reasons other than dilapidation. It is clear however that the virtually complete elimination of deficient housing is by no means an unrealistic objective in a context of rapid economic growth Construction costs have risen more rapidly than broad price indexes in recent years. For example while the all-inclusive price index for GNP rose by percent between and the subindex for nonfarm residential construction rose by percent. If this were to continue it would mean that the share of current-price GNP devoted to the building of houses must rise if the proportion of real output going into housing investment is not to fall. There is a need to identify artificial barriers to technological progress and to efficient allocation of resources in the construction industry. Their reduction or removal can make a significant contribution to growth in this important sector of the economy CONCLUSION This Chapter began with the observation that sustained long-run growth of potential supply is both difficult to achieve and pointless of achievement unless the growth of demand keeps pace. Capacity to produce is not an end in itself but an instrument for the satisfaction of needs and the discharge of responsibilities. The needs will go unfilled and the responsibilities unmet to the extent that growing productive power runs to waste in idle machines and unemployed men Here the objectives of stabilization policy and growth policy coalesce The mandate of the Employment Act renews itself perpetually as maximum levels of production employment and purchasing power rise through time The weapons of stabilization policy the budget the tax system control of the supply of money and credit must be aimed anew for their target is moving. In particular as Part II of Chapter explains with given expenditures and given tax rates the Federal budget surplus at full employment grows with the economy. If it grows too rapidly it can become an obstacle to full employment to healthy economic growth indeed to its own realization. If it grows too slowly it can contribute to inflationary pressure Some surplus at full employment may be desirable to help to finance the formation of capital. How large it should be depends on the size of the investment program required by the economy on the freely made saving decisions of families and business firms and on the level of government expenditures. It is the function of monetary policy the tax system and transfer payments to help to generate demand for the investment needed for economic growth. It is the function of over-all fiscal policy to insure that investment demand is matched at full employment by an equivalent volume of private and public saving The course of the budget surplus at full employment depends on the growth of the national income the responsiveness of tax revenues to a rising tax base and the changing level of Federal outlays. Even if Federal expenditures remain a constant proportion of GNP as they have in recent years the surplus at full employment will grow slightly because the progressive character of the tax system causes revenues to rise relative to GNP If expenditures remain constant or nearly so the full employment surplus will grow much more rapidly As the economy returns to the full employment track the full employment surplus will need to be kept from growing indefinitely and perhaps to be reduced. The choice or rather the division for it is unlikely to be an " either-or " matter is between reductions in tax receipts and increases in government expenditures whether Federal State or local. A pragmatic decision will almost certainly involve both. It is unlikely that the most urgent unmet needs of the population will lie all in the area of private consumption or all in the areas traditionally allotted to public consumption and investment. Undoubtedly much of the reduction in the full employment surplus should be channeled directly to private purchasing power just as most by far of present consumption spending is in private hands The choice of a balance between public and private expenditures is an important choice for society. It should be made consciously through the normal democratic processes. And it should be made by weighing the urgency of alternative uses of resources rather than by appeal to simple slogans on one side or the other The concern of this chapter has been the source of rising productive potential and the policies that can strengthen them. Granted continued prosperity we can have slower growth or faster growth. There is substitution between the composition of output in the present and the level of output in the future. Just as a single individual can increase his consumption possibilities in the future by present saving so can a whole society provide more fully for its future by using present resources for acts of investment in the broadest sense. No absolute reduction in current consumption need occur ; it is only necessary that consumption grow less rapidly than total output for a time. Indeed future levels of consumption will be higher than they could otherwise be the cost is primarily in postponement. Happily for an advanced society like ours much of what is described from this point of view as investment can also be seen as present enjoyment of some of the delights of civilization : widespread education good health and the search for knowledge Chapter The Balance of International Payments T HE RECOVERY AND GROWTH of the U.S. economy are not important for the United States alone. On the vigor of our economy depend in large measure the strength and stamina of the free world and the standing of freedom in the minds of men everywhere. Leadership in the world requires the support of a growing and dynamic domestic economy using to the full its vast productive capacity. The other nations of the free world rely heavily on the United States as a market for their products and as a source of capital and technology for their economic growth. The United States has taken the lead in meeting the responsibilities of the advanced countries to foster the economic development of the low-income nations. The less developed cquntries need both public and private investment capital ; they need full opportunity to sell their products in world markets in order to earn the industrial imports that their development programs require ; and they need a democratic alternative to the communist prescription for economic development The U.S. balance of international payments is the outcome of countless separate transactions by governments private businesses and individuals The obligations of world leadership entail large government outlays abroad. U.S. business firms and consumers pay out billions of dollars for foreign goods and services. U.S. corporations financial institutions and individuals acquire properties buy securities and lend money abroad. The United States is one of a very few countries with a long standing policy permitting residents and foreigners complete freedom to make payments abroad in its currency. For many years the United States had little reason to be concerned whether all these payments were covered by corresponding receipts from abroad. Foreign demands for U.S. goods and services were large ; the dollar was and still is a ticket of entry to the world 's largest and most diversified market. In some periods the surplus of receipts was so large that the United States took actions to moderate its effects both at home and abroad. And if international payments happened to exceed receipts in any year foreigners were willing to hold most of the dollars they acquired ; only a small part of the deficit had to be met from our large gold reserves Recently persistent payments deficits and gold losses have made it necessary for the U.S. Government to give greater attention to the net financial outcome of its transactions and those of its citizens with the rest of the world. Payments need not and should not be directly controlled but the balance must be under control. Many private international transactions depend in large part on economic circumstances at home. Consequently domestic economic policy must be framed with an eye to the balance of payments. Action to safeguard the international position of the dollar is today an essential part of policy for full employment and growth The policies adopted in to strengthen the balance of payments are already beginning to take effect. The deficit in the international payments of the United States which had averaged $ billion annually in each of the three preceding years was less than $ billion in according to preliminary estimates. Gold reserves declined by less than $ billion in compared with $ billion in The full effects of measures under way and proposed will in time restore a sustainable balance in U.S. transactions with the rest of the world This chapter examines first the background for policies to improve the balance of payments and safeguard the position of the dollar : the general objectives which guide U.S. international economic and financial policies ; the trading investing and international banking functions of the United States and their interrelations ; and recent changes in the world economy affecting the U.S. balance of payments. In the final sections of the chapter policies that are under way and proposed are discussed : measures to balance the basic international accounts ; measures to limit disruptive flows of short-term capital ; and measures to strengthen the international monetary system T H E UNITED STATES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY Objectives of U.S. Foreign Economic Policy A basic objective of U.S. policy is to provide an economic environment in which the people of the United States and of all nations can steadily raise their standards of living. Economic growth at home will support and will be supported by progress and development abroad provided that international cooperation and commerce distribute eauitably and efficiently the fruits of productive specialization among all free nations. International financial arrangements and policies are means to this fundamental end. A stable and efficient system of international payments is essential to facilitate desirable international flows of goods services and capital. The dollar has become the principal international currency and the stability of the dollar is the foundation of the international payments system which has evolved since the war. For this reason the President has declared that the present gold value of the dollar will be maintained To safeguard the stability of the dollar the United States is determined to improve its balance of international payments Postwar progress. U.S. foreign economic policy since the war has sought to build an international economic environment in which goods services and capital flow freely across national boundaries. This policy has been based on the conviction that a free exchange of products and capital in worldwide markets will raise standards of living both in the United States and in the rest of the world. The example of the vast continental market of the United States attests to the economic gains afforded by geographical specialization and exchange and by the mobilization of savings in one region to finance productive investment opportunities in another. Without this huge internal market unhampered by trade restrictions between States American standards of living could not have risen to their present heights Throughout the world similarly dramatic gains can be achieved by international specialization and trade The framework of international economic cooperation in the free world today especially among the industrial countries represents a notable achievement. The great depression and the war left a legacy of national restrictions on movements of goods and capital exchange controls quantitative restrictions on imports bilateral clearing and trading arrangements discrimination against dollar goods. Since the war the countries of the free world have been engaged in clearing away this restrictive legacy. Even before the war ended the foundations were laid for the International Monetary Fund the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The United States provided aid and leadership in European economic reconstruction and trade liberalization through the Marshall Plan and through association with the Organization for European Economic Cooperation. Substantial progress has been made toward a world of currencies convertible at fixed exchange rates and toward freedom from direct and discriminatory controls over trade and payments. Progress has also been made though less rapidly toward a world of lower tariff barriers ; here is an opportunity for a major step forward Expanding trade : a new program. Foreign trade is not so vital to the United States as it is to most other countries. But the contributions of trade to our domestic welfare are nonetheless real and important. Net foreign purchases of our products contribute to output employment and economic growth in the United States. More significant the opportunity to sell our products abroad in exchange for foreign goods enables us to specialize the structure of our production and to diversify the patterns of our consumption By specializing in the production and export of goods in which the United States is unexcelled Americans are enabled to import goods which would be impossible or costly to produce at home. Foreign trade raises living standards by widening the choice of goods available to the American consumer and by providing him with some goods and services at lower prices As other countries have recovered from the devastation of war and have rebuilt and modernized their productive capacity they have become increasingly vigorous competitors of the United States in world markets. The most notable new source of competition is the European Economic Community or Common Market which now includes France Germany Italy Belgium Holland and Luxembourg and which shortly may include the United Kingdom and several other European countries. Members of the Common Market are committed to the rapid elimination of tariffs among themselves and the establishment of a common external tariff on imports from the rest of the world Still in its formative years the Common Market has imparted amazing vitality to the economies of its members. U.S. exports to Western Europe have risen sharply in response to the rapid economic growth within the Common Market countries. We can not be sure that this rise in exports will continue unless we can negotiate substantial reductions of the Common Market 's external tariff. The evolution and enlargement of the Common Market inevitably increases tariff discrimination against U.S. exports ; we must compete over this tariff barrier while members of the Common Market have steadily freer access to each other 's markets The Administration is therefore proposing to the Congress a major revision in foreign trade policy. The President 's current authority to negotiate tariff reductions has been virtually exhausted. For the first time since the original Trade Agreements Act was passed in Congress is being asked to equip the President with new kinds of bargaining instruments for negotiating with the Common Market. We must assure access of the products of our farms and factories to the world 's largest market outside our own. Successful negotiations will make possible increasing specialization of production in both Atlantic markets. It will also make it possible to offer the free nations of other continents greater access to markets on both sides of the Atlantic Safeguarding the dollar. A stable and efficient system of international payments is an integral part of the liberal international economic environment toward which the free world has been moving. Uncertainties about the value and convertibility of the proceeds of international transactions disrupt movements of goods services and capital between nations. Convertible currencies and stable exchange rates as envisaged in the Bretton Woods agreements provide assurance of the value of international claims acquired by trade or investment The United States performs a special world banking function in the present international payments system. The dollar alone with the pound sterling among national currencies has come to be used as a major international currency by the free world. Private traders banks and governments have chosen to use dollars both as a means of payment and as a store of value Foreign countries hold liquid dollar balances acquired in international transactions in much the same way that individual depositors hold balances in commercial banks. Foreign governments and central banks accept dollars as a partial substitute for gold in their international reserves because the dollar is an international currency and because the policy of the U.S Treasury is to sell gold on demand to foreign governments and monetary authorities at a fixed price. The dollar became a " reserve currency " without any conscious international decision to establish a payments system based on key national currencies. Use of the dollar as a reserve currency has met growing needs for international reserves and economized the limited and slowly growing supply of gold Foreign central banks and governments hold as part of their international reserves $ billion of short-term dollar obligations which can be used to purchase gold from the United States. In addition foreign private short-term dollar holdings amount to $ billion. Whenever dollars held by foreign private banks or individuals or dollars held by U.S. residents themselves are sold to foreign central banks for other currencies they become potential claims on our gold stock Because of the strategic role of the dollar maintenance of its established gold value is essential to the stability and efficiency of the present system of international payments. Accordingly when the President pledged that the gold value of the dollar would be maintained he stated that " the full strength of our total gold stock and other international reserves stands behind the value of the dollar for use if needed. " This reserve strength comprises $ billion in gold ( two-fifths of the monetary gold stock of the free world ) small amounts of convertible foreign currencies and drawing rights on the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) of which $ billion is automatically available under current practices of the Fund. An additional $ billion could become available in accordance with Fund policies insofar as the Fund has available resources in gold and usable foreign currencies. The recent agreement to strengthen the IMF ( discussed at the end of this chapter ) should do much to assure the availability of such resources Reducing the deficit. Deficits in the U.S. balance of payments are financed either by drawing down our gold reserves or by increasing the potential foreign claims against them in the form of liquid dollar liabilities to foreigners official and private. Large and continuing deficits can not be financed indefinitely. U.S. reserves although very large are not inexhaustible. Foreigners have accumulated large liquid dollar balances but they will not be willing tot let these balances grow without limit Therefore the policy of the U.S. Government as stated by the President in his message to Congress of February is to " gain control of our balance of payments position so that we can achieve over-all equilibrium in our international payments. This means that any sustained future outflow of dollars into the monetary reserves of other countries should come about only as a result of considered judgments as to the appropriate needs for dollar reserves. " Maintaining basic objectives. These related tasks maintaining the external value of the dollar and bringing our international accounts into balance must be accomplished by means which promote the basic national objectives from which the tasks derive. To balance our accounts by restrictions on trade and capital movements for example would confuse means and ends. Such restrictions would violate the fundamental principles of international economic relations for which our policy has striven for many years with so much success. Similarly the foreign policy of the United States calls for large loans and grants to foreign countries for development and for defense ; and the maintenance of our military establishment abroad entails substantial overseas expenditures. To curtail the substance of these programs would provide no solution t > the " dollar problem. " o Rather the task of balance of payments policy is to find the foreign exchange resources necessary to finance them. Finally full recovery and economic growth primary national goals in themselves are also essential elements in the long-run capacity of the United States to meet its international commitments and responsibilities. Measures to rectify the balance of payments must be consistent with expansion of the U.S. economy The United States as Trader Investor and Banker The accounts. The U.S. balance of international payments over the last decade is shown in Table In the table international transactions are classified into four accounts : ( ) current account and unilateral transfers encompassing merchandise trade earnings on U.S. foreign investments less foreign earnings on investments in the United States services including tourism and ocean freight private remittances and government military expenditures and development grants ; ( ) long-term capital account coverTABLE United States balance of international payments [ Billions of dollars ! average Type of transaction i Long-term capital account U.S. direct investment4 Other private U.S. investment Government loans ( less repayments ) Foreign long-term investment5 Balance on " basic " accounts ( entries above ) Military expenditures net Interest and dividends net Other services net Government nonmilitary grants Pensions and remittances Merchandise trade balance. Exports Imports c commercial Errors and omissions Over-all balance [ deficit ( ) ] _ First quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rate Net of foreign military purchases in the United States Excludes subsidiary earnings not repatriated Excludes reinvested subsidiary earnings amounting to $ billion in Excludes reinvested subsidiary earnings amounting to $ billion in NOTE.- Minus signs indicate payments to foreigners Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on Department of Commerce data Current account and unilateral transfers U.S. short-term capital and foreign credit average ing direct investments in business enterprise abroad private purchases of foreign securities U.S. Government loans and long-term investments by foreigners in the United States ; ( ) short-term capital account including commercial credits under one year and U.S. purchases of foreign short-term securities ; ( ) over-all balance comprising net purchases of monetary gold and convertible currencies plus decreases in U.S. liquid liabilities to foreigners The accounts are of course far more interrelated than a simple classification of transactions suggests ; foreign aid private direct investment and private remittances often consist in shipment abroad of U.S. goods. Even dollar outflows which are not so closely linked to the purchase of U.S. goods and services frequently result in reverse payments to the United States either directly from the immediate recipient or indirectly through transactions involving third countries. The volume of our exports and indeed the size of the trade surplus are thus not independent of the size of our government outlays and private investments overseas The first account covers international transactions which relate to the earning and spending of national income. A surplus in this account means that the Nation as a whole is earning more than it is spending in its relations with the rest of the world and this " saving " leads to an increase in the net assets of the country. Throughout the period covered by the table the United States had a substantial merchandise trade surplus which with other current receipts was usually enough to pay for large overseas military expenditures and government grants for foreign reconstruction and development. In the first three quarters of the surplus on current account and unilateral transfers was at an annual rate of $ billion The second account summarizes the transactions of the United States as an investing nation. In recent years the United States as Table shows has invested in long-term foreign assets more than its surplus on current account and unilateral transfers. It has also lent to foreigners substantial amounts of short-term capital as the third account in the table shows. The excess of our long-term investment and short-term lending over our surplus on current account and unilateral transfers the over-all deficit has been financed by increasing our liquid liabilities to foreigners and by selling gold The present payments problem of the United States is not one of solvency. The Nation is not " living beyond its means " ; rather its means are steadily increasing. At the end of the U.S. Government owned foreign assets totaling $ billion in addition to its gold holdings of $ billion ; and U.S. citizens owned another $ billion in assets abroad ( Table ) In total U.S. net claims on foreigners ( including reinvested subsidiary earnings on investments abroad ) rose by $ billion in and the increase was perhaps as much in These increases substantially exceeded our losses of gold. Our foreign assets give basic long-run strength to the dollar ; but because most of these assets are either privately owned or long-term investments or both they can not be quickly mobilized I5O TABLE International investment and gold position of the United States and [ Billions of dollars end of year ] Assets and liabilities i Assets. Gold I M F subscription and short-term Monetary gold International Monetary Fund subscription 3_ Short-term private Long-term Direct investment Other private investment U.S. Government claims Liabilities Liquid Short-term by holders : Foreign official * International Monetary Fund s Other international organizations Privates Foreign and international holdings of U.S. Government bonds and notes Long-term Direct investment Other private investment Excess of assets over liabilities Preliminary Under current practices of I M F the United States has a virtually automatic right to draw the amount of its subscription less the amount of U.S. liabilities to I M F as shown in the lower part of the table Includes U.S. Government claims in inconvertible currencies As reported by banks in the U.S Noninterest-bearing notes ( and in deposits ) Includes estimated foreign holding of U.S. currency and other liquid claims not accounted for elsewhere Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System It is useful to distinguish net payments resulting from merchandise trade services unilateral transfers and long-term investment the so-called basic accounts from net payments resulting from the more volatile and sometimes substantial flows of short-term capital. The balance on basic accounts and the over-all balance are shown in Table and Chart In the " basic " deficit was larger than the over-all deficit because of net inflows of short-term capital while in and again in the over-all deficit exceeded the deficit on basic accounts as a result of net outflows of short-term capital The over-all balance exerts a significant influence on the liquidity position of the United States. The change in the U.S. position resulting from overall deficits in the past decade can be seen from the reduction in the monetary gold stock and the increase in U.S. liquid liabilities to foreigners shown in Table and Chart Reserves and liquid liabilities. In the United States held percent of the world monetary gold stock and half of the world total of official gold and foreign exchange reserves. Capital seeking haven from the political disruptions of the 's followed by the import needs of war-torn Europe produced this undue concentration of world reserves. In those CHART Balance of Trade and Payments BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES " X / J hA TRADE BALANCE y ^ X / ^ X X- A -BASIC JALANCE ~ OVER- ALL BALA 4CE i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i I960 i i i NOTE : FOR DEFINITIONS OF DIFFERENT BALANCES SEE TABLE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE circumstances deficits in the U.S. balance of payments served the very useful function of rebuilding the depleted reserves of other countries Countries chose to replenish reserves largely by holding dollars rather than by purchasing gold. While cumulative deficits totaled $ billion in the past years ( Chart ) U.S. gold sales amounted to just $ billion of which $ billion represented reacquisition of gold that the United States had obtained in the early postwar period. The rest of the deficit was settled by an increase in foreign dollar holdings Despite the continuous rise in foreign dollar holdings the liquidity position of the United States is strong. The importance of the United States in international trade and international banking the facilities offered by the New York money market and the variety and quality of goods services and securities which dollars command within the United States make it advantageous for foreigners to hold large dollar balances. These working balances will not readily be withdrawn although they are not entirely insensitive to yield opportunities abroad. Furthermore as world trade expands the size of these working balances is likely to rise The present position of the United States is satisfactory as long as foreign holders of dollars are confident that the gold value of the currency will be maintained. Loss of confidence can however result in a serious " run. " Indeed as the failures of basically sound and solvent com- mercial banks before the days of deposit insurance testify there is no conceivable liquidity position which can withstand general loss of confidence Payments deficits and gold tosses. As U.S. experience in the past years indicates there is only a loose link between external deficits and gold losses Deficits occur when total payments to foreigners exceed total receipts from foreigners ; a decline in gold reserves occurs when a foreign government or central bank converts dollars into gold at the U.S. Treasury. A deficit in the balance of payments need not and usually does not coincide with an equal decline in gold reserves. Foreigners may increase their dollar holdings by part or all of the deficit or as happened in even by more than the deficit ( Chart \ ) Similarly this country may lose gold even when it has a balance of payments surplus if foreign official institutions wish to convert dollars acquired in the past Payments deficits contribute indirectly to gold losses by adding to the supply of dollars in foreign hands thus increasing the likelihood that they will be acquired by governments which may wish to convert them into gold. Moreover the fact that there are persistent payments deficits may reduce foreigners ' willingness to hold dollars Three years of large payments deficits contributed to a temporary decline in confidence in the dollar and to the large gold sales of late An outflow of short-term funds began in mid-1960 as a normal response to higher interest rates abroad but it was augmented when doubts arose about the stability of the dollar as evidenced by substantial private purchases of gold on the London market. These doubts reflected a number of factors : the large payments deficits of and and the loss of gold associated with them the outflow of funds early in associated with differentials in interest rates the initial rise in the London gold price and fears that strong action to defend the dollar would not be taken Confidence was restored when the new Administration declared and demonstrated its determination to defend the dollar intensified measures taken by the previous Administration to reduce the payments deficit and inaugurated new measures Recent Developments Affecting the U.S. Payments Position Although the United States has been running deficits in its international accounts since these deficits were moderate in amount and did not cause concern until Concern has arisen since then partly because of the unexpected persistence of large deficits and partly because the deficits could not be attributed to temporary developments likely to be soon reversed Several significant new factors changed the U.S. position in the world economy : ( ) The establishment of external currency convertibility by most of the European countries at the end of removed an important barrier to international capital flows. ( ) The establishment of the European Economic Community promised a large rapidly growing tariff-free market in Europe holding out much the same investment opportunities as the CHART Changes in U. S. Gold Stock and Liquid Liabilities to Foreigners ( Annual and Cumulative ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL CHANGE IN GOLD STOCK ^ s / \ OVER -ALL BALANCE INCREASE IN LIQUID LIABILITIES i | I ! I I960 I960 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CUMULATIVE DEFICIT END O F YEAR FIRST QUARTERS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM tariff-free internal market of the United States. ( ) Intercontinental ballistic missiles and restoration of political stability in Western Europe reduced the special attractions of the United States as a haven for funds and as a location for capital investment. ( ) The large overseas military expenditures and extensive foreign aid programs of the United States came to be clearly recognized as long-term commitments. ( ) The decline of the U.S. trade surplus from $ billion in to a postwar low of $ billion in focused attention on the long-run improvement in the competitive position of Western European countries and Japan relative to the United States an improvement caused mainly by remarkable advances in output and productivity in those countries. ( ) In addition a sharp rise in certain key prices in the United States relative to those of major competitors weakened the competitiveness of some U.S. products in world markets. ( This development is described in Chapter ) ( ) By gold and foreign exchange reserves of many European countries had been rebuilt from their depleted postwar levels ; U.S. payments deficits were no longer needed for this purpose These developments occurred within a short span of years and affected not only the U.S. payments position itself but attitudes and expectations about its future. The U.S. economy which was geared to the entirely different environment of the years of " dollar shortage " suddenly had to adjust to a new situation. In brief the required readjustment is that the United States must pay for overseas military commitments grants and investments to a greater extent by an export surplus earned in stiff " world competition and to a lesser extent by selling gold and accumulating liquid liabilities to foreigners. For the domestic economy this implies changes in the structure of prices wages investment and employment and a new orientation of American enterprise to world markets. A complete readjustment of this nature takes time POLICIES T O IMPROVE THE U.S. PAYMENTS POSITION In the new environment of the 's the United States can not continue deficits of the size of the late 's. The balance of payments objective for the United States is to attain at high employment levels a balanced position in its basic international accounts during the next few years. We must move toward equilibrium at a pace which demonstrates clearly that the balance of payments is under control The objective of a balanced basic position does not mean that balance must be maintained continuously. In some years a surplus in international payments will be appropriate ; in other years a deficit. But the average position over a period of years must be strong enough to maintain confidence in the parity of the dollar The primary task is to improve the position of the basic accounts Progress toward balance in these accounts will itself diminish the likelihood of sustained short-term capital outflows. Therefore in a discussion of pros621876 O-62-11 pects and policies for improving the balance of payments position it is convenient to discuss first the basic accounts and then the short-term capital account Basic Accounts The underlying trend of the basic accounts position is not easy to discern from current quarterly and yearly statistics. It is difficult to disentangle movements of lasting significance from changes resulting from seasonal cyclical and random factors. When in the first half of slack in the U.S. economy combined with boom conditions in Europe and Japan to bring our basic accounts into temporary surplus it would have been clearly wrong to conclude that the problem was permanently solved. Conversely subsequent reappearance of a deficit on basic accounts which may even rise temporarily as recovery proceeds in the United States reflects a reversal of cyclical influences rather than a deterioration in the underlying position. Long-run improvement resulting from competitive adjustments and government policies may be masked by temporary developments here and abroad The dimensions of the problem facing the United States may be indicated by the basic international accounts in the six-month period embracing the second and third quarters of the latest months for which complete information is available expressed in terms of annual rates ( Table ) Overseas military expenditures less foreign military purchases in this country were running at $ billion in mid-1961. Government grants and loans amounted to $ billion but $ billion of these resulted directly in the export of U.S. goods and services leaving $ billion to be otherwise financed. Long-term private investment abroad was running at about $ billion and pensions and remittances to foreigners cost nearly $ million The overseas commitments and investments resulting in payments of $ billion ( rounded ) must somehow be financed by net receipts from other transactions. This requirement was partially met by debt repayments by foreign governments ( excluding special prepayments in April ) and net earnings on services ( excluding military transactions and receipts associated with government aid ) amounting to $ billion at an annual rate. Full balance in the basic accounts would therefore have required a merchandise trade surplus ( excluding exports financed directly by government grants and loans ) of $ billion. This contrasts with the trade surplus of $ billion actually achieved. The resulting deficit of $ billion had to be financed by a sale of gold and an increase in our liquid liabilities to foreigners Without temporary cyclical factors the gap would probably somewhat exceed the deficit of $ billion on basic accounts actually experienced during this period since our gross national product ( GNP ) was still far below full employment levels. At full employment imports can be expected to be higher than they were in mid-1961 T A B L E United States balance of international payments [ Millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] fourth quarter Type of transaction Second quarter Third quarter Current account and transfers excluding major Government transactions Merchandise trade balance 2_ Net balance on services Pensions and remittances Major Government transactions_ Military expenditures net Government grants and loans Exports of goods financed by Government grants and loans Exports of services financed by Government grants and loans Repayments of Government loans Private long-term capital net Balance on " basic " accounts ( entries above ) U.S. short-term capital and foreign commercial credit Errors and omissions Over-all balance [ deficit ( ) ] Second and third quarters ( annual rates ) First quarter Preliminary Excludes exports of goods financed by Government grants and loans Excludes military expenditures net and exports of services financed by Government grants and loans Includes private expenditures of foreign exchange by United States forces and their dependents ; net of foreign military purchases in the United States Excludes $ million in receipts from foreign governments through extraordinary debt repayments Note. Minus signs indicate payments to foreigners Source : Based on Department of Commerce data The payments position in the second and third quarters of reflects to only a small extent the impact of government balance of payments policies initiated during the year. The full effects of these measures and of further measures planned or proposed will take time. So will the full response of U.S. industry to the increased competitive challenge from abroad and to the improvement in the U.S. competitive position achieved in the past two years. But the gap to be narrowed and eventually closed is not large less than percent of our exports of goods and services and less than one-half of percent of our GNP. Though it will take time to make the needed adjustments and for their effects to outweigh unfavorable cyclical factors U.S. international reserves provide ample means to cover interim deficits on the basic accounts Improvement in the U.S. balance of payments is more than a U.S problem. Our deficit is matched by corresponding surpluses elsewhere especially in Europe. Unless the surplus countries allow their surpluses to decline we can not reduce our deficit without accentuating the payments problems of other deficit countries. Surplus and deficit countries bear joint responsibility for rectifying payments imbalances and for maintaining the stability of the international monetary system during the period of adjustment Reducing the basic deficit involves either diminishing the outflows on government and net capital account or increasing the current account surplus. Both these approaches are being taken. Measures to reduce the payments deficit must be consistent with the primary objectives of U.S. policy : to fulfill foreign economic and military obligations to encourage the flow of goods services and capital among nations and to expand the U.S. economy There is no single dramatic cure-all for the payments problem. Accordingly the Administration is pursuing a variety of measures on many fronts Military outlays. U.S. military outlays in foreign countries have averaged nearly $ billion annually during the last six years even after foreign purchases of military equipment in the United States are deducted. These overseas expenditures by and for U.S. forces for construction logistical support services and personal purchases are an integral part of the national defense effort. In addition the United States provides substantial military grants in kind valued at $ billion in to the governments of friendly nations The Department of Defense has taken several measures to conserve foreign exchange including increased procurement of its supplies from U.S sources even at higher cost to the federal budget More than half of the military outlays are in Europe. The Berlin situation is causing an increase in these outlays. The United States is currently discussing with the Federal Republic of Germany and other NATO Allies measures which would have the effect of offsetting these dollar outlays for defense purposes. The Federal Republic of Germany is already making a substantial contribution in this regard. It is the objective of the Administration to work out arrangements which would offset as much of our overseas military expenditures as is feasible Government loans and grants. Government loans and grants have shifted markedly since the early 's from European countries and Japan to the less developed countries and have risen from $ billion annually in the mid-1950 's to an annual rate of $ billion during the first three quarters of Repayments on past government loans rose steadily during the 's and in they exceeded $ million The growing size of our aid expenditures reflects the pressing needs of the less developed countries for capital. The recent U.S. payments deficits however have necessitated policies to reduce the foreign exchange cost of these programs. The President has instructed the aid agencies to tie development aid directly to purchases of U.S. goods and services wherever possible. In the first nine months of before this policy had taken full effect nearly percent of government loans and grant disbursements resulted directly in the export of U.S. goods and services Though a policy of tied aid may be unavoidable under present conditions it has the twofold disadvantage of reducing the efficiency of a given level of aid and of shielding some U.S. export industries from foreign com- petition. When the United States achieves over-all balance in its international accounts it will be appropriate to discuss with European countries Japan and Canada the possibility of putting all the development aid of industrial countries on an untied basis The United States has encouraged other industrial countries to increase their aid efforts and to provide aid on an untied basis when their payments positions permit. Recent arrangements among several industrial countries to provide assistance for the development programs of India and Pakistan are examples of a new cooperative approach. Increased flows of development capital are of vital importance not only to the developing countries but also to the industrial countries which will be able to sell to a vastly expanded market as the incomes and foreign exchange earnings of the less developed countries rise Private long-term investment. A highly developed economy like that of the United States today is quite naturally a source of capital for investment beyond as well as within its borders. This country is the world 's largest source of savings. Since the United States is far ahead of many countries both in applied technology and in productive facilities per worker there are bound to be attractive opportunities abroad for duplicating our advanced techniques of production Private long-term investment averaged $ billion a year in the last five years substantially higher than in the early 's. In addition reinvested earnings of U.S. subsidiaries abroad averaged $ billion annually. In U.S. private long-term investment abroad is estimated to have been about $ billion While outflows of U.S. capital are adding to our national wealth foreign properties which may yield substantial return flows of earnings in the balance of payments over future years these outflows increase the payments deficit in the short run Since the share of U.S. direct investment outflows going toward Europe has increased substantially. The promise of an expanding European Common Market has enhanced the attractiveness of Europe as a location for production. Flows of saving to develop productive opportunities abroad increase the efficiency of the world economy. However capital is not allocated efficiently when it moves primarily in response to tax advantages or to restrictive or discriminatory trade barriers abroad. If the President 's trade program is enacted and the new common external tariff in Europe is reduced through negotiations artificial incentives to invest behind the European tariff wall will be reduced. This is one important way in which an expansionist trade policy will improve the U.S. payments position The Administration has also proposed changes in the tax treatment of foreign income which in addition to achieving greater equity relative to tax treatment of domestic income will ease our balance of payments deficit Under the President 's proposal earnings on U.S. investments in other industrial countries would be taxed on the same basis as corporate earnings in the United States. This would be achieved by taxing U.S. corporations each year on their current share of the undistributed profits realized in that year by subsidiary corporations organized in economically advanced countries. Any decline in the outflow of U.S. capital resulting from a withdrawal of existing tax inducements would be consistent both with efficiency in the allocation of capital resources in the world and with equity between U.S. firms operating abroad and competing firms located in the United States. Legislation has also been proposed which would curtail tax haven privileges An additional proposal discussed in earlier chapters would provide a tax credit to spur domestic investment These measures along with rising domestic activity would increase the relative attractiveness of domestic as opposed to foreign investment A higher rate of domestic economic expansion would increase the attractiveness of the United States for investment by foreigners The United States is urging countries in Western Europe to liberalize restrictions on the outflow of capital owned by their residents in order to permit more foreign capital issues to be offered in their markets and to permit more investment in the United States and in underdeveloped countries. Many European countries still limit foreign issues in their capital markets and control tightly purchases of foreign securities by their residents Services. Net exports of services excluding military expenditures and sales were at an annual rate of $ billion during the first three quarters of These services include travel expenditures transportation services royalties interest and dividends. Repatriated earnings on U.S. investments abroad which are counted as receipts for services in the balance of payments accounts amounted to $ billion in Our expenditures on foreign travel were $ billion and foreigners spent nearly $ billion in this country During an Office of Tourism was established in the Department of Commerce to encourage foreign travel to the United States. In addition the duty-free tourist allowance for returning U.S. travelers was reduced from $ to $ a person The proposed change in tax provisions regarding overseas investment should result in an increase in the repatriation of earnings from U.S. investments abroad Merchandise trade. Merchandise trade has earned large net receipts in every year since the war. The trade surplus has on average increased but it has not increased sufficiently to cover the combined rise in overseas military foreign aid and investment outlays Restrictive commercial policies would be one way to try to check imports and increase the trade surplus. But raising tariffs and imposing quotas while perhaps improving the trade position temporarily would be inconsistent with the liberal trade objectives of the United States and would invite retaliatory action abroad thus reversing any temporary gains Imports could also be checked by restraining domestic economic activity But this would be an absurdly costly policy for the United States because imports comprise only a small part of each dollar of final demand. To obtain a $ billion reduction in imports might require a $ billion reduction of GNP. Even this decrease in imports would not result in an equivalent improvement in the trade balance for as the dollar earnings of other countries declined some of our best customers would curtail their purchases in the United States. Moreover the prospects for fundamental balance of payments improvement would be dim in a continuously slack economy beset by excess capacity and deficient in incentives to make investments at home which raise productivity and lower costs. Sacrificing recovery for a temporary gain in the balance of payments position would be shortsighted and would not inspire confidence in the dollar Clearly our efforts to improve the trade position must be expansive rather than restrictive. A program has been established under the direction of the Department of Commerce to promote exports both by increasing awareness among U.S. businessmen of sales opportunities abroad and by increasing foreign awareness of the wide array and high quality of U.S products. The program includes regional conferences and a more active field service in the United States to provide information on foreign markets trade exhibits and missions abroad and an increased number of government commercial representatives to aid the U.S. businessman abroad In addition to improving the flow of information about export possibilities steps have been taken to improve U.S. competitiveness in the important dimensions of credit availability and export insurance for commercial and political risks steps designed to place the U.S. businessman on a par with foreign exporters. The Export-Import Bank has established in cooperation with the commercial banks and a group of insurance companies simplified and expanded opportunities for obtaining credit and export insurance An exporter is now able to arrange for full credit and insurance advantages directly with his local bank A fundamental requirement for increasing our trade balance is a domestic environment of full recovery and growth without inflation. We must exploit the gains in productivity available from bringing into full use the excess capacity now prevalent in U.S. industry and we must speed the advance of U.S. technology. The measures to accelerate the growth of productivity outlined in Chapter are for these reasons essential elements of policy for long-run improvement in the balance of payments. In particular the tax credit for investment proposed by the President and the revision of depreciation guidelines underway at the Treasury will promote investment at home and make American industry more competitive It is true that economic growth by raising incomes in the United States will tend to increase the purchases of foreign goods by U.S. consumers and businesses. But economic growth achieved through advances in productivity and improvements in technology will also enable U.S. goods to compete more effectively with foreign products both in the United States and in foreign markets. The technological leadership and high productivity of the United States have proved in the past to be vital sources of our comparative advantage in world markets. And today the most rapidly growing countries in the free world generally rank among tho : e with the strongest international payments positions An accelerated advance in productivity will be of little help to the balance of payments however if the improvements are eroded away by increases in money costs and prices. The price increases of impaired the competitive position of several important U.S. industries in world markets. More recently price and wage developments in the United States have been favorable relative to those in other countries. The stability of U.S. prices in the last three years and the reasons for optimism concerning U.S. prices in the current economic recovery are discussed in Chapter Policies to avoid cost inflation at home can be reinforced by a liberal trade policy which expands the area of international competition to which U.S. producers are exposed The future course of exports will depend not only on U.S. policies but also on business activity prices and wages and commercial policy abroad. Successful international trade negotiations under the proposed Trade Expansion Act will provide increasing opportunities for U.S. exports In addition the United States continues to press for the elimination of open and concealed discrimination against U.S. goods agricultural products provide outstanding examples and against the products of third countries many of which are good customers of the United States The continued expansion of the European economies is of great importance for the future of U.S. exports. And the rapid growth of all the industrial countries is of vital concern to the primary producing countries whose exports have been largely stagnant in recent years. As the exports of the primary producing countries increase their purchases from the United States and other industrial countries will expand Short-Term Capital Account Dollars are transferred to foreigners not only through deficits in the basic accounts of the United States but also through short-term lending by Americans to foreigners. Much of this lending is commercially oriented and often provides financing for American exports. During the first half of for example a large part of the short-term capital outflow from the United States was used to finance an increase in exports from the United States and other countries to Japan. An increase in such commercial credit will be a natural consequence of policies taken during to boost U.S exports However some flows of short-term capital are not linked directly to export financing. These flows of funds both U.S. and foreign owned have increased markedly since the establishment of external currency convertibility of the leading European countries in the relaxation of restrictions on capital transactions by their own nationals and the re-establishment of confidence in the stability of European currencies Short-term capital movements are sensitive to differences in interest rates between major financial centers. In late for example when yields on short-term securities were substantially higher in Canadian and European markets than in the United States a significant volume of U.S funds moved abroad. Again in the last few months of substantial amounts of capital moved abroad to benefit from higher yields Liquid funds also move in hope or fear of changes in exchange rates or regulations. For example the revaluations of the German mark and the Dutch guilder in March led to expectations of further revaluations and resulted in large short-term capital flows. Movements of this kind often reflect objective factors related to basic balance of payments positions But they sometimes respond to rumor and opinion unrelated to the basic situation A notable feature of the U.S. balance of payments in the past two years was the sharp swing in the balancing item " errors and omissions " from a net inflow through of some $ million a year to a net outflow of $ million in and a further $ million in the first half of Preliminary estimates for late also show a large unrecorded outflow This change no doubt reflected a sizable transfer of U.S. capital abroad and a withdrawal of foreign private capital both of which moved outside channels normally covered by our recording network Flows of short-term capital although they frequently perform a useful function can be seriously disruptive. They can be large sudden erratic contagious and self-reinforcing. Monetary authorities are gradually adjusting their policies and techniques to cope with these flows. During the past two years several steps were taken to reduce the incentive to shift capital among financial centers. Foremost among these was increasing cooperation among central banks to avoid large differentials in short-term interest rates among countries. High interest rates in Europe were lowered in late and early U.S. monetary policy and technique have been adapted to the new international financial environment in the manner described in Chapter Although the Federal Reserve has maintained generally easy money and credit conditions U.S. short-term rates have been held above levels characteristic of previous recession and recovery periods In December the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation raised permissible interest rates on commercial-bank time deposits. The ceiling rate for deposits exceeding months was raised from percent to percent a year. As banks move rates up to the new ceilings they will increase the attractiveness of holding funds in the United States Finally the U.S. Treasury has for the first time since the mid-1930 's engaged in foreign exchange operations in cooperation with foreign central banks. The Treasury this year undertook transactions in German marks and Swiss francs both on a current basis and in the forward exchange market. The aim was to increase the cost to traders and investors of exchange risk " cover " for movements out of dollars diminishing the incentive to shift funds abroad and increasing the incentive to move funds here Although these policies will moderate the disruptive flows of short-term capital they can not eliminate them. Further measures are therefore needed to neutralize or minimize the possible effects of such flows on the international monetary system MEASURES T O STRENGTHEN THE WORLD MONETARY SYSTEM Stability of the present world monetary system depends upon confidence in the value of the dollar. Therefore a primary aim of the United States and of other countries must be to correct the underlying conditions which result in persistent U.S. deficits and persistent surpluses elsewhere. This is fundamental but it will take time While policies to achieve this fundamental adjustment are taking effect full confidence must be maintained in the ability of the United States to meet foreign demands for gold. There are a number of measures which can strengthen the " banking " or liquidity position of the United States while the fundamental adjustment of the payments position proceeds Some of them apply to the dollar alone ; others are general measures to strengthen the world monetary system. All of them require a high degree of international consultation and cooperation One means of strengthening the U.S. liquidity position as well as its payments position8 at a given time is to obtain advance repayment of long-term debts owed to the U.S. Government. For example in April the Federal Republic of Germany prepaid $ million to the United States. This translated a long-term U.S. asset partly into a reduction of short-term U.S. liabilities and partly into a rise in U.S. holdings of German marks. The United States still has outstanding about $ billion of long-term loans to countries that have strong payments positions The gross reserve position can also be strengthened by borrowing directly in foreign currencies from other governments or central banks. This device was employed recently on a small scale when the United States borrowed from Switzerland $ million in Swiss francs in order to support forward exchange operations of the Treasury Recently there has been increasing recognition that even when large movements of private short-term capital can not be prevented they can be offset by reverse movements of official capital. In March several central banks agreed through the so-called Basle arrangements to extend short-term credit to the United Kingdom to offset the flight of private funds from London Several countries now consider their drawing rights on the International Monetary Fund as an integral part of their foreign exchange reserves In his Balance of Payments Message of February President Kennedy stated that " access to the Fund 's resources must be regarded as a part of our international reserves " and that if appropriate the United States would use its drawing rights. The drawing from the Fund of currencies equivalent to $ billion by the United Kingdom in August and the prompt repayment of $ million as British reserves rose indicate the flexibility with which drawing rights on the Fund can be used to supplement reserves. Furthermore in accordance with recent IMF policy member countries have increasingly made drawings in currencies other than the dollar which the Fund formerly relied on heavily for most of its operations This policy puts to effective use the Fund 's holdings of the currencies of surplus countries. But the Fund 's holdings of some of these currencies may not be fully adequate to meet the potential demands for them Improvement of the Fund 's access to the currencies of the major industrial countries was discussed at the annual Fund meeting in Vienna in September. It was announced in early January that ten industrial countries have agreed to lend amounts of their currencies totaling $ billion to the Fund if these resources should be required to forestall or cope with an impairment of the international monetary system. Availability of these special resources should enable the Fund better to perform its function of financing temporary payments deficits in the interests of maintaining general exchange rate stability In his February Message the President said " Increasing international monetary reserves will be required to support the ever-growing volume of trade services and capital movements among the countries of the free world. Until now the free nations have relied upon increased gold production and continued growth in holdings of dollars and pounds sterling In the future it may not always be desirable or appropriate to rely entirely on these sources. We must now in cooperation with other lending countries begin to consider ways in which international monetary institutions especially the International Monetary Fund can be strengthened and more effectively utilized both in furnishing needed increases in reserves and in providing the flexibility required to support a healthy and growing world economy. " The agreement to supplement the resources of the Fund is an important step toward strengthening the international monetary system to meet the demands which the continuing economic progress of the free world will place upon it in the future Finally the newly created Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development comprising European countries the United States and Canada provides a continuing forum in which payments imbalances and internal or international monetary problems of concern to all members as well as trade development aid and other matters of common interest can be discussed frankly and constructively. Still another forum for international cooperation is provided by the monthly meetings of central bankers at the Bank for International Settlements in Basle. Although the United States is not a member of the Bank for International Settlements representatives of the Federal Reserve System participate informally in the discussions These measures of cooperation among nations together with the large gold reserves of the United States give this country the time to carry through the necessary adjustment in its balance of payments and to carry it through in ways consistent with general economic expansion at home and abroad with promotion of a world economy in which goods services and capital flow freely and with the responsibilities of world leadership. They give us time but not time to waste Chapter Price Behavior in a Free and Growing Economy T H E OBJECTIVES P RICE BEHAVIOR embraces both changes in the over-all level of prices throughout the economy and changes in price structure the relation of particular prices to each other. Changes in either the level or the structure of prices have far-reaching influences which can affect for better or worse the performance of a free economy. Both aspects of price behavior are closely related to major problems which confront the U.S economy today Our success in solving the international payments problem ( discussed in the previous chapter ) will depend to a major extent on our ability to avoid inflation. To recognize this compelling reason for price stability is not to say that stable prices are desirable only for their contribution to the achievement of equilibrium in our balance of payments. Even creeping inflation has effects on the distribution of income which are always capricious and often cruel and it may generate perverse changes in the structure of prices. Galloping inflation is profoundly disruptive of economic efficiency and growth. But to these persisting arguments for avoiding inflation is now added the pressing and immediate need to strengthen the competitiveness of U.S. industry in world markets International competitiveness is affected by many considerations including quality variety service credit facilities and promptness in delivery But after full weight is given to these considerations price remains at the heart of the matter. The effect of price developments on our international competitive position will not of course be determined by the behavior of U.S. prices alone ; what counts is the change in the ratio of U.S. prices to the prices of those countries with which we compete in world markets There is independent reason to expect in the next few years a moderate upward price trend in some competitive countries but a decline in the ratio of our prices to theirs is obviously more likely if our own prices remain stable than if they rise Large potential gains in national economic welfare are at stake in the course of price developments over the next year or two. Stable prices together with the many other measures to strengthen our payments position discussed in Chapter will move us toward equilibrium in our inter- national payments. This in turn will remove a possible impediment to the vigorous pursuit of full employment It is always possible to strengthen the balance of payments at least for a time by weakening the economy. Checking and reversing the economic expansion would reduce our demand for imports by reducing our demand for all goods and services. Raising interest rates sharply would probably attract some foreign capital to the United States but it would raise the cost and reduce the volume of domestic expenditures for new business plant and equipment and residential construction. This road to balance of payments equilibrium endangers the interests of the whole Nation and specifically the interests both of labor and of business ; for the former it increases unemployment while for the latter it lowers profits. Both groups stand to gain from price level stability which lays the foundation for the harmonious coexistence of balance of payments equilibrium with full employment and rapid economic growth Price level stability does not of course require stability of all prices On the contrary the structure of relative prices constitutes the central nervous system of a decentralized economy. Changing relative prices are the signals and stimuli which foster the efficiency and guide the growth of such an economy Changing relative prices serve to ration scarce goods and services. They encourage consumers and business firms to economize on the use of things which have grown scarcer and to use more freely those things which have become more abundant. They attract resources into the production of those things for which demand has increased and encourage the outflow of resources from the production of things for which demand has declined They provide generous rewards to innovators and then assure that the benefits arising from innovation are widely diffused throughout the economy They direct economic activity into the most productive channels. A smoothly functioning price system while it can not solve all of the resourceuse problems of our economy is nevertheless an indispensable agent for reconciling decentralized private decision-making with national economic objectives In the context of current economic policy goals flexible relative prices play an important role in encouraging maximum production and shaping the pattern of growth. As the economy approaches full utilization of productive resources premature and stubborn bottlenecks may arise in some sectors while labor and capital are underutilized elsewhere. This danger is lessened if productive resources are sufficiently mobile to shift promptly into the sectors of the economy which are coming under pressure Flexible price and wage relationships are not in themselves sufficient to assure that capital and labor will flow from relatively declining to relatively expanding sectors. But flexible price and wage relationships can smooth the process both by signaling the directions in which resource movements should occur and by providing incentives to encourage such shifts. Prices must fall as well as rise however if changing relative prices are to play their role in guiding resource movements without forcing a steady rise in the over-all level of prices T H E PRESENT SITUATION Price Developments in Perspective The frequent characterization of the postwar period as generally " inflationary " obscures two important facts. First increases in wholesale prices were concentrated in three periods : and In the other of the postwar years taken together the net movement of wholesale prices was downward. Second since the middle of the wholesale price level in the United States has been stable and there are signs that the inflationary impulses set off by the second World War and reinforced by the Korean conflict have been weakening War-induced inflation. By far the strongest burst of inflation occurred immediately after the end of the war and for obvious reasons. The stock of consumers ' and producers ' durable goods had been depleted during the long years of depression and war. Private debt had been reduced and the heavy reliance on public debt financing of the war had provided households and firms with large supplies of liquid assets The result was a demand for consumer goods and plant and equipment which far exceeded the capacity of the economy to produce them. Although the Federal Government ran a substantial cash surplus in the period which had the effect of reducing total demand for goods and services aggregate demand nevertheless outran supply until late in From the end of the war through September the consumer price index rose by percent and the wholesale price index by percent. In the recession which followed both consumer and wholesale prices fell the former by percent between November and October the latter by percent A new burst of excess-demand inflation was set off by the Korean hostilities. Between June and February consumer prices rose by percent and wholesale prices by percent as consumers and businesses remembering the shortages of scrambled to build up stocks of goods These two inflationary episodes account for percent of the increase in the level of consumer prices since the second World War and more than account for the increase in the wholesale price level. Costs rose steeply in these periods but the major force pulling prices upward was clearly pressure of excessive demand for a wide range of products Post-Korean price stability. The scare-buying of late and early drove prices to a level from which a mild reaction set in. From mid1951 to mid-1955 except for construction costs and the index of services to consumers most price indexes remained stable or fell. Consumer prices for food and other commodities as well as wholesale price indexes of farm and nonfarm commodities were lower in mid-1955 than they had been in mid1951 despite the fact that large parts of the economy had operated at near capacity levels from the fall of to the fall of Construction costs failed to stabilize in the post-Korean period ; while the average of wholesale prices fell by percent between February and May the Department of Commerce index of construction costs rose by percent Another exception to this record of stability consumer services is highly important. Services have a weight of about one-third in the consumer price index. Prices of services taken as a group have risen in every year since the war and have accounted for much of the rise in the consumer price index Because of the heterogeneous character of the services category no single explanation can account for the behavior of the services index. Some tentative observations may be made however about the forces influencing the prices of particular services. Residential occupancy costs with a weight of about percent within the services category include rents mortgage payments and interest real estate taxes and property insurance. Rents and home prices tend to be influenced in the short run by the vacancy rate and in the long run by changes in construction costs interest rates and property taxes. Movements in all these components tended to push the index upward in the postwar period. In addition the retention of rent controls in some important areas well into the postwar period tended to delay the adjustment of rents to market forces. Medical care service prices with a weight of about percent have been rising steeply This is a sector however in which there has probably been a substantial improvement in the quality of services. If it were possible to take account of quality changes in the index the rate of increase would have been less. Regulated utility services ( telephone gas electricity and water ) with a combined weight of about percent are subject to substantial price lags. Depreciation costs recognized for rate-making purposes have tended to rise as the share of low-priced prewar capital goods in the rate base has diminished and the share of higher-priced postwar goods has increased Public transportation services ( transit fares and railroad fares ) with a combined weight of about percent may have been influenced to a limited extent by the same forces mentioned in connection with regulated utility services and to a further extent by the effects of declining demand on unit cost in industries where overhead costs are high. Personal care services ( men 's haircuts and certain beauty parlor services ) with a weight of about percent are services not readily susceptible to improvements in labor productivity though wages in this sector tend to move up in step with economy-wide trends Inflation The relative price stability which began in gave way in to renewed inflationary pressure which persisted into early Although prices rose far less sharply than in or consumer prices rose by percent from May to March and wholesale prices increased by percent In contrast to the two earlier inflationary bursts there is still considerable uncertainty as to the causes of rising prices during this period. A simple explanation running in terms of over-all excess demand is not satisfactory If aggregate excess demand prevailed at all it existed only briefly toward the end of After the end of capacity utilization slackened as investment created capacity more rapidly than final demands were increasing Employment of production workers in manufacturing began to decline in the latter half of and was lower in than in The average workweek in manufacturing declined over this period from hours in to in to in Unemployment as a percent of the civilian labor force seasonally adjusted dipped below percent in only three months during the entire period Any explanation of the price experience must give special weight to the fact that the boom was concentrated in durable manufactured goods. Demand strained production capacity in the machinery and equipment industries. Except for the third quarter of in which a strike occurred the iron and steel industry operated at a rate above percent of capacity from the second quarter of through the first quarter of Automobile production set an all-time record in In this sector of the economy prices and wages rose sharply. More than three-fourths of the rise in the index of wholesale industrial prices was directly attributable to price increases in metals and metal products and machinery and motive products ( including motor vehicles ) Substantial employment cost increases were negotiated in the automobile settlement of and the steel settlement of Both were three-year agreements with the result that large wage commitments made in a boom environment became effective as the economy was slowing down. Price and wage behavior in this sector initiated impulses which spread to other parts of the economy both via increases in materials and equipment cost and via imitative influences in wage settlements Elements of major importance in the episode were thus the existence of relatively high demand principally in one sector of the economy ; the use of market power by management to maintain profit margins despite rising costs ; the exercise of market power by labor unions in an effort to capture a substantial share of rising profits for their membership ; and the transmission of these developments to other sectors of the economy One of the striking and significant aspects of the inflation was the leading part played by industries which are important exporters Metals machinery and transport equipment make up about two-thirds of U.S. exports of manufactures. What in this context is more important these U.S. prices rose faster than the prices for similar goods in foreign countries. To take but one example between and U.S. steel O-62-12 prices rose nearly percent more than the average price rise in five other major steel exporting countries During this period the United States experienced a noteworthy decline in its share of world exports of manufactures from percent in to 27J/2 percent in The decline was even sharper for some product groups ; the U.S. share of world exports of iron and steel products for example declined from percent to percent. The relative increase in U.S. prices probably contributed along with the rapid postwar growth in capacity and output abroad to the drop in American export shares Price behavior since Since mid-1958 there has been stability on the average in the prices of commodities at wholesale and retail with a continuing upward trend in consumer service prices. This record of relative price stability is in part the result of widespread excess capacity in the last few years but it may also reflect a weakening of lagged price responses to the sharply inflationary episodes of and An important element in the cessation of inflationary pressure has been the stability shown in the prices of metals and machinery. The index of metal and metal products which rose by percent from the beginning of to the end of and drifted irregularly upward through late has since remained below its high. The index of machinery and motive products which rose by percent from January to September has also been stable since then. Steel prices were raised once a year in the period for a total increase of percent but have not been raised since Movements in construction costs are in sharp contrast to this pattern of price stability. After increasing against the general price trend over they rose percent from May through March an increase significantly greater than the percent rise in the wholesale price level over the same period. From March through December the increase was percent As Chart shows a period of stability in the wholesale price index tends to be a period of slow rise in the consumer price index and in the implicit price index for GNP. The reason for the divergent behavior of consumer prices is primarily the service component already discussed ; the price index for GNP rises because of the methods of measurement used for the government sector ( in which no allowance is made for productivity increase ) and for plant and equipment spending ( where only partial allowance is made for quality change ) The chart also calls attention to an important difference between price behavior in the recovery and in the recovery of In stability in the wholesale price index resulted from a significant reduction in the prices of farm products and processed foods balanced by a rise in industrial prices. In the first months of recovery in the index for industrial commodities rose by percent. By contrast in the index of industrial prices fell by percent between February and CHART Price Developments INDEX = ( Ra/io scale ) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR * * r I960 I960 INDEX = ( Ratio scale ) WHOLESALE PRICES INDUSTRIALS ALL COMMODITIES 7N FARM PRODUCTS AND PROCESSED FOODS INDEX = ( Ratio scale ) CONSUMER PRICES SERVICES ALL ^ * ^ ^ ( : OMMODITIE : ii mill..MI NOTE : TOP PANEL QUARTERLY DATA ; OTHER PANELS MONTHLY DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I960 December reinforcing rather than offsetting a fall of percent in farm and food prices. In all of the previous postwar recoveries by contrast the index of wholesale industrial prices rose over the first months of recovery From the recession 's turning point in February through November consumer prices rose by percent. While this was a greater increase than the percent by which the index rose in the first months of recovery from the trough the difference in performance is attributable to movements in the retail food index which fell more sharply after the upturn than in The behavior of other major components was similar in the two recoveries except for rents which rose slightly more in than they did in More than three-fourths of the rise in consumer prices during was attributable to higher service prices particularly advances for health insurance and other health services movie admissions rent and public transportation. Moderating the rise in the service price index were lower average mortgage interest rates and stable average prices for utilities Wage and Cost Developments in Perspective Wages and salaries are at the same time the principal cost to employers the main source of income to employees and the major source of demand to the economy as a whole If living standards are to rise over time real wages must increase. Stability in the general price level means therefore that average money wage rates should follow a generally rising path. As output per man-hour increases rising money wage rates can be absorbed into stable labor costs per unit of output. So long as unit labor costs do not increase rising wages are fully compatible with stability in the price level Whatever its cause a rising price level is characteristically accompanied by a rate of wage increase in excess of the rate of increase in output per man-hour. It is quite true of course that when employment costs per man-hour rise more rapidly than output per man-hour prices sooner or later will increase. But it is equally true that when prices are pulled up by excess demand competition for labor will tend to raise employment costs per man-hour faster than output per man-hour increases. Thus wage increases will tend to outstrip productivity increases both when the inflationary pressures arise from cost and when they arise from demand. The mere coexistence of rising prices and wages rising faster than productivity tells nothing about causation Postwar wage changes. While wages rose throughout the postwar period they rose more rapidly in the first part of the period than in more recent years. The primary cause of the most rapid increases lies in the excess demand which was the legacy of the second World War and which arose again during the Korean mobilization. Hourly compensation in manufacturing increased at an average rate of nearly percent a year between and ; the rate of increase fell to percent between and and to less than percent between and ( Table ) The period of course included most of the two war-induced inflationary booms T A B L E Changes in compensation and productivity in all private nonagricultural and in manufacturing industries to industries Percentage change per year Item to to to to Private nonagricultural industries all employees : Average hourly compensation Output per man-hour. Manufacturing industries all employees : Average hourly compensation Output per man-hour Manufacturing industries production workers : Average gross hourly earnings Average hourly earnings adjusted to exclude overtime and interindustry shifts Preliminary Wages and salaries of all employees and supplements to wages and salaries such as employer contributions for social insurance for private pension health and welfare funds for injuries for pay of the military reserve etc Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor In the post-Korean years a period which included three of the four postwar recessions over-all demand conditions played a less decisive role in wage behavior. The movement of wages during this period reflected in part the power exercised in labor markets by strong unions and the power possessed by large companies to pass on higher wage costs in higher prices Although the high demand of the period was concentrated in the area of durable manufactures wages also rose by substantial increments in some less prosperous but highly organized industries The post-Korean years were marked by the coincidence of relatively large wage increases with declines in industry employment. Table illustrates these developments as they are reflected in changes in average hourly earnings and the number of production workers for selected industries. Earnings in textiles and apparel typically lower than the average for all manufacturing industries fell further behind during the years Workers in retail trade received percentage wage increases equal to the average of those in manufacturing ; the initial low wage level and the increase in employment in retailing suggest that this rise in wages reflects pressure of demand. Construction worker employment increased and wages rose more than the average for manufacturing ; indeed over the entire postwar period average hourly earnings in construction have risen more than percent against a rise of percent for production workers in manufacturing. In manufacturing and mining unionization was undoubt- T A B L E Changes in average hourly earnings- and employment of production selected industries September to September Average hourly earnings ( dollars ) Employment ( thousands ) workers in Percentage change September to September Industry Septem- Septem- Septem- Septem- Average ber ber ber ber hourly earnings Manufacturing Employment Blast furnaces and basic steel products Motor vehicles and equipment Flat glass Fabricated metals Metal cans Petroleum refining Tires and inner tubes Textile-mill products Apparel and related products- * Bituminous coal mining. Contract construction Class I railroads Retail trade ( * ) i Includes data for Alaska and Hawaii Also includes industries not shown separately Increase of less than percent * Data relate to all employees Excludes eating and drinking places Note. Data relate to production workers or nonsupervisory employees except as noted Source : Department of Labor edly a factor in the increase in wages during a period of declining employment ; the above-average increase in wages in construction reflects both unionization and the stimulus of strong demand The effect of unionization is also reflected in the contrast between earnings and employment of salaried workers in manufacturing and those of production workers in manufacturing over the period. Although aggregate salaries in manufacturing have risen twice as rapidly as aggregate wages annual disbursements per worker for salaried workers increased at an average rate of only percent a year during the period while disbursements per production worker increased at a rate of percent. At the same time the number of salaried workers was increasing at a rate of percent a year and the number of production workers declining at a rate of percent Recent wage developments. Although wages and fringe benefits have continued to increase throughout the economy the rate of increase in hourly earnings in manufacturing has declined steadily since The decline has been not only steady but large ; as Table demonstrates the rate of increase in adjusted hourly earnings has fallen by one-half since These percentage movements are consistent with recent declines in median wage increases measured in cents per hour under major collective bargaining contracts. These are shown in Table T A B L E * Changes in average hourly earnings and hourly compensation in manufacturing to industries Percentage increase Adjusted hourly earnings i Period Current prices to to to to to to _ Current prices Constant prices Average hourly2 compensation Constant prices Wages of production workers adjusted to exclude overtime and interindustry shifts Wages and salaries of all employees and supplements to wages and salaries such as employer contributions for social insurance for private pension health and welfare funds for injuries for pay of the military reserve etc Preliminary Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor T A B L E Median hourly wage increases negotiated or effective in major bargaining situations collective Median hourly wage increases ( cents ) Year Negotiated during year Negotiated or effective during year _ _ I960 _ _ _ __ i Preliminary NOTE. Data are limited to major collective bargaining situations ( generally those affecting or more workers ) in manufacturing and selected nonmanufacturing industries. The latter exclude construction the service trades finance and government Source : Department of Labor Further evidence of this decline in the magnitude of wage increases is presented in Table This table shows for an increase in the number of workers affected by zero or negative wage changes and a decline in the number of workers receiving large percentage wage increases in major negotiations. The percentage of employees receiving wage increases of / percent or more declined from percent in to percent in Smaller percentage increases in hourly wages do not necessarily imply smaller percentage increases in real wages. In recent years annual increases in consumer prices have tended to become smaller and thus have offset to some extent lower rates of increase in adjusted hourly earnings and total hourly compensation in manufacturing TABLE Employees affected by major collective bargaining negotiations by wage change i Wage change Thousands of employees No wage change Decrease in wages. Increase in wages _ Under 2H percent 2H and under and under 3H 3J ^ and over Not specified or computed _ Thousands of employees Total employees affected Percent of total ( ) Percent of total Thousands of employees Percent of total ( ) ( ) ( ) Preliminary Less than percent NOTE. Data relate to changes negotiated during the year. They exclude changes negotiated in earlier years ( i.e. deferred increases ) and cost-of-living escalator adjustments Data are limited to major collective bargaining situations ( generally those affecting or more workers ) in manufacturing and selected nonmanufacturing industries. The latter exclude construction the service trades finance and government Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor For example in a percent rise in adjusted hourly earnings ( as shown in Table ) was translated into an increase of only percent in real adjusted hourly earnings because consumer prices rose by percent. In on the other hand money earnings increased by only percent but real earnings rose by percent because of a slower rise in consumer prices. Similarly total hourly compensation in money terms increased by percent in and by only percent in ; however as a result of differences in price movements the percentage rise in real compensation was greater in the second period than in the first The recent slowing down in the rates of increase of money wages may signify a gradual weakening of some of the cost pressures in the economy However the continuation of this trend is by no means certain. With longterm contracts the industries affected by negotiations vary considerably from year to year and the behavior of average wage rates in any year may be fortuitously influenced by this consideration. Thus in negotiations were concluded in basic steel ; in new long-term agreements were negotiated in automobiles automotive parts meat-packing farm equipment and construction. In major contracts will expire in basic steel aluminum fabricated metals construction aircraft airlines and the maritime industry. It must also be remembered that the period was characterized by relatively high rates of unemployment ; the test of wage behavior in a period characterized by stronger demand for labor is still ahead The shares of wages and profits. Employee compensation as a percent of corporate sales rose somewhat between the immediate postwar years and but since then the employee share has been below the high with no clear trend either up or down. This is shown in Table T A B L E Relation of employee compensation profits and capital consumption allowances to sales : All private corporations Percent of sales Profits Period Employee compensation Before taxes Capital consumpBefore taxes tion allowplus invenances tory valua- After taxes tion adjustment Profits after taxes plus capital consumption allowances I960 ! * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The sum of compensation of employees profits and capital consumption allowances is a comparatively small percentage of sales because the latter includes all sales made by firms to other firms in successive stages of the production process and therefore reflects a large amount of duplication. The comparative relations shown here would remain unaltered however if they were calculated on the basis of unduplicated sales Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) Corporate profits after taxes as a share of corporate sales were at their highest level in the period when they were between and percent annually. Since the profit-after-tax share has been lower fluctuating between and percent. Throughout the period the profits share has shown a clear tendency to dip in periods of high unemployment and unutilized capacity A number of forces were involved in the behavior of profits. Unusually high inventory gains resulting from bursts of excess demand inflation swelled the profits share in and ; this can be seen in Table by comparing corporate profits before taxes with profits before taxes plus inventory valuation adjustment. The rate of Federal corporate income taxation was increased in two steps from a level of percent in to percent in where it stands today ; also an excess profits tax was in effect from to Failure of the economy since the first half of to reach full employment has tended to depress the profits share in recent years Corporate capital consumption allowances ( principally depreciation charges ) have risen steadily throughout the postwar period as a share of corporate sales. One explanation of this trend is the fact that depreciation charges immediately after the war were based upon prewar prices of capital goods and were thus further out of alignment with the replacement cost of business plant and equipment than they are today. In other words as compared with recent years corporate profits in the earlier postwar years were relatively overstated and depreciation charges relatively understated Also the rise in depreciation charges is related to the Korean accelerated tax amortization program and to the more generous depreciation formula enacted in the Revenue Act of Corporate profits after taxes plus capital consumption allowances " cash flow " have shown considerable stability in relation to sales particularly if allowance is made for the large inventory gains of and This is shown in the last column of Table Gash flow is of course not the same as net profits ; only a part of it is return on investment and the remainder is an element of cost. But cash flow is a significant measure as an indication of potential availability of internally generated funds for the financing of investment T H E OUTLOOK FOR PRICES Although over-all excess demand is unlikely to develop in 19G2 and costprice developments in the past year were favorable to continued price stability the economic future can never be predicted with certainty. Unexpected inflationary pressures could emerge from any one of several sources : scare-buying induced by a national security crisis the emergence of major bottlenecks caused by shifts in the pattern of demand price increases for imported raw materials exercise of market power by management or labor to increase their shares of the national income or other causes which lie at least within the realm of possibility Nevertheless a review of the relevant statistical and analytical evidence gives some grounds for optimism on the outlook for price behavior in the months ahead though the evidence can not of course be conclusive Changes in the wholesale price index are more closely related to our international competitiveness than are changes in the consumer price index or the GNP implicit price index. The consumer price index is heavily influenced by changes in the prices of consumer services and in wholesale and retail margins which do not directly affect our international trade and it does not encompass producers ' durable equipment which is a major component of our foreign trade. On the other hand the all-inclusive GNP implicit price index includes major components which do not enter directly into international trade such as consumer services and government services. As noted earlier in this chapter stability in the wholesale price index is likely to be associated with a slow rise in the consumer price index and a slightly greater rise in the GNP implicit price index At the present time we are on the plateau of a period of price stability. Wholesale prices have been stable for over / years and wholesale industrial prices ( excluding farm and food prices ) have been stable for more than 2J/2 years. Both the wholesale price index and wholesale industrial prices were lower in December than at the cyclical trough in February This was the first of the four postwar recoveries in which wholesale industrial prices fell during the first months of recovery Recent wage changes have been consistent with these price developments As indicated earlier annual wage increases in manufacturing have been declining for several years. The index of wage and salary cost per unit of output in manufacturing changed little from the cyclical peak in July to the peak in May ; by contrast there were substantial peak-to-peak increases from to and from to Such encouragement as may be derived from these recent price and wage trends must be tempered by the realization that they do not provide full protection for fixed-income recipients and relate mainly to a period characterized by excess unemployment and productive capacity. The U.S. economy last experienced full employment in the first half of ; the recovery of stopped well short of full employment While some significance can be attached to the fact that adjusted hourly earnings in manufacturing increased slightly less in a year of recovery than in a cyclical trough year and from the further fact that wholesale industrial prices fell during the recovery the behavior of wages and prices in a period of sustained slack is an insufficient basis for inferences about price-wage behavior when the economy is moving up toward full employment Other considerations provide somewhat firmer grounds for optimism As indicated in the analysis of Chapter the continued recovery of the economy in is not likely to create major supply bottlenecks or to reach a state of over-all excess demand. The supply outlook for major imported raw materials does not suggest that an inflationary stimulus will originate in this quarter Foreign competition in the last few years has injected a powerful pricerestraining force into the U.S. economy. We are now faced with sharp competition from imports in our domestic markets and from the exports of other industrial countries in our traditional export markets Competition of any kind internal or external provides strong discipline for prices ; the effects of foreign competition are stronger than might be suggested by the absolute size of foreign trade in our economy. The response to import competition itself tends to limit imports so that the volume of realized imports is not a full measure of the force exerted by foreign competition. Moreover conventional views as to appropriate shares of markets have great weight in pricing and other decisions. The number of foreign automobiles imported never amounted to as much as percent of sales in the United States and yet they helped to bring about a radical change in the design and marketing policy of a great industry The commodities component of the consumer price index which in the last few years has mirrored the stability in the wholesale price index is likely to continue to follow the course of wholesale prices in the months ahead. The services component which has risen steadily since the war will probably continue to do so. There are some favorable signs however which may indicate a slowing down in the rise of the prices of services The great postwar expansion in the housing supply and higher vacancy rates seem to have slowed down the rise in rents. Also movements in the rates charged by public utilities subject to rate regulation should reflect increasingly the narrowing of the gap between original cost and replacement cost of capital goods included in the rate base The slowing down since in the upward creep of consumer prices has reduced the effects on wages of cost of living escalator provisions in labor contracts and may moderate somewhat the pressure of employees for large wage increases. It is also worthy of note that escalator provisions have been eliminated from or modified in a number of collective bargaining agreements Developments in the steel industry in were propitious for the continuation of price stability. Steel prices at the end of the year were slightly below the level of the end of This was a striking shift in trend for an industry in which prices had risen at the average rate of percent a year from to In early the steel industry after a long strike reached a wage settlement with the Steelworkers Union which provided for an estimated percent annual increase in employment cost per worker. Though still somewhat above the over-all trend rate of productivity increase this was a considerably smaller settlement than the contract the cost of which was estimated at percent a year Under the contract a wage increase was scheduled to take effect on October Confronted on one side with increasing foreign competition stronger rivalry with substitutes and intraindustry price shading and on the other with an increase in wage rates steel companies were reported in the press to be weighing the desirability of an October price increase In this setting the President on September addressed a letter to the heads of the largest steel companies. Urging them to preserve price stability the President stressed the damaging impact of a steel price increase on the balance of payments. " Steel is a bellwether " he said " as well as a major element in industrial costs. A rise in steel prices would force price increases in many industries and invite price increases in others. " The President said : In emphasizing the vital importance of steel prices to the strength of our economy I do not wish to minimize the urgency of preventing inflationary movements in steel wages. I recognize too that the steel industry by absorbing increases in employment costs since has demonstrated a will to halt the price-wage spiral in steel. If the industry were now to forego a price increase it would enter collective bargaining negotiations next spring with a record of three and a half years of price stability. It would clearly then be the turn of the labor representatives to limit wage demands to a level consistent with continued price stability. The moral position of the steel industry next spring and its claim to the support of public opinion will be strengthened by the exercise of price restraint now A week later the President addressed a letter to the President of the United Steelworkers of America. Referring to the forthcoming collective bargaining negotiations the President urged " a labor settlement within the limits of advances in productivity and price stability. " The President expressed his confidence that " we can rely upon the leadership and members of the Steelworkers Union to act responsibly in the wage negotiations next year in the interests of all of the American people. " At the end of the year steel prices had not been raised All of these considerations suggest that a resumption of inflation in the course of the economic expansion foreseen for is not inevitable. As the year opens the atmosphere is favorable for reasonable price stability Whether this atmosphere is preserved or dissipated will depend on the wisdom of Government business and labor in evolving policies affecting prices and costs POLICIES AFFECTING PRICE BEHAVIOR The Setting The over-all stability of prices should be achieved in a manner consistent with the flexible response of individual prices and wage rates to changes in cost and demand within an environment of dynamic competition. Thus government policies to promote price stability must work to maintain and increase the freedom of the private economy not to limit it. In peacetime attempts to stabilize prices through the imposition of direct wage and price controls or through interference with the rights of employees to organize and bargain collectively are unacceptable. Also unacceptable are policies which pursue price stability without regard for the effects on employment production and purchasing power. Prices might be stabilized in an underemployed economy ; but to accept heavy unemployment and persistent slack as the necessary cost of price stability is to undermine the vitality and flexibility of the economy and to reduce American strength Competitive behavior throughout the economy involves more than rivalry among firms selling similar products in a single market ; it also involves hard bargaining between firms buying and selling from each other and between firms and unions. Abridgement of competition may be evidenced as much in permissive wage increases which are simply passed along in higher prices as in agreements among firms to divide markets Public policies to encourage economy-wide competition not only contribute to the goal of price stability ; they also promote efficiency and the advance of productivity. Hence such policies serve both the goal of economic growth and the goal of balance of payments equilibrium. In addition such policies have an independent justification in that they make the economy more responsive to the demands of consumers and thereby improve the qualitative nature of the output generated by the economy at rising levels of activity. Improving the range of consumer choices is an important facet of economic progress and one that gives ultimate meaning to policies of full employment and economic growth Policies to Foster Market Competition Competition in product markets is promoted by an increase in the number and diversity of market alternatives available and by the removal of anticompetitive restrictions on business behavior. Examples of the former are reduction of import barriers and encouragement of new and growing businesses. Examples of the latter are attempts to halt tendencies toward monopolization and to eliminate collusive agreements among firms through antitrust policy Reduction of import barriers widens and strengthens competition in domestic markets. The experience of the European Common Market has demonstrated clearly that a broadened scope for international competition tends to spur cost reduction and innovation and to stimulate economic vitality. Two factors have been of paramount importance in the success of this experiment. First the terms of the Common Market agreement were such that producers understood well in advance the scope and timetable of coming tariff reductions and thus were able to prepare for them. Second because free trade policies were pursued in an environment of rapid economic growth increased foreign competition was not so much a threat to existing markets as an incentive to respond to new profit-making opportunities. Similar advantages can be reaped for the United States through the adoption of the new foreign trade expansion program proposed by the President. Although imports are now and will remain a much smaller proportion of sales in our market than in Europe modest increases in imports can yield competitive benefits to the U.S. economy out of proportion to their size Public policy toward small business has as its purpose the strengthening of the small business sector of the economy and the removal of artificial and discriminatory barriers to the profitability and growth of small firms. Although some of the limitations upon small business participation in the economy arise from technological considerations and true cost economies associated with large size important limitations arise from direct discrimination and from lack of access to capital of widespread market contact and of information. Programs which redress these imbalances of competitive advantage make possible the salutary competition of new and growing enterprises throughout the economy. Small firms are often particularly well-situated to perceive changing market needs and production possibilities and to take the lead in adapting to them thus contributing to the efficiency and growth of the economy Antitrust policies promote market competition by halting tendencies toward monopolization and by eliminating unfair methods of competition and illegal restraints upon trade. Antimerger actions are designed to prevent the disappearance of independent competitors and the consequent impairment of competition. Checking monopolistic price increases during periods of expanded demand is facilitated both by the continuing effort to prevent the increase of business concentration and by the detection and prosecution of market conspiracies. The dissolution of such conspiracies is especially important during periods of economic expansion for it is during such periods that potential competitors find it easiest to reach agreement on market divisions and price increases. An important by-product of corrective antitrust action is the deterrent effect which successful prosecution has upon other potential offenders. To the extent that potential anticompetitive developments are deterred and existing competitive elements in the economy preserved and strengthened antitrust policy contributes to the maintenance of competition and price stability far more than a simple list of prosecutions would indicate GUIDEPOSTS FOR NoNINFLATIONARY WAGE AND PRICE BEHAVIOR There are important segments of the economy where firms are large or employees well-organized or both. In these sectors private parties may exercise considerable discretion over the terms of wage bargains and price decisions. Thus at least in the short run there is considerable room for the exercise of private power and a parallel need for the assumption of private responsibility Individual wage and price decisions assume national importance when they involve large numbers of workers and large amounts of output directly or when they are regarded by large segments of the economy as setting a pattern. Because such decisions affect the progress of the whole economy there is legitimate reason for public interest in their content and consequences. An informed public aware of the significance of major wage bargains and price decisions and equipped to judge for itself their compatibility with the national interest can help to create an atmosphere in which the parties to such decisions will exercise their powers responsibly How is the public to judge whether a particular wage-price decision is in the national interest ? No simple test exists and it is not possible to set out systematically all of the many considerations which bear on such a judgment However since the question is of prime importance to the strength and progress of the American economy it deserves widespread public discussion and clarification of the issues. What follows is intended as a contribution to such a discussion Mandatory controls in peacetime over the outcomes of wage negotiations and over individual price decisions are neither desirable in the American tradition nor practical in a diffuse and decentralized continental economy Free collective bargaining is the vehicle for the achievement of contractual agreements on wages fringes and working conditions as well as on the " web of rules " by which a large segment of industry governs the performance of work and the distribution of rewards. Similarly final price decisions lie and should continue to lie in the hands of individual firms. It is however both desirable and practical that discretionary decisions on wages and prices recognize the national interest in the results. The guideposts suggested here as aids to public understanding are not concerned primarily with the relation of employers and employees to each other but rather with their joint relation to the rest of the economy Wages prices and productivity. If all prices remain stable all hourly labor costs may increase as fast as economy-wide productivity without for that reason alone changing the relative share of labor and nonlabor incomes in total output. At the same time each kind of income increases steadily in absolute amount. If hourly labor costs increase at a slower rate than productivity the share of nonlabor incomes will grow or prices will fall or both. Conversely if hourly labor costs increase more rapidly than productivity the share of labor incomes in the total product will increase or prices will rise or both. It is this relationship among long-run economywide productivity wages and prices which makes the rate of productivity change an important benchmark for noninflationary wage and price behavior Productivity is a guide rather than a rule for appraising wage and price behavior for several reasons. First there are a number of problems involved in measuring productivity change and a number of alternative measures are available. Second there is nothing immutable in fact or in justice about the distribution of the total product between labor and nonlabor incomes Third the pattern of wages and prices among industries is and should be responsive to forces other than changes in productivity Alternative measures of productivity. If the rate of growth of productivity over time is to serve as a useful benchmark for wage and price behavior there must be some meeting of minds about the appropriate methods of measuring the trend rate of increase in productivity both for industry as a whole and for individual industries. This is a large and complex T A B L E Annual rates of growth of output per man-hour to [ Based on establishment series ] Average annual percentage change * Industry series to to to to Total private economy. Nonagriculture Nonmanufacturing. Manufacturing Manufacturing corrected for varying rates of capacity utilization Computed from least squares trend of the logarithms of the output per man-hour indexes. See Table B-31 for indexes for Not available Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers subject and there is much still to be learned. The most that can be done at present is to give some indication of orders of magnitude and of the range within which most plausible measures are likely to fall ( Table ) There are a number of conceptual problems in connection with productivity measurement which can give rise to differences in estimates of its rate of growth. Three important conceptual problems are the following : ( ) Over what time interval should productivity trends be measured ? Very short intervals may give excessive weight to business-cycle movements in productivity which are not the relevant standards for wage behavior The erratic nature of year-to-year changes in productivity is shown in Chart Very long intervals may hide significant breaks in trends ; indeed in the United States and in other countries as well productivity appears to have risen more rapidly since the end of the second World War than before. It would be wholly inappropriate for wage behavior in the 's to be governed by events long in the past. On the other hand productivity in the total private economy appears to have advanced less rapidly in the second half of the postwar period than in the first CHART Indexes of Output per Man-Hour INDEX = ( Ratio scale ) I ILLUSTRATIVE GROWTH RATES I TOTAL NONAGRICULTURAL I I0 NOTE : MAN-HOURS ESTIMATES BASED PRIMARILY ON ESTABLISHMENT DATA SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR O-62-13 I960 ( ) Even for periods of intermediate length it is desirable to segregate the trend movements in productivity from those that reflect business-cycle forces. Where the basic statistical materials are available this problem can be handled by an analytical separation of trend effects and the effects of changes in the rate of capacity utilization ( ) Even apart from such difficulties there often exist alternative statistical measures of output and labor input. The alternatives may differ conceptually or may simply be derived from different statistical sources A difficult problem of choice may emerge unless the alternative measures happen to give similar results Selected measures of the rate of growth of productivity in different sectors of the economy for different time periods are shown in Table Several measures are given because none of the single figures is clearly superior for all purposes The share of labor income. The proportions in which labor and nonlabor incomes share the product of industry have not been immutable throughout American history nor can they be expected to stand forever where they are today. It is desirable that labor and management should bargain explicitly about the distribution of the income of particular firms or industries. It is however undesirable that they should bargain implicitly about the general price level. Excessive wage settlements which are paid for through price increases in major industries put direct pressure on the general price level and produce spillover and imitative effects throughout the economy. Such settlements may fail to redistribute income within the industry involved ; rather they redistribute income between that industry and other segments of the economy through the mechanism of inflation Prices and wages in individual industries. What are the guideposts which may be used in judging whether a particular price or wage decision may be inflationary ? The desired objective is a stable price level within which particular prices rise fall or remain stable in response to economic pressures. Hence price stability within any particular industry is not necessarily a correct guide to price and wage decisions in that industry. It is possible however to describe in broad outline a set of guides which if followed would preserve over-all price stability while still allowing sufficient flexibility to accommodate objectives of efficiency and equity. These are not arbitrary guides. They describe briefly and no doubt incompletely how prices and wage rates would behave in a smoothly functioning competitive economy operating near full employment. Nor do they constitute a mechanical formula for determining whether a particular price or wage decision is inflationary. They will serve their purpose if they suggest to the interested public a useful way of approaching the appraisal of such a decision If as a point of departure we assume no change in the relative shares of labor and nonlabor incomes in a particular industry then a general guide may be advanced for noninflationary wage behavior and another for noninflationary price behavior. Both guides as will be seen are only first approximations The general guide for noninflationary wage behavior is that the rate of increase in wage rates ( including fringe benefits ) in each industry be equal to the trend rate of over-all productivity increase. General acceptance of this guide would maintain stability of labor cost per unit of output for the economy as a whole though not of course for individual industries The general guide for noninflationary price behavior calls for price reduction if the industry 's rate of productivity increase exceeds the over-all rate for this would mean declining unit labor costs ; it calls for an appropriate increase in price if the opposite relationship prevails ; and it calls for stable prices if the two rates of productivity increase are equal These are advanced as general guideposts. To reconcile them with objectives of equity and efficiency specific modifications must be made to adapt them to the circumstances of particular industries. If all of these modifications are made each in the specific circumstances to which it applies they are consistent with stability of the general price level. Public judgments about the effects on the price level of particular wage or price decisions should take into account the modifications as well as the general guides. The most important modifications are the following : ( ) Wage rate increases would exceed the general guide rate in an industry which would otherwise be unable to attract sufficient labor ; or in which wage rates are exceptionally low compared with the range of wages earned elsewhere by similar labor because the bargaining position of workers has been weak in particular local labor markets ( ) Wage rate increases would fall short of the general guide rate in an industry which could not provide jobs for its entire labor force even in times of generally full employment ; or in which wage rates are exceptionally high compared with the range of wages earned elsewhere by similar labor because the bargaining position of workers has been especially strong ( ) Prices would rise more rapidly or fall more slowly than indicated by the general guide rate in an industry in which the level of profits was insufficient to attract the capital required to finance a needed expansion in capacity ; or in which costs other than labor costs had risen ( ) Prices would rise more slowly or fall more rapidly than indicated by the general guide in an industry in which the relation of productive capacity to full employment demand shows the desirability of an outflow of capital from the industry ; or in which costs other than labor costs have fallen ; or in which excessive market power has resulted in rates of profit substantially higher than those earned elsewhere on investments of comparable risk It is a measure of the difficulty of the problem that even these complex guideposts leave out of account several important considerations. Although output per man-hour rises mainly in response to improvements in the quantity and quality of capital goods with which employees are equipped employees are often able to improve their performance by means within their own control. It is * obviously in the public interest that incentives be preserved which would reward employees for such efforts Also in connection with the use of measures of over-all productivity gain as benchmarks for wage increases it must be borne in mind that average hourly labor costs often change through the process of up- or downgrading shifts between wage and salaried employment and other forces Such changes may either add to or subtract from the increment which is available for wage increases under the over-all productivity guide Finally it must be reiterated that collective bargaining within an industry over the division of the proceeds between labor and nonlabor income is not necessarily disruptive of over-all price stability. The relative shares can change within the bounds of noninflationary price behavior. But when a disagreement between management and labor is resolved by passing the bill to the rest of the economy the bill is paid in depreciated currency to the ultimate advantage of no one It is no accident that productivity is the central guidepost for wage settlements. Ultimately it is rising output per man hour which must yield the ingredients of a rising standard of living. Growth in productivity makes it possible for real wages and real profits to rise side by side Rising productivity is the foundation of the country 's leadership of the free world enabling it to earn in world competition the means to discharge its commitments overseas. Rapid advance of productivity is the key to stability of the price level as money incomes rise to fundamental improvement in the balance of international payments and to growth in the Nation 's capacity to meet the challenges of the 's at home and abroad. That is why policy to accelerate economic growth stresses investments in science and technology plant and equipment education and training the basic sources of future gains in productivity Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL DECEMBER The PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully WALTER W. HELLER Chairman KERMIT GORDON JAMES TOBIN X Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established nearly years ago under the Employment Act of In for only the second time since the passage of the Act a change of Administration took place and the membership of the Council was entirely reconstituted COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP Walter W. Heller took office as Chairman of the Council on January He is on leave of absence from the University of Minnesota where he served as Professor of Economics and Chairman of the Department of Economics in the School of Business Administration. He succeeded Raymond J. Saulnier Professor of Economics at Barnard College Columbia University who had served as a member of the Council from April and as Chairman from December until his resignation on January Kermit Gordon took office as a member of the Council on January He is on leave of absence from Williams College where he is David A. Wells Professor of Political Economy. James Tobin took office as a member of the Council on January He is on leave of absence from Yale University where he is Sterling Professor of Economics. Messrs Gordon and Tobin succeeded Messrs. Karl Brandt and Henry C. Wallich who resigned on January Mr. Brandt resumed his duties as Professor of Economic Policy and Associate Director of the Food Research Institute at Stanford University. Mr. Wallich returned to his position as Professor of Economics at Yale University Following is a list of all past Council members together with their dates of service : Name Position Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling J o h n D Clark Roy B lough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Joseph S. Davis Raymond J. S aulnier _. Paul W. McCracken. Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman. Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member August 1946.._ August November May August May June Septembers March September 1953.._ December May April December December November May Separation date November November May January May Februarv August January December February April October December January January January January COUNCIL STAFF The Council is currently assisted by a senior professional staff of economists and statisticians. The full-time professional staff members are Richard E. Attiyeh Barbara R. Berman Charles A. Cooper Richard N Cooper Rashi Fein Catherine H. Furlong Frances M. James Marshall A Kaplan David W. Lusher Richard R. Nelson Arthur M. Okun George L. Perry Lee E. Preston Vernon W. Ruttan Robert M. Solow Walter F. Stettner Lloyd Ulman Leroy S. Wehrle and Sidney G. Winter Jr In addition Kenneth J. Arrow Henry W. Briefs Martin Bronfenbrenner Richard E. Caves James Duesenberry Otto Eckstein Dale E. Hathaway Peter B. Kenen Burton H. Klein Robert J. Lampman John R. Meyer James R. Nelson Joseph A. Pechman William A. Salant Paul A. Samuelson Charles L. Schultze Warren L. Smith Charles A. Taff and Robert Triffin served the Council during as Consultants Bernard S. Beckler Harold F. Breimyer Samuel L. Brown and Robert C. Colwell resigned from the Council during to accept positions elsewhere in government. Special mention should be made of the retirement of Collis Stocking on September Mr. Stocking served the Council with distinction for years as Administrative Officer and a Senior Economist COUNCIL ACTIVITIES The economic problems which confront the Council today are perhaps more complex than ever before. The Council has the unique responsibility and opportunity to view a wide variety of specific developments policies and proposals in the broad perspective of their combined effects on the national economy. Its central concern under the Employment Act is the stability growth and efficiency of the U.S. economy. Especially now this concern compels the Council to consider the interconnections between domestic economic developments and policies and the international economic relations of the United States Responding to these concerns and to the request of the President that the Council play a broader role as an economic staff agency the Council in added new staff members and consultants to strengthen its capabilities in studying problems in the fields of international economics defense and disarmament economics economic growth manpower consumer economics natural resources and the economics of technology and research and development By a variety of means the Council in carried out its statutory responsibilities as a Presidential staff agency under the Employment Act Much of its activity took the form of assistance to the President and dayto-day contacts with members of the White House staff and officials of other Executive Agencies. Its responsibilities were also discharged through such formal institutional arrangements as regular attendance of the Chair- man of the Council at meetings of the Cabinet and Council participation in the work of a number of interdepartmental committees The Council took an active part in the work of several new committees set up in to deal with special economic problems. A Council member served as chairman of an ad hoc committee on housing credit consisting of representatives of the Federal agencies responsible for housing and its financing. The Council was represented on the White House Committee on Small Business and the Panel on Civilian Technology and it worked with the President 's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy Of particular importance was the development of new machinery for interagency cooperation in formulating fiscal estimates and policies. The Chairman of the Council served with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget on a committee charged with coordinating the economic budgetary and revenue estimates for which the three agencies have primary responsibility and of reporting on them to the President. The estimates are developed with the aid of working groups representing the Council the Treasury Department and the Bureau of the Budget and in the preparation of projections of economic activity several other agencies as well The Chairman of the Council served with the Secretary of the Treasury the Director of the Budget and the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in an advisory group which met periodically with the President to review monetary developments issues and policies The members and staff of the Council served on such interagency groups as the Economic Growth Study Committee the Advisory Committee on U.S. National Health Survey the Civil and Defense Mobilization Board the Committee on the Monthly Business Cycle Report the Committee on Natural Resources of the Federal Council on Science and Technology and the Special Advisory Committee on the Statistical Abstract The Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability which had been established under Reorganization Plan No. of and whose Chairman was the Chairman of the Council was abolished on March by order of the President. On the same date the Council on Foreign Economic Policy established by Presidential letter of December and on which the Council members had served was also terminated. The functions of both these groups are now being performed elsewhere within the Government In the international sphere the Council participated in the work of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Problems the National Security Council the Interdepartmental Committee of Under Secretaries on Foreign Economic Policy and the Committee on Balance-of-Payments Information The Council has increasingly been drawn into economic consultations of international organizations. Mr. Heller served as Chairman of the U.S delegation to the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation ( beginning in Octber the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Mr. Tobin served on the U.S. delegation to this Committee and to its Working Party on Balance of Payments Equilibrium and Mr. Robert Solow of the Council staff was Chairman of the U.S. delegation to the Committee 's Working Party on Policies for the Promotion of Economic Growth. Mr. Gordon was a member of the U.S. delegation to the first Ministerial Meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Mr. Heller and Mr. Tobin were members of the U.S. delegation to the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development held in Vienna in September. Mr. Gordon served on the U.S. delegation to the annual meetings of the United Nations Economic and Social Council. Mr. Tobin was Chairman of the U.S. delegation to the meeting of Senior Economic Advisers at the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Mr. Heller was a member of the U.S. delegation to the first meeting of the Cabinet-level United States-Japan Committee on Economics and Trade CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY During the Council testified before the Joint Economic Committee on three occasions. In its initial appearance on March a comprehensive statement on economic conditions and policy entitled " The American Economy in : Problems and Policies " was submitted.1 In this document the Council also set forth the following six general principles to govern its policy on testimony before the Committee : " The Council has a responsibility to explain to the Congress and to the public the general economic strategy of the President 's program especially as it relates to the objectives of the Employment Act. This is the same kind of responsibility that other Executive agencies assume in regard to programs in their jurisdictions " It is not appropriate or necessary for the Council to go into the details of legislative proposals or of administrative actions which fall primarily in the domain of operating Executive departments or agencies who can and do testify before the appropriate committees. Our concern is with the over-all pattern * of economic policy " The program of the President is of course the outcome of a decision process in which advice recommendations and considerations of many kinds from many sources inside and outside the Executive play a part. The professional economic advice of the Council is one element ; it is not and should not be the sole consideration in the formulation of Presidential economic policy or of Congressional policy Hearings Before the Joint Economic Committee Congress of the United States ( 87th Congress First Session ) January Economic Report of the President and the Economic Situation and Outlook pp. " In Congressional testimony and in other public statements the Council must protect its advisory relationship to the President. We assume that the Committee does not expect the Council to indicate in what respects its advice has or has not been taken by the President nor to what extent particular proposals or omissions of proposals reflect the advice of the Council " Subject to the limits mentioned members of the Council are glad to discuss to the best of their knowledge and ability as professional economists the economic situation and problems of the country and the possible alternative means of achieving the goals of the Employment Act and other commonly held economic objectives. In this undertaking the Council wishes to cooperate as fully as possible with the Committee arid the Congress in achieving a better understanding of our economic problems and approaches to their solutions " The Council is composed of professional economists. But economic policy as the Committee well knows is not an exact science. The Council is and necessarily must be in harmony with the general aims and direction of the President and his Administration. A member of the Council who felt otherwise would resign. This general harmony is of course consistent with divergencies of views on specific issues. " On April the Council testified on general economic matters before the full committee ; and on June it testified before the Subcommittee on International Exchange and Payments of the Joint Economic Committee In addition Mr. Tobin represented the Council before a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency in support of S. the " Truth-in-Lending " bill NONGOVERNMENTAL MEETINGS AND ACTIVITIES Section ( e ) ( ) of the Employment Act directs that in carrying out its statutory responsibilities " the Council may constitute such advisory committees and may consult with such representatives of industry agriculture labor consumers State and local governments and other groups as it deems advisable. " In accordance with this directive the Council in actively sought the counsel and views of representatives of a wide variety of interests In the early months of the year many of the new Council 's meetings with nongovernmental representatives were of an informal nature. However more formal relations were subsequently established with a number of groups including the Economic Policy Committee of the AFL-CIO and the Committee on Domestic Economy of the Business Council. Roundtable discussions with business financial and academic economists were also organized. It is expected that these activities will be continued and expanded during the coming years Ibid. pp. In an effort to stimulate wider understanding and consideration of current economic policy issues Council members participated during in a number of public discussions conferences and radio and television programs. These included White House Regional Conferences held in cities throughout the Nation PUBLICATIONS In keeping with its responsibilities under the Employment Act the outgoing Council assisted President Eisenhower in the preparation of the Economic Report to the Congress. Copies were distributed to members of the Joint Economic Committee all other members of the Congress Departments and Agencies of the Government representatives of the press and depository libraries throughout the country. The Superintendent of Documents sold copies to the general public The Council prepares Economic Indicators a monthly compendium of current economic statistics published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. Copies are distributed to all members of the Congress and to depository libraries. In addition copies of each monthly issue are sold by the Superintendent of Documents to subscribers and others INCREASE IN APPROPRIATIONS By direction of the President the Council during the year undertook broadened responsibilities related to the basic directives of the Employment Act. The Council was also called upon to discharge functions performed in the previous Administration by a Special Assistant to the President with responsibilities for economic policy a post which has been discontinued To carry out these expanded duties the Council sought amendment of the Employment Act to eliminate the $ ceiling on salaries contained in the original legislation and an increase in its appropriation for fiscal The elimination of the salary ceiling effected by H.R. was signed into law by the President on June Subsequently the Council received a supplemental appropriation of $ for salaries and other purposes for the fiscal year bringing its total appropriation for that year to $ Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION 2OI CONTENTS income or expenditure : Page Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in prices B-6. Implicit price deflators for gross national product B-7. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-8. Gross private and government product in current and prices B-9. Personal consumption expenditures B-10. Gross private domestic investment B-ll. National income by type of income B-12. Relation of gross national product and national income B-l Relation of national income and personal income B-14. Sources of personal income B-l Disposition of personal income B-l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices B-l Financial saving by individuals B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving Employment wages and productivity : B-l Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-20. Employment and unemployment by age and sex B Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons B-22. Unemployed persons by duration of unemployment B Unemployment insurance programs selected data B-24. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-25. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries B-26. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries B Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries B Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices B Labor turnover rates in manufacturing industries B-31. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data Production and business activity : B Industrial production indexes market groupings B Industrial production indexes industry groupings B-34. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and B-35. New construction activity National B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 O-62-14 Production and business activity Continued Page B-36. New public construction activity B-37. Housing starts and applications for financing B Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-39. Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders Prices : B-40. Wholesale price indexes B-41. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing B-42. Consumer price indexes by major groups B-43. Consumer price indexes by special groups Money supply credit and finance : B-44. Money supply B-45. Loans and investments of all commercial banks B-46. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-47. Bond yields and interest rates B-48. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding B-49. Instalment credit extended and repaid B-50. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing " B-51. Net public and private debt Government finance : B-52. U.S. Government debt by kind of obligation B-53. Estimated ownership of U.S. Government obligations B Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt B-55. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt B-56. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years B-57. Government cash receipts from and payments to the public B-58. Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts B-59. Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts B Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years B-61. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Corporate profits and finance : B-62. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group B Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class B-65. Sources and uses of corporate funds B-66. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations B-67. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-68. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit B-69. Business population and business failures Agriculture : Page B-70. Income from agriculture B-71. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-72. Farm production indexes B-73. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-74. Farm population employment and productivity B-75. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture International statistics : B-76. United States balance of payments B-77. Major U.S. Government foreign assistance by type and by area total postwar period and fiscal years B-78. United States merchandise exports and imports by economic category and B-79. United States merchandise exports and imports by area and B-80. Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international organizations and B-81. Price changes in international trade Note. Detail in these tables will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Data for Alaska and Hawaii are not included unless specifically noted Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current prices NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private domestic investment Year or quarter _ PerTotal sonal gross conna- sumptional tion prod- ex- Total uct penditures New construction Government purchases of goods and services I O Net exports of goods and serv- Total ices Federal Total Ii i State and local Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III. IV : I II Ill IV : I II III IV. ! ( ) See Table B-9 for major components See Table B-10 for further detail and explanation of components For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period. See Table B-7 for exports and imports separately * This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June See also Table B-56 s Less than $ million fi Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Total New construction gross Producnational Dura- Noners ' product Total ble durable Services Total durable Residential Other equipgoods goods Total nonment farm Year or quarter Change in business inventories ' * I960 go e Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I III IV I960 : I II III IV II : I II III See footnotes at end of table p T A B L E B Gross national product or expenditure in prices * Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Government purchases of goods and services Year or quarter Net exports of goods and services2 Federal Total Total a National defense * State and local Other ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I... II.. IIIIV. : I... II.. IIIIV. : I-. II.. III. IV These estimates represent an approximate conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See Tables B-3 and B-6. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes converted to a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on change in business inventories For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U. S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales which are not shown separately in this table. See Table B-l for Government sales in current prices * See footnote Table B-l Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available separately Less than $ million NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-61l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Total gross Year or quarter national product Gross private domestic investment Personal consumption expenditures New construction Total ProChange ducers ' in busiResidurable ness DurNon- Serv- Total dential equip- invenable durable ices Total non- Other ment tories goods goods farm I960- Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III. IV. : I II III. IV. : I. II III. IV J8.7 See footnotes at end of table p. 2IO TABLE B Gross national product or expenditure in prices J Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Year or quarter Net exports Exports Imports ._ _ -_ _ _ s Total State Federal and local Gross private product Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II HI IV ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U.S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business See Table B-6 for implicit price deflators For net exports of goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Net of Government sales Gross national product less compensation of general government employees ; i.e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E B-4. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Year or quarter Total gross na- Final Inventory tional sales change product I960 i Durable goods Total Nondurable goods 112.3l ' ? i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I L01.1 II III IV : I II III IV 10.'9 : I II III IV i ! ; Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-5. Gross national product by major type of product in prices l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Year or quarter Goods output Total gross goods Serv- ConDurable goods Total na- Final Inventory structional sales change ices tion prodInvenInvenInvenTotal Final tory Final Final tory uct goods sales change Total sales change Total sales tory change 19S0 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : III I III IV : I II III IV _ ^ For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U.S. Income and Output A Supplement to the S'irvey of Current Business Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-6. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross national product Total Year or quarter Gross private domes tic investmenti New construction DurNonable durable Services goods goods Total Producers ' Residurable dential Other equipnonment farm .-_ * I I960 * I II III IV * I __ _ _ _ ._ _-_ II III IV II III2 IV See footnotes at end of table p. T A B L E B-6. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and imports of goods and services * Government purchases of goods and services Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Federal State and local _ : _ -_ _ 1944_ -._ _ : I II III IV : I II III IV _ : I II III IV __- Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services For explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices see U.S. Income and Output A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E B Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Business Persons Disposable personal income Year or quarter Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving or dissaving International Excess of receipts or investment For- Net exDorts of goods eign and services net transfers by govNet ExImern- exports ports ports ment Excess of transfers or net exports Gross retained earnings i Gross private domestic investment 1Q37 l r ; 1P0. ( ) $ * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II- III. IV. : I. II.. III. IV. : I II__ III. IV * ( ) See footnotes at end of table p 2l6 ( ) TABLE B Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Government Surplus or Total Statisdeficit i income tical Trans- PurTrans- ( ) on or re- disfers chases Total fers income ceipts crepof ancy interex- inter- and est goods pendi- est prodand and tures and uct sub- servsubacsidies ices sidies count Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter * Tax and Net nonre- tax receipts ceipts or accruals s-1.7 Gross national product or expenditure Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV * ( ) ( ) * -L ( ) ( ) _ ] ( ) Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and excess of wage accruals over disbursements For foreign net transfers by Governrrent were negligible ; therefore for that period net exports of 3goods and services and net foreign investment have been equated Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest paid by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; data for fourth quarter are not available. All other data incorporating or derived from thesefiguresare correspondingly approximate Less than $ million ' Not available NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E B Gross private and government product in current and prices [ Billions of dollars ] pricej5 * Current prices Year Total gross national product Gross private product l Total Farm Nonfarm Gross government product3 Total gross national product Gross private product Total Farm * Nonfarm Gross government product3 19501951._ Gross national product less compensation of general government employees i. e. gross product accruing from domestic business households and institutions and from the rest of the world See Survey of Current Business October for description of series and estimates in current and constant prices and implicit deflators for Includes compensation of general government employees and excludes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities * See footnote Table B-2 Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers 2l8 TABLE B Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Total personal consumption Total expenditures Year or quarter Nondurable goods Services Total L4 < i S. < __ _ ; Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I__ II III IV : I. II III IV : I. II III IV 43.1L1137.5 i. ( Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) O ] T A B L E B Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross private domestic invest- Total ment New construction l Residential Total nonfarm Producers ' durable equipment Other Total NonTotal farm Farm NonTotal farm Farm Nonfarm Farm 1930_ -L6 ( ) 1949_ ( ) 1955_ <_ i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I I I III... IV. __ : : I II... III : II... III.. IV <__ Revisions in series on new construction shown in Table B-35 have not yet been incorporated into these series Includes petroleum and natural gas well drilling which are excluded from estimates in Table B-35 Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter ComTotal penna- sation tional of eminploycome ees Business and proCorporate profits fessional income and inventory and inventory valuation valuation In- Rentadjustment adjustment come al inof InIn- farm come In- Net of ven- income ven- proCor- tory terest pertory prieof porate valusons unin- valuTotal corpo- ation tors Total profits ation before adrated adtaxes justenter- justment prises ment ( ) _ M6.2 ( ) M6.1 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III.. IV ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) National incomj is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-12 Wages and salaries and supplements to wages and salaries ( employer contributions for social insurance ; employer contributions to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items ) Excludes income resulting from net reductions of farm inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to farm inventories during the period. Data for differ from those shown in Table B-70 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts See Table B-62 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes s Less than $ million e Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; data for fourth quarter are not available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-l Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : SubEquals : sidies less Gross Net nacurrent Indirect business Busina- surplus ; ional taxes ness tional of govprodDepretransprodfer uct Total ciation Other * ernuct ment charges Fed- State payand ments enter- Total eral local prises Less : Capital consumption allowances Year or quarter Equals : NaStatisti- tional cal income discrepancy ( ) ( ) ( ) L2 SI. L.O L.2 L. ] L.3 ( ) L.5 L.6 L.8 I960. a < ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates II.. III. IV. ( s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( e ) : I II.. III. IV. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) : I II.. III. IV ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( ) ) : I Accidental damage to fixed capital and capital outlays charged to current account Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers * Data for corporate profits are appoximations for the year as a whole ; data for fourth quarter are not available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate a Not available NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Plus : CorpoExcess rate of profits ContriNational and in- butions wage income acfor vensocial cruals tory over valu- insurdisance ation burseadjustments ment Year or quarter Equals : Government transfer payments to persons Net interest paid by government Dividends Business transfer payments Personal income J-i _ _ L ? L.2 : L.2 L.8 L.8 L.8 L.8 L.8 I960 i -__ Seasonally adjusted annual rat ( JS II HI IV I960 : I II III IV * I : I II Ill IV _ ._ : L.8 Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; data for fourth quarter are not available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE R-14. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Proprietors ' income Wage and salary disbursements * Year or quarter Total personal income Total Commodityproducing industries Other Distrib- Service Gov- labor Busiutive indus- ern- income ness indus- tries ment and Farms profesManu- tries factursional Total ing < Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I... II.. III. IV_ : I... II.. III. IV. : I.._ II. _ III IV See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B-14. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Year or quarter Rental income Divi- Personal of per- dends interest income Total sons Old-age State and sur- unemvivors ployinsurment inance surance benefits benefits Veterans ' benefits Less : Personal contributions Other for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I960. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I : I : I II III IV II III II III IV The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-ll in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and excludes the excess of 2wage accruals over wage disbursements Excludes income resulting from net reductions of inventories and gives credit in computing income to net additions to inventories during the period Data for differ from those in Table B-70 because of revisions by the Department of A griculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Disposition of personal income Year or quarter Personal Personal income taxesi Less : Equals : Personal DisposEquals : conable sumption Personal personal income expenditures saving Billions of dollars I960. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II. III IV. : I II. III. IV. : I II. III IV Includes also such items as fines and penalties Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) Saving as percent of " disposable personal income ( percent ) T A B L E B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Per capita disposable personal income ( dollars ) Current prices prices ] Year or quarter Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Current prices Total personal consumption expenditures ( billions of dollars ) prices Current prices prices Per capita personal consumption expenditures ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current prices prices 183i650 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I.. II. III IV. : I.. II. III IV. : I.. II. III IV * Estimates in current prices divided by the implicit price deflator for personal consumption expenditures on a base See Table B-2 for explanation Total expenditures in prices divided by population * Population of the United States including armed forces abroad. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B Financial saving by individuals 61l [ Billions of dollars ! Securities Currency Savand ings Total bank shares U.S. Other de ( ) Total sav- govposits ines ernbonds ment Year or quarter : I S7.3 : I II III IV I I I III IV i Less : Increase in debt Mort- Con- Secugage sumer rities debt debt * loans ( ) ( ) j ( ) q Government insurance and pension reserves ' Noninsured pension funds II III IV Private insurCor- ance Dorate reand serves other ( ) ( " ) _ i ( \ Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified Includes shares in savings and loan associations and shares and deposits in credit unions " Other government " includes U.S. Government issues ( except savings tonds ) State and local government securities and beginning nonguaranteed Federal agency issues which are included in " corporate and other " for years prior to Includes insured pension reserves Includes Social Security funds State and local retirement systems etc Mortgage debt to institutions on one- to four-family nohfarm dwellings Consumer debt owed to corporations largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumer goods although including some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods. Policy loans on Government and private life insurance have been deducted from those items of saving Change in bank loans to brokers and dealers and others for the purpose of purchasing cr carrying securities B Less than $ million io Preliminary NOTE. Figures beginning have been revised since the Economic Report of the President January In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce are derived as the difference between disposable personal income and expenditures. Conceptually Commerce saving includes the following items not included in Securities and Exchange Commission saving : Housing farm and unincorporated business investment in inventories and plant and equipment net of depreciation and increase in debt. Government insurance is excluded from the Commerce saving series. For a reconciliation of the two series see Securities and Exchange Commission Statistical Bulletin July and Survey of Current Business July The flow-of-funds system of accounts of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System includes capital investments as well as financial components of saving and covers saving of Federal State and local governments businesses financial institutions and consumers. While the Federal Reserve 's estimates of consumer saving in financial form are similar to the Securities and Exchange Commission estimates of individuals ' saving there are some statistical and conceptual differences in the two sets of data Revisions for in the consumer credit statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into these estimates Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit on income and product transactions Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Year or quarter Total Total Personal saving 1938_ Gross business Total saving State and local = ! * I960. Statistical Gross disprivate Net for- crepTotal domes- eign in- ancy tic in- vestvest- ment ' ment Federal Gross investment g g Seasonally adjusted annua rates II.. III. IV. : I II.. III. IV. : I IT.. III. IV : I ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Net exports of goods and services less foreign net transfers by Government. For net foreign investment and net exports of goods and services have been equated since foreign net transfers by Government were negligible during that period Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; data for fourth quarter are not available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-19. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Total NTonin- labor stitu- force Armed tional ( includ- forces i ing i popuTotal lation i armed | forces ) i Year or month Total labor force as percent Unem- of nonNon- ploy-2 Institutional agri- ment popucullation tural Employment Total Agricultural Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Percent ( ) _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1940_ New definitions : " Including Hawaii Alaska : January.. February March April May June _ July August September. October November December- and See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Noninstitutional population i Year or month Total labor force Armed ( includ- forces ing Total armed forces ) Total labor force as Employment percent of nonUnem- instituployAgri- Non- ment tional agripopuTotal culcultural tural lation Thousands of persons years of age and over Including Alaska Hawaii : January February March April May June July August September October November December Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Percent and 7O.e _. ( Seasonally adjusted * : January.. February March April May _ June July August September. October November. December. : January. _ February March April May _ June July August September. October November. December. 67,0O7 6,05f ! \ \ i ' " i Data for revised to include about members of the armed forces who were outside the United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census and were excluded from the estimates a See Note Not available * Seasonally Adjusted totals may differ from the sum of components because totals and components have been seasonally adjusted separately NOTE. Civilian labor force data beginning with March are based on a 333-area sample. For May 1956-February they are based on a 330-area sample ; for January 1954-April they are based on a 230-area sample ; for on a 68-area sample ; for on a smaller sample ; and for on sources other than direct enumeration Effective January persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of layoff and persons waiting to start new wage and salary jobs within the following days are classified as unemployed. Such persons had previously been classified as employed ( with a job but not at work ) The combined total of the groups changing classification has averaged about to a month in recent years. The small number of persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs are classified as not in the labor force instead of employed as formerly. Persons waiting to open-new businesses or start new farms within days continued to be classified as employed Beginning July monthly data are for the calendar week ending nearest the 15th of the month ; previously for week containing the 8th. Annual data are averages of monthly figures For the years estimating procedures made use of Census data ; for subsequent years Census data were used. For the effects of this change on the historical comparability of the data see Annual Report on the Labor Force Series P-50 No. April p. Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-20. Employment and unemployment by age and sex [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed Year or month Unemployed Total years civil45 years years years and over ian Total and over Total labor em- u n e m force ployed years FeFe- ployed Male male Male male Male Fe- Male Female male Old definitions : : * ; K : January-.February March April May June ',124 * ' ^ July August September October November December ! ! " : January- -February. March April May June ' ',340 July August September October.. November December G7,038 " " ' New definitions : i r See Note Table B-19 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions Beginning January I960 data for Alaska and Hawaii are included NOTE. Data are not available prior to for all the age/sex groups above See Note Table B-19 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-21. Employed persons not at work by reason for not working and special groups of unemployed persons [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employed persons not at work by reason for not working Year or month Total Bad weather Industrial dispute Vacation Special groups of unemployed persons Illness All other reasons Tempo- New wage rary and salary layoff job < New definitions : ) ( ) " : January February.. March April May June July August September October November December. : January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober NovemberDecember. ' Beginning includes persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days Under the old definitions of employment and unemployment these groups were included in the " employed but not at work " category Persons on layoff with definite instructions to return to work within days of the layoff Persons scheduled to start new wage and salary jobs within days. Under the old definitions the " new job or business " group included these persons as well as persons waiting to open new businesses or start new farms within days ( see " all other " category in this table ) and persons in school during the survey week and waiting to start new jobs ( these are now classified as " not in the labor force " ) See Note Table B-19 for explanation Not available Beginning January data for Alaska and Hawaii are included NOTE. See Note Table B-19 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Source : Department of Labor r TABLE B-22. Unemployed persons by durationof unemployment Duration of unemployment Total unemployed Year or quarter weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Average duration of unemployment ( weeks ) Thousands of persons years of age and over Old definitions : i _ I960 * ( ) N e w definitions : * I II HI IV I960 : I * II III IV " I II III IV i See Note Table B-19 for explanation of differences between the old and new definitions For duration of less than months data are available only for under months ( ) and to months ( ) Not available * Beginning January data for Alaska and Hawaii are included NOTE. See Note Table B-19 for information on area sample used and reporting periods Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-23. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Year or month State programs Insured Total Cov- unem- benefits ered ploypaid [ nsured ment em ( mil- unem- Initial ploy- claims ploy- ( weekly lions ment aver- of dol- ment lee } lars ) Exhaustions Weekly average thousands Thousands Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid AverTotal age ( mil- weekly Season- lions of check Unad- ally ad- dollars ) ( doljusted justed ( ) lars ) Percent 1947_ ( ) : January February March April May June ( ) July August September October. _ November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December ? _ Includes persons under the State U C F E ( Federal employee effective January ) and R R B ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs Also includes Federal and State programs for temporary extension of benefits beginning June Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment. ^ Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year Includes benefits paid under extended duration provisions of State laws beginning June For total unemployment only * Preliminary s March is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined ; workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods and for Puerto Rico since January Source : Department of Labor O T A B L E B-24. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagr { cultural establishments 1929-61l [ Thousands of employees ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining TransCon- porta- Wholetract tion sale conand and struc- public retail tion utili- trade ties GovFi ernnance ice ment insur- and ( Fedance miscel- eral and lane- State real and estate ous local ) ( ) I960. ( ) Seasonally adjusted January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober...November December : See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B-24. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments ! Continued [ Thousands of employees ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining GovFiTransernCon- porta- Whole- nance Serv- ment ice tract tion insur- and sale ( Fedconand and ance miscel- eral struc- public retail and lane- State tion utili- trade real and ties estate ous local ) Seasonally adjusted : January February.. March April May June July August September. October November. December. _ January February March April May June July August September. October November December Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of t v e pay period ending nearest tbe 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force ( Table B-19 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. ; and which are based on a sample survey of households whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Not available Preliminary NOTE. Series revised to conform to Standard Industrial Classification and March benchmark data. For further details see Employment and Earnings Annual Supplement Issue November Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-25. Average weekly hours of work in selected industries Retail trade Con- ( except Teletract eating Whole- Bitumi- Class I phone nous consale comrailNon coal and muniTotal Durable durable struc- drink- trade mining roads * cation3 goods goods tion ing Manufacturing Year or month places ) s : January February.. March April May June July August September- October November. December.. : January February.. March April ._ May June July August September. October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted ( ) ( ) ( ) * Unadjusted ) Based upon data summarized in the M-300 report by the Interstate Commerce Commission. Hours and earnings data relate to all employees who received pay during the month except executives officials and staff assistants Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives Not available Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Series revised ; see Note Table B-24 Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in contract construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment See Table B-28 for unadjusted average weekly hours in manufacturing Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Source : Department of Labor T A B L E B-26. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Year or month Total 1940_ * : January February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober NovemberDecember-- : January February March April May June __ July August SeptemberOctober November 66December _ $ Durable goods ( ) $ Nondurable goods ( ) $ Retail Contrade TeleBitutract ( except Whole- minous Class I phone Agriculconsale eating rail- comcoal structrade mining roads munica- ture and tion tion drinking places ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ( ) $ s.962 ( ) $ $ " " " For coverage of series see footnote Table B-25 Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; for April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Not available Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Series revised ; see Note Table B-24 Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in contract construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Sources : Department of Labor and Department of Agriculture TABLE B Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Retail Manufacturing Year or month Total trade TeleCon- ( except tract eatin ? Whole- Bitumi- Class T phone nous consale rail- comDura- Non- struccoal and muble durable tion drink- trade mining roads nication2 goods goods ing places ) : January February March April May June July August September.. October November.. December : January February March April May June.. July August September. October November _ December $ $ $ P6.29 ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ $ ^ $ $ $ For coverage of series see footnote Table B-25 Prior to April data relate to all employees except executives ; for April 1945-May mainly to employees subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act ; and beginning June to nonsupervisory employees only Not available * Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Preliminary NOTE. Series revised ; see Note Table B-24 Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining construction workers in contract construction and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Data are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Source : Department of Labor 24O T A B L E B-28. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries Durable goods manufac- Nondurable goods manuturing industries facturing industries All manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Year or month * * : January February. __ March April May June July August September. October November. December. : January February.._ March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December * overtime ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ( Average hourly earnings hours Average weekly Average hourly earnings hours Excluding overExExExExExtime cludcludclud ; ludcludand ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing interoveroveroveroverover- industime time time time time try shift ( = ) Ex ; ludGross Average weekly Average hourly earnings $ ) ) $ ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) $ $ ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ) $ $ : Not available April used. Annual average not available a Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Preliminary NOTE. Series revised ; see Note Table B-24 Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on employment ( in the case of hours ) and man-hours ( in the case of earnings ) See Table B-25 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Source : Department of Labor T A B L E B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current prices prices l Worker with no dependents Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices * $ $ $ $ $ $ ] _. _ __ I960 I960 ' J a n u a r y February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November33 December _ _ ~ r Estimates in current prices divided by the consumer price index on a base ( using 11-month average ) Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Preliminary * Not available NOTE. Series revised ; see Note Table B-24 Data relate to production workers and are for pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month The annual figures for are simple arithmetic averages of the monthly figures shown and are not strictly comparable with the averages for earlier years which have been weighted by data on man-hours Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Source : Department of Labor T A B L E B Labor turnover rates in manufacturing [ Rates per employees ] Accession rates Year or month Total i _ Layoffs ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _- _ m _. I960 * Quits New hires _ Separation rates Total industries ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted July I960 ' January February.. March April May June September October November * January February March April- * May June __ July August.. October -_ _ November -_ __ Includes rehires and other accessions not published separately Includes discharges and miscellaneous separations not published separately. ( Prior to quits include miscellaneous separations. ) Not available * January-November average Preliminary NOTE. Series revised ; see Note Table B-24 Beginning January data relate to all employees ; previously to production workers only Beginning January transfers between establishments of the same firm are included in total accessions and total separations therefore rates for these items are not strictly comparable with prior data Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-31. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data [ = ] Output Output per man-hour Year Nonagricultural industries Total Agripri- culvate ture Man-hours I Nongigricultural industries Total AgriManMan- Non- pri- culufacufac- man- vate ture Total turTotal tur- ufacing ing turing Nonagricultural industries Total AgriNon- pri- culManman- vate ture ufacufacTotal turing turing Nonmanufacturing Establishment basis 19J1 3____ Labor force basis i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 3____ ( ) ( ) ( ) < > ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( o ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) f 101.5i e g ' ) t C 102.fi ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( S ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) Output refers to gross national product in prices Man-hour estimates based primarily on establishment data Preliminary Man-hour estimates based primarily on labor force data s Not available NOTE. For information on sources and methodology see Bureau of Labor Statistics ( Department of Labor ) Bulletin No. Trends in Output per Man-hour in the Private Economy Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-32. Industrial production indexes market groupings = ] Final products Consumer goods Year or month Total Materials Equipment including defense Total AutoTotal motive Home prod- goods Total Busi- Dur- Nonable durable goods goods _ S8.9 I960- Seasonally adjusted I960 : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November3 December _ _ Annual indexes for are respectively : and Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately Preliminary i Not available Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Industrial production indexes industry groupings [ = ] Manufacturing Year or month Durable manufactures Total FabriTransPri- cated Ma- portamary metal chinery tion metals prodequipucts ment Instruments Clay Furniture and re- glass and lated and miscelprod- lumber laneous ucts _ _ I960 x SI. _ Total industrial produc- Total tion Seasonally adjusted I960 * January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July AugustSeptember October November December L._ ) See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B-33. Industrial production indexes industry groupings Continued [ = ] M anufacturing Nondurable manufactures Year or month Total Textile apparel Paper atad and leather printing products ChemFoods ical beverpetroages leum and and rubber tobacco products Mining Utilities Seasonally adjusted : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February. March April May June July August September October November December i Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Year or quarter Total i Total Durable goods Transportation Non- Mining durable goods Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and other 1957_ 7.3B -_ I960.-1961 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV3 : I Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction Estimates for fourth quarter and first quarter based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and November The quarterly anticipations include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data NOTE. Thesefiguresdo not agree precisely with the plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals and institutions and of certain outlays charged to current account This series is not available for years prior to and for to Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce TABLE B-35. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month _ ' __ _New series : Total new construction Resi- Nonresidential building and other construction dential Total i building Com ( nonTotal mercial Indus- Public Other * farm ) trial utility Public construction Seasonally adjusted annual rates ( New series * ) : January February March. _ April May June.. July August September October November December __ _ _ : January February March April May June..July August September... October November __ December s Data in this table do not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product. The latter data include expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas well drilling and do not reflect revisions in the " new series " presented above. ( See Table B-l. ) Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Farm institutional and all other * New series beginning January not comparable with prior data. In addition to major differences between old and new series data for Alaska and Hawaii are included beginning January For details see Construction Activity C August and C ( Supplement ) July Bureau of the Census * Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-36. New public construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Total new public construction x Major types of new public construction Federal Year All public sources Direct Federal aid State and local Highway Educational Hospital and institutional Sewer and water and miscellaneous public service Conservation and development Military facilities other public2 All __ ___ * For expenditures classified by ownership combine " Federal aid " and " State and local " columns to obtain State and local ownership. " Direct " column stands as it is for Federal ownership Includes nonresidential building other than educational and hospital and institutional ( industrial commercial public administration social and recreational and miscellaneous ) public residential buildings and publicly owned parks and playgrounds memorials etc Beginning with data include estimates for Alaska and Hawaii. Comparability with earlier data is not seriously affected since these two States accounted for less than two-thirds of one percent of total new public construction in * Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-37. Housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Total housing starts ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total Total private Private private and and public public 196U : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December __ New series ^ Private housing starts Proposed home conadjusted an- struction nual rates Total VA Private farm FHA apGovernment and Non- appli- praisal programs non- farm cations reTotal farm quests FHA VA Nonfarm housing starts * ( ) New series U264 Military housing starts including thosefinancedwith mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in total private and public starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Units in mortgage applications for new home construction FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency Not available In addition to major differences between old and new series arising from revisions in sources and methods new series include data for Alaska and Hawaii. For details see Housing Starts C20-11 ( Supplement ) Bureau of the Census May Preliminary ; December and year estimated by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Data for VA programs include Alaska and Hawaii ; FHA programs include Alaska Hawaii and Puerto Rico Sources : Department of Commerce Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) Veterans Administration ( VA ) and Housing and Home Finance Agency ( except as noted ) O-62-17 TABLE B-38. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in billions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade i Manufacturing Wholesale trade i Retail trade i Year or month InvenInvenInvenSales2 tories Ratio Sales2 Inven- Ratio Sales tories3 Ratio Sales tories Ratio tories s '13.3 M8.3 Seasonally adjusted : January February.. March April May June July August September October November December. : January February. March April May June July August September October November December ' The series beginning in for wholesale trade and for retail trade are not comparable with previous years because of changes in definitions Monthly average shown for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Preliminary Beginnine January retail sales and inventories include data for Alaska and Hawaii Beginning January wholesale sales and inventories include data for Alaska and Hawaii NOTE. For a description of the series and their comparability see Survey of Current Business September and November June and December for retail and August for manufacturing and wholesale The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B Manufacturers ' sales inventories and orders [ Billions of dollars ] Year or month New orders Inventories Sales * Unfilled Nondurable goods Durable goods NonDura- Non- orders industries industries ble durable ble durable ( unadgoods goods Total goods goods just-3 indus- indus- ed ) indus- indus- Pur- Goods Fin- Pur- Goods Fintries tries tries tries chased ished ished chased in mate- process goods mate- process goods rials rials Dura- I960 Seasonally adjusted : January February-- March April May. June July August September- October November- December. : January February. _ March April May June July August September- October November6 December lb. Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period End of period Based on data through November Preliminary NOTE. See Table B-38 for total sales and inventories of manufacturers Source : Department of Commerce PRICES TABLE B-40. Wholesale price indexes [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( industrials ) All commodities Farm products Processed foods : January. February March April May June July August September October November December : January. _ February March April May June Year or month July August September _ October November. _ December Total See footnotes at end of table p. Textile Chemi- Rubber Lumber cals and prodand and ucts allied rubber wood prodprodand products ucts apparel ucts TABLE B-40. Wholesale price indexes Continued [ = ] i All commodities other than farm products and foods ( industrials ) continued Year or month Hides skins leather and leather products Fuel and related prodducts and power Pulp paper and allied products Metals and metal products Machin ^ ery and motive products Furniture and other household durables Tobacco Nonme- manu- Miscelfactures laneous tallic and mineral prodbottled products beveructs ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) : January February. _ March April May June July August September-October November. December. __ : January February March April May June July August September. October November. December 5_ This does not replace the former index ( = ) as the official index prior to January D a t a beginning January represent the revised sample and weighting pattern. Prior to January they are based on the month-to-month movement of the former index Formerly titled " F u e l power and lighting materials. " Formerly titled " Nonmetallic minerals structural. " Not available Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-41. Wholesale price indexes ' by stage of processing [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components i Crude materials All Year or month modi- ties Foodstuffs Total and feedstuffs Materials and components for manufacturing MaMa- terials Ma- ComNonterials for terials poTotal food for for non- du- nents ma- Fuel Total food du- rable for terials manu- rable manu- manuexcept factur- manu- factur- facturfuel ing factur- ing ing ing Materials and components for construction _. January February.._ March April May June July : August September. October November. December.. : January February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober NovemberDecember * See footnotes at end of table p. T A B L E B Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Producer Other finished Dunongoods Foods durable rable goods goods Crude materials InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods exand com- cluding ponents foods 1955_._ * : January February. March April May June July August September October November December : January February. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November4 December Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing : and manufactured animal feeds Preliminary NOTE. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector and their relative importance see Monthly Labor Review December and Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes ( BLS Bulletin No. ) Source : Department of Labor TABLE B Consumer price indexes by major groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = Year or month All items Housing Food Total Rent Apparel ReadTrans- Medi- Per- ing and Other porta- cal sonal recrea- goods and tion care care tion services ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ) 97T1 ( ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ( ) 1956._ I9601961 2_ : January. __ February. March April May June July August September October.. November December : January.._ February. March April May June July Z ._ J August September October.. November Not available January-November average Source : Department of Labor ( TABLE B-43. Consumer price indexes by special groups For city wage-earner and clerical-worker families [ = ] Services Commodities Yew or month All All All items items less All items less shel- comfood ter modities All serv- Commodities less food Food All NonDura- durables bles All services Rent less rent _ -._ L : January February March April May June JulyAugustSeptember October November December : January February March April May June July .._ August September October November i January-November average Source : Department of Labor MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-44. Money supply [ Averages of daily figures billions of dollars ] Money supply Year and month Seasonally adjusted Total Currency Demand outside deposits i banks Related deposits ( unadjusted ) Unadjusted Total Currency Demand outside deposits1 banks Gross time Government U.S : December. : December. : December. : December., : December. _ : December. : December. : December. : : : : : December. December. December.December. December. : December. : December 2_ : January _ February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December. : January. February March April May June July August September. _ October November. December Demand deposits at all commercial banks ( member and nonmember ) Preliminary NOTE. Between January and August the series were expanded to include data for all banks in Alaska and Hawaii Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE R-45. Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars end of period ] Year or month Total loans and investments Investments Loans Total Business loans Total June 5_ June 5_ June June June June U.S. GovOther ernment obligations securities 196U : January.._ February _ March April May June ^ y August September. October November. December. : January B February March April May June July August September.. October November _ December End-of-year figures ( except ) are for call dates. Other data ( including those for December ) are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net i.e. after deduction of valuation reserves. Includes commercial and industrial agricultural security real estate bank consumer and other loans Beginning with data are shown gross of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks Figures in this table are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Therefore they do not agree with figures in Table B-53 which are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U.S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Beginning June business loans exclude loans to financial institutions Preliminary ; December estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for March used instead of last Wednesday of February NOTE. Between January and August this series was expanded to include data for all banks in Alaska and Hawaii Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) 26l T A B L E B-46. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves 1'920-67 [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Member Governbank ment se- borrowcurities ings Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member b a n k free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) : December : : : : : December December December December December i : : : : : December December December December December : : : : : December December December December December : : : : : December December December December December : : : : : December December December December December : : : : : December December December December December : December : December I960 * January February March April May June July August September October November December * January February March April..May June July August September October ___ November December Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Preliminary NOTE. Data for member banks in Alaska and Hawaii included beginning and respectively Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-47. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate ' bonds ( Moody 's ) Common stock yields 3-month Treas- month Taxable stocks ury- issues bonds Aaa Baa ( Moody 's ) bills i U.S. Government securities Year or month Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) Average rate on Prime Fedshort- comeral vcrm Remerbank serve cial loans paper Bank to busi- disnesscount selected months rate cities ( ) i U.00 n.oo u.oo ^ : January February March. _ April May June 1933._ f July August __ September October November December ) ( ) See footnotes at end of table p. ( ) 'I'sY ~ ~ " TABLE B-47. Bondyields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Common stock yields 3-month stocks Treas- month Taxable bonds Aaa Baa ( Moody 's ) ury bills i issues ' U.S. Government securities Year or month Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor 's ) : January.. February- March April May June July August September October November December : J a n u a r y FebruaryMarch April May June July August September October.. November December Average rate on Prime shortcomterm merbank cial loans paper to busi- nessselected months cities ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ' ~ ~ ' Federal Reserve Bank discount rate Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years * Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available before August Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years i From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less Series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial institutions NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation T A B L E B Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of year or month Noninstalment credit Other Repair and AutoPercontodern- sonal mobile sumer paper goodsl zation loans loans paper Charge Other accounts Total Total : J a n u a r y February March April May June July August September October November December. : January.. February March April May June July August September. October November.. December 5_ Total Includes all consumer credit extended for the purpose of purchasing automobiles and other consumer goods Includes only such loans held by financial institutions ; those held by retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit * Not available Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Series revised beginning For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin December Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning January and August respectively Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-49. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Total Repair and Other consumer modernization goods paper loans Automobile paper Period Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid : January February March April May__ June July August September October November December J a n u a r y February March April May June July August September... October November December1.. : I960 i Extended Personal loans Repaid Extended Repaid Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted January.. February March April May Juiie July August September October November December : J a n u a r y February March April May June July August September October November December L Preliminary ; December b y Council of Economic Advisers N O T E S e e also Table B-48 Series revised beginning For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin December D a t a for Alaska a n d Hawaii included beginning J a n u a r y and August respectively. Therefore t h e difference between extensions and repayments for J a n u a r y and August and for the year does n o t equal the net change in credit outstanding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and offinancing,1939 [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties to 4-family houses End of year or quarter All properties Government underwritten Total Total FHA insured ConvenVA tional guaranteed Total Multifamily Farm and propcomerties mercial properties a III. IV. : I II III_ IV. : III IV : I II Derived figures Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations O TABLE B-51. Net public and private debt * [ Billions of dollars ] Private End of year2 Corporate Individual and noncorporate Fed- State eral and Nonfarm Total Gov- local ern- gov- Total ernment ment ComTotal Long- Short- Total Farm merterm term cial ConTotal Mort- and sumer gage financial4 Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see Survey of Current Business October Data for State and local government debt are for June Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories < Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders * Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Revisions beginning in the consumer credit data of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been incorporated into this series Sources : Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and Interstate Commerce Commission ( except as noted ) GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-52. U.S. Government debt by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt End of year or month 1932__ : J a n u a r y February. March April May June _ July August September October. _ November December : J a n u a r y February. March April May June July. August September October.. November December Gross public debt and guaranteed issues Marketable public issues Nonmarketable public issues Shortterm issuesa United States savings bonds Treasury bonds Treasury tax and savings notes CO ( e ) Investment bonds * Special issues * Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds and armed forces leave bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Series A bonds and beginning April Series B convertible bonds Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December s Less than $ million The last series of Treasury savings notes matured in April Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-53. Estimated ownership of U.S. Government obligations [ Par values,i billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of year or month 19401941_ _ ..__ 1956..._ ._ ._ : January February March April May _ June _ July August September October _ November December : : January February March April May June July August September October November December 8_._ Held by others Held by U.S GovMutual ernsavings ment Federal Com- banks Other Total investment Total Reserve mercial and in- corporabanks banks surance tions accomcounts panies ? State Misceland local individ- laneous uals invesgoverntors ? ments fi S.I United States savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B- which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of 6Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund and the International Development Asso ciation in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U.S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE B Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within lyear to years years Average length to to 20and years years over Millions of dollars Years Months Fiscal year : : January... February. March April May June July August September October.. November December : January.. February. March April May June ' * July August September October.. November December NOTE. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which are classified to earliest call date Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-55. Federal budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt { Millions of dollars ] Net budget receipts Fiscal or calendar year Fiscal year : Budget expenditures Surplus or deficit ( ) Public debt at end of year 68f550 C a l e n d a r year : * Gross receipts less refunds of receipts and transfers of tax receipts to the old-age and survivors insurance trust fund the disability insurance trust fund the railroad retirement account the unemployment trust fund and the highway trust fund Excludes guaranteed obligations ; therefore differs from total shown in Tables B-52 and B-53. The change in the public debt from year to year reflects not only the budget surplus or deficit but also changes in the Government 's cash on hand and the use of corporate debt and investment transactions by certain Government enterprises Estimate Preliminary NOTE. Certain interfund transactions are excluded from budpet receipts and expenditures beginning fiscal year For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget TABLE B-56. Federal budget receipts by source and expenditures by function fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Budget expenditures by functiorL Budget receipts by source Fiscal year Total Indi- CorpoAll vidual ration Excise other income taxes income receipts taxes taxes Total National defense Veterans ' services and benefits Agriculture and agricultural resources Inter- All other expenditures est Budget surplus or deficit ( ) 1947_1948. 1950._ 1951__ 1952__ 1953._ 1955._ 1956_ 1957-_ 1958._ I960._ 1961_ Includes employment taxes estate and gift taxes customs revenues and miscellaneous receipts. See also Note below Includes expenditures for international affairs and finance ; space research and technology ; natural resources ; commerce and transportation ; housing and community development ; health labor and welfare ; education ; and general government. Also includes adjustment to daily Treasury statement ( for actuals ) and allowance for contingencies ( for estimates ) See also Note below Estimate NOTE. Total budget receipts and total budget expenditures and the " all other " categories exclude certain interfund transactions Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget TABLE B Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Total State and local Federal i Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments ) Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments Cash receipts Cash payments * I960.. * _ Fiscal or calendar year Fiscal year : Calendar year : Excess of receipts or of payments For derivation of Federal cash receipts and payments see Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June 196S and Table B-60 Estimated by Council of Economic Advisers from receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts. Cash receipts consist of personal tax and nontax receipts indirect business tax and nontax accruals and corporate tax accruals adjusted to a collection basis. Cash payments are total expenditures less Federal grants-in-aid and less contributions for social insurance. ( Federal grants-in-aid are therefore excluded from State and local receipts and payments and included only in Federal payments. ) See also Table B-58 Less than $ million Estimate Preliminary Sources : Treasury Department Bureau of the Budget Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-58. Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Calendar year or quarter State and local government Federal Government i Surplus or deficit Ex ( ) on ReReceipts pendi- income ceipts and tures product account SurSurplus or plus or deficit deficit Ex- ( ) on ReEx- ( ) on pendi- income ceipts pendi- income tures tures and and prodproduct acuct account count ( ) 1946_ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I IIIII IV : : ( ) : I II... IIIIV ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) IIIII IV See Note Table B-59 Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expend itures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-59.- Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Personal Corpotax rate Year or quarter and profits Total nontax tax acre- cruals ceipts Fiscal year : 1956i Calendar year : Expenditures Indirect busi- ConPurtribuchases tax tions of for Total goods and social and servinsurices ance cruals ' Surplus Subsi- or dies defiless cit cur- ( ) Grantson in-aid Net rent surinto State inand ter- plus come and For- local est of eign govern- paid gov- prod ( net ) ments ern- uct ment acenter- count prises Transfer payments To ) 2Q.6 /22.2 ) ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates Calendar quarter : : I II III IV : I II... III.. IV : I II... Ill IV3 ) ) 1/5.0 At Not available Estimate Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. These accounts like the cash budget include the transactions of the trust accounts. Unlike both the conventional budget and the cash statement they exclude certain capital and lending transactions In general they do not use the cash basis for transactions with business. Instead corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual instead of a cash basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery instead of the payment for goods and services ; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans financed by banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them Data for Alaska and Hawaii included beginning Sources : Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) T A B L E B Reconciliation of Federal Government receipts and expenditures in the conventional budget and the consolidated cash statement with receipts and expenditures in the national income accounts fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ! Fiscal years Receipts or expenditures RECEIPTS Budget receipts Intragovernmental transactions Less : Receipts from exercise of monetary authority Plus : Trust fund receipts Equals : Federal receipts from the public ( consolidated cash receipts ) Adjustments for agency coverage : Less : District of Columbia revenues Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Less : Interest dividends and other earnings Plus : Contributions to Federal employees ' retirement funds etc Adjustments for timing : Plus : Excess of corporate tax accruals over collections ; personal taxes social insurance contributions etc Adjustments for capital transactions : Less : Realization upon loans and investments sale of Government property etc Equals : Receipts National income accounts EXPENDITURES Budget expenditures Intragovernmental transactions Less : Accrued interest and other non-cash expenditures ( net ) Trust fund expenditures Plus : Government-sponsored enterprise expenditures ( net ) Equals : Federal payments to the public ( consolidated cash expenditures ) Adjustments for agency coverage : Less : District of Columbia expenditures Adjustments for netting and consolidation : Less : Interest received and proceeds of Government sales Plus : Contributions to Federal employees ' retirement funds etc Adjustments for timing : Plus : Excess of interest accruals over payments on savings bonds and Treasury bills Excess of deliveries over expenditures and miscellaneous items Less : Commodity Credit Corporation foreign currency exchanges Adjustments for capital transactions Less : Loans Federal National Mortgage Association secondary market mortgage purchases redemption of International Monetary Fund notes etc Trust and deposit fund items Purchase of land and existing assets Other * Equals : Expenditures National income accounts ) ) o S Less than $ million Consist of transactions in financial assets and liabilities land and secondhand assets. Acquisition of newly produced tangible assets are included in expenditures for goods and services as defined in the national income and product accounts Includes net change in Commodity Credit Corporation guaranteed non-recourse loans and increase in bearing account Commodity Credit Corporation inventory valuation adjustment Sources : Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce nprtTTin QnH n r n H n o f Qr>r>nnnfo TABLE B-61. State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Revenues by source Expenditures by function ReveFiscal year ] Total Property taxes Sales nue Corpo- from and Indiration Fedgross vidual net reincorre income eral Govceipts taxes taxes erntaxes All other revenue Total Education Highways Public All welfare other * ment Fiscal years not the same for all governments a Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between governments in these categories are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and community redevelopment local recreation general control interest on general debt and other and unallocable expenditures Includes data for Alaska Includes data for Alaska and Hawaii NOTE. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-51 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-62. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Year or quarter Manufacturing All industries Dura- Nonble durable Total goods goods indus- industries tries ( ) ( ) 1953._ Corpo- CorpoTransporrate rate tation profits tax All Divi- Undiscommu- other before liabilnication indus- taxes ity i Total dend tributed payand tries ments profits public utilities ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates II.. III. IV_ : I IIIII. IV. : I II.. III. IV ( ) : I _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Less than $ million Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Data for corporate profits are approximations for the year as a whole ; data for fourth quarter are not available. All other data incorporating or derived from these figures are correspondingly approximate Not available Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-63. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales private facturing corporations by industry group Durable goods industries All private manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Lumber and Furwood niture prod- and ucts fix ( except tures furniture ) Stone clay and products Primary iron and steel industries Primary nonferrous metal industries MisEleccellatrical MoIn- neous MaFab- chin- ma- tor Other stru- manritrans- ments ufacery chincated ( ex- ery vehi- porta- and turcles metal cept equip- and tion reing prod- elec- ment equip- equip- lated ( inucts trical ) and ment ment prod- cludsupucts ing plies ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent BASED ON 19S7 SIC : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II Ill Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents BASED ON SIC ' : I III IV. : I II Ill IV II : I II Ill IV. _ _ : I II III _ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B-63. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders'equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Year or quarter Printing and Food ApTo- Tex- parel Paper puband tile and lishkin- bacco mill and ing dred man- prod- related allied ufacprod ( exprod- tures ucts prod- ucts cept ucts ucts newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum Petro- and Rub- Leather and leum coal ber leather refin- ( ex- prod- proding cept ucts ucts petroleum refining ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent BASED O 19S7 SIC N : I II Ill IV : I II III IV : I II III : I II III. IV Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents BASED O SIC i N : I II- IV. : I II III. IV- : : II. III IV. I II. III Standard Industrial Classification NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U.S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission arid Securities and Exchange Commission Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-64. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales private manufacturing corporations by asset size class Asset size class ( millions of dollars ) Year or quarter All asset sizes Under to to to and over Ratio of profits { annual rate ) to stockholders equity percent Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes BASED ON SIC * : I ^ II IV : I II III IV I960 : I II III IV I II III- Profits per dollar of sales cents Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After Before After taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes BASED ON SIC > : I _ II H I __ _ IV : I II III IV I960 : I II III IV I II Ill .._ i Standard Industrial Classification NOTE. Data on a comparable basis are not available for earlier periods. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Reports for U.S. Manufacturing Corporations Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-65. Sources and uses of corporate funds 1950-61J [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Total uses Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( book value ) Customer net receivables Cash and U.S. Government securities _ Other assets ) ( ) Retained profits and deple13.0 tion allowances Depreciation and amortization allowances. _.. Total sourcesInternal sources- External sources Federal income tax liability _ Other liabilities Bank loans and mortgage loans Net new issues Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) ( ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Preliminary estimates Receivables are net of payables which are therefore not shown separately Less than $ million Preliminary estimate b y Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) O TABLE B-66. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations 1939-61l [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets Current liabilities Net working capital Year or quarter I960- : I.. IIIII IV : IIIII IV : I IIIII All United States corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations and insurance companies Year-end data through are based on Statistics of Income ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. Statistics of Income data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. As more complete information becomes available estimates are revised * Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on the corporation 's books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on the corporation 's books Includes marketable securities other than U.S. Government Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-67. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter Corporate securities offered for cash ' State and Gross proceeds Proposed uses of net proceeds municipal securities New money offered for cash Retire- Other Com- Pre- Bonds ( prinTotal mon ferred and Total Plant Work- ment purcipal of sestock stock notes ing and amounts ) Total equip- capi- curities tal ment 1941._ 1944._ : I II- III. IV- : I... IIIII IV. I II.. _ III. IV * These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions sales of investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as offerings under employeepurchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation * Preliminary NOTE. Data for Alaska and Hawaii included for all periods Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission The Commercial and Financial Chronicle and The Bond Buyer TABLE B-68. Common stock prices and earnings and stock market credit Year or month Common Common stock stock price/ prices earnings index ratio = industrials ( SEC ) i ( Standard & Poor 's ) Stock market credit Customer credit ( excluding U.S Government securities ) Total Net debit balances Bank loans to brokers and Bank loans dealers to " others " * Millions of dollars I960. : January.. February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December. : January February March April May June July August September October November December. ~ l7 ~ ( ) Based on stocks Based on stocks for and stocks beginning Ratio is obtained by dividing the stock price index as of the end of the period by the seasonally adjusted annual rate of earnings for the quarter then ending As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U.S. Government obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period * Loans by weekly reporting member banks to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. From through June loans for purchasing or carrying U.S. Government securities were reported separately only by New York and Chicago banks Accordingly for that period any loans for purchasing or carrying such securities at other reporting banks are included. Series also revised beginning July March and July Data are for last Wednesday of period. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin August * Loans by weekly reporting member banks for purchasing or carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Series revised beginning July January July and July Data are for last Wednesday of period. For details see Federal Reserve Bulletin August * Not available Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange TABLE B-69. Business population and business failures Year or month Operating businesses and business turnover ( thousands offirms ) > DisOper- New conating busi- tinbusi- ness- ued ness- es busies nesses Business failures Newbusiness incorporations ( number ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Liability size class Under $ Total Under $ and and over Number of failures Business failure rate Total ; ( ) ( ) " CO ( ) February March.._ April May June July. August September October ~ ~ ~ U November December _ : January. _ February March April May June July August.. _ September 6t'.5 October... November December Excludes firms in the fields of agriculture and professional services. Includes self-employed person only if he has either an established place of business or at least one paid employee. Series revised beginning Data through are averages of end-of-quarter estimates centered at June Beginning data are for beginning of period. Quarterly data shown here are seasonally adjusted Total for period < Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises. Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Not available Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data s Includes data for Hawaii beginning and Alaska beginning ( Data for comparable to are ; data for comparable to are ) Sources : Department of Commerce and Dun & Bradstreet Inc January ) ( ) AGRICULTURE TABLE B-70. Income from agriculture Year or quarter Income received by total farm population from agricultural sources Farm Total wages Income received by farm operators from farming Net Realized gross Cash receipts from Total marketings Production expenses Excluding net inventory change Including net inventory change * Billions of dollars Net income per farm including net inventory change Current prices Dollars i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I.__ II.. III. IV. ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : I * Ill IV s ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Net income of farm operators from farming ( including net inventory change ) and farm wages as shown Farm wages received by farm resident workers Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms * Includes net change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at the average price for the year. Data prior to differ from farm proprietors ' income shown in Tables B l l and B-14 because of revisions by the Department of Agriculture not yet incorporated into the national income accounts of the Department of Commerce Based on estimated number of farms as reported by the Department of Agriculture according to Census of Agriculture definition except as noted in footnote Income in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base Per farm figures for based on interim approximations of number of farms consistent with the Census of Agriculture definition of a farm Preliminary Not available Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E B Indexes of prices received and prices paid by Jarmers and parity ratio [ = ] Prices received by farmers Livestock and products Crops Year or month All farm prodAll Food ucts l crops grains Feed grains and hay Feed Total grains OilCot- To- bearton bacco ing crops All livestock and products l Meat Dairy Poulani- p r o d try mals ucts and 194C _ : January February March April May _._ June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December ___ See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B-71.- Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Continued [ = ] Prices paid b y farmers Year or m o n t h All Commodities and services items inProduction items terest Famtaxes and iy l All All wage items living producM o t o r Farm Fermarates titerns tion Feed ve ( parity hicles chin- lizer items ery index ) : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ : January February March _ April May Tune July August... September October _ November D e cember Includes items not shown separately Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index Includes wartime subsidy payments Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture Parity In3 W a g e atio * ter- Taxes ates * est 10S 1C 6SB 63t ( ( IK 1C ( ' ( * & ] ( TABLE B-72. Farm production indexes [ = ] Crops Livestock and products Farm Year Oil outPoulFruits Hay Cot- To- bear- Totals Meat Dairy try put i Total Feed and Food Vege- and ani- prodgrains forage grains tables nuts ton bacco ing mals ucts and crops eggs 1933__ 1939___ 1944-__ ^ 1946___ 1947._ 1948.__ 1949.__ 1953___ 1955.._ 1956._ 1957__ I960.. * __ Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E R-73. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs Cropland harvested ( millions of acres ) Year Livestock breeding Exclu- units sive of ( 1947use for Total feed for = ) horses and mules Index numbers of Inputs ( = ) Manhours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm labor MeFeed chani- Ferti- seed Farm cal and real power lizer live- Misceland estate ' and stock laneous lime mapurchinery chases * i Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens * Animal units of breeding livestock excluding horses and mules * Includes buildings and improvements on land * Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers ' purchases Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E B Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April ) i yflar i ear Net migration to and As per- from Num- cent of farms ber total ( thou ( thou- popu- sands ) sands ) lation Farm employment ( thousands ) * Farm output Per Family Hired unit Total workers workers of total input LiveCrop stock proproduc- duction per Per man-hour tion per breedacre ing Liveunit Total Crops stock Index = ( ) L L I960 _ ( ) ( ) C O ( ) i Farm population as denned by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms both urban and rural regardless of occupation according to concept in use prior to Total population of United States as of July excluding Alaska and Hawaii ; includes armed forces abroad s Net change for year beginning in April estimated by Department of Agriculture. For and subsequent years includes inductions and enlistments into the armed forces and persons returning from the armed forces. For all years includes persons who have not moved but who are in and out of the farm popu lation because agricultural operations have begun or have ceased on the place where they are living * Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-19 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected. For further explanation see monthly report on Farm Labor September Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Not available * On the basis of i960 Census definitions farm population for is or percent of total population. Comparable figures for earlier years are not yet available Preliminary Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce TABLE R-75. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Claims Assets Other physical assets Beginning of year HouseProMahold DeposReal chinReal Invest- Total estate Other priefurtors ' Total estate ery its U.S ment Live- and Crops nishdebt debt equiand savings in coings stock motor ties curand rency bonds operavehitives iquipcles ment 1940._ ( ) Financial assets V / < * > I960. S New basis * > ? f ? ( ) 7q ? ? ? ? Includes all crops held on farms for whatever purpose and crops held off farms as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Estimated valuation for plus purchases minus depreciation since then Not available Tentative estimates based on revisions in process as a result of the Census of Agriculture Preliminary Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-76. United States balance of payments l [ Millions of dollars ] Type of transaction JanuarySeptember Recorded transactions other than changes in monetary gold stock and in liquid liabilities : United States payments : Total Imports of goods and services : Total. Merchandise adjusted Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services Military expenditures Income on investments : Private Government Unilateral transfers net : Total Government grants _____ Remittances and pensions United States capital net : Total... Private net : Total Direct investments net New issues _ _ Redemptions ther long-term net Short-term net Government net * Total Long-term capital outflow. Repayments Short-term net United States receipts * Total a Exports of goods and services : Total.. Merchandise adjusted Transportation Travel Miscellaneous services _. Military transactions Income on investments : Direct investments Other private Government Foreign investments in the United States other than liquid funds netBalance on recorded transactions [ net receipts or net payments ( ) ] Unrecorded transactions errors and omis643 sions [ net receipts or net payments ( ) ] Increase in liquid liabilities to foreign countries and international institutions United States gold sales or purchases ( ) * Excludes transfers of goods and services under military grant programs Excludes $ million for increase in United States subscription to the International Monetary Fund of which $ million was paid in gold and $ million in non-interest-bearing notes Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E R-77. Major U.S. Government foreign assistance by type and by area total period and fiscal years postwar [ Fiscal years billions of dollars ] Fiscal year Total net Total postwar I960 Total Investment in five international financial institutions Total postwar 1___ _ I960-1961 Western Europe ( excluding Greece and Turkey ) Near East ( including Greece and Turkey ) and South Asia Other Africa International orFar East American ganizaand Repub- tions and unspeciPacific lics fied areas Under assistance programs net Total postwar * I960 Net grants of military supplies and services Total postwar Other aid net Total postwar l I9601961 _ __ ! _ _ Net grants ( less conversions ) Total postwar l I960 Net credits ( including conversions ) Total postwar * I960 Other assistance ( through net accumulation of foreign currency claims ) Total postwar i_ ( J ) ( ) ( ) ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( } ? s ( ) ( ) ( ) ' Fiscal years Inter-American Development Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Development Association International Finance Corporation and International Monetary Fund Less than $ million Other assistance ( net ) represents the transfer of United States farm products in exchange for foreign currencies less the U.S. Government 's disbursements of the currencies as grants credit or for purchases Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B United States merchandise export and imports by economic category and [ Millions of dollars ] Category JanuarySeptember Domestic exports : Total * Agricultural NonagriculturaL Food and beverages Agricultural foodstuffs Nonagricultural foodstuffs Industrial supplies and materials Cotton tobacco and other agricultural Nonagricultural industrial materials Materials used in farmingCapital equipment Machinery and related items Commercial transportation equipment Special category equipment2 ._ Consumer goods nonfood Government military sales and unclassified General imports : Total Industrial supplies and materials Petroleum and products Newsprint and paper base stocks Materials associated with nondurable goods output Selected building materials ( excluding metals ) All other industrial supplies and materials ( associated mainly with durable goods output ) Food and beverages Materials used in farmingConsumer goods nonfoodCapital equipment ( including agricultural machinery ) All other and unclassified i Excludes military aid shipments of supplies and equipment under the Mutual Security Program ; in excludes military shipments under the Greek-Turkey and the China military aid programs Excludes Government military cash sales Total adjusted to exclude $ million of the value reported b y economic category Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-79. United States merchandise exports and imports by area and [ Millions of dollars ] January-October Area Exports ( Including reexports ) : Total i Canada Other Western HemisphereWestern Europe Other Europe Asia. Oceania Africa General imports : Total Canada _ Other Western HemisphereWestern Europe Otjher Europe Asia Oceania Africa U Excludes special category items Total adjusted to exclude $ million of the value reported by area Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E B Estimated gold reserves and dollar holdings of foreign countries and international organizations and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country September l Total '48,267 Continental Western Europe Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Sweden Norway Denmark and Finland ) Switzerland Other United Kingdom Canada Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Cuba Mexico Peru Uruguay Venezuela Other Asia Japan Other All other countries International _ Preliminary NOTE. Includes gold reserves and dollar holdings of all foreign countries ( with the exception of gold reserves of U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries and Communist China ) and of international organizations ( International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Monetary Fund United Nations and others ) Holdings of the Bank for International Settlements and the European Payments Union/European Fund and the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold are included under " other " Continental Western Europe Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E B-81. Price changes in international trade [ = ] Area or commodity class Third quarter Area : Developed areas : Exports Terms of trade Underdeveloped areas : Exports Terms of trade i Latin America : Exports Terms of trade * >85 >80 >82 Manufactured goods Nonferrous base metals.. Primary commodities : Total Excluding crude petroleum Foodstuffs Coffee tea cocoa Cereals Other agricultural commodities Fats oils oilseeds Textiles Wool Latin America excluding petroleum : Exports Terms of trade ! Commodity class : Minerals Metal ores Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Data are for second quarter Manufactured goods indexes are for exports. Primary commodities indexes are for exports and imports combined NOTE. Data shown for area groups and for manufactured goods are unit value indexes All others are price indexes Data exclude trade of Soviet area and Communist China Source : United Nations 3OO U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O ! N ] I ' : \ l '1 I i ! I ! l | | > ' i ! : " ' ' ' j ; ' i ^ ? i f i i ' ' s i ' i \ j ! ' ( ! ' ' ' in ' ' II " ; iij ! ! I1 'I : : ; ' ! i ! ' ! ! ' $ FRB of St. Louis Research Librai ! ! ' ! [ ' ' i ! tj | : ; I hi ii ' : M ' ' i J i ij j ' ji ' ! : I | M i l ! [ : r ! M " ' : : ' ' | ; | j- j ; r S i | ' ' ii I i i i Pi I : i ' ' : i ; ! ' i ! ' " : ; jj ! i i ! ! j < j i j ! \ j