ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Transmitted to the Congress February Together With THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Price $ CONTENTS ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Page A TIME FOR DECISIONS THE RECORD AND PROBLEMS OF PROSPERITY A Year of Readjustment at Home A Year of External Problems and Promise Seven Years of Expansion The Role of Policy The Problems of Prosperity FISCAL POLICY AND THE OUTLOOK FOR The The The The Current Economic Situation Current Fiscal Situation Role of Fiscal Restraint Economic Outlook with the Tax Increase PROBLEMS AND PROGRAMS IN OUR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS ECONOMIC The U.S. Balance-of-Payments Deficit Program for The Dollar and the International Monetary System Trade Aid to Developing Countries THE RETURN TO PRICE STABILITY Responsible Wage and Price Behavior Structural Price Problems Cabinet Committee on Price Stability CITIES AND HOUSING EXPANDING INDIVIDUAL OPPORTUNITY Employment and Training Unemployment Insurance Education Health Income Maintenance CONSUMER PROTECTION OTHER ECONOMIC POLICIES CONCLUSION m ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER SUSTAINING PROSPERITY : RECORD AND PROSPECTS CHAPTER T H E STRATEGY OF STABILIZATION POLICY CHAPTER T H E PROBLEM OF RISING PRICES CHAPTER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND Page INDIVIDUAL OPPOR- TUNITY CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page IV ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : Most Americans see the economy in terms of a particular job or farm or business. Yet the welfare of each of us depends significantly on the state of the economy as a whole It was never more necessary for all Americans to try to see the whole economy in perspective to realize its achievements to recognize its problems to understand what must be done to develop its full potential for good. For as a people we face some important choices A TIME FOR DECISIONS Seldom can any single choice make or break an economy as strong and healthy as ours. But the series of interrelated decisions we face will affect our economy and that of the whole free world for years to come We face these hard decisions with a confidence born of success. Our economy has never been stronger and more vigorous than during the 's Our achievements demonstrate that we can manage our economic affairs wisely that we can make sound choices If we now choose responsibly we can look forward at home to more years of healthy prosperity and of social and economic progress If we choose responsibly and our friends abroad cooperate responsibly we and they can look forward in confidence to the continuing smooth and rapid expansion of the mutually rewarding international exchange of goods and services But if we temporize try to avoid the hard choices before us we will soon discover that we have even more difficult choices to make. In six months or a year we could find our prices and interest rates rising far too fast. In a few months we and our friends abroad could face new uncertainty and turbulence in international financial affairs If we wait for the problems to become acute and obvious then everyone will be ready to act. By then the tasks could well be much harder In the coming weeks and months we must choose whether we will conduct our fiscal affairs sensibly ; or whether we will allow a clearly excessive budgetary deficit to go uncorrected by failing to raise taxes and thereby risk a feverish boom that could generate an unacceptable acceleration of price increases a possible financial crisis and perhaps ultimately a recession ; whether as businessmen and workers we will behave prudently in setting prices and wages ; or whether we will risk an intensified wage-price spiral that would threaten our trade surplus and the stability of our economy for years to come ; whether we will act firmly and wisely to control our balanceof-payments deficit ; or whether we will risk a breakdown in the financial system that has underpinned world prosperity a possible reversion toward economic isolationism and a spiraling slowdown in world economic expansion ; whether we will move constructively to deal with the urgent problems of our cities and compassionately to bring hope to our disadvantaged ; or whether we are willing to risk irreversible urban deterioration and social explosion I know that Americans can face up to the tasks before us that we can run our economic affairs responsibly. I am confident that we will take timely action to maintain the health and strength of our economy and our society in the months and years ahead THE RECORD AND PROBLEMS OF PROSPERITY The year was one of uncertainties and difficulties both in our external and our internal economic affairs. Yet there were reasons for confidence as well as concern both internationally and domestically A YEAR OF READJUSTMENT AT HOME For the domestic economy was a year of readjustment after the strains of Growth in the first half was at an annual rate of only a little over percent after correction for price increases. But vigorous growth resumed in the second half at a yearly rate of around ^ percent Last year had to be a year of readjustment because our economy began the year out of balance. Inventories were excessive housing was in a slump and business spending on new plant and equipment threatened to drop away from a level that seemed too high to be sustained Those imbalances no longer exist. That is why our economy is again advancing so strongly Because readjustments were necessary the gains of were not as great as were those of nor as those anticipated for Yet it was a year of important economic progress on most fronts During an additional % million persons found jobs ; our unemployment rate at percent matched that of and was lower than in any previous year since ; average earnings of factory workers rose by $ a week ; total employee compensation rose $ billion ; farm proprietors ' net income dipped but by yearend had returned to the level of a year earlier ; total consumer income after taxes climbed $ 35/ billion ; industrial production after dropping almost ^ percent recovered by December to a new all-time peak ; and the annual rate of housing starts rose a half million During prices also advanced more than we would have wished. Even so real purchasing power per capita available to consumers after taxes rose percent A YEAR OF EXTERNAL PROBLEMS AND PROMISE The U.S. balance-of-payments deficit a chronic problem since worsened in after several years of substantial improvement In important measure this deterioration reflected the fears and uncertainties surrounding the devaluation of the British pound in November The same uncertainties also fed a massive wave of private speculation against gold late in the year. This subsided only after the United States and other countries in the " gold pool " demonstrated their determination backed by the use of their monetary reserves not to allow a change in the price of gold In the absence of strong new action by the United States and by the surplus countries of Western Europe there was danger that the deterioration of the U.S. payments balance and speculation against gold and currencies might feed upon and reinforce one another in a way that could touch off an international financial crisis in Even if the dangers were remote the grave consequences of such a crisis for the world economy demanded bold and immediate preventive action. It was taken on January The substance of our measures plans and priorities is discussed later in this Report But saw progress as well as problems on the international front For it also brought the culmination of two giant forward steps in world international economic affairs both long in gestation : In June the Kennedy Round of negotiations produced agreement on the single most significant multilateral reduction in world trade barriers in history. It promises further to stimulate the expansion of international trade already a major source of postwar economic growth throughout the world In September the member nations of the IMF reached agreement on plans to create by deliberate cooperative action a new form of world reserves supplemeating gold and the dollar. Once this plan comes into full operation the vulnerability of the present system to speculation should gradually fade away and so should any threat of a possible future strangulation of the growth of world trade and production SEVEN YEARS OF EXPANSION If stood alone it would have to be judged a satisfactory year despite its problems But must not be seen in isolation rather as the seventh year of the longest and strongest economic expansion in our history. The opening months of were merely a brief pause in the broad sweep of economic advance Over these seven years our total real output of goods and services has increased more than percent ; per capita income after taxes and valued in dollars of constant purchasing power has risen percent ; million more people are at work ; more than million Americans have moved above the poverty line Over just the past four years 2J4 million more students are in college ; ^ million new homes have been built ; million new cars have been sold ; use of electricity has risen one-third ; million more families own stock million more have savings accounts and the assets of private pension funds have grown by $ billion ; and percent more Negroes have found professional technical and managerial jobs Had the path of real output in followed the bumpy path of the Nation 's total real output over the past seven years would have been $ billion lower ( valued in today 's prices ) than it actually was this cumulative difference is about equal in real terms to the Nation 's total output in the annual rate of output today ( valued in today 's prices ) would be $ billion lower than in fact it is this difference is equivalent to about $ a year per person now employed Truly the American people have enjoyed exceptional economic benefits over these seven years. But these striking benefits confer obligations Over this period million more families have achieved yearly incomes above $ They and the 6J/2 million who already enjoyed such incomes in have a special obligation to the more than million households still in poverty The seven-year increase of $ in real per capita income ( valued in today 's prices ) exceeds the current total average per capita income in nations with percent of the world 's population. This fact makes inescapable the obligation of the American people for helping to maintain security and for providing economic assistance to the developing world I believe that the American people whose present affluence would have been beyond the belief of most of us only years ago accept these obligations. My policies at home and abroad continue to be founded on a vision of the opportunities and obligations for the wealthy to help the poor to help themselves T H E ROLE OF POLICY It is far more than coincidence that during these seven years of achievement fiscal and monetary policy have been actively and consciously employed to promote prosperity No longer does Federal economic policy rely primarily on the " automatic stabilizers " built into our system or wait for a recession or serious inflation to occur before measures are taken Fiscal and monetary policies have not been perfectly executed nor perfectly coordinated in the past few years. But our policies have remained under continuous and coordinated review. And our actions have been consistently in the right direction if not always perfectly timed nor in precisely the right degree T H E PROBLEMS OF PROSPERITY Healthy prosperity has brought exceptional gains in production incomes and jobs But prosperity has not solved all of our economic problems and it has created some of its own. These are the priority problems facing us in First and foremost we must take the necessary steps to put our fiscal affairs in order. Unless we do we shall be unable to deal effectively with the other problems that confront us We must slow down the wage-price spiral. Although we can not achieve stability all at once we must make progress in toward our goal of reasonable price stability in a steadily growing high-employment economy We must push forward vigorously to restore equilibrium in our international accounts. We shall do so in full awareness of our responsibilities to promote and sustain a strong and expanding world economy. And we will enlist the cooperation of all other nations who share those responsibilities We must deal more effectively with our urban problems. More and more of our people live in cities. Yet cities threaten to become less and less livable unless we take decisive steps to correct : slum housing ; inadequate public services ; congestion noise and pollution ; inadequate transportation ; unplanned sprawl ; segregation discrimination and deficient job opportunities ; crime delinquency and alienation We must continue the struggle to expand the opportunities available to every citizen especially our disadvantaged. They require education training and adequate health care to prepare them for useful careers and freedom from discrimination in finding jobs and housing. Those unable to work need adequate income protection. The war on poverty must go forward FISCAL POLICY AND THE OUTLOOK FOR T H E CURRENT ECONOMIC SITUATION The month-to-month changes of our economic indicators were often puzzling in But when seen in perspective economic developments reveal a slowdown though not a decline in the first half as we predicted a year ago ; and a strong and sustained recovery in the second half as we predicted last January and again in August when I renewed my request for a tax increase In the second half of last year the annual rate of our gross national product advanced by $ 32l/i billion. In only one earlier half-year the second half of has it advanced by more The unemployment rate in December was percent. In only months of the last has it been lower Factory orders and shipments of durable goods were at an all-time high Personal income rose more than $ billion in November and December And disturbingly the rate of increase in industrial wholesale prices in the second half of has been exceeded in only other half-year periods in the past years Every prospect is for continued rapid increase of output in the months ahead. Most experienced observers agree that the pace now is and in the months ahead will be too fast for safety. The gain in gross national product in the current quarter is generally expected to be one of the largest in our history a record we could gladly do without at this time T H E CURRENT FISCAL SITUATION Following the major tax cuts of and equivalent to about $ billion in today 's economy the booming economy of and brought Federal revenues into balance with Federal spending. In both years there was a small Federal surplus on the comprehensive national income accounts basis The slowdown in economic growth that began in late dampened the growth of revenues. At the same time the cost of our commitment to freedom in Southeast Asia was steadily rising As a result the Federal sector account plunged into deficit $ ^ billion in calendar year Sharply rising Federal spending was a strong expansionary force in the economy between mid-1965 and mid-1967. While housing was still recovering from the after-effects of tight money and private demand was sluggish during thefirsthalf of last year the stimulus from Federal spending was welcome Federal spending has not been growing rapidly since mid-1967 nor will it increase rapidly in the next year and a half. But because of the already high level of defense outlays total Federal expenditures are too large to be piled on top of normal private demand without overheating our economy. It is because private demand has now returned to normal after its temporary weakness that we now need new measures of fiscal restraint Without the proposed income tax surcharge and the maintenance of current excise tax rates the Federal sector deficit on national income account would remain close to the level of Unless action is quickly taken to expand Federal revenues a deficit that large in combination with a resurgent private economy would have these consequences : It would speed up a wage-price spiral already turning far too rapidly It would seriously impair our already difficult international economic position by damaging confidence in the dollar and by stimulating imports and putting exports at a competitive disadvantage Financing such a deficit would increasingly strain financial markets pushing interest rates further above present record highs and threatening another financial squeeze and another slump in homebuilding T H E ROLE OF FISCAL RESTRAINT The extraordinary achievements of our economy during the past seven years were made possible by our willingness to use fiscal and monetary policies to stimulate adequate expansion of total demand Now however restraint is essential to our economic health. High interest rates and tight money can restrain the economy and will do so if fiscal policy fails to do it. But the cost of monetary restraint is high and unfair imposed primarily on a single industry homebuilding We must demonstrate that we can use fiscal policies flexibly that we can raise as well as lower taxes I therefore urgently renew my request that the Congress enact a temporary 10-percent surcharge on corporate and individual income taxes For corporations the surcharge would become effective January and continue through June For individuals the surcharge would become effective on April The 10-percent increase in withholding tax would continue through June Taxpayers in the lower income brackets would be exempted from any surcharge The legislation should as I recommended last year put all corporations on a fully current payments basis and extend tem- porarily the telephone and automobile excise taxes otherwise scheduled to drop on April These measures would increase tax revenues in fiscal year by $ billion and in fiscal year by $ billion If future circumstances should permit ending the surcharge before June it can be promptly repealed The surcharge of percent on individual income taxes would reduce individual incomes by about percent on the average. With the lowincome exemption the surcharge would add nothing to the taxes of a family of four with an income of $ It would increase the tax bill for a family of four making $ by about percent of income Effective Federal tax rates on individual income would still remain on the average about percent lower than in A tax increase in the form of a surcharge on present taxes has many advantages : it is simple requiring no additional administrative expense or inconvenience to the taxpayer ; it preserves the present progressiveness of the system as it applies to middle and upper incomes and the present division between corporate and personal taxes ; it is easy to identify and repeal when no longer needed T H E ECONOMIC OUTLOOK WITH THE TAX INCREASE The fiscal policies I am now proposing will accomplish a sharp reduction in the Federal deficit on national income account and erase it early in ; encourage balanced economic expansion to continue at a rate appropriate to our rising productive potential ; permit the unemployment rate to remain below percent for the third straight year ; allow credit to remain available without soaring interest rates to meet the needs of housing and other key areas ; promote a gradual slowing down of price increases ; in combination with the other measures we are taking encourage an expansion of our foreign trade surplus Even with the surcharge GNP should increase by some $ billion about % percent. With prices rising more than percent real output of goods and services in will be more than percent above Consumer purchases and homebuilding activity will rise strongly Expenditures to expand and modernize productive capacity will grow at the moderate pace consistent with business needs II While State and local governments will continue to increase spending at a fairly rapid rate Federal purchases will grow by less than half as much as in There will be further large gains in private incomes even after higher taxes and prices The economic outlook is thus favorable assuming fiscal restraint is forthcoming. Damage has already been done to interest rates to our trade surplus and to the level of prices by the failure of Congress to act last fall. But it is still not too late to avoid far more serious problems if action is taken in the next few weeks I again urge the Congress to act promptly on my tax proposals PROBLEMS AND PROGRAMS IN OUR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC AFFAIRS T H E U.S BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS DEFICIT On January I announced the main elements of our new balanceof-payments program for That program deals decisively with the threat to the dollar that developed in Nature of the Problem It is important to be clear about the nature of our balance-of-payments problem. The United States has a sizable surplus of exports of goods and services over imports. Our past overseas investments bring in excellent and growing earnings and our new overseas investments are running at a very high level. There is a small but growing reverse flow of foreign investment here We have heavy military expenditures overseas which are not fully offset by our allies ; and our aid program still accounts for a small outflow of dollars Our export sales our investment return and the inflow of investment from abroad are not large enough to finance our imports our new investments abroad and our net Government overseas expenditures The difference the deficit is financed partly by sales of gold and partly by increased foreign holdings of short-term dollar investments by foreign businesses banks individuals and governments The position of the United States in its international economic affairs is thus much like that of a wealthy and prosperous businessman whose liquidity has come under strain His commercial operations remain highly successful with the value of his sales well in excess of his costs His large long-term investments in other enterprises are yielding an excellent return and he sees an abundance of further opportunities for profitable investments that will bring large future returns Both his income and his net worth are growing strongly every year And he does not hesitate to spend freely on the good things of life while also making large gifts to worthy causes But he has been borrowing extensively at short term to help finance his long-term investments. Each year he adds more to his short-term debts than to his liquid assets. It is in this sense but only this that he has an annual deficit. It is a liquidity deficit. It is not a deficit in his profit and loss account nor an overspending of his income Some of his short-term creditors although not really doubting the strong excess of his assets over his liabilities are nevertheless getting a bit concerned about continuing to expand or even to renew their short-term credits Should some of them refuse to renew their loans his situation could become awkward. Other creditors might become nervous and would rush to present their claims. Financial pressures would extend to other smaller businessmen with whom he had strong commercial ties and whose basic positions were less sound That man like the United States needs to pull back for a while to strengthen his liquidity He will want to cut costs and increase sales in his commercial operations He will have to pass up for a while many of his attractive opportunities for profitable long-term investments He will need to review the terms of his spending and gifts to ease their impact on his cash position Most of all he wants no doubt to arise about his ability to meet his debts as they come due. He would easily survive a financial crisis with no major impairment of his income or net worth. But some other businessmen who bought from or sold to him could easily be dragged into bankruptcy Reducing the Deficit Since the United States has been making a determined effort to reduce its liquidity deficit. Through steady progress had been made In the deficit held even in spite of the rising overseas costs of Vietnam. But the deficit increased in particularly sharply in the fourth quarter reversing that progress. The instability generated by devaluation of the British pound was responsible for a significant part of the deterioration but not for all of it Overseas defense costs rose despite tight controls on spending The net balance of tourist expenditures shifted further against the United States Private U.S. capital outflows rose even though direct investment was held in check by the voluntary program ; and foreign capital inflows decreased Our trade balance failed to improve as much as we expected mainly because of the economic slowdown in Europe Some of the steps we might consider to reduce our payments abroad such as reverting to high tariffs or quotas would reverse long-term policies and by provoking retaliation reduce our receipts by as much as or more than our payments. And many of the other things we could do would seriously and irresponsibly harm our domestic economy friendly countries overseas or the flow of world trade PROGRAM FOR We have a clear duty to act. And we are taking action as constructively and responsibly as we can Domestic Economic Policies The avoidance of excessive demand in our economy is crucial to the strength of the dollar as well as to our domestic prosperity If we place too much pressure on our resources U.S. buyers will turn abroad for supplies and our imports will soar. And if our prices rise we will weaken our export competitiveness and attract even more imports not just immediately but for years to come That is why the first order of business in defense of the dollar is to pass the tax bill We must also exert every effort to avoid the possible destructive effects on our trade surplus of strikes or the threat of strikes in key industries I urge business and labor to cooperate with the Secretaries of Labor and Commerce in dealing with this danger to our export surplus Direct Balance-of-Payments Measures In addition to assuring the health of our economy at home we must act directly on the key international flows that contribute to our deficit Our direct balance-of-payments measures are designed to move us strongly toward equilibrium this year. Some measures are temporary and will be removed as soon as conditions permit. Others are designed for longer range needs. Several will require congressional action We have already put into effect a new mandatory program to restrain direct investment abroad which will reduce outflows by at least $ billion from a tighter Federal Reserve program to restrain foreign lending by U.S. banks and other financial institutions to achieve an inflow of at least $ million We have begun action to save $ million on Government expenditures overseas. Negotiations are already underway to minimize the foreign exchange costs of our essential security commitments abroad. Orders have already been issued to cut the number of civilian personnel abroad We are organizing major efforts to encourage foreign investment and travel in the United States I announced on January that the Secretary of the Treasury would explore with the Congress legislative measures to help us achieve our objective of reducing our travel deficit abroad by $ million this year Those explorations are proceeding In the meantime I again ask the American people to defer for the next two years all nonessential travel outside the Western Hemisphere I also announced on January that we were initiating discussions with our friends abroad on ways to minimize the disadvantages to our trade from various nontariff barriers and national tax systems abroad ; and that we were preparing legislation in this area whose scope and nature would depend on the outcome of these consultations The consultations have been in progress since January When they are completed I will announce their outcome and indicate what if any legislation we shall seek I am asking the Congress for the funds necessary to support long-term measures to stimulate exports by intensifying promotion of American goods overseas ; and expanding and strengthening the role of the Export-Import Bank Responsibilities of Surplus Countries As we fulfill our responsibilities other nations have an equal obligation to act. The balance-of-payments surpluses of our trading partners in continental Europe are essentially the mirror image of our deficit Their constructive adjustments as well as our own can contribute to remedying our mutual imbalance For them as for us action at home heads the list. The nations of continental Europe should use theirfiscaland monetary policies to pursue steady expansion of their domestic economies. Indeed if they were to tighten credit and budgets in order to protect their surpluses then we could not succeed in our efforts to come into equilibrium in a healthy world economy. Even worse a competitive slowdown in world economic expansion could ensue to the detriment of all peoples everywhere Surplus countries can also contribute to a smooth process of adjustment by reducing their barriers to trade by increasing their economic assistance to developing countries by expanding their capital markets to finance their own investment by permitting wider access to these capital markets by other nations and by meeting their full share of the foreignexchange costs of our collective defense effort The world tried competitive beggar-my-neighbor policies in the 's and they ended in chaos. The surplus countries have the obligation to assure that this does not happen again T H E DOLLAR AND THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM The interests of major nations are also linked together in the international monetary system. For us there is a special responsibility since the dollar is a world currency widely used by businesses abroad held along with gold as a reserve asset by foreign central banks Our deficits in the past decade have sent more dollars abroad than businesses there needed to acquire or than governments have wanted to hold as reserves. Many of these dollars were used to purchase gold from the United States Speculation generated by the strains on the international monetary system has caused further drains of gold from international reserves much of it from our own As a result U.S. gold reserves have declined to about $ billion. This is still ample to cope with foreseeable demands on our gold stock. But persistent large U.S. deficits would threaten the entire international monetary system Our commitment to maintain dollar convertibility into gold at $ an ounce is firm and clear. We will not be a party to raising its price. The dollar will continue to be kept as good as or better than gold Freeing Our Gold Reserves I am therefore asking the Congress to take prompt action to free our gold reserves so that they can unequivocally fulfill their true purpose to insure the international convertibility of the dollar into gold at $ per ounce The gold reserve requirement against Federal Reserve notes is not needed to tell us what prudent monetary policy should be that myth was destroyed long ago It is not needed to give value to the dollar that value derives from our productive economy The reserve requirement does make some foreigners question whether all of our gold is really available to guarantee our commitment to sell gold at the $ price. Removing the requirement will prove to them that we mean what we say I ask speedy action from the Congress because it will demonstrate to the world the determination of America to meet its international economic obligations Special Drawing Rights Through U.S. deficits the dollar has been the major element of the recent growth of international reserves As we move into balance the world can no longer look to the dollar for major future additions to reserves Neither can it depend on gold. Gold production has been leveling off in the face of rising industrial use and a steady drain into private hoards What is needed is a reserve asset universally acceptable as a supplement to gold and dollars that can be created in the amount needed to meet the desired expansion of world reserves The Special Drawing Rights plan agreed on in Rio de Janeiro last September provides such an asset. This plan will fundamentally strengthen and ultimately transform the international monetary system in the years ahead The agreement should be promptly ratified and swiftly activated on an adequate scale. I will call upon the Congress to approve U.S. participation TRADE The Kennedy Round was completed on June the most successful multilateral agreement on tariff reduction ever negotiated. Four years of hard negotiating were required but the ultimate success was worth it. A fair bargain was struck. Our farmers and businessmen will get major benefits as new markets are opened to them We will continue to work with our trading partners in the GATT and in other bodies to find new approaches to the liberalization of world trade with urgent consideration given to nontariff barriers Some would throw away the gains from three decades of liberal trade policy retreating into shortsighted protectionism. Mandatory quotas on American imports would meet prompt retaliation abroad All Americans would pay a high price for the benefit of a few Protectionism is no answer to our balance-of-payments problem. Its solution depends on expanding world trade The Government stands ready to help the few that may be hurt by rising imports but in ways that expand trade strengthen our economy and improve our international relations Accordingly I will shortly send to the Congress legislation which will provide an extension of unused tariff-reducing authority ; liberalize the criteria for adjustment assistance to firms and workers ; and eliminate the American selling price system of customs valuation During the year ahead opportunities may develop to expand peaceful trade with the countries of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. I again urge the Congress to provide the necessary authority for us to pursue such opportunities should they develop The United States has been discussing with other industrial countries a system of temporary generalized tariff preferences by all developed countries for all developing countries. Agreement was reached in the OECD on the general principles of such a system. It will be presented to the developing countries at the UNCTAD meeting in New Delhi We shall continue to consult with Members of Congress and representatives of American industry agriculture and labor as these discussions proceed AID TO DEVELOPING COUNTRIES If economic progress were now to slow down in the developing countries that make up two-thirds of the free world in the arc of Asia from Turkey to Korea in Latin America and in Africa our hopes for a peaceful world would be menaced. In this means that we should approve a prudent AID program ; quickly agree with other donor countries on a substantially increased replenishment of funds for the International Development Association ; extend the Food for Freedom Act ; authorize the United States to share with other donors in establishing the Special Funds of the Asian Development Bank Several less-developed countries have made great strides in the promotion of family planning. We must be prepared to assist their efforts if the grim race between food supplies and population is to be won decisively We can do these things as in conscience we must without detriment to our international payments. AID has already made great progress in reducing the impact of its program on the U.S. balance of payments. In that impact would be reduced by another $ million so that less than percent of AID 's dollar expenditures will be for nonU.S. goods and services l8 THE RETURN TO PRICE STABILITY Neither the United States nor any other free industrial nation has yet learned how to couple steady growth at high employment with reasonable stability of prices Our price record since has been superior to that of any other major industrial country. Even since mid-1965 we have done better than in past periods of hostilities when direct controls were used But our recent record has clearly not been good enough. For one reason firm discipline with respect to U.S. costs and prices is essential to a strong balance-of-payments position Rising prices are not just a last-year problem or a this- and next-year problem. They are a persistent long-term problem for a high-employment economy one that will not fade away by itself We must do what we can to minimize price increases in But we must also settle in for a long hard fight aimed toward and One source of inflationary pressure is a rate of economic expansion that strains available productive resources. Too much demand will lift prices and wages all across the line Thus the readiness to apply fiscal and monetary restraint when demand threatens to become too strong must be the fundamental reliance in our battle to restore and then maintain stable prices RESPONSIBLE WAGE AND PRICE BEHAVIOR But inflationary pressures also arise when labor and business each seek to expand their claims against the national product through excessive wage settlements or unnecessary price hikes at a faster rate than real national product is growing If labor seeks percent of the total national pie and business percent the only result can be rising prices. This inflates the pie but does not increase its substance Whatever the initial source which starts prices rising the rise tends to perpetuate itself. Higher prices enlarge labor 's wage demands. Faster wage increases raise costs which makes prices rise some more. Once a wage-price spiral has begun it is exceedingly difficult to slow it down In each of the last two years our price level has risen by about percent and in the last six months by about percent. With a somewhat stronger economy in and with labor unions building the expectation of further price rises into their wage demands there is danger the spiral will accelerate. If it does we face the prospect that the spiral will still be turning steadily in and into The longer it turns the harder it is to stop A highly restrictive fiscal and monetary policy could throttle the economy and create widespread unemployment and idle capacity in order to dampen upward pressures on wages and prices. But it would serve the objective of price stability only by sacrificing most of our other key economic objectives Dealing with inflation by creating a recession or persistent slack is succumbing to the disease not curing it. The experience of and when the unemployment rate reached 7/2 percent and consumer prices still rose percent is a clear reminder of the large costs of such a policy and of its limited effectiveness in halting a spiral in motion. This is a course which I reject and which I am confident that the American people reject Therefore in addition to urging prompt action by the Congress on my tax proposals I must again urge in the strongest terms I know that unions and business firms exercise the most rigorous restraint in their wage and price determinations in We must make a decisive turn back toward price stability this year This will only be possible if the average gain in wages and fringe benefits incorporated in new labor agreements this year begins to move back toward parity with our gains in productivity ; and if businesses absorb cost increases wherever possible and avoid any price decision which would on the average increase their margins over labor and materials cost STRUCTURAL PRICE PROBLEMS There are other sources of price increase we can begin to attack in We should not expect quick results. But over the longer pull an important contribution can be made There arc a number of industries in which prices have climbed persistently because of supply bottlenecks in labor materials or capacity ; because of backward technology ; because of inefficient distribution systems or trade practices ; or for other so-called " structural " reasons If we regard the battle against rising prices as a long-term task it is time to begin to fight on every front where long-term results can be achieved Existing Government organization is not effectively suited to dealing with the full range and dimensions of the problem of prices CABINET COMMITTEE ON PRICE STABILITY I am therefore establishing a Cabinet Committee on Price Stability including the heads of the major relevant departments and offices of Government coordinated by the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and served by a small professional staff The Committee will focus the attention both of the private economy and of the Federal Government on the objective of price stability It will study and recommend both for private and for public action measures which can improve efficiency remove bottlenecks and improve technology in industries which are the source of persistent inflation. And it will give price stability a high priority in the formulation and administration of all Government programs The Committee will work closely with representatives of business labor and the public to seek ideas and initiatives to correct persistent structural problems that cause prices to rise and to inform them of the consequences of irresponsible wage and price behavior. It will not however become involved in specific current wage or price matters Through this new machinery we seek to achieve a new and more effective cooperation among business labor and government in the pursuit of price stability in a free market economy CITIES AND HOUSING The American city is in distress plagued by poverty unemployment and slums ; hobbled by inadequate public services inefficient transportation pollution and congestion The city is also the source of an unprecedented affluence. Bitter poverty amidst spreading affluence spotlights the problems of the disadvantaged Yet that very affluence should be the source of great hope. For general affluence makes it possible to erase pockets of deprivation. We now have the means for a massive reconstruction of urban America The first step in an effective attack on urban problems came last year when cities received the first round of Model Cities planning grants By the end of this year many of these cities will be ready to begin work This first round will ultimately permit the transformation of blighted areas housing million people into decent places to live and work I will ask the Congress to fund fully the $ billion authorization for the Model Cities program in fiscal year Our next step will be to fulfill the commitment of the Housing Act of to provide every American family with decent housing. Our goal is to eliminate substandard housing in ten years. This task will require the full cooperation of labor business local government and the residents of blighted areas Too long we have regarded the unemployed slum dweller as a national burden. The time has come to recognize him as a national resource and to offer him a job rebuilding the slums in which he lives Our target for fiscal year is to begin new and rehabilitated units several times the current rate. Rent supplement and " turnkey " public housing programs will be modified and enlarged to engage private enterprise on a massive scale The expansion of federally assisted housing must not shrink the private housing market. During the next ten years we will need million housing units in addition to those receiving Federal assistance Their production will balloon the need for mortgage money. I will therefore propose legislation to strengthen the mortgage market and the financial institutions that supply mortgage credit. I also propose that current interest rate ceilings on FHA and VA mortgages be lifted to allow them to compete on equal terms with other assets I also urge the Congress to complete action on legislation to strengthen regulation of savings and loan holding companies to provide Federal charters for mutual savings institutions If we are- to reconstruct the American city we need knowledge and innovation as much as men and money. We lead the world in technology. Yet little of its power is directed to the problems of cities As afirststep I have named a panel to establish an Institute for Urban Development. This Institute will undertake the systematic analysis of fundamental urban problems for Government agencies The agonies of our cities will not yield easily or quickly nor to simple solutions. Yet the breadth of our vision must be scaled to the magnitude of our problem and our opportunity In the coming weeks I shall send the Congress a message containing my detailed recommendations EXPANDING INDIVIDUAL OPPORTUNITY America has historically taken pride in being the " land of opportunity. " To a far greater extent than any earlier civilization American society has provided opportunities for the majority of its citizens to achieve whatever their ambitions and abilities might permit Yet for a minority steadily diminishing in every generation opportunity has remained a myth The recent experience of prolonged prosperity and high employment has pried open the doors of opportunity for many who formerly were shut off from the main circle of abundance. Indeed sustained prosperity is the single most important source of expanding opportunity But even prolonged and general prosperity leaves too many Americans untouched unable to share in its rewards Despite our prosperity there are still more than million families whom we classify as poor. They include about one-seventh of our people Many are Negro. But two-thirds are white. Many are old. But nearly half are children. Many live in urban areas. But about half live in small towns or in rural areas. Most were born poor Regardless of race age or where they live they are not statistics they are people. We can not turn our backs on our fellow Americans who need help I regard it as a primary purpose of government to expand the opportunities for all citizens to share in our economic and social progress. For most this means the opportunity for rewarding employment. For millions who are retired disabled or otherwise unable to seek active work a share in prosperity requires wise and humane programs of income maintenance and social insurance. For all it means full access to education and to health care America has made great progress in recent years in the creation of jobs the provision of adequate incomes and the improvement of health and education. The future holds promise of further advance EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING More Americans entered the labor force last year than in any year since World War II. And these job seekers were accommodated to a remarkable degree The over-all unemployment rate averaged percent as it did in Except for the years of World War II and the Korean war this two-year average was the best in four decades The unemployment rate for adult men both white and Negro was the lowest since World War II Yet there is no room for complacency in these achievements. The unemployment rate for Negroes Mexican-Americans and other minorities remains distressingly high and far too many of our teenagers look for work and fail to find it We have already made impressive progress in improving job opportunities through the Neighborhood Youth Corps the Job Corps our other manpower training and retraining programs provision of daycare facilities for working mothers and in many other ways Increasingly our efforts are concentrated on the disadvantaged who have been unable to share in our prosperity. In continuing partnership with State and local governments we will expand our training and related manpower activities with special emphasis on an enlarged Concentrated Employment program But this year the Federal Government is also seeking a new partnership with private industry to train and hire the disadvantaged. I believe this partnership can succeed and must in providing work opportunities for every American who wants a job and who will make reasonable efforts to prepare himself to hold it UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE Even when there are enough jobs to go around and manpower is better matched to jobs some will inevitably experience unemployment in our dynamic economy Our present unemployment compensation system was designed in the 's. The economy has greatly changed since then but the unemployment compensation system has not In many cases the man or woman unemployed today lost his job because his skills have become obsolete not because his employer lost his market. That worker needs long-term benefits which can support him through a substantial period of retraining guidance and similar services not merely cash benefits which run out at a critical moment Further the benefits provided under many State systems have proved inadequate to current needs I am therefore asking the Congress for new legislation to strengthen the Federal-State unemployment insurance system by increasing coverage raising benefits modifying eligibility conditions increasing the Federal unemployment tax base and rate providing federally financed extended benefits to be triggered by high unemployment ; and to link extended benefits to the training and employment rehabilitation of the recipients EDUCATION The Federal Government has done more to improve educational opportunities in the past three years than in all its previous history. In particular attention has been focused on providing opportunities for children to throw off their legacy of poverty. Head Start the Elementary and Secondary Education Act and higher education legislation stand as landmarks of our progress One key program for based on the Education Professions Development Act of last year gives special emphasis to the single most important element in the educational process our teachers. We must attract more teachers to work with disadvantaged youth and help such teachers develop the new skills and new sensitivities needed to teach the children from poor families I shall propose an Educational Opportunity Act continuing our efforts to break down the financial barriers which keep young people from poor families from entering or remaining in college HEALTH Victories in the progress of health care have recently been written in headlines. Soon a failing heart may no longer be an inevitable prelude to death. Less dramatic but equally important is that Medicare and Medicaid have brought the gains of medical research within the reach of millions But this is no time to pause. Our rising standards and our expanding powers to cure press against present limitations on our ability to supply medical care Much recent effort has centered on the health needs of our older citizens. This was right for the elderly often combine high medical need with limited financial resources Now we must turn attention to our children. Millions of young Americans today receive inadequate medical attention both a result and a cause of poverty. I therefore propose a five-year plan to bring complete health services to children of low-income families beginning with prenatal care for mothers and continuing through the first year of infancy The supply of qualified health personnel has lagged behind the expanding demand. I will shortly propose new measures to increase this supply Last year medical care prices rose percent more than twice as fast as other prices. I shall propose new measures to slow down the spiraling cost of health care INCOME MAINTENANCE I have recently appointed a Presidential Commission on Income Maintenance. This distinguished group of citizens under the chairmanship of Mr. Ben Heineman has a broad charter to examine every aspect of our present public welfare and income maintenance programs and to propose necessary reforms. The Commission will examine a number of major reforms proposed in recent years including several varieties of minimum income guarantees. It will evaluate the costs and benefits of these proposals in terms of their effects both on the recipients and on the economy CONSUMER PROTECTION The true test of the efficiency of any economic system is its ability to meet the needs of consumers. The American economy with its free markets has far surpassed alltrthers in meeting this test But the market does not always give the consumer the protection he needs. There is a role too for Government action especially as our wants and our products become more complex Last year the Congress enacted and I approved important new legislation to protect our consumers Important new measures are being proposed to the Congress for the protection of consumers. I hope that this Congress will go down in history as the consumer-conscious Congress OTHER ECONOMIC POLICIES The Department of Transportation now one year old is moving vigorously toward rationalization and coordination of our transportation policies. I have asked its Secretary to develop new proposals to improve air safety and air service The number of air passengers has doubled in the past five years and will more than double again in the next ten. Airway and airport facilities must keep up with this growth. These facilities are costly and benefit primarily their users who should pay the necessary costs Total holdings of our stockpile of strategic and critical materials now stand at $ billion of which $ billion exceeds our stockpile requirements as presently determined. Continuing to carry these excess materials in the stockpile both imposes an unnecessary burden on our taxpayers and restricts their availability to our industries I renew my recommendation that I be given authority to dispose of many of these excesses especially of nickel platinum beryl ore magnesium and castor oil all currently in short supply in the commercial market Accurate comprehensive and timely statistics are essential to the development of sound economic policies by government business and labor Our economic statistics are the best and most comprehensive in the world. But they can be and need to be further improved. The costs will be exceedingly small relative to the benefits To this end my budget provides for several new statistical efforts which can be rapidly and inexpensively translated into improved guides for public and private decisions CONCLUSION A strong and sustained advance of production surely does not mean we have solved all economic problems much less that the Nation is making satisfactory progress toward its broader and more fundamental goals Americans know how to create an expanding abundance. But we are still learning how to use it wisely and compassionately to further the self-development and happiness of men women and children Similarly merely to achieve a balance in our international payments would not assure that our international economic relations amply serve the interests of this Nation and of world progress. We could bring our balance of payments into equilibrium by means which would weaken our domestic economy forfeit our foreign policy objectives or impair the vitality of world economic development This Administration will never forget that the purpose of our economy and of our economic policies is to serve the American people not the reverse Yet this recognition would not justify policies which ignore the dangers of inflation economic distortions and ultimately recession. For these are equally enemies of our public purposes Nor will we forget that balance-of-payments policies should serve the Nation 's basic goals abroad and at home not the reverse Yet this recognition makes it no less necessary to deal firmly and decisively with our balance-of-payments problem. For a breakdown of the international financial system would bring incalculable harm not only to ourselves and free peoples around the world but even to world peace and progress I am determined that our economic policies in will be prudent as well as creative ; safe as well as ambitious ; responsible as well as compassionate The American people are giving their sons and brothers to fight for freedom abroad. At home we must support their sacrifice by preserving a sound economy. I believe that the American people will accept the cost of doing that by paying an extra cent of each dollar of income in taxes by accepting the cutback of lower-priority Federal programs and by limiting the expansion of Federal spending to a few areas of the most vital priority Today the war in Vietnam is costing us percent of our total production. That is a burden a wealthy people can bear. It represents less than one year 's growth in our total output But one day peace will return. If we plan wisely as the committee on post-Vietnam adjustment I announced in my Economic Report last year has been doing and act boldly we will have that percent of output to add over a year or two to our normal percent a year of economic growth If we preserve a healthy economy in the meantime we will be prepared when our sons and brothers return to take full advantage of that bonus Our obligation to them demands that we do no less ( LjJ&L February THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington B.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report February in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully GARDNER ACKLEY Chairman JAMES S DUESENBERRY ARTHUR M. OKUN CONTENTS Page CHAPTER SUSTAINING PROSPERITY : RECORD AND PROSPECTS. Economic Activity in Income and Employment Production Pattern Within the Year The Composition of Output Investment Sectors Government Personal Saving Balance of Saving and Investment Resource Use in Prospects and Policies for Federal Fiscal Program Economic Outlook Outlook by Sectors CHAPTER T H E STRATEGY OF STABILIZATION POLICY Seven Years of Economic Expansion Measures of Gains Realization of Potential Fiscal Policy in the 's The Heritage of Current Fiscal Policy Budgetary Actions Challenges of Prosperity Monetary Developments Balanced Expansion Monetary Policy in Present Tasks of Policy Inflationary Pressures With No Restraint The Impact of Monetary Restraint The Program of Fiscal Restraint Agenda for Policymaking Flexibility and Forecasting Planning for Peace Impovements in Economic Statistics Reducing the Vulnerability of the Mortgage Market Page CHAPTER THE PROBLEM OF RISING PRICES Price Stability and High Employment Inflationary Bias in a Prosperous Economy The Goal of Price Stability The Recent Record Price Changes Since Developments in Labor Supply and Demand Prices of Consumer Services Prices of Industrial Products Farm and Food Prices Retail Prices Construction Price and Wage Policy Direct Controls Fiscal and Monetary Measures Improving Market Efficiency Incomes Policies Wage-Price Policy for ^ Ill CHAPTER ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INDIVIDUAL OPPORTUNITY The Changing Structure of Opportunities Changes in the Farm Economy The Growth of Nonfarm Jobs Recent Changes in Population Distribution Implications for Public Policy Population Distribution and Public Policy Clarifying Some Issues The Demography of Poverty Poverty Among the Aged Families Headed by Women Households With a Male Earner Income Maintenance Housing Changes in Housing Quality The Need for Further Federal Assistance Education Education and Economic Opportunity Education Programs Health Economic Status and Health Care Measures to Improve Health Care The Comprehensive Approach to Community Redevelopment CHAPTER THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY A Year of Major Developments Adjustment Process Mutual Responsibilities Principles of Adjustment The U.S. Balance of Payments The Recent Record The Program Prospects for Long-Term Prospects The International Monetary System The Gold-Exchange Standard Gold Reserves Dollars as Reserves Meeting Reserve Needs The Rio Agreement Trade Policies Kennedy Round Trade With Less-Developed Countries Conclusion Page APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Changes in Gross National Product and Federal Sector of the National Income and Product Accounts Since Second Quarter Disposition of Disposable Personal Income in Selected Periods Gross Saving and Investment in Selected Years of Relatively High Employment Employment and Unemployment by Demographic and Occupational Groups Selected Years Measures of Economic Activity During the Current Expansion Page Federal Fiscal Actions in Two Periods Since Fourth Quarter Net Inflow of Household Time and Savings Deposits to Main Financial Institutions Net Funds Raised by Nonfinancial Sectors Change in Income Tax Liability for a Married Couple With Two Dependents Price Increases During Periods of High Employment Consumer Price Increases in Major OECD Countries Since January and June Major Price Trends During Selected Periods Since December ; Wage and Benefit Changes in Collective Bargaining Situations Changes in Average Gross Hourly Earnings by Industry Changes in Compensation Productivity Unit Labor Cost and Output Price in the Private Economy Since Changes in Consumer Prices for Services Changes in Medical Care Components of Consumer Prices for Services Changes in Selected Economic Indicators by Industry Division ' Number of Farms and Farm Income by Value-of-Sales Classes and Components of Population Change by Area Number of Poor Households and Incidence of Poverty and The Poor and Their Work Experience Occupied Housing Units by Quality and Percentage of Males Years Old Who Completed High School a Routine Medical Checkups and Number of Physician Visits for Children by Selected Age Groups United States Balance of Payments United States Balance of Payments : Capital Transactions Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing For Selected Industralized Countries Since Growth of Exports of Less-Developed Countries in Two Selected Periods Charts Page Total Gross National Product and Final Sales Selected Shares of Gross National Product Real Gross National Product After the Recession Troughs of and Gross National Product Actual and Potential and Unemployment Rate Selected Interest Rates Changes in Money Supply Time Deposits and Selected Bank Assets Gross Investment and Saving of Nonfinancial Corporations.. Consumer Prices Wholesale Prices Food Prices Prices and Unit Labor Costs Changing Farm Structure Average Annual Net Migration by Regions U.S. Balance of International Payments World Monetary Reserves Chapter Sustaining Prosperity : Record and Prospects T HE U.S. ECONOMY recorded further progress in Despite a pronounced inventory adjustment in the first half of the year expansion continued through an unprecedented seventh consecutive year. The unemployment rate remained at its lowest level in more than a decade averaging percent for the second straight year. The value of the Nation 's total output of goods and services gross national product ( GNP ) rose $ billion to a level now estimated at $ billion ; after allowance for price changes GNP grew by / percent Expansionary fiscal and monetary policies worked to sustain expansion when private demand was sluggish in the first half of The rebound of the second half reflected the contribution of these forces. As opens fiscal policy remains highly stimulative and it is now overly expansionary in an economy again growing at a rapid pace. The ready availability of credit for housing and other high-priority needs is in jeopardy today after a rapid rise of interest rates in the second half of To avoid a return to severe credit stringency to promote price stability and to safeguard the balance of payments the President is asking Congress to make enactment of a tax surcharge the first order of business in The outlook for and its dependence on tax action is set forth in this Chapter. A more detailed discussion of fiscal and monetary policy past present and future is the subject of Chapter The unsatisfactory price performance of continued through ; consumer prices again rose nearly percent. The task of decelerating price and cost increases and of gradually restoring price stability while maintaining high employment is a key assignment for economic policy in as Chapter makes clear. Poverty in our cities has received increasing attention. Chapter discusses this and other pressing problems involved in assuring the opportunities of all Americans to obtain adequate health care housing and education. The balance of payments was a serious problem in especially in the closing months. The President has set forth a comprehensive new program to deal decisively with our payments deficit. The key international aspects of our economy are discussed in Chapter ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IN Employment expanded in and the real incomes of American families continued to grow. The purchasing power of the average American personal disposable income per capita corrected for price changes rose percent less than the percent annual rate of the period although well above the percent average yearly advance for the entire postwar period INCOME AND EMPLOYMENT Most of the income gains of households came from increased employment and higher wage rates. Incomes from social insurance benefits were also an important contributor ; they rose $ billion partly reflecting new and expanded programs of health insurance. Dividends interest and rental incomes advanced moderately. The income of farm proprietors however declined $ } billion from its record level of The civilian labor force registered an unusually large gain of nearly million from to and the growth of civilian jobs kept pace. The number of workers on nonfarm payrolls increased by million. Manufacturing employment rose only the smallest advance since But private nonfarm employment outside manufacturing increased about as rapidly as in and with a gain of million. Government employment predominantly State and local advanced The Armed Forces expanded by an additional Total compensation of employees increased $ billion or percent reflecting the combination of higher employment and increased wages and fringe benefits Corporate profits fared less well in For the year as a whole profits before tax are now estimated at $ billion down nearly $ billion from although well above any previous year. The dip in profits interrupted a sustained six-year advance which had provided a sharp contrast with the 's when profits did not increase significantly in any two consecutive years. Profits typically decline in a period of slow expansion partly because lagging productivity growth tends to raise unit labor costs. In early the erosion of profits was accentuated as sluggish output and sales followed a period of particularly rapid growth of capacity and other overhead elements PRODUCTION The growth of output in was not impressive by the standards of recent years. The yi -percent increase in real GNP total output after adjustment for price changes was the smallest since and far short of the 5j/2-percent yearly average of Growth rates differed widely among sectors. Industrial production rose only percent from to as manufacturing industries bore the brunt of the inventory adjustment and capital goods slowdown. Durable goods output was particularly affected. In the breakdown of real GNP by major product classes durable goods output rose less than one-half of percent for the year as a whole while output of nondurable goods rose 3/2 percent. The real volume of new structures actually declined from to Services registered the largest yearly gain an advance of 4l/2 percent in real terms PATTERN WITHIN THE YEAR The annual record for does not tell the whole story for there was a marked change of pace between the first and second halves of the year Inventory Adjustment in the First Half The performance of the economy during the first half of was dominated by a massive adjustment in the rate of inventory accumulation. In many respects the first half of resembled other periods of inventory adjustment. But this time the marked reduction in inventory investment did not cumulate into a decline in over-all economic activity An inventory adjustment is generated by excessive growth of stocks in relation to sales. In a smoothly expanding economy production and sales tend to move approximately in parallel with production exceeding final sales by about percent. This margin allows for the larger inventories of goods at all stages in the pipeline raw materials work-inprocess and finished products that are needed as production and sales advance. When producers are optimistic about sales they tend to step up their production. If actual demands fail to live up to expectations sales fall below production by an abnormally wide margin and inventories pile up Such a pattern evolved in Early in that year demand was advancing at an unusually rapid pace led by major increases in defense outlays an investment boom and rising consumer expenditures. Business expectations were buoyed up by the vigor of demand. Production expanded steadily. But as the year developed the optimistic expectations of producers were not completely fulfilled. Final sales slowed down in part because of monetary and fiscal policy actions designed to moderate the pace of advance. Residential construction fell sharply during the course of reflecting an extreme shortage of mortgage credit. In the closing months of the year the end of the plant and equipment boom and a sudden rise in consumer saving weakened over-all demand As production continued to increase the rate of inventory accumulation soared. In the fourth quarter of inventory investment reached a record $ billion ( annual rate ) The absolute level of stocks was not greatly excessive in relation to final sales but the rate of inventory investment had to be decreased sharply to limit further accumulation A sharp reduction in the rate of inventory investment tends to weaken final sales as well. When firms cut back production to curb the growth of inventories the workweek is shortened and some workers are laid off. The cutback of employment lowers household incomes thereby dampening consumer buying. Meanwhile declining operating rates in industry weaken incentives for business fixed investment. The process tends to feed on itself As a result of the initial effort to bring production into line with sales final demands slow further and inventories must be curtailed even more to restore balance between stocks and sales Inventory adjustment was a basic feature of the four postwar recessions : In each of those periods real GNP fell between lj/i and percent over a period of two to four quarters and the unemployment rate rose to percent or more. But the inventory adjustment of did not lead to a recession. Real GNP was virtually unchanged from the fourth quarter of to the first quarter of and then resumed its advance. The unemployment rate remained in a narrow range close to percent throughout the slowdown From the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of inventory investment fell $ billion to a near-zero rate. In absolute size ( although not as a percentage of total output ) this was the largest drop ever over a twoquarter period. Nevertheless GNP continued to advance although the pace slowed markedly as seen in Table TABLE Changes in gross national product and Federal sector of the national income and product accounts since second quarter [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Change Item II to 1V Gross national product IV to II to IV1 Personal consumption expenditures Business fixed investment Residential structures Net exports Government purchases of goods and services : Federal State and local.. Federal sector national income and product accounts : Change in business inventories Final sales Receipts Expenditures ! * Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers Surplus or deficit ( ) * Defense purchases. Other purchases Other expenditures. An unusually large increase in final sales provided the thrust for continued expansion. As shown in Chart the $ billion advance in final sales over the two quarters represented a marked acceleration from the pace of the preceding three quarters. In fact the gains in finaj sales in each of the first two quarters of had been exceeded only in the booming fourth quarter of and the first quarter of This acceleration in final sales was due mainly to the stimulus provided by rising Federal expenditures and expansionary monetary policy. As recorded in Table Federal defense purchases ( annual rate ) rose $ billion between the fourth quarter of and the second quarter of Meanwhile Federal transfer payments to persons principally for increased social insurance and health benefits rose $ ^ billion. While Federal outlays advanced rapidly receipts remained on a plateau partly because the slowdown of economic activity automatically held down the tax base. The Federal deficit which had been $ billion ( annual rate ) in the fourth quarter of rose to a postwar record of nearly $ billion in the second quarter of Federal receipts and expenditures and the accompanying surplus or deficit are cited throughout this Annual Report as they are recorded in the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts. These measures are closely comparable to the new concept of the " expenditure account " described in The Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year The strongly expansionary fiscal program supported the growth of personal incomes and hence of consumption. Although the saving rate remained high during the first two quarters of consumer outlays increased $ billion nearly matching the growth of disposable income The easing of monetary policy in the closing months of was clearly reflected in the recovery of residential construction in the first half of a major contrast with its previous rapid decline The monetary stimulus during this period came from a deliberately expansionary policy. The fiscal stimulus reflected primarily the continued rapid expansion of defense purchases and rising outlays from previously enacted social insurance legislation. But some discretionary fiscal steps to strengthen expansion were taken early restoration of the investment tax credit and a rescheduling of some Federal outlays that had been postponed in the fall of The balance between stocks and final sales improved during the first half of Inventory investment bottomed out by midyear with no significant liquidation of total stocks and with a continued advance in over-all economic activity While the avoidance of recession was a major favorable development it can not be read as an indication that the business cycle is dead. On the contrary the sharp inventory swing showed the continued vulnerability of the economy to cyclical forces. It was only because fiscal and monetary policy were operating in a stimulative direction that the expansion endured Chart Total Gross National Product and Final Sales BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * CHANGE FROM PREVIOUS QUARTER TOTAL GNP \ / F I N A L SALES BSSL, ' I IV I IV II I II III IV BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * LEVEL DURING QUARTER TOTAL GNP FINAL SALES CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES J I I J IV I I II SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I III J I IV I Rebound in the Second Half The slowdown ended in the spring. Thereafter the economy maintained a brisk pace for the remainder of The only marked departure from this course occurred during September and October when major work stoppages most notably the strike at the Ford Motor Company held activity back As sales kept rising and confidence returned inventory accumulation was gradually resumed. This turnaround accounted for most of the difference in the pace of activity between the first and second halves of the year. Homebuilding outlays continued to rise dramatically surpassing their level in the last quarter of Business fixed investment showed signs of an upturn. Final sales increased substantially but not as rapidly as in the first half. Federal purchases for defense advanced much more moderately and the growth of consumer spending slowed. The saving rate rose further in part because of the limited availability of new automobiles in the fourth quarter GNP rose $ % billion from the second to the fourth quarter. In real terms the advance was % percent ( annual rate ) The Ford strike held down the rise in GNP by an estimated $ billion and curtailed the annual rate of real growth by percentage point over this period As strikes were settled at Ford and elsewhere the economy ended the year on a strong note. Industrial production displayed an especially vigorous upsurge and finally surpassed its earlier peak of December According to preliminary data the new orders and shipments of durable goods manufacturers rose by percent,and percent respectively over the final two months of and exceeded the all-time monthly records set in Over the same two months personal income increased by $ billion and nonfarm payroll employment rose by To a large extent the extraordinary size of these gains represented post-strike recovery rather than underlying growth forces. Nevertheless the economy was advancing rapidly as began THE COMPOSITION OF OUTPUT Shifts in the pattern of demand among major sectors of the private economy in generally worked toward restoring the balance that had been upset in The years had been characterized by a remarkably balanced expansion among the various sectors : Inventories advanced in line with sales ; business fixed investment though rising rapidly in and was geared appropriately to the expansion of markets ; homebuilding rose to a high level which was maintained for an unusually long period ; net exports advanced strongly ; and consumer spending kept pace with rapidly growing incomes In however this orderly pattern was interrupted. In particular marked imbalances arose in the various areas of investment. Business capital spending continued to rise rapidly and began to add to capacity at a rate exceeding the long-term sustainable growth of demand. Inventory investment reached record levels and stocks outpaced sales. Residential construction declined sharply as the flow of mortgage credit dwindled. Net exports slipped badly as consumers and business turned to foreign sources for products which the domestic market could not supply INVESTMENT SECTORS The economy became better balanced as the composition of investment moved toward a more normal pattern ( Chart ) Business Fixed Investment Business fixed investment has averaged percent of GNP during the entire post-Korean period. The share rose from the beginning of to the end of ultimately reaching a peak of percent. The unusually sharp increase in plant and equipment expenditures was finally ended by the slowdown in over-all expansion the suspension of the investment tax credit in the fall of and monetary stringency. Business capital spending dipped a little for a time but it remained essentially on a high plateau in By yearend its share had fallen to percent of GNP Inventory Investment During the past years inventory investment has fluctuated markedly around an average level of percent of GNP. As noted earlier it accelerated sharply in to reach the unsustainable rate of percent of GNP at yearend. In the second quarter of inventory investment was negligible. It recovered thereafter reaching a rather normal percent of GNP in the fourth quarter Residential Construction During the period expenditures on residential construction activity averaged percent of GNP and private nonfarm housing starts averaged just under million units a year. As a result of monetary tightness homebuilding declined sharply during with housing starts falling to an annual rate of million units in December. Residential construction expenditures fell from percent of GNP in the first quarter to a low of percent in the fourth quarter The year witnessed a steady and spectacular recovery in residential construction reflecting renewed availability of mortgage financing and strong underlying demand. By the fourth quarter the share of homebuilding in GNP had increased to percent Chart Selected Shares of Gross National Product PERCENT OF G N P DOMESTIC INVESTMENT " * RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES .x.. * * CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES V A V s \ / J I _ | I I I I I I I I PERCENT OF G N P GOVERNMENT PURCHASES AND MET EXPORTS \ FEDERAL PURCHASES " .Xe...- " ^ ^ ^ ^ 'Jr * * STATE AND LOCAL PURCHASES NET EXPORTS _ I I I I I I I NOTE.-BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I I I I I I Net Exports Exports of goods and services exceeded imports by an average of percent of GNP during the period. Demands for imports rose sharply in and the share of net exports in GNP dropped to a low point of percent in the fourth quarter of During the first three quarters of net exports recovered somewhat and averaged percent of GNP. In the fourth quarter however a disturbing new decline in net exports was registered as sluggishness of demand abroad held U.S. export sales on a plateau while the economic rebound at home generated a renewed growth of imports GOVERNMENT Purchases of goods and services by State and local governments have risen steadily and rapidly during the post-Korean period supported in part by the strong expansion of Federal grants-in-aid. State and local purchases amounted to percent of GNP in advanced to percent in increased further to percent in and reached percent of GNP in the fourth quarter of The total growth of State and local purchases has been fairly steady. But employment has accelerated in recent years with increases of nearly workers in both and State and local payrolls absorbed about two-fifths of the growth in the total civilian labor force in these two years Federal purchases of goods and services have shown much more erratic movements reflecting marked shifts in defense requirements. As a share of GNP they reached a post-Korean low of percent in the second quarter of but have been rising since then because of the conflict in Vietnam Still by standards of earlier years Federal purchases as a share of GNP are currently not particularly high. In the fourth quarter of they amounted to percent of GNP not much different from the percent average share in and far below the percent share at the close of the Korean war PERSONAL SAVING Beginning in the fourth quarter of and persisting throughout individuals have been saving an especially large share of their after-tax incomes and thus have been spending a reduced share on consumer goods and services. At current income levels an increase of percentage point in the saving rate corresponds to a $ 5/2 billion reduction in consumer spending The ratio of personal saving to disposable personal income was percent in Table shows that this is unusually high by standards of recent years although not in comparison with In the analysis of current data it must be recognized that revisions in the national accounts have at times in the past markedly changed the initial estimates of the saving rate. But other statistical evidence also suggests that saving in was much higher than in previous years TABLE Disposition of disposable personal income in selected periods ( Percent ] Category Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Durable goods average Food and beverages. Other nondurables.- Services Autos and parts Other durables. Nondurable goods average Interest paid and transfer payments foreigners _ ._ Saving. i Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers A significant part of the rise in the saving rate in may be attributable to a decline in the proportion of disposable income spent on automobiles from an average of percent in to percent in The proportion in seems unusually high and the decline in may be partly the backwash of that earlier experience. Moreover it is quite normal in light of past performance for a decline in the share of income spent on autos to be associated with a rise in the saving rate A variety of other factors many of them short run in character may also have influenced saving. The recent increase in the saving rate may have been caused in part by the Medicare program introduced in mid-1966 This program contributed $ billion to disposable income in Some part of these benefits must have covered health care which otherwise would have drawn down personal saving Developments in financial markets may also have affected saving. During households bought large amounts of bonds ; as a result the growth in their holdings of liquid assets such as currency demand deposits and saving deposits was curtailed. During the course of however consumers rebuilt their liquidity at a rapid rate. To a degree this was accomplished by a shift in the composition of financial assets away from less liquid types of securities but in part the additional liquidity may have been accumulated through increased saving Some economists have also suggested that consumer saving is likely to be unusually high in the period immediately following an acceleration of prices They cite and as precedents While few of these factors would imply a permanently higher saving rate past evidence indicates that a reversion to a more normal rate is most likely to occur gradually rather than abruptly BALANCE OF SAVING AND INVESTMENT The shift in saving and investment demands in can also be viewed in terms of the balance of total investment and saving in the aggregate economy The difference between gross private investment and gross private saving is in principle always matched by the surplus or deficit of Federal State and local governments. In fact a statistical discrepancy generally creeps into the measurement of these flows and prevents complete realization of the definitional equality ( Table ) In despite its unbalanced composition gross private investment amounted to percent of GNP a quite typical share for a full employment year. It exceeded the total saving of individuals and corporations by a small margin. This small excess of private investment over private saving was essentially matched by the moderate surplus of State and local governments. Federal receipts meanwhile virtually equalled expenditures ; thus the Federal Government neither drew down nor added to total national saving TABLE Gross saving and investment in selected years of relatively high employment Percent of gross national product Source or use of saving Private sector : Gross investment Business fixed investment Residential structu res Change in business inventories Net foreign investment Gross saving Personal saving Gross business saving Excess of private saving or investment ( ) Government sector : Federal surplus or deficit ( ) State and local surplus or deficit ( ) Government surplus or deficit ( ) Statistical discrepancy <3 ) Preliminary Less than percent * Less than percent Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers ( ) For the year however gross private investment amounted to an unusually low percent of GNP. Inventory accumulation residential building and net foreign investment were all below their average shares of recent years. Meanwhile personal saving was unusually large as a share of GNP. While a drop in the share of gross business saving provided a partial offset total private saving as a share of GNP still rose in The resulting large excess of private saving over private investment implied a comparable major swing toward deficits in the Government sectors. The surplus of State and local governments vanished and the Federal sector recorded a deficit amounting to percent of GNP The expansionary fiscal position helped to offset the weakness of private demand and thus to maintain the economy at essentially full employment If fiscal and monetary policies had been less expansionary the sag in private demand would have lowered output employment and incomes ; saving and investment would then have come into balance at lower levels of economic activity As the experience demonstrates under conditions of unusual weakness in private demand a large Federal deficit at full employment can help to sustain total demand at an appropriate level. Table also contains the data for which was similar to in this respect. But under conditions of strong private demand a similarly expansionary budget would be inappropriate causing inflationary pressures and requiring monetary restraint to curb investment demand. Some of the major factors operating to produce the excess of private saving in were clearly temporary ; these included the inventory overhang at the beginning of the year and the lingering impact of tight money on residential construction. The relative weakness of private demand in the first half of gave way to growing strength in the latter part of the year and this is continuing into RESOURCE USE IN Although real GNP increased only / percent from to the average unemployment rate did not rise. The growth of the economy 's supply capabilities generally allows output to increase about percent per year with constant utilization rates. A growth of actual output much below that rate would normally be expected to be accompanied by a rise in the unemployment rate. But this did not occur last year Much of the production slowdown early in the year was reflected in a decline of average hours worked per man rather than in a reduction of employment. For as a whole average hours worked per man in private nonfarm employment were percent below the high level of Firms correctly viewed the slowdown as temporary and they were reluctant to release the skilled labor which had been so difficult to find in For the private economy man-hour productivity appears to have risen only percent in A decline in utilization rates normally holds down the growth of productivity. Moreover business firms were apparently still mak- ing up shortages of professional and managerial workers. For example employment of nonproduction workers in manufacturing grew percent in the first half of the year when output was falling Labor Force The unemployment rate for as a whole was held down by the shortened workweek and the slowdown in the rate of productivity growth even though the growth of the labor force exceeded normal demographic trends by a wide margin From the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of there was a moderate decline in the number of women in the labor force and the total civilian labor force grew only slightly. As the pace of economic expansion quickened in the second half an unusually large number of women entered the labor force and the expansion of adult female employment accounted for over percent of the increase in total civilian employment. This parallel movement of labor force participation and employment is the chief reason why the unemployment rate did not rise significantly in the first half nor decrease notably in the second half It should be noted that the unemployment data for are difficult to interpret and to compare with former years because of the introduction of an improved questionnaire in the monthly survey of employment There is some evidence that the new procedures may result in a measured unemployment rate slightly below that yielded by the old questionnaire. Thus it is possible that on a strictly comparable basis unemployment would have registered an increase of about percent of the labor force from to As shown in Table there were only small changes in the demographic and occupational patterns of unemployment rates in The unemployment rate of nonwhite men continued the steady decline that has taken place since although the rate is still more than twice that for white men The unemployment rate increased somewhat for adult females both white and nonwhite. It also rose further for nonwhite teenagers the only group that has not experienced a significant decline in unemployment since The burden of unemployment remains rather heavily concentrated among nonwhites who represent percent of the unemployed but only percent of the employed. Many of these workers suffer particularly from discrimination lack of education and inadequate skills and experience Much of the unemployment in other groups stems from short layoffs voluntary quits and particularly in the case of women and teenagers from frequent temporary movements into the labor force Many workers did have difficulty in finding jobs in but many employers were still having recruiting problems even though the labor market was less strained than in While there was room for an increase in the workweek at the end of the year labor markets were not generally characterized by excess supplies of labor TABLE Employment and unemployment by demographic and occupational groups selected years Percentage distribution of employment status Unemployment rate ( percent ) Group Total Employ- Unemployment ment Demographic groups : White Teenagers Adult males Adult females Nonwhite Teenagers Adult males Adult females Occupational groups : White collar workers Blue collar workers Service workers Farm workers Number unemployed in each group as percent of labor force for the group Distribution by occupational groups relates to experienced workers Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Capacity Utilization In contrast with employment of manpower plant and equipment utilization in manufacturing was markedly reduced in from the strained conditions of Average operating rates fell from more than percent in to percent in as manufacturing capacity grew by ^ percent while output barely increased for the year as a whole. The decline in utilization was limited to the first half of except in the case of the automobile industry where output was heavily affected by strikes. From June to December total manufacturing production increased at an annual rate of 8J/2 percent outpacing the growth of capacity ; at yearend operating rates were rising in most manufacturing sectors PROSPECTS AND POLICIES FOR At the end of the economy was in a strong position to move into its eighth year of uninterrupted expansion. As noted above the composition of demand is now fairly well balanced with that of supply Because some slack developed during real GNP can rise in by somewhat more than percent without straining resources. But a growth of demand much above that rate would tend to accelerate the increase of wages and prices. An excessive rate of growth of demand could also upset the balance among the sectors of the economy by generating a surge of business investment and ultimately placing renewed pressures on the capital goods industries. The financial conditions which would inevitably be associated with such developments would again severely depress homebuilding And a new wave of imports would impair the needed improvement in the U.S. balance of payments In the main objectives of fiscal and monetary policy are to sustain economic expansion to maintain reasonable balance between demand and resources in the economy as a whole and among its major sectors to promote a return toward over-all price stability and to support progress toward balance-of-payments equilibrium FEDERAL FISCAL PROGRAM Federal expenditures in are expected to rise by about $ billion considerably less than the $ billion increase of last year. Defense purchases including military pay increases are scheduled to rise only $ billion as compared with $ billion in The remaining increases in expenditures cover requirements under existing law and provide for high priority civilian programs. Nondefense purchases also including pay increases will rise $ billion. Medicaid manpower training and housing and community development programs will add to the total of grants-in-aid in A scheduled increase in social security benefits in March will add $ billion to transfer payments for the year This increase will be offset in large part by a $ billion rise in payroll taxes which became effective January Reflecting continued growth of Medicare health benefits and ongoing retirement pensions as well as the new social security programs total transfers to persons should rise $ billion Excluding the scheduled changes in social security benefits the remaining expected increase in Federal expenditures is approximately equal to the normal annual growth of Federal revenues at existing tax rates. Thus in the absence of tax rate increases the Federal deficit would change little from its estimated level of $ 12j/2 billion for It would remain overly expansionary in relation to the expected growth of private demand Accordingly the President has again asked Congress to enact a temporary 10-percent surcharge on personal and corporate income taxes effective April for individuals and January for corporations. The proposed surcharge will yield an estimated $ billion of additional revenues in The President is also recommending the retention of certain excise taxes now scheduled to expire in April in order to avoid a revenue loss of nearly $ billion in With the President 's tax program the Federal deficit will be reduced to an estimated $ billion for the calendar year. Thus the proposed tax changes will eliminate much of the expansionary thrust of the Federal budget as private demand continues to grow. The President 's tax proposals are discussed in detail in Chapter ECONOMIC OUTLOOK Assuming enactment of the President 's fiscal program early in the current legislative session GNP for is expected to approximate $ billion given the $ billion now estimated for This projection of course is intended to represent the midpoint of a range of possible outcomes rather than a precise estimate. After correction for an anticipated over-all price increase somewhat in excess of percent the midpoint estimate would imply an increase of somewhat more than percent in real GNP. With this output increase and an expected growth of % percent in the civilian labor force the unemployment rate for the year as a whole should be essentially unchanged from its current level Just as it was evident a year ago that had inherited a slow start from the conditions which prevailed at the end of it is equally clear now that has inherited a running start from the economic conditions of the closing months of Automobile production schedules for the beginning of are exceptionally large. The latest surveys of business plans for plant and equipment and the recent strength of new orders for machinery and equipment both point to an advance in business investment in the first half There is also evidence that a buildup of steel inventories has already begun in anticipation of labor negotiations. Most of the catchup in automobile production is expected to be concentrated in the first quarter and the steel stockpiling in the first half Although the rate of advance may be excessive in the early part of prompt enactment of the President 's tax proposals will insure moderate and appropriate expansion after midyear When the prospective pattern of economic activity is uneven forecasting involves special uncertainties. One year ago the Council foresaw an uneven pattern of activity for with an advance of $ billion in GNP for the year as a whole. The actual gain was $ billion smaller. Nevertheless the Council did project a slowdown in the first half followed by a marked rebound in the second. Developments during the year generally corresponded to this pattern The ability of economists to forecast is far from perfect but a projection carefully distilled from the available evidence is indispensable in the formulation of economic policy OUTLOOK BY SECTORS The over-all outlook can be better understood by examining the major expenditure categories Business Fixed Investment The recovery of business fixed investment which seems to have begun late in is likely to continue at a moderate rate throughout In the most recent Commerce-SEC investment survey the results of which are in substantial agreement with other yearend surveys business firms in utilities airlines and a few manufacturing sectors including nonelectrical machinery reported plans for considerable increases in investment in the first half of Responding to some improvement in operating rates and profits in the first part of the year other manufacturing industries currently planning little change in outlays for the first half of may be expected to raise their investment outlays later in the year. For the year as a whole the gain over is expected to be about $ or $ billion Business Inventories For as a whole inventory accumulation is estimated at only $ billion. Inventory accumulation in the first half of spurred by the rebuilding of automobile stocks and forward buying of steel inventories might run at twice the rate. The accumulation rate should be approximately normal in the second half of so that for the year as a whole the net addition to stocks is expected to total several billion dollars above that of Homebuilding Provided the tax increase is enacted early in the relief of pressures on financial markets should be sufficient to permit continued growth in residential building. Private nonfarm housing starts in are expected to exceed l * /2 million for the first time since a substantial increase over though still below the basic demand of our expanding population Expenditures on homebuilding and modernization of existing residences should rise through the year and for as a whole exceed outlays by $ to $ billion The events of have shown quite clearly that housing demand is strong enough to support a high and rising level of building even when mortgage interest rates are high provided funds are available at thrift institutions. Over the past to months the monetary authorities as explained in Chapter have been especially mindful of the need to provide financial support for building activity. If they are able to maintain this course residential building will continue to be an important stimulus to general economic expansion while providing the improved housing capacity needed in many areas of the country Government Purchases of goods and services by State and local governments should rise by $ or $ billion in Here too part of the expected growth is dependent on the existence of financial conditions that will permit State and local governments to carry out planned construction projects For the year as a whole Federal purchases are expected to rise by $ billion. The quarterly pattern of advance during the year is expected to be fairly smooth except that the third quarter rate will be enlarged by a Federal pay increase estimated at $ ^ billion ( annual rate ) The timing of this bulge should serve to offset some of the effect on aggregate demand of the reduction in inventory accumulation expected in the second half of the year Consumption An expected gain of about $ billion in disposable income consumer income after tax and surtax should promote a sizable advance in consumer spending. Recent increases in consumer liquidity should reinforce the gains in income. Expenditures on household durables should receive particular support from the continued high level of homebuilding. Another contributing element is the prospective catchup in automobile sales For the consumer sector is clearly an area of particular uncertainty in forecasting private demand. As noted above the saving rate has been unusually high for the past five quarters. And the latest evidence indicates that consumers are still spending cautiously. Nevertheless the weight of past evidence would suggest that following a period of abnormally high saving the most likely possibility is a gradual decline in the saving rate The saving rate implicit in the projection of an $ billion GNP is only slightly below the percent rate of The automobile catchup essentially accounts for the small projected decline. On this basis consumer spending is expected to rise about $ billion in With the prompt enactment of the President 's tax proposals the prospects outlined above suggest that while price increases will continue to be troublesome the U.S. economy should experience healthy and balanced economic growth in Chapter The Strategy of Stabilization Policy T HE EMPLOYMENT ACT of charged the Federal Government with the responsibility to promote " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " Active pursuit of these goals through the use of discretionary economic policy over the past seven years has led to new standards of economic performance. This chapter deals with some of the lessons of recent economic experience as they apply to the current and foreseeable problems facing the economy SEVEN YEARS OF ECONOMIC EXPANSION Since February the United States has experienced an unprecedented period of sustained economic expansion. This long uninterrupted advance represents a marked contrast with our historical pattern of ups and downs During the years from when the relevant economic records begin to I960 there were periods of expansion averaging 2J/2 years in length Each terminated with a relapse into recession or depression. The longest previous advance was the 80-month expansion that accompanied World War I I ; and the next longest was the anemic 50-month recovery from the Great Depression MEASURES OF GAINS The present prosperity has been outstanding in strength as well as in length ( Table ) Over nearly seven years of expansion gross national product ( GNP ) measured in constant prices increased percent an average of percent a year. The addition of $ billion ( in prices ) was greater than the entire real output of the Nation only years ago. All major expenditure components shared in the increase with the most marked advance occurring in business fixed investment Over the ^ 4-year period real disposable income per capita the after-tax spendable income of the average American corrected for price changes rose percent a greater gain than that of the preceding years. Civilian employment increased by million jobs. These employment gains outpaced the growth of the labor force and permitted unemployment rates to decline for all major groups of workers T A B L E Measures of economic activity during the current expansion Percentage change l Amount Series Unit or base Total Per year I IV .do -do _do_ .do. .do- Millions of persons do Percent do.. .do .do- = _do = do Production : Gross national productPersonal consumption expenditures Business fixed investment Residential structures Government purchases Federal State and local Industrial production- Billions of dollars prices .do = Income : Disposable personal income Billions of dollars prices Corporate profits aftertax _ _ Billions of dollars2 Per capita disposable personal income. Dollars prices Employment : Civilian employment Nonagricultural payroll employment. Unemployment rate : Total Males years and over. Teenagers Nonwhite-.- Prices : Gross national product deflator Personal consumption expenditures deflator Wholesale prices Consumer prices Preliminary Annual rates IV not available ; III used Percent of civilian labor force in each group unemployed Note. All data seasonally adjusted except wholesale and consumer prices Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers The price performance for much of the period was outstanding although the record of the past two years is blemished. For the period as a whole the over-all GNP price deflator rose percent a year the consumer price index increased at an average yearly rate of percent and wholesale prices rose at an annual rate of only percent. During the preceding seven years of slow growth and intermittent recession the annual rates of increase had been : percent for the GNP deflator percent for consumer prices and percent for wholesale prices The steady and sustained growth since early contrasts sharply with the record of the preceding seven years. Chart shows the path of real GNP in the current expansion in comparison with the cyclical path following the recession trough in If our real GNP in had plodded and bumped along as it did in the earlier period it would have reached $ billion at the end of ( in end-of-1967 prices ) In fact the actual per- Chart Real Gross National Product After the Recession Troughs of and RECESSION TROUGH = GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES I I I I J I I I I I I I I I I I I I MONTHS AFTER TROUGH NOTE.-BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED QUARTERLY DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS formance of the economy topped this by $ billion a difference larger than the current total of Federal purchases of goods and services REALIZATION OF POTENTIAL The large recent gains in output reflect the fact that over-all demand has caught up and kept up with the economy 's rising productive capacity. In the late 's and early 's the Nation was sacrificing the opportunity to consume and invest a substantial amount of the output it was capable of producing ( Chart ) Potentially productive men and machines were idle because of inadequate demand for their services. At the recession trough in the first quarter of actual GNP was $ billion ( prices ) below the estimated potential output of the economy at a 4-percent unemployment rate. This " gap " was gradually reduced and finally closed in the last half of Since then actual GNP has fluctuated in a relatively narrow range around its growing potential exceeding it somewhat in the boom of and falling a little short during 6o Chart Gross National Product Actual and Potential and Unemployment Rate BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * ( ratio scale ) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES POTENTIAL ! / / GP A ACTUAL I I PERCENT PERCENT [ ] GNP GAP AS PERCENT OF POTENTIAL ( Left scale ) UNEMPLOYMENT RATE ? / ( Right scale ) SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J/TREND LINE OF 3y2 % THROUGH MIDDLE OF TO IV VA FROM IV TO IV AND % FROM IV TO IV -2/UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE ; SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS 6i O The Nation 's potential output has grown by an estimated percent since early The rate of increase is currently about percent a year reflecting a 15/2-percent rise in available man-hours and a J/i-percent rate of increase in output per man-hour Available man-hours grow slightly less rapidly than the labor force. The recent normal growth trend of the labor force is about % percent a year This is rapid by previous standards and reflects the high birth rates of the immediate postwar years. Under steady employment conditions however longer vacations shorter workweeks and an increasing employment of parttime workers mostly women lead to a decline of about * percent in average hours worked per year. This holds the trend of growth in total man-hours to about 1Y2 percent a year As a result of a more skilled and better trained labor force improved management and technology and the enlarged quantity and higher quality of the capital stock the Nation experiences growing productivity as " measured by output per man-hour. In the postwar era the trend in the growth of productivity in the private economy has been somewhat over percent a year. However improvements in the efficiency of Government workers are not statistically measured and are arbitrarily taken at zero Therefore the trend rate of increase in output per man-hour for the total economy private and public is just over J/2 percent a year. The growth rate of potential output is therefore about percent a year currently. It exceeds the 5/2-percent rate estimated for the late 's and early 's primarily because the growth of the labor force has accelerated The vigorous advance of aggregate demand in recent years has assured that the economy 's great and growing productive potential has been generally realized in actual output and not squandered in idleness FISCAL POLICY IN THE 'S The improved and fuller use of our productive capabilities in the 's has been significantly influenced by fiscal and monetary policy. It is no accident that this most successful period of sustained growth in our economic history has coincided with a new and determined commitment to apply economic policies in active pursuit of the goals of the Employment Act The balanced expansion of was strongly supported by stimulative fiscal measures. Federal tax liabilities were lowered through depreciation reform the investment tax credit a sharp reduction in personal and corporate tax rates and the reduction or elimination of many Federal excise taxes. Increases in expenditures during the period provided for the introduction and expansion of high priority social programs and in for stepped-up defense needs As discussed in detail below monetary policy played a vital role during this period in insuring that the growing credit needs of the expanding economy were adequately met The rapid expansion of spending for the Vietnam conflict threw the economy off stride after mid-1965. But the economic strains inherent in the defense buildup were moderated by adjustments in policy. In particular monetary policy played a much more active role in and than in the preceding period A review of fiscal policy prior to the 's is helpful in understanding the more recent developments THE HERITAGE OF CURRENT FISCAL POLICY The conscious use of Federal tax and expenditure policy to help promote high employment and healthy growth dates back at least to the 's. Since World War II fiscal policy has contributed to the improved record of economic stability both through the greater importance of automatic stabilizers and the growing use of discretionary policies Automatic Stabilizers Several features of the postwar budgetary system have helped to increase economic stability passively and automatically. Because the Federal tax system relies heavily on personal and corporate income taxes tax liabilities increase or decrease along with economic activity. A decline in activity reduces incomes which in turn automatically results in reduced tax receipts even if tax rates are not changed. The fall in after-tax spendable incomes of individuals and corporations is thus cushioned by the amount of the decline in tax revenues. As a result secondary reductions in spending are smaller than they would otherwise have been and the ultimate decline in output and incomes is more limited. The same kind of stabilizing effect occurs to a degree in Federal expenditures because certain outlays especially unemployment benefits and welfare payments automatically increase in a period of contracting economic activity and thus support consumer spending When economic activity rises these same stabilizers work in the opposite direction. Every rise in income leads to higher tax collections which given the level of Federal expenditures restrict further increases in private spending. To the extent that the rise in private incomes reduces Federal outlays for unemployment benefits and welfare payments the dampening effect is further strengthened Automatic fiscal stabilizers are more important now than they were before World War II. Over much of the postwar period they have been the primary reliance of stabilization policy. To a large extent the increased strength of the stabilizers simply reflects the higher tax rates in the postwar period accompanying the greater importance of defense spending and the enlarged civilian responsibilities of the Federal Government The automatic stabilizers were also made more powerful as a result of structural changes such as the introduction of unemployment insurance and the greater reliance on progressive income taxes receipts from which fluctuate proportionately more in response to income changes than those from other taxes The frequency of recessions from to was not notably reduced from earlier times which is not surprising. Automatic stabilizers can not prevent a decline ; they merely help to limit one once it starts. But the automatic stabilizers have helped to make postwar recessions brief and relatively mild. The workings of the automatic stabilizers created substantial Federal deficits in each postwar recession which were accepted by each Administration as a beneficial stabilizing influence Discretionary Policies Discretionary fiscal actions were also used at times to stimulate the economy during recession periods and early stages of recovery. Certain tax rates were allowed to fall as scheduled at the start of in full recognition that this would further unbalance the Federal budget. Increases in Federal expenditures helped to insure and accelerate recovery in Although these actions were taken considerably after the onset of recession they played a constructive role in strengthening recovery In one major instance discretionary fiscal actions also were taken to curb inflationary pressures of excess demand. Three separate legislative actions to raise corporate and individual tax rates in helped to restrain a booming Korean defense economy. Civilian budgetary expenditures were also substantially trimmed. Although most support for these actions reflected the traditional view that more money was needed simply to " pay for the war " there were many both within and outside the Government who understood fully the role of fiscal policy in stabilizing the economy The discretionary actions that were taken during the decade of the 's seem in retrospect to have worked in the right direction. The cases in which fiscal policy seems to have gone astray involve errors of omission rather than commission A particularly instructive case was the reliance on automatic stabilizers during the upswing from to When the economy is in an inflationary surge restraint from the automatic stabilizers is a welcome force Under some circumstances however the expansion of tax revenues that accompanies economic growth can exert an undesirable restraint. As the period illustrated it can become a " fiscal drag " preventing the attainment or maintenance of high employment. Unless there is some combination of higher Federal expenditures and reduction in tax rates equivalent to the normal growth of revenues the Federal budget becomes increasingly restrictive over time The possibility of reductions in tax rates was widely advocated and seriously discussed early in but no action was taken. Although expenditures rose sharply during the course of that year they leveled off thereafter and showed no upward trend from the end of to mid-1960. Because Federal expenditures stood still and tax rates were unchanged the budget began to exert a significant fiscal drag. For a time private demand strengthened enough to keep the economy advancing. But as private demand lost its vigor the economy turned down in the spring of and the fourth postwar recession began BUDGETARY ACTIONS When the Kennedy Administration took office the recession had essentially run its course cushioned by the automatic stabilizers and by a prompt shift to a strongly expansive monetary policy. But the Nation 's output was far below its potential and the unemployment rate stood at percent close to a postwar record high The Federal sector was in deficit by $ * /2 billion ( annual rate ) in the fourth quarter of on the national income account basis ( which is the measure employed throughout this Report ) At the same time however tax receipts were being held down by the major shortfall of incomes below the economy 's potential. If in fact the economy had been operating at its potential there would have been a Federal surplus of an estimated $ billion. This hypothetical measure of the " full-employment surplus " is abstract and imprecise but it is a useful way of distinguishing between the passive operation of automatic stabilizers and discretionary shifts in the budget. If private demand weakens and the economy contracts thereby lowering tax revenues the actual Federal surplus will be substantially reduced ( or deficit increased ) even with no discretionary changes in expenditures or tax rates. But the full-employment surplus would not thereby be altered ; it would continue to reflect what expenditures and tax yields would be at potential output levels. On the other hand higher discretionary expenditures or a reduction in tax rates would be reflected in a lower fullemployment surplus as well as in an initial decline of the actual surplus The huge gap between actual and potential output early in was a clear signal that expansionary fiscal actions were needed. If the restraining impact of the large full-employment surplus continued the economy 's potential could be realized only through a compensating excess of private investment over private saving at potential output in an amount larger than percent of GNP. That would have required extraordinary buoyancy of private demand which did not appear to be present or forthcoming Expansionary Actions in Significant fiscal steps were taken in to stimulate the economy. A liberalization of social security benefits was accelerated and increases in public assistance were initiated. Advances in defense spending were required by growing international tensions and these accomplished a part of the stimulative job which might otherwise have been carried out by tax cuts or strengthened civilian programs. The full-employment surplus was brought down to $ billion by the end of Meanwhile the economy 's early re- covery from recession was strong and brisk narrowing the gap between actual and potential output by some $ billion ( prices ) from the first to the fourth quarter It was expected that this initial stimulus would touch off a strong and sustained rise in business spending. But after five years of experience with sluggish markets and excess capacity businessmen were not prepared to raise plant and equipment spending far in advance of the growth of demand The economy continued to advance but at a much slower pace ; progress toward full employment was interrupted early in The gap between actual and potential output remained between $ and $ billion ( prices ) and the unemployment rate hovered around ^ percent Two key tax measures were adopted in to stimulate investment : depreciation rules were liberalized and an investment tax credit of percent on machinery and equipment was enacted. These measures were designed for the long run and were not expected to yield large results immediately The tax actions were combined with moderate further increases in Federal expenditures. Even so the revenue growth of a normally expanding economy swung both the full-employment surplus and the actual deficit toward restraint in the second half of Tax Reduction in and Against this background President Kennedy announced in August of his intention to propose a major stimulative tax reduction along with important tax reforms. The proposal was subsequently spelled out in the January Budget program. This was an unprecedented step ; it initiated a major expansionary fiscal action at a time when the economy was neither in recession nor threatened by imminent recession the Federal sector was in deficit and Federal expenditures were continuing on an upward trend. The tax program was based on the diagnosis and forecast that a substantial further reduction in the Federal full-employment surplus was needed given the state of private demand to produce a sustained and balanced expansion of output up to the potential level The tax proposal was intensively debated in Congress but action on it was not completed in Meanwhile expenditures grew less rapidly than either the actual or potential advance of revenues and the budget became even more restrictive. The march toward full employment was resumed with the enactment in February of the Revenue Act of President Johnson 's first major legislative achievement. Individuals received an average cut of one-fifth in their tax liabilities in two stages covering and The reduction for corporations was about one-tenth ; combined with the earlier tax measures of corporate taxes were brought one-fifth below the level of When the cut in tax liabilities had become fully effective in it totaled $ billion. ( By the annual saving to taxpayers due to the tax reductions in the act had grown to more than $ billion. ) The effects of the tax reduction on private demand were clear and dramatic. An upsurge in consumer spending indicated that most of the extra take-home pay resulting from tax reduction was being spent in the Nation 's shops and markets. Responding to the vigor of consumer demand business investment spending forged ahead. In late and early the unemployment rate dropped below percent for an extended period for the first time in seven years. The estimated gap between actual and potential output was narrowed to $ billion ( prices ) in the first half of The gains in income produced a huge rebound in Federal receipts bringing the Federal sector into surplus in the first half of New stimulative policies were prepared in the spring of in order to complete the advance to full employment. In line with the President 's proposals Congress enacted a major phased reduction of excise taxes The first stage took effect in June cutting taxes by $ % billion ( annual rate ) A retroactive liberalization of social security benefits was enacted Summary The over-all operation of fiscal policy from the end of to the middle of is summarized in Table Expansionary fiscal actions over the period totaled $ billion $ 25j/i billion through expenditure increases and $ ^ billion through net tax reductions. A gross total of $ 155/2 billion of tax cuts was offset in part by social security tax increases of $ billion If tax rates had remained unchanged normal revenue growth ( calculated at full employment ) over the 4/ -year period would have amounted to TABLE Federal fiscal actions in two periods since fourth quarter [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] IV to II Item Federal expenditure increases II to IV Defense purchases Other purchases OASDHI3 benefits. All other Federal tax reductions 5_ Corporate Personal OASDHI payroll taxes Indirect business Total expansionary actions6 Normal revenue growth at full employment Change in full employment surplus Preliminary Includes adjustment in unemployment insurance benefits for change in unemployment Old-age survivors disability and hospital and related insurance ( OASDHI ) Consists of transfers other than OASDHI grants interest and subsidies Minus sign indicates an increase in tax Sum of expenditure increases and tax reductions Normal revenue growth minus expansionary actions Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers rate $ 30/ billion. Because expansionary actions exceeded this " fiscal dividend " the full-employment surplus was reduced by $ 7j4 billion. In contrast the actual balance shifted from a fractional deficit to a surplus of nearly $ billion reflecting the vigorous advance of private demand The precise movements of the budget during the period were not perfect in size or timing. But they clearly did the job of promoting orderly progress toward full employment without straining over-all productive capacity or creating serious bottlenecks CHALLENGES OF PROSPERITY As of mid-1965 there was every reason to believe that the record of orderly progress could be extended. The expansion was characterized by remarkable balance in all sectors and strong forward momentum. The fiscal program and monetary policy that ruled at the time seemed appropriate to the economy 's needs. The main future task of budgetary policy appeared to be that of distributing the fiscal dividend providing for expenditure increases and tax reductions that in combination approximately matched the economy 's normal revenue growth along a rising trend of full-employment GNP Nevertheless the fuller use of resources posed new problems of diagnosis and policy application. Previously the risks had been almost entirely on the side of insufficient demand ; and the primary task of policy had been to provide stimulus. As the unemployment rate fell toward percent the economy entered territory that had been uninhabited for nearly a decade There were now risks on both sides not only of inadequate but of excessive stimulus No one could know precisely how fully resources might be used without unleashing inflationary forces. In the Council had set an interim target of a 4-percent unemployment rate intending to review the possibility of adopting a more ambitious goal in light of the actual operation of the economy in the neighborhood of 4-percent unemployment In the period of slack excess supply and unused productive capabilities created buyers ' markets. In such circumstances the human costs of inadequate demand are very large while the risks of price inflation are likely to be small. As full utilization is attained the pressures toward higher prices increase as Chapter indicates. And if excess demand becomes widespread and sellers ' markets generally come to prevail a wage-price spiral and accelerating inflation can result. Finding acceptable and feasible ways to reconcile high employment with reasonable price stability thus becomes a major challenge to policy in a prosperous economy In the Nation stood ready to face this welcome challenge. However the task of stabilization was immensely complicated by the sharp increase in defense spending after mid-1965 Defense and the Budget A marked rise in defense spending inevitably creates problems for fiscal management especially when the economy is close to full employment. The additional defense requirements since mid-1965 have absorbed about onefourth of the Nation 's growth in real output. Thus the production available for private use has continued to rise. Yet the advance in defense spending has been sufficiently large to dominate the Federal Budget in this period. It accounts for the fact that we now face the need for tax increases rather than further opportunities for a welcome tax reduction From the middle of to the end of the increase in Federal expenditures was $ billion as shown in Table Some $ billion of this was for defense. Of the $ billion increase in OASDHI benefits about $ billion represented the landmark social decision to provide improved health care for the aged under social security and the balance represented normal growth in the ongoing programs. The $ billion increase in OASDHI benefits was more than covered by increased payroll taxes. Other nondefense expenditures increased by $ billion. Over the same period normal growth of Federal revenues at full employment at constant tax rates amounted to about $ billion. In addition there were net tax rate increases which added about $ billion to revenues All in all with the large rise in defense outlays and the high priorities for certain public civilian programs the $ billion increase in expenditures far outpaced the normal expansion of revenues plus the effect of tax rate increases. As a result the Federal budget became very expansionary over these 2J/2 years with a drop of $ billion in the full-employment surplus It should be noted that the advance of $ billion in nondefense expenditures other than for social insurance was only about half the normal growth of revenues other than from payroll taxes Fiscal Policy A variety of policy measures- both fiscal and monetary was adopted over the 5/2-year period to cope with the pressures resulting from the increase in the defense budget. The design of policy actions was made especially difficult by uncertainties about the future path of defense outlays After the exceedingly rapid economic advance during the second half of the need for restraint in policy was clearly recognized at the beginning of An already scheduled rise in payroll taxes for social insurance amounting to $ billion ( annual rate ) took effect at the start of the year The President 's budgetary program reinforced this restraining influence with requests for a new graduated withholding system on individual income taxes for a reversal of certain scheduled excise tax reductions and a speedup in the collection of corporate income taxes. As enacted by the Congress in March these measures siphoned $ ^ billion ( annual rate ) from the private economy. Nevertheless a large part of the burden of providing restraint fell on monetary policy The effects of tight money were evident in a sharp contraction of homebuilding during the course of which in turn contributed to a moderation of the over-all economic advance. But business investment spending proved unresponsive to monetary tightness at least in the short run and continued to advance at a rapid rate during the spring and summer of The investment boom put severe strain on the plant capacity and labor supplies of the machinery and construction industries. There was also danger that an excessive and unsustainable surge of plant and equipment spending might set the stage for a subsequent slump in investment demand. Finally the investment boom added mightily to the pressures on financial markets during the spring and summer of The dramatic decline in homebuilding the highly disturbed atmosphere of financial markets and the pressures of business fixed investment on capital goods industries clearly indicated that fiscal policy needed to assume a larger share of the responsibility for restraining the economy In the light of these considerations the Administration in September requested a temporary suspension of the investment tax credit initiated certain cutbacks in Federal spending and placed stringent limits on net new issues by Federal agencies. At the same time the monetary authorities took various complementary steps to ease the pressure on financial markets including in particular a direct request to member banks to restrict their business lending. In addition legislative and other action was taken to moderate the competition for savings and improve the flow of credit through the adoption of new rules governing interest-rate ceilings on time and savings accounts at banks and thrift institutions The suspension of the tax credit was enacted by the Congress in October The capital goods boom halted and business spending on plant and equipment declined slightly during the first half of The suspension of the investment credit contributed to this result but monetary policy and the other activities cited as well as the general slowdown of the economy were also partially responsible. It can be argued in retrospect that investment demand might have slowed down adequately without suspension of the tax credit. But the impact of the September fiscal program on financial markets was clear and beneficial beyond any reasonable doubt Long-term interest rates responded quickly to the President 's fiscal proposals and declined from the sharp peaks reached during the first week of September Subsequently the Federal Reserve System relaxed its monetary restraints. As a result of this shift in the mix of stabilization policies the recovery of homebuilding got a head start of several months After the suspension of the investment credit had done its job the credit was restored by Congress in the spring of upon recommendation by the President As described in Chapter fiscal policy exerted a major expansionary influence in the first half of when the economy was particularly sluggish. The large and growing full-employment deficit reinforced by an expansionary monetary policy helped maintain the forward motion of the economy. When economic activity strengthened in the second half of the year the President called for prompt tax action to moderate the stimulus of fiscal policy and initiated a program to curb Federal expenditures. As Congress adjourned without acting on the proposed tax surcharge the year ended with renewed financial strains and with the recovery in homebuilding once again threatened by credit stringency MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS Through nearly five years of economic expansion monetary policy reinforced expansionary fiscal measures. In however monetary policy became a major restraining force. When inflationary pressures diminished late in a relaxation of credit policies was initiated and subsequently maintained through most of BALANCED EXPANSION From until late in monetary policy was consistently expansionary ; it made a major contribution to the advance of the economy by accommodating growing credit demands at remarkably stable interest rates To be sure short-term interest rates rose during this period as monetary policy and debt management actions deliberately sought to keep key shortterm rates in the United States reasonably aligned with those in foreign money centers so as to limit outflows of interest-sensitive funds. Long-term rates however were only slightly higher in mid-1965 than in early ( Chart ) Indeed some important interest rates those on mortgages and State and local government bonds were lower than they had been at the beginning of the period of expansion A policy of monetary ease was indispensable to provide the 60-percent increase in funds raised by businesses governments and individuals without any substantial tightening of availability or increase in long-term rates Meanwhile demands for funds burgeoned mainly because of the invigoration of demands for goods and services that stemmed from an actively expansionary fiscal policy Institutional Changes During this period there were significant changes in the character of financial instruments and in the behavior and practices of financial institutions In particular the long-term tendency for businesses to economize in the holding of demand deposits was reinforced by the development of new money market instruments notably the negotiable time certificate of deposit ( CD ) Upward revisions in the maximum interest rates which Federal regulations allowed to be paid on time and savings deposits enabled commercial banks to attract large inflows of such deposits Chart Selected Interest Rates PERCENT CONVENTIONAL MORTGAGES ON NEW HOMES r y \ r j CORPORATE Aaa BONDS ( New Is sues ) Li PRIME BANK RATE \ \ V NEW MUNICIPAL BONDS / \ ..A.. * / y /- \ Vf 3-MONTH TREASURY BILLS ( New Issues ) I I ,.,..J NOTE.-DATA PLOTTED ARE QUARTERLY THROUGH MONTHLY THEREAFTER SOURCES : FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND TREASURY DEPARTMENT In addition to promoting the sale mainly to corporations of negotiable CD 's of large denominations the banks also developed various attractive forms of nonnegotiable certificates of deposit which effectively tapped household savings. While the deposits of savings and loan associations continued to grow these institutions encountered increasingly strong competition from the commercial banks and their share in the total flow of time and savings deposits of households declined from percent in to percent in ( Table ) Some of these institutions also began to experiment with special savings certificates of various kinds As banks and other financial institutions developed new more convenient and higher-yielding forms of liquid assets they induced a continued substitution of these new liquid assets for demand deposits in the portfolios of households and businesses TABLE Net inflow of household time and savings deposits to main financial institutions Type of financial institution annual average Total net inflow ( billions of dollars ) Percent of total going to : Commercial banks Mutual savings banks Savings and loan associations Credit unions Preliminary Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The substitution of new forms of liquid assets for demand deposits was particularly marked in corporate portfolios. Between the end of and the end of nonfinancial corporations reduced their holdings of demand deposits and currency by $ billion and of Treasury securities by $ billion while increasing their holdings of CD 's by $ billion Business firms and households were willing to reduce their money holdings relative to their holdings of other liquid assets and relative to the volume of their transactions only as interest rates on such assets rose. After a brief decline in short-term interest rates rose steadily and by mid-1965 approached the peak levels of Rates offered on CD 's and similar obligations by banks and thrift institutions also rose In the two previous expansions rising interest rates had induced corporate treasurers to shift from demand deposits to Treasury bills. In the early } s rate increases induced a further shift to CD 's. However the process differed in important respects from that which occurred in the expansion periods of the 1950Js. In earlier periods the rise in short-term interest rates was brought about through a restricted growth of bank credit. Growth of reserves was inadequate to permit demand deposits to grow in pace with GNP. And since demand deposits were then the principal source of funds to the banks they were forced to restrict credit In the early 's as the use of CD 's expanded bank credit increased rapidly even though the expansion of bank reserves and of demand deposits occurred at a comparatively low rate. Since CD 's carried lower reserve requirements than demand deposits a given rise in the reserve base permitted more rapid growth of bank credit By raising CD ceilings providing only a moderate growth of bank reserves and raising the discount rate in and the Federal Reserve was able to maintain upward pressure on short-term rates without restricting bank lending. At the same time the expansion in their time liabilities encouraged commercial banks to increase their investments in longer term assets ( mainly mortgages and tax-exempt securities ) This served to limit upward pressure on key long-term rates that otherwise might have risen in response to increased borrowing to finance State and local and private investment. The outcome was consistent with the double objective of encouraging domestic expansion while preventing an excessive outflow of short-term funds to foreign markets where interest rates were higher The changing financial patterns that emerged during this period thus played an important part in the support of steady and balanced expansion But these same patterns held risks for the future. A significant portion of the funds secured by financial institutions through aggressive competition was obtained from interest-sensitive investors who would be quick to withdraw their funds if interest rates elsewhere became relatively more attractive Such risks however were not particularly serious for the banks so long as over-all financial conditions continued to evolve gradually and without sudden changes in interest rate levels. On the other hand the risks for savings and loan associations and to a lesser extent for mutual savings banks became substantially greater. Such institutions have far less flexibility than commercial banks in managing their portfolios which are heavily concentrated in mortgages. Moreover in an attempt to meet commercial bank competition they had in some cases engaged in overly aggressive efforts to attract interest-sensitive funds and had thus become rather vulnerable to changes in the financial environment MONETARY POLICY IN In the latter part of as defense expenditures turned sharply upward and business investment spending began to accelerate credit requirements mounted at an extraordinary rate. There followed a period of intense and often uneven pressure on financial markets which differed sharply from the earlier patterns of orderly adaptation to changing needs The period was marked by a steep upward movement in both short- and long-term interest rates ( Chart ) Indeed long-term rates reached the highest level in over years during and after receding for a relatively brief period advanced substantially further during the course of in some cases rising to the highest levels since the 's or 's While in both and rising interest rates reflected unusually heavy credit demands the factors giving rise to these demands differed significantly in these two years as did the direction of monetary policy and the availability of credit The Credit Squeeze The response of the monetary authorities to the extraordinary rise in credit demands in late was a clearcut shift toward a policy of credit restraint This was signified initially by an increase in the discount rate in December At the same time the ceiling rate on CD 's was raised. Thereafter credit tightening was reinforced by increasingly limited growth of the reserve base Monetary restriction continued until September By November monetary policy had clearly shifted in an expansionary direction During the first half of the year the nonborrowed reserves of the commercial banks grew at an annual rate of only percent. Since banks were faced with a very strong loan demand they borrowed reserves from the Federal Reserve banks. The money supply was thus able to increase at an annual rate of percent. Banks also competed vigorously for CD 's and for consumers ' time deposits. While this competition helped to drive up rates it also enabled banks to accommodate their loan customers. Total bank credit increased at an annual rate of percent over this period To accommodate business demands banks rationed mortgage lending and other types of credit competed strongly for time deposits and made inroads into their liquidity through the sale of securities. Even so bank lending could not fully keep pace with the business demand for funds. Corporations consequently also issued large amounts of new debt securities in an effort to meet their needs. They were thus brought into increasingly active open market competition with other seekers of funds including particularly the Federal Government and State and local governments. As a result longterm interest rates rose markedly from late through mid-1966 It was only after midyear however that monetary stringency reached its peak. During the summer months as Federal Reserve actions actually reduced the volume of nonborrowed reserves the spread between the * /2 -percent ceiling rate on CD 's and the yield on Treasury bills narrowed. Banks found it increasingly difficult to replace maturing CD 's as corporations shifted to still higher yielding alternative liquid assets. Although banks increased their borrowings from the Federal Reserve and their sales of securities it became progressively harder for them to accommodate business loan demands. Yet in order to restrict the funds available for bank lending to business the Federal Reserve left the ceiling rate on CD 's unchanged The rise in open market interest rates induced by large corporate and taxexempt security issues and by bank sales of securities attracted an unusually large share of household savings directly into market issues at the expense of the growth of household deposits at banks and thrift institutions. The attraction became particularly strong when short- and medium-term open market rates rose above the maximum interest rates payable on CD 's and savings accounts As was explained in more detail in the Council 's Annual Report it was the thrift institutions and particularly the savings and loan associations which suffered most severely from this process of " disintermediation " Because they had only limited scope for raising the rates they offer on deposits thrift institutions were at a special disadvantage in the ensuing competition for deposits both with open market instruments and with commercial banks By the third quarter of withdrawals of interest-sensitive deposits from thrift institutions had become so large that their usually sizable net inflow of funds was reduced to a trickle Following the various steps taken by the Administration and the monetary and regulatory authorities in September when the credit scarcity had reached acute proportions a calmer atmosphere was restored in the financial markets. The rate of growth of bank lending to business slowed markedly in September and with the moderating level of business activity continued low throughout the remainder of the year ( Chart ) At the same time the levels of nonborrowed reserves and of demand deposits were further reduced and banks in adjusting to lower reserve levels liquidated a large volume of security holdings. As monetary restraint was significantly relaxed in November bank reserve and deposit levels stabilized. By yearend a rapid pace of monetary expansion was underway that carried through into the following year In monetary policies played a major active role in determining the over-all path of economic activity. Tight credit was clearly the primary factor accounting for a sharp decline in homebuilding of $ billion ( annual rate ) from the first to fourth quarter. The impact of tight money also extended to mortgage-financed business construction as well as certain other plant and equipment expenditures. The ability of tight money to restrain the economy was clearly demonstrated in but so were its uneven impact and the troublesome side effects of a financial squeeze The Experience The moderation of the rate of economic advance at the end of produced a setting for monetary and credit developments in which was in several respects the opposite of that which had prevailed a year earlier Plant and equipment expenditures had leveled off following a period of exceptionally rapid advance and the prospect of a substantial first half inventory adjustment was clear. This pointed to some moderation in underlying credit demands although it could be expected that reductions in private borrowing needs would to an important extent be counterbalanced by a larger Federal deficit Further monetary policy had turned expansionary in order to help cushion the inventory adjustment and to assist actively in the recovery of homebuilding. The Administration 's proposal for a special income tax surcharge in the second half of the year was intended to reduce Government demands on the capital market and to give fiscal policy a larger role in restraining demand In a more balanced economic and financial setting these circumstances could have been expected to produce a marked easing in money and capital market pressures manifested both in greater availability of credit and in moderation of the pressure on interest rates The actual course of financial development proved rather different. Although credit did become more easily available pressures on the capital markets remained intense for most of the year and interest rates resumed an upward course after only a relatively brief interruption. To a major Chart Changes in Money Supply Time Deposits and Selected Bank Assets PERCENT C H A N G E PER YEAR ! / MONEY S UPPLY TIME DEPOSITS ADJUSTED ( AT COMMERCIAL BANKS ) P H JAN.AUG SEPT.DEC vXv'vXv COMMERCIAL BANK INVESTMENTS I I COMMERCIAL BANK BUSINESS LOANS ^ AVERAGE ANNUAL PERCENTAGE CHANGE DURING PERIOD ; BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA NOTE.-FOR MONEY SUPPLY AND TIME DEPOSITS BASED ON AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES ; FOR INVESTMENTS AND LOANS ON END-OF-PERIOD DATA SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM O extent these developments could be attributed to the after-effects of the unusual strains and imbalances which the financial system had experienced in as well as to congressional inaction on the President 's fiscal program to correct these imbalances Availability and Cost of Credit Monetary conditions at least as measured by changes in bank reserves money supply and bank credit remained easy until very late in the year During the first months of total member bank reserves increased at an annual rate of percent nonborrowed reserves by percent and the money supply by percent compared to increases of only percent percent and percent respectively in the corresponding months of Total bank credit which had shown almost no change in the second half of expanded at an annual rate of percent during these months. In March the Federal Reserve lowered reserve requirements against savings deposits and the first $ million of time deposits in member banks and in April it reduced the discount rate from / to percent The changed monetary environment was associated with marked improvements in the liquidity positions of thrift institutions and commercial banks With an unusually high rate of financial saving by consumers and with commercial banks and thrift institutions in a better position to compete effectively against open market instruments both types of institutions experienced record inflows of time and savings deposits. Savings and loan associations were able to step up relatively rapidly their acquisitions of mortgages during the second and third quarters of the year thus contributing greatly to the recovery of the construction industry Credit usually becomes cheaper when it becomes more readily available. But in and particularly during the second half of the year there was a marked contrast between the ready availability of credit and the unusually high level of long-term interest rates Both short and long rates had begun to fall sharply in late Shortterm rates continued to decline until early June with the rate on 3-month Treasury bills reaching a low of ^ percent compared to the peak of 5J/2 percent in the previous September. Declines in other short-term rates were in the range of * / to percentage points Long-term rates however reached their low in late February when they stood ^ to % percentage points below the highs. They turned upward in early April and continued to rise with only occasional interruptions through the rest of the year. By July they had regained the levels of the previous fall. By yearend they stood at the highest levels in years or more with long-term Treasury bonds yielding percent and highest grade corporate bonds about percent. After midyear short-term rates also began to move upward and continued to do so through the remainder of the year though they remained below the peaks reached in the fall of ( Chart ) Thus the spread between long- and short-term rates widened significantly during the first half of the year and in spite of some reduction around midyear remained relatively large in the second half. The typical pattern when interest rates are high and rising is for short-term rates to rise relative to long-term rates and indeed often to exceed them In attempting to explain both the unusual contrast between the relatively easy availability of credit and the sharp rise of interest rates and the unusually wide spread between long-term and short-term rates it is useful to begin by summarizing the more notable aspects of the demand for funds in The Demand for Funds The total volume of borrowing in set a new record percent above the average of ( Table ) To be sure the volume of mortgage borrowing remained at the low average level of although in sharp contrast with the movement within the year was strongly upward. Consumer borrowing while much stronger in the second half than in the first also remained low. Bank lending to business fell to about half the level and was particularly small in the second half. Corporate and taxexempt bond issues on the other hand both reached new record highs Federal borrowing too was up considerably. State and local securities outstanding rose by $ billion including an unprecedented $ billion of industrial revenue bonds. Some of the high borrowing however represented a postponement from The Federal Government borrowed $ billion more in than in Its borrowing was unusually concentrated in the second half of the TABLE Net funds raised by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Type of credit All nonfinancial sectors annual average Total First half L Second half i Total First half i Second half U.S. Government. Rest of world Private domestic nonfinancial sectors Consumer credit Bank loanss Commercial paper State and local obligations Corporate securities Home mortgages * Other mortgages Other Seasonally adjusted annual rates Preliminary ; includes estimate for fourth quarter Bank loans not elsewhere classified * Mortgages on to 4-family homes Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System year. The speed-up of corporate tax payments and the unusually large surpluses in Government agency accounts held down Treasury cash needs during the first half The volume of corporate security issues registered a substantial increase in volume of $ billion in even though the gap between the flow of corporate internal funds and corporate expenditures for investment was smaller than in ( Chart ) In part the explanation for the exceedingly large volume of corporate borrowing in lies in the events of ; in part it reflected expectations of what might happen in Some corporate issues were postponed during the market squeeze of ; further postponements may have occurred late in and early in as interest rates began to fall and when many expected that rates would continue to decline A more important legacy from however was the lesson that corporations learned about the costs of excessive dependence on commercial banks. The lesson that bank credit could become very difficult to obtain Chart Gross Investment and Saving of Nonfinancial Corporations BILLIONS O F DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES GROSS INVESTMENTJ/ GROSS SAVING ? / i i J/FIXED INVESTMENT PLUS CHANGE IN INVENTORIES ^ /CORPORATE PROFITS AND INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT LESS PROFITS TAX ACCRUALS AND DIVIDEND PAYMENTS PLUS CAPITAL CONSUMPTION ALLOWANCES SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM 8o even by highly credit-worthy borrowers led many of them to conclude that a larger part of their debt capital should be obtained at long term. The impetus this gave to bond issues was strengthened as the expectation began to spread that long-term rates would increase as economic activity rebounded The President 's renewed tax proposals of August brought some relief to credit markets. But as Congress delayed action the pressure on rates was renewed. Each time the prospects for passage of the surcharge seemed to improve rates tended to level off ; each time the prospects appeared to worsen the rise was renewed The continuing and increasing prospect of a strongly resurgent economy without fiscal restraint and therefore subject to renewed monetary restraint strengthened the expectation of rising rates and of the possibility of a renewed squeeze on bank lending. This encouraged corporations to borrow even at exceedingly high rates The Imbalance in Security Markets The impact of enlarged corporate borrowing on long-term interest rates and on corporate rates in particular was reinforced by the unusual distribution of demand relative to supply. On the demand side of the credit market there was a notable bulge of corporate bond issues. On the supply side the most notable feature was the large financial surplus of households. The two did not easily mesh Household accumulation of financial assets in was about percent higher than in the preceding year as consumer saving proceeded at an unusually high rate while outstanding consumer debt increased less than in Part of the increase in household financial assets took the form of contractual increases in pension and life insurance reserves. The bulk of it however went into liquid assets as did most of the proceeds from the net sale by households of some $ billion of securities The remarkable rise in the demand and thrift deposits of households reflected the higher rate of total financial saving the unusually low acquisition of liquid assets during the previous year and changes in relative yields on competing forms of financial assets. Declining yields on short-term Treasury and Federal agency securities in the first part of the year made thrift deposits relatively more attractive than in In the second half of the year the spread between thrift deposit rates and yields on competing marketable securities narrowed sharply but households continued to rebuild liquidity However the flow of savings into deposits began to moderate at yearend The bulk of corporate bond issues over the last decade has been purchased by life insurance companies and private pension funds. In however the volume of corporate bond issues was unusually large relative to the increase in the assets of these institutions. Consequently corporate bonds had to be sold to buyers who commanded a limited proportion of the total available funds and these sales could be made only at sharply rising yields 8i Mutual savings banks and State and local government pension funds responded to high and rising yields by increasing their purchases. Higher interest rates and the availability of many attractive convertible issues apparently also induced households to increase considerably their purchases of corporate bonds The Situation at Yearend Late in the year the Federal Reserve slowed the growth of reserves and the rate of growth of the money supply declined. Inflows of time deposits also tapered off while business loans advanced somewhat more rapidly During November and December banks sold Government securities in significant volume. The devaluation of sterling caused a speculative reaction in the security markets. After the November rise in the discount rate shortterm rates increased The year ended with interest rates far above year-earlier levels but with credit still readily available. There was little evidence that the high rates in had as yet dampened business investment expenditures to any significant degree. And outlays on residential construction exceeded their average by the fourth quarter. Banks remained relatively liquid and able to accommodate their customers without difficulty. Although mortgage markets had been fearing disintermediation for months actual inflows into thrift institutions had slowed only moderately. Nevertheless the spread between rates on savings deposits and those available on open market securities had narrowed significantly. Any further rise in open-market rates could seriously endanger the ability of the thrift institutions to finance an adequate level of residential construction PRESENT TASKS OF POLICY As was emphasized in Chapter the current and prospective economic climate is such that restraint upon the expansion of demand is vitally needed. Enactment of the President 's fiscal program will provide the needed restraint while enabling the economy to advance at a healthy rate. As explained in Chapter price increases in will still be unacceptably large But with the tax increase there is the prospect that price increases will decelerate during the year. In absence of fiscal restraint however the economy would be subject to serious inflationary pressures or serious financial stringency and most probably some combination of the two. The improved balance among the sectors that was achieved in would once again be upset INFLATIONARY PRESSURES WITH NO RESTRAINT In the absence of any added restraint from either higher taxes or monetary policy the growth of total demand in would be substantially greater than the $ billion forecast given in Chapter The forecast assumed that the surcharge would withdraw about $ % billion of pur- chasing power ( annual rate ) from consumers starting in April and that it would reduce after-tax corporate profits by $ } /2 billion for the entire year Without the withdrawal from personal incomes consumer spending in the second quarter and thereafter would be substantially higher than that contemplated in the forecast given in Chapter Responding to the additional consumer demand business would attempt to raise output and employment. The resulting increases in wages dividends and other income payments would swell consumer incomes and in turn lead to still further additions to consumer expenditures. Rising consumer spending together with the failure of corporate tax rates to rise would add to after-tax profits providing both incentives and means for financing more business investment expenditures than would be the case if the tax increase were enacted. It is likely in addition that the greater consumer and business spending would lead to more rapid accumulation of inventories Thus the interacting forces of consumer and business spending would via the well-known multiplier process generate increases in money income and total demand that would far exceed the magnitude of the surcharge In an economy at substantially full employment a rapid growth of demand far in excess of the economy 's growth potential would result primarily in rising prices and only marginally in additional output. With additional workers hard to find and employees tempted by alternative opportunities wage rates would rise rapidly. To be sure it might be possible to mobilize some additional manpower from among the remaining unemployed. Frictionally unemployed workers would find jobs more quickly ; some seasonally unemployed workers would take second jobs ; and some poorly qualified workers would be hired. Nevertheless the number of unfilled jobs would increase greatly and the recruiting difficulties of employers would be accentuated. The strains in labor supplies would slow productivity growth and with accelerating wages would generate rapidly increasing costs As discussed in Chapter an acceleration of wage and cost increases would provide the impetus to keep the wage-price spiral turning long after the excessive demand had vanished. The absence of restraint not only implies a more rapid price rise in but greatly increases the difficulty of moving back to price stability in future years. It would moreover weaken our balance of payments by impairing our export competitiveness for years to come and by generating a rapid rise in imports. Finally rapid expansion of demand and soaring profits would be likely to touch off a capital goods boom in if not sooner ; such a development could sow the seeds of a subsequent collapse of investment in plant and equipment. Whatever additional gains in output and employment might be obtained during the inflationary boom would be paid for many times over in such a subsequent bust THE IMPACT OF MONETARY RESTRAINT If there is no tax increase the Nation would not in fact experience the unrestrained inflationary pressures outlined above. It is certain that the expansion of demand would be checked to some degree by credit restraint In present circumstances the accompanying further rapid expansion of credit demand would impose severe strains on financial markets even under an expansionary Federal Reserve policy. The competition for liquidity the imbalances in the flows of funds and the expectational disturbances which operated in would be intensified in With credit markets under strain on the one hand and an economy operating under serious inflationary pressures on the other the making of credit policy would be unusually difficult. To the extent that monetary policy accommodated credit demands in the interest of avoiding strains on the financial markets prices and wages would rise more rapidly. To the extent that policy was aimed at moderating inflationary pressures the more interest rates would rise and the more homebuilding would be depressed A monetary policy which imposed the same degree of over-all restraint on demand as the proposed tax increase could do so only at the risk of creating serious imbalances in the economy. As in the mortgage markets and the homebuilding industry would in all probability be more seriously restricted than other sectors of the market. They might fare somewhat better than in since the thrift institutions are now more liquid rate ceilings limit bank competition for savings funds and some interestsensitive deposits have already been withdrawn. On the other hand both mortgage lenders and builders are more sensitive than formerly to the dangers of credit restraint. Signs of increasing credit tightness could lead to a major restriction of mortgage commitments and an abrupt scaling down of building plans even before lenders found their resources seriously strained Credit restraint would affect other sectors as well. Mortgage-financed nonresidential construction small businesses users of consumer credit and State and local capital projects would all feel the pinch. The effects of a further rise in the general level of long-term interest rates into territory unknown in this century could restrict investment and retard economic growth for a long time after the need for restraint had passed To be sure sharply rising interest rates might also reduce our balanceof-payments deficits by attracting funds from abroad. But this would be only a temporary gain one that at best would continue only so long as interest rates stayed at a level which disrupted our domestic economy. Moreover if other major countries allowed their own interest rates to rise to avoid the loss of funds they would threaten to throw not merely their own economies but the world economy into recession The actual course of events with no tax increase would probably involve both an increase in inflationary pressures and a tightening of credit conditions After a hard look at the alternatives it has been and remains the conviction of both the Administration and the Federal Reserve System that the Nation should depend on fiscal policy not monetary policy to carry the main burden of the additional restraint on the growth of demand that now appears necessary for THE PROGRAM OF FISCAL RESTRAINT The expenditure program in the budget for fiscal year was reviewed in Chapter It is a budget consistent with a program of fiscal restraint but it can not alone provide the degree of restraint that is required Without new tax legislation the full-employment deficit would remain close to its recent $ 12j/i billion rate. The health of the economy therefore requires prompt enactment of a temporary surcharge on income taxes initially proposed by the President last January amended last August and reaffirmed in the current fiscal program Surcharge Proposal The Administration 's tax recommendation calls for a 10-percent surcharge on the income taxes of corporations to be in effect from January through mid-1969 ; and on the income taxes of individuals with low-income families exempted to be in effect from April through mid-1969 For the year as a whole the surcharge on individuals would equal percent of annual tax liability. For the average family a surcharge of percent of taxes would amount to approximately three-fourths of percent of income. Since the surcharge would share the progressive character of our basic income tax structure it would take a somewhat larger percentage of the income of more affluent Americans e.g. nearly J/i percent for a family of four with a $ income as indicated in Table The table also shows that the surcharge would leave individual tax liabilities well below their levels The recommended form of the tax increase parallels the conclusion of the Subcommittee on Fiscal Policy of the Joint Economic Committee in that " a uniform percentage addition to corporate and TABLE Change in income tax liability for a married couple with two dependents Amount of tax liability l Change in tax liability Annual wage income $ $ 7,500._ $ $ $ $ $ $ to to $ Change in tax as percent of income to to Tax liability computation assumes minimum deduction or deduction equal to percent of income whichever is greater Proposed tax surcharge of percent beginning April ; equivalent to percent increase for the year No increase for married couples with two dependents whose tax at rates is $ or less Source : Treasury Department personal income tax liabilities to be effective for a stated period best satisfies criteria for short-run stabilizing revenue changes. " Obviously other types of tax increases would also provide fiscal restraint but they would be inferior to the proposed surcharge in many respects. Excise tax increases if imposed on broad groups of consumer goods and services would have a much larger relative impact on the poor. If on the other hand the excises were confined to luxuries the revenue gain could not be sufficient to provide adequate fiscal restraint. Moreover excise taxes have the disadvantage of exerting direct upward pressure on prices Another alternative would be to increase revenues via " loophole " -closing tax reforms. Certain reforms are desirable in themselves to improve equity and efficiency in the tax structure ; these should be enacted on a permanent basis not linked to a temporary tax increase designed to meet stabilization needs. In any case reforms could not be enacted promptly enough to insure the needed fiscal restraint in the first half of Congressional debates on tax reform have repeatedly demonstrated that legislation in this area can be enacted only after lengthy consideration. Moreover because tax reform measures can not normally be incorporated into the withholding system there would be a further lag in their contribution to revenue and restraint even after enactment. Significant additional revenue from reform could not realistically be provided before the middle of at the very earliest Major reforms would drastically change the situation of taxpayers who had based important economic decisions on the present law. For this reason major reforms probably need to contain transition provisions to avoid imposing large initial losses on the affected taxpayers. This further reduces the potential of tax reform to meet present revenue needs Economic Impact of the Tax Increase The increase in taxes is intended to moderate the growth of demand and to allocate a portion of the Nation 's extraordinary defense costs broadly and equitably among individuals and businesses As indicated above the economic effects of a tax increase are the mirrorimage of the expansionary effects accomplished by tax reduction. But a tax cut enacted when there are ample idle resources ? s in has its main expansionary effect on output with only a minor impact on prices. Under present circumstances however with rapidly expanding demands and essentially full employment the main restraining impact of the tax increase will be on prices and only secondarily on output Under current circumstances the tax increase will add to Federal revenues. To be sure under conditions of widespread slack raising tax rates would merely lower employment and production and could even pull down incomes so much that Federal revenues would actually prove to be smaller This is the counterpart of the proposition that in such an economy a tax reduction can actually increase Federal revenues by stimulating a strong economic advance. But in the present situation a tax increase of the magnitude proposed will still permit a healthy expansion of employment output and real income. Revenues will rise substantially as higher effective tax rates are applied to a rising revenue base Of course an inflation which was not checked by either fiscal or monetary action might expand the revenue base even more rapidly. But such extra expansion would primarily reflect higher prices rather than increased production. Therefore although revenues might conceivably then rise even more than with a tax increase the real purchasing power of those revenues would not. Federal outlays would have to be increased to maintain the same real level of public services in the face of higher prices for the items bought by the Government The tax increase works to curb price increases by moderating the pressures of demand. However like any other fiscal or monetary measure it can not cope immediately with cost pressures already built into the system. To be sure some have argued that a rise in the corporate profits tax may in fact add to cost pressures by inducing firms to raise prices in order to protect their profits from the impact of the higher tax. But any firm which was already taking full advantage of its opportunities to earn profits would have no incentive to raise its prices as a result of a higher corporate tax rate. The price which results in the largest profits before taxes yields the largest profits after taxes regardless of the tax rate There may be cases particularly among firms with substantial market power where businessmen typically forego potentially available profits and aim at a target rate of after-tax return ( based on " standard " costs and volume ) In such instances which some economists regard as quantitatively important firms might make a one-shot price increase to reestablish the target after-tax profit when the profits tax rate rises. In such cases the profits tax would work like an excise tax no better and no worse. It would then reduce the growth of the real spendable incomes and the market demand of consumers rather than of business firms Workers too may wish to achieve greater wage increases to compensate for the downward impact of income tax surcharge on their take-home pay But their wishes are not likely to be fulfilled since firms will also have higher tax bills to pay and will be facing less buoyant markets In addition to its immediate contribution to the stabilization of prices wages and interest rates and to the U.S. balance of payments the tax surcharge has major implications for the long-term management of stabilization policy. Congressional response in the weeks ahead will demonstrate the political feasibility of making fiscal policy work in the unpleasant task of restraint as well as in the more welcome task of providing tax cuts and added public programs. The proof that taxes can be raised when necessary will strengthen the ability of the Nation to resume a long-run policy of tax reduction when the defense emergency ends AGENDA FOR POLICYMAKING Recent experience reveals the benefits and costs the potentialities and limitations of policy adjustments. Active discretionary policy is indispensable despite its imperfections. These very imperfections point to the need for flexibility in policymaking and for improvements in the techniques of diagnosis and application FLEXIBILITY AND FORECASTING Large and sometimes imperfectly foreseeable increases in defense spending have recently required sizable and frequent adjustments in monetary and fiscal policies such as the temporary suspension and early restoration of the investment tax credit. In a peacetime world policy moves would not ordinarily need to be as frequent or as abrupt. Yet policy will not be able to stand still Even in the ideal situation of smoothly rising private demands when budgetary policy merely needs to allocate the fiscal dividend of economic growth tax adjustments will be called for from time to time. In particular tax reductions are likely to be a frequent aspect of the annual budget program. The desirable expansion of Government expenditures will seldom equal the revenue increase accompanying high-employment growth Moreover private demands will not grow smoothly at all times. Changes in consumer buying in technology in the growth and composition of the population and in interregional migration can lead to alterations in the vigor of private demand. In a full-employment economy a spurt in the growth of demand can trigger a burst of inflation and tendencies toward sluggishness if not offset can cumulate into recession Small and temporary fluctuations will not throw the economy off course The full-employment path is not a tightrope. Policy action can not need not and in view of the cosis should not try to offset every minor wiggle But policy decisions must be alert to major disturbances. And they can not be blind to the economic impact of budgetary decisions in social or national security areas. The shortcomings of our policy record under the Employment Act reflect inaction or inadequate action far more often than excessive or inappropriate action To carry out their tasks policymakers must have the benefit of accurate diagnoses of the current state of demand and the best possible forecasts of prospective demand Indeed forecasting of some kind is indispensable. The Government can not avoid making fiscal and monetary policy decisions which influence the future course of the economy. Because policy can not be devised and implemented instantly and because its effects on the economy operate with a lag decisions are inevitably tied to predictions. Only an illusory escape is offered by rules which suggest basing decisions on the " facts of the present " or on holding some particular magnitudes unchanged through time or changing some magnitudes by specified preordained amounts. Such rules themselves involve some form of implicit or naive projections. And for all their limitations explicit forecasts carefully prepared by professional experts are demonstrably superior to implicit forecasts The limitations of the economist 's ability to predict the future argues for prudence in policy decisions flexibility in the use of instruments and continuing efforts to improve the reliability of forecasting techniques. It also points up the fact that to the policymaker knowledge of the nature and magnitude of the uncertainties surrounding the projection can be as crucial as the best-judgment forecast itself The Federal Government is currently taking steps to improve the environment in which future policies will be formulated. Three of these steps are discussed below. First as directed by the President a year ago Federal agencies have been considering economic policies to make full use of the opportunities afforded by peace when a welcome cessation of hostilities in Vietnam occurs. Second new efforts are being made to improve the quantity and quality of the economic data so vital in determining the current position and future prospects of the economy. Finally serious attention is being given to certain institutional aspects of the mortgage market in order to improve its functioning and to insure more adequate and equitable supplies of credit for housing PLANNING FOR PEACE When hostilities end in Vietnam the subsequent reduction of defense expenditures will free resources to meet additional private and public wants. But just as the sharp buildup of war spending has raised stabilization problems for the economy during the past two years so too will the cutback in spending. Further the reconversion process will be complicated by the uneven impact of the current defense effort upon various industries geographical areas and types of manpower Policy will be challenged both to smooth the transition and most especially to avoid the economic downturn that a large drop in defense outlays would bring if not offset by rising demands elsewhere. With the benefit of forward planning efforts now underway an active use of appropriate fiscal and monetary measures will be able to meet the welcome challenge of peace The cost of hostilities in Southeast Asia is currently estimated at about $ billion annually a large dollar magnitude although only some percent of our GNP. In the post-Vietnam adjustment the precise downward course of defense spending will depend on many dimensions of our international relations including the nature of the peace arrangement. The committee working on this problem has studied and is continuing to study what this transition would look like under various assumptions as to the magnitude and the timing of the phasing down of military activities in Southeast Asia. One such assumption and it is only an assumption not a state- ment of policy or a prediction is that over a period of time defense outlays in real terms would return essentially to the level prevailing in The major part of the manpower and expenditure reductions associated with this pattern might be accomplished over a period of approximately 15/2 years after hostilities cease. This assumes about as rapid a phasing down as could be reasonably expected on the basis of past experience In this case the Armed Forces might be reduced by roughly men per month over an 18-month period to about million a little below the pre-Vietnam level. Perhaps a quarter to a third of the discharged veterans would resume their schooling ; the remainder would become full-time participants in the civilian job market. Since the Nation 's job market currently absorbs about lyi million net new entrants a year an additional a year for a time should not pose an insuperable problem if total demand is strong. A variety of measures to improve the training and placement of returning servicemen is now being explored The reduction in the Armed Forces would lower military payrolls by nearly $ billion over the 6-quarter period as measured in prices Other defense purchases mainly items bought from private business for procurement operation and maintenance might decline by about $ billion ( prices ) over this year-and-one-half interval and minor further reductions would continue for an additional year. This illustrative pattern of demobilization which as indicated is about as rapid as could reasonably be expected implies a reduction in real outlays for defense amounting to $ billion ( prices ) over a year and a half The freed resources would become available for civilian use. But if no steps were taken to strengthen demands for civilian output such a sharp reduction in the Federal contribution to aggregate demand would almost certainly result in a contraction of economic activity During the period of demobilization fiscal actions would be required to distribute the fiscal dividend from peace as well as the dividend associated with economic growth. Over a period of a year and a half the two might total more than $ billion. Thus the requirements and opportunities for fiscal action in a demobilization period would be large If it were still in effect removal of the temporary surcharge now proposed by the President would be first on the agenda of possible stimulative measures Further tax reductions would be a welcome and effective way to invigorate private civilian demands. Opportunities would also be provided to progress more rapidly on urgent social programs. As Chapter makes clear there are many areas where added public expenditures could yield a very high social return. Among them are improvements in educational opportunities and standards the extension of health programs the provision of more adequate housing the control of air and water pollution the promotion of highway beautification and safety the elimination of urban blight and the development of low-cost rapid transit. Some new programs might be undertaken directly by the Federal Government ; others would be made effective through an expansion of grants-in-aid to State and local governments ; some would involve a partnership of public and private enterprise. Other competitors for a share of the peace dividend could include a number of possible new initiatives in fiscal policy such as the proposal for a negative income tax and a variety of proposals for providing broad and flexible grants out of Federal revenues to States and cities. The analysis necessary to establish priorities among the various proposals is being pursued by interagency working groups Monetary policy would also have a key role to play. The demobilization period might provide an excellent opportunity to move toward financial conditions in terms of both interest rates and availability that would actively encourage investment spending in the private sector and assure a vigorous expansion of housing construction IMPROVEMENTS IN ECONOMIC STATISTICS The Federal statistics recording current economic developments are the compass by which policymakers must chart their course. The United States has the most accurate comprehensive and detailed economic statistics in the world based on information that has consistently improved in accuracy speed and coverage. Yet the need for accurate and timely statistical data to guide vital policy decisions keeps outrunning the available information That need is accentuated by the current state of the economy and the current aims of policy. Sustaining expansion close to the economy 's potential growth path is a more difficult task than that of merely attempting to moderate wide swings in output. In a slack economy it was often sufficient for the indicators merely to point in the right direction. Now more accurate information about the speed of the movement and the distance from full employment is called for. The need for early and careful diagnosis of the extent and location of inflationary dangers also requires comprehensive information about the price cost and productivity performance of various sectors of the economy. Capital markets and especially the mortgage market have taken on a key role calling for more comprehensive data and indicators. The current importance of our international trade position places added emphasis on the need for better information about export and import prices The President 's program for fiscal includes a number of particularly urgent improvements in economic statistics. Each improvement has been recommended because it meets these tests : that it assist current policy formulation that the proposal be capable of rapid implementation and that its costs be moderate given the present budgetary stringency. These are the key items in the President 's program : ( ) Nonmanufacturing industries additional information on employment wages investments sales and other indicators for trade services and finance that will bring the data closer to the coverage and quality of the data now available for manufacturing industries ( ) Construction an enlarged effort to collect more accurate and more timely information on the value of construction activity ( ) Business investment extension of coverage of the plant and equipment survey to all nonfarm industries and collection of separate quarterly data on business investment in plant as distinguished from equipment ( ) International price competitiveness a better comparison of price trends of internationally traded goods ( ) Improved price indexes covering individual industries systematically emphasizing actual transactions rather than quoted prices and developing methods to make more adequate allowance for quality changes in our measurement of prices ( ) Quarterly data on national product by industry a new economic tableau that will ultimately provide comprehensive information on output labor input prices and productivity by major sectors on a quarterly basis ( ) Manufacturing inventories expanded coverage and increased detail ( ) Mortgage flows and commitments a comprehensive system of quarterly and ultimately monthly statistics ( ) Bank deposits more adequate information on ownership and turnover to be collected by the Federal Reserve ; and ( ) Securities markets new information on purchases and sales by institutional investors and more comprehensive and accurate data on new issues and retirements The total program of improvements which involves an annual budget cost of about $ ^ million could make a critical difference in guiding decisions involving billions of dollars REDUCING THE VULNERABILITY OF THE MORTGAGE MARKET The recent sharp fluctuations in the availability of mortgage funds have demonstrated the need for action to reduce the excessive vulnerability of the mortgage market and the homebuilding industry to variations in monetary conditions. The basic demand for mortgage financing is expected to grow rapidly in the next few years while the ability of thrift institutions to meet this demand may diminish as commercial banks compete more effectively for time deposits. Thus both long-term and cyclical considerations suggest the need to strengthen the thrift institutions which supply the bulk of mortgage funds and to devise new means of attracting funds into mortgages In recent years savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks have accounted for about two-thirds of total private mortgage financing In earlier periods of tight money mutual savings banks showed some sensitivity to monetary conditions but savings and loan associations had little difficulty in maintaining the level of their lending activities. In however the flow of funds to both types of institutions declined sharply Because their funds are primarily invested in mortgages with fairly long maturities and fixed interest charges the thrift institutions were unable to raise their earnings enough to permit payment of interest rates in line with those available from banks and open market instruments. Earnings of commercial banks which carry more diversified portfolios adjust more promptly to changes in interest rates. While rate competition among financial institutions has as noted earlier been limited since through ceilings on the rates paid by both thrift institutions and commercial banks thrift deposits remain in competition with corporate bonds and other " open market " instruments. Moreover thrift institutions have lacked sufficient liquidity or " secondary " reserves to permit them to maintain an even flow of funds into mortgages when the flow of deposits shrinks. The squeeze on mortgages is intensified when commercial banks and insurance companies cut back their contributions to that market in such periods in order to take advantage of higher yielding open market investments or to continue serving their customers for business loans Savings and loan associations would have a stronger basic competitive position if they held more secondary reserves and more diversified portfolios A large part of their funds comes from savers with moderate assets whose savings are not particularly rate-sensitive. These funds can appropriately be invested in long-term relatively nonliquid assets. But when thrift institutions attract funds from rate-sensitive investors they should hold a sufficient amount of assets which are either liquid or which mature in a shorter period than mortgages The scope for improved portfolio structure of thrift institutions would be enlarged through the chartering of Federal savings associations ( formerly described as the Federal chartering of mutual savings banks ) Pending legislation besides providing the Federal Home Loan Bank Board with needed additional supervisory powers in this area would enable the newly chartered thrift institutions to carry a more diversified asset portfolio than is now permissible for savings and loan associations. ( Such revision would require some adjustment in the existing tax provisions governing thrift institutions which are keyed to portfolio composition. ) Adoption of the legislation would increase the institutions ' over-all efficiency and competitive strength. The position of thrift institutions would also be strengthened by the further development of instruments not redeemable on demand. Such instruments enable thrift institutions to attract funds from " marginal " interest-sensitive investors at premium rates without requiring an across-theboard dividend or interest-rate increase on all other accounts. With the authorization and encouragement of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board the institutions have in the recent past already created a considerable range of certificate and bonus accounts with maturities ranging from as little as six months to more than years By using these special instruments to attract interest-sensitive funds without pushing up rates on all accounts the thrift institutions would be better able to maintain their competitive position in tight money periods and to reduce fluctuations in their provision of mortgage funds New Sources of Funds To the extent that thrift institutions shift to more diversified portfolios the amount of funds available to the mortgage market will be initially reduced. In the longer run however the savings and loan associations will better serve the mortgage market by maintaining a steadier inflow of funds and by strengthening their own competitive position. Nonetheless it is important that new channels be opened to bring funds into the mortgage market from other sources. The principal possibilities here lie in the development of techniques for tapping other sources of funds particularly pension funds and trust accounts. These large institutional investors find it costly as well as inconvenient to manage a portfolio consisting of many individual mortgages ; to acquire such a portfolio is usually far less attractive than to purchase corporate or municipal securities which enjoy a high credit rating tend to be carefully tailored to the investor 's requirements and are easily marketable It has been proposed in this connection that the FHA be authorized to issue for a fee " full recourse " guarantees for bonds issued against pools of FHA-guaranteed or VA-insured residential mortgages. Such pools of mortgages would be created by mortgage bankers individual thrift institutions or mortgage bond corporations that might be specially formed to take advantage of the new guarantee. This arrangement would relieve the bond buyer but not the mortgage originator or banker of the already small risk of delays and costs in exercising the guarantee on the mortgages underlying the bonds These obligations would constitute a fairly attractive and marketable outlet for the funds of institutional investors capable of competing effectively with various other open market instruments. This and other proposals for channeling funds from the bond market into the mortgage market are being actively studied within the Administration Reducing Legal Limitations on Interest Rates Effective implementation of some of the steps cited above may in practice prove very difficult unless action is taken to modify or eliminate various existing legal limitations on interest rate charges or payments. In particular the statutory interest rate ceilings on FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgages have impeded the flow of mortgage credit. For an adequate flow it is essential that seekers of such credit be able to compete in the capital market by offering yields comparable to those available from other borrowers Because of the ceilings however the yields on FHA and VA mortgages could during the past two years be rendered competitive only through the use of heavy initial discounts on such mortgages. This has meant in some cases a sharp increase in the initial payment required of the FHA home buyer generally imposing a much more severe burden on him than is entailed by a somewhat higher interest rate payable over many years especially after allowing for the partially offsetting tax benefit. More often it has forced builders or sellers to absorb a substantially greater part of the initial financing cost reducing their incentive to enter into the transaction Given the need for allowing effective yields on FHA and VA mortgages to rise above the present legal ceilings if funds are to flow into such mortgages at all when market rates are high the lifting of the ceiling proposed by the President in his Economic Report would clearly be to the benefit of both buyers and sellers of residential properties. Similarly it would be desirable if comparable remedial action were taken by the nine States ( with percent of the total population ) that now set legal maximum interest rates on conventional mortgages at percent or less. These ceilings are already inhibiting many lenders from originating or purchasing mortgages in the States involved Conclusion The measures discussed here would not of course entirely insulate the mortgage market from the effects of tight money. But they would give mortgage borrowers an opportunity to compete with other borrowers for the available supply of funds even under tight money conditions. Funds would of course be available to mortgage borrowers only to the extent that they were willing to pay a competitive rate. Many buyers might still choose to defer home purchase during a period of monetary restraint and the economy is served by such voluntary deferrals when resources are under strain. There is no reason to insulate the mortgage market completely from general credit conditions. But homebuyers as well as builders and other property sellers should not be completely frozen out simply as the result of existing institutional limitations on the mortgage market Chapter The Problem of Rising Prices T HE MOST IMPORTANT and most gratifying economic development in was the maintenance of high employment. The most disturbing economic news was the continuation of the creeping inflation that began in Neither the United States nor any other major industrial country has fully succeeded in combining price stability with high employment. Table shows the average rise in U.S. prices during each of the four postwar periods when the unemployment rate was consistently below percent The price record of the current period compares favorably with the experience of earlier periods including that of when the unemployment rate averaged somewhat higher The recent price record of the United States also compares favorably with that of other major industrial nations. Table shows the average rate of price increase in the principal member nations of the OEGD over the past 65/2 years and the past 5/2 years. For the period from January to November the U.S. record is by far the best. Since June however three countries Germany France and the Netherlands have had better price records than the United States. But in each of these countries a slowing down of price increases has been achieved only at the expense of a loss of jobs and in at least the first two a reduction of economic growth PRICE STABILITY AND HIGH EMPLOYMENT The problem of rising prices is thus neither new nor confined to the United States. In some instances both at home and abroad rapidly rising prices have reflected pressures on productive capacity from excessive demand which ideally could have been moderated by fiscal and monetary restraint But industrial economies have also displayed an " inflationary bias " a tendency for prices to rise even when over-all demand does not exceed productive capacity. Since high employment of resources especially manpower is obviously a top priority for public policy it is important that we learn to control this inflationary bias TABLE Price increases during periods of high employmentl Percentage increase per year Average unemployment rate ( percent ) Period January 1947-January September 1950-November May 1955-September July 1965-December Consumer price index Wholesale price index GNP deflator Periods during which the monthly seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was less than percent except that beginning of the first period is arbitrarily taken as January Price change is measured between the month ( quarter ) prior to the first month ( quarter ) of the period and the last month ( quarter ) of the period GNP deflator for fourth quarter is estimated Note. Changes in consumer and wholesale price indexes based on monthly data and changes in the GNP deflator on seasonally adjusted quarterly data Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE Consumer price increases in major OECD countries since January and June Percentage increase per year Country January to November June to November United States.. Belgium...... Canada France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands.... Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development INFLATIONARY BIAS IN A PROSPEROUS ECONOMY There are several sources of inflationary bias in a high-employment economy in which output grows in pace with and does not generally strain productive capacity Market Power The first source of bias which clearly interacts with and strengthens the others lies in the fact that at high employment of manpower and capital resources the competitive pressures which limit the ability of firms and unions to raise prices and wages are weaker than in a slack economy. Some firms are likely to attempt to use their market power to widen their profit margins and some groups of workers may attempt to raise their wages relative to wages of others. There is also an increased resistance to price reductions when costs fall or demand slackens. Wage rates seldom decline even when unemployment is widespread. But in a generally strong economy many groups of workers try often successfully to resist even any relative reduction in their own wages compared to those of other workers If a significant number of firms or unions take advantage of their market power to seek improvements in their profits or relative wages those who have to pay higher prices or wages will seek to maintain their absolute positions by adding their cost increases to their prices or their cost-of-living increases to their wages. They may even seek to restore their relative positions by taking a markup on cost increases or demanding wage increases as large as other workers obtained There are many reasons why the effective market power of large firms and unions is greater at high levels of resource use than at lower ones At high levels of employment and capacity utilization firms have less reason to fear that if they raise prices they will lose customers to competitors For their competitors are then not in a position to take on a large volume of additional business. Similiarly when profits are high throughout the economy there is less of a threat that new firms will enter a particular industry in response to higher prices. In wage bargaining when union members are fully employed organized labor is naturally less concerned that a large settlement may curtail the growth of employment. Moreover a firm which is operating close to capacity is less willing to risk a protracted strike and therefore more likely to accede to demands for large settlements since it would have difficulty making up for output lost during a work stoppage Uneven Pressures of Demand A second source of bias arises from the fact that at high but not excessive over-all employment of manpower and capital resources the pressures of demand on supply will not be equal in all sectors of either the product or labor markets. In some industries the growth of demand may be so large that it can not be immediately matched by additional output. This pulls up prices even where individual firms possess little or no market power. Likewise in those labor markets that are particularly tight the rise of wages tends to speed up even if workers are unorganized. But the rise in prices and the faster rise in wages where markets are under pressure is not automatically offset by price reductions or a slower advance of wages in the rest of the economy. Moreover other firms which buy the products which have risen in price will pass along the cost increase perhaps with a markup applied and other groups of workers will try to match the wage gains secured in the tight labor markets An extraneous reduction of supply in a key sector e.g. agriculture can have similar effects. Prices then rise in that sector without falling elsewhere leading to larger wage increases that raise costs and prices generally. Though these influences may be temporary the wage and price movements they induce are not reversed fully when the supply problem is overcome Temporary Spurts of Demand The third source of inflationary bias lies in the fact that the growth of over-all demand is unlikely to be completely smooth even with the best of fiscal and monetary policies. When demand is already adequate to use most productive resources a sudden speedup in the growth of demand may create temporary upward pressures on prices and costs in a wide range of sectors And even if such a spurt in demand is subsequently balanced out by a temporarily reduced growth of demand costs and prices do not then correspondingly fall. Indeed the spreading and spiraling effect of the previous cost and price increases will continue to be felt. Thus although a spurt of demand in and was followed by a balancing slowdown the wageprice spiral set off by the initial spurt continued to turn in the relatively slack period of Inefficiencies and Bottlenecks Even in an economy as efficient and progressive as ours there are a few industries and labor markets where gross inefficiencies persist stagnant technology weak management firms of inefficient size restrictive labor practices unnecessarily costly systems of distribution Government policies that weaken incentives to economize avoidable seasonally of production and employment inadequate methods for training and recruiting workers and similar factors. Prices or wages or both tend to rise faster in these industries than in others * in a high-employment economy this tendency is aggravated. These industries constitute a further source of inflationary bias in the sense that they offer unexploited opportunities for significant cost reductions Workings of the Spiral Any of these sources or their interaction can easily trip off a price-wage spiral. In such a spiral rising living costs support demands for wage increases in excess of productivity gains. The resulting bulge in labor costs is reflected in prices. Price and wage increases can continue to reinforce each other long after the initial source of inflation has ceased to operate. Thus the spiral can continue to turn more or less on its own momentum. But unfortunately one or another of the basic sources of the bias is likely to provide new motive power so long as resources remain adequately utilized On the other hand the circular relationship between wages and prices can support price stability as well as a spiral. If prices remain stable the demand for wage increases is not swollen to cover rising living costs. And if wage increases remain moderate costs and prices may remain stable But the stability can be broken on the side of either wrages or prices. And once broken it is difficult to reestablish A general rise in prices and wages does not directly reduce total private demands for the higher prices and wages provide additions to money incomes sufficient to permit the higher prices to be paid. But the spiral can be curtailed by Government policies. The existence of a wage-price spiral requires that the rate of growth of aggregate demand in money terms exceed the rate of growth of real productive capacity. If fiscal and monetary policies should fail to permit the expansion of demand in money terms necessary to " vali- date " the price rise real growth would not keep up with the growth of capacity. Unemployment would rise and utilization rates decline. This would lead to the gradual slowing down and termination of the spiral. Obviously the greater the restraint through fiscal and monetary policy the more quickly the spiral can be brought under control. But this may require an unacceptably high level of unemployment THE GOAL OF PRICE STABILITY Since minimum unemployment and high utilization of our productive resources bring so many obvious benefits to the Nation and to most individuals the temptation is great to dismiss the accompanying inflationary bias as a minor inconvenience a-cost far outweighed by the benefits. Nevertheless price stability is an important goal because the costs of inflation are serious and pervasive. Inflation impairs economic efficiency redistributes income capriciously and weakens the Nation 's competitiveness in world markets A realistic stabilization policy can not expect to hold down to zero the average change of prices of consumer goods and services. From to although wholesale prices remained virtually constant and there was obvious slack in the economy consumer prices rose between and 1J4 percent each year. Such a moderate rate of price increase however does not represent a significant erosion in the purchasing power of the consumer 's dollar. This is especially true because improvements in quality and the introduction of new goods add to consumption opportunities even when they are not fully reflected in price indexes as reductions in prices Furthermore the objective of price stability does not aim to hold any specific price constant. Within a stable average price level there can and must be constant adjustments to changing levels and patterns of demand to diverse movement of costs in different sectors and to technological change. Costs and prices of some items rise ; others fall. These relative price changes attract resources toward those areas where the need is greatest Similarly price stability is compatible with rising wages. Labor compensation can move up in line with the average growth of labor productivity without adding to the labor costs of output. And the stability of over-all labor costs is thoroughly consistent with readjustments in the relationships among wages in different sectors and for different occupations. These changes tend to be gradual and the disparities self-correcting as workers particularly new entrants are attracted into the areas where labor is in greatest demand The Impairment of Efficiency Once prices start moving up on a broad front however the necessary relative adjustments of prices and wages become much more difficult. Some prices respond immediately to changes in underlying economic conditions others only after a long delay but then often with a big change. Thus while each change may appear to correct one set of disparities it creates others ; adjustment of the latter in turn creates new problems. Relative prices wages and profits can not achieve the patterns appropriate to the changing needs of the economy when all of them are ratcheting upward at an uncertain and uneven rate. The efficient allocation and use of resources inevitably suffers. Thus the objective of price stability is linked to the aim of economic efficiency Arbitrary Redistribution of Income Inflation has a significant effect on the distribution of income and wealth By and large that impact is haphazard and inequitable from a social point of view. Some groups in the economy are more vulnerable to inflation than others ; this is why inflation has been described as the " crudest tax. " A particularly significant income shift associated with rising prices takes place between the active participants in the economy whose money incomes adjust more or less to rising prices and those such as the retired and disabled who are not active participants. The money incomes of millions of the families in the latter group are relatively fixed at any given time and augmented little if at all by rising prices. Many depend on pensions and other sources of retirement income which come from accumulated savings in forms that have a fixed money value such as savings deposits insurance policies or bonds. Some retired persons live on previously accumulated wealth that has a fixed money value. There are some partial offsets : interest rates on deposits tend to rise in periods of inflation and so may the prices of common stocks and of real estate. But not everybody holds assets that rise in price or yield. Legislative changes in social security have provided considerable relief to many retired and disabled individuals at the lower end of the income range but not to all. Nevertheless the inactive members of the population as a group suffer losses of real income that to them are significant even though the corresponding gains of the active group are relatively small in terms of its income To be sure in a period of inflation some workers will have the opportunity for wage gains sufficiently large to enhance their real incomes relative to other workers. Some businessmen do manage to widen their profit margins. Yet in the ensuing spiral neither business as a whole nor labor as a whole is likely to make permanently larger gains in real income as a result of inflation. Periods of rapid rises in both wage rates and prices have not significantly altered the long-term distribution of income between labor and business. Both groups reap their gains in a depreciated dollar with some loss to both by sacrificing the smooth functioning of the economy. Most gains achieved by individual groups of workers are principally at the expense of other workers and the profit gains of some industries may be obtained largely at the expense of profits in other sectors Improvements in the distribution of economic rewards and in equality of opportunity often occur in.periods of high demand and relatively full employment. It is during such periods that persons with educational racial IOI locational age or physical disadvantages find the greatest opportunities to move into the mainstream of economic life and secure their greatest relative gains. But these gains come from full employment not from the excessive wage and price increases that may accompany it. Our objective is to achieve the gains while avoiding costly inflation Inflation and the Balance of Payments As Chapter makes clear rising prices also have important international implications which particularly at the present time can be even more serious. If our prices rise faster than those of our major competitors American goods suffer in world markets. An increase in the U.S. surplus of exports over imports is needed to strengthen our balance of payments and to permit the eventual relaxation of the restrictions now necessary to maintain our payments position A healthy trade surplus also has a direct and individual meaning for the pocketbooks of the vast numbers of American workers businessmen and farmers who are engaged in industries exposed to export or import competition. If costs and prices in these industries are not kept in check markets may shrink and profits along with markets. Restriction of imports to compensate for this deterioration would be no answer since it would lead to retaliatory curbs on our exports and thus to reduced markets and job opportunities in our export industries Slowing the Trend of Rising Prices The social and economic costs of rising prices point to the pressing need to reestablish and to maintain reasonable stability of the U.S. price level It is clear however that the current inflationary trend can not be stopped abruptly. Yet it is equally clear that the trend must be slowed down. Once a deceleration is achieved it can become self-reinforcing. As wage increases slow down unit labor costs and prices will move up less rapidly. The successive upward adjustments of wages to prices and of prices to wages can progressively shrink. If price increases slow down in and reasonable stability is in the process of being restored the health and strength of the U.S. economy will not be seriously impaired by the fact that prices are still rising. But a new acceleration of price increases could have serious consequences both domestic and international THE RECENT RECORD The upward movement of prices moderated somewhat during the first half of largely reflecting declines in farm prices and the sluggishness of industrial demand. But the pace stepped up again in the second half. Developments during and the prospects and problems for the years immediately ahead can best be understood in the perspective of the entire period of economic expansion ( Charts and ) Chart Consumer Prices = y- SERVICES A L L ITEMS FOOD ^ ^ ^ ^ >w COMMODITIES LESS FOOD II I M I I I i i1i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i I i I n ! M ll M i l l llMM SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR PRICE CHANGES SINCE For the purpose of such an assessment the period since can be divided into four fairly distinct segments : relative stability through mid-1965 ; acceleration mid-1965 through September ; easing pressures September through mid-1967 ; and renewed rapid advance since June ( Table ) Through Mid-1965 A remarkable degree of price stability characterized the early years of the 19605s. Economic activity rose along a balanced and fairly steady path Because the margin of underutilized resources had been very large in and because it was absorbed gradually significant economic gains did not upset the stability of prices. Some moderate pressures began to emerge in ; many firms were approaching their preferred operating rates as expansion of plant and equipment lagged somewhat behind the growth of output and profits rose sharply The first significant departure from price stability occurred among farm products. Throughout this period farm prices had been falling slowly. Early IO3 Chart Wholesale Prices = PROCESSED FOODS AND FEEDS FARM PRODUCTS I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR in they suddenly reversed direction reflecting reduced domestic supplies and heavy export demand. Price increases for food at both wholesale and retail followed promptly Mid-1965 Through September Around mid-1965 the growth of demand for industrial products suddenly accelerated as the direct and indirect consequences of the enlarged commitment of U.S. forces in Vietnam. Manufacturing output and employment spurted sharply in the last quarter of and the first quarter of and continued to rise steadily through most of Prices of consumer services began to accelerate as service firms found it more difficult to obtain workers. With rising food and service prices and stronger demands for labor upward pressures on wages intensified in both the organized and unorganized sectors. In the industrial area the impact of demand on prices was strongest in the defense-related and capital goods sectors where shortages of both capacity and skilled manpower were most pronounced. But prices also advanced in many other areas The upward pressures on prices and wages in this period reflected both the speed of the advance and the high level of resource utilization which the economy achieved. These pressures tripped off a price-wage spiral Rising living costs and tight labor markets combined to enlarge wage increases and the resulting bulge in unit labor costs and the stronger product IO4 TABLE Major price trends during selected periods since December Percentage change per year Price group December to June June to September September to June June to December Wholesale prices : All commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Industrials Consumer prices : All items Commodities Food Commodities less food Services GNPdeflatori i Based on seasonally adjusted data for quarter containing month indicated Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor markets generated higher prices. Rising prices in turn served as the basis for further wage advances and further wage advances as the basis for price increases September Through Mid-1967 Largely as a consequence of restrictive monetary and fiscal policies and a concurrent rise in the personal saving rate the growth of final demand slowed in late A period of inventory adjustment and sluggish overall growth followed in the first half of The slowdown combined with larger supplies caused prices to fall sharply for most farm products and some other commodities traded in organized markets. To a degree these declines were reflected in lower prices for foods and other commodities directly processed or fabricated from the less costly raw materials. Price increases also slowed in most but not all other areas The rise in prices that did occur in that sluggish period was essentially a reflection of rising costs rather than of excessive demand. However these cost increases originated in the strong demand conditions of and Thus the price-wage spiral continued to turn although the initial motive force had subsided Second Half of As demand advanced with renewed strength in the second half of the rate of price increase again stepped up. Demand was not yet pressing on productive capacity over-all or in most major sectors. The period of slow expansion had created enough slack so that production could respond to increasing demand without significant strain on productive resources But costs had continued to rise throughout the period of sluggishness. The full adjustment of prices to these rising costs had been suppressed or de- layed in the first half year. Later in the year stronger markets and expectations of renewed expansion led businessmen to raise prices to reflect the earlier cost increases thus turning the wage-price spiral another notch Because the basic inflationary force in was rising costs the pattern of price and wage changes was rather different from that of when excessive demands were the chief inflationary force DEVELOPMENTS IN The rate of increase of prices in was much the same as in To be sure the annual average of wholesale prices barely rose from to in contrast with a percent increase from to However the increase in consumer prices slowed only from percent in to percent in The GNP deflator which covers all output rose percent in as against percent in All three price indexes showed a modest deceleration when price changes are measured during the year ( December to December ) rather than by annual averages. For example during consumer prices increased percent compared with percent during And the GNP deflator registered a percent advance during slightly less than the percent rise during Increases in wages and hourly labor compensation continued at high levels in Meanwhile productivity gains lagged and unit labor costs rose considerably The discussion which follows summarizes the wage and price record of LABOR SUPPLY AND DEMAND Labor markets were generally not as tight in as they had been in despite the fact that the over-all unemployment rate was the same in both years. This conclusion is supported by various measures of labor market tightness such as hours of work new hire and layoff rates help-wanted advertising unfilled job openings and insured unemployment Employment showed little change in the first half of the year but surged ahead in the second half. Most measures of labor market conditions reflected the changing pace of employment. For example the number of unfilled nonfarm job openings placed by employers with the U.S. Employment Service declined percent from September to July then moved irregularly upward. Throughout unfilled openings remained above Average hours per week in manufacturing the help-wanted index compiled by the National Industrial Conference Board insured unemployment and new hire and layoff rates weakened from the fall of to mid-1967 then strengthened during the remainder of the year. All these measures indicated that labor market conditions eased in ; all except the workweek indicated that labor markets were tighter than in any year between the end of the Korean war and The unemployment rate however did not rise in though it fluctuated from month to month. Changes in employment were offset to a remarkable degree by parallel changes in the labor force. The participation of women in the labor force varied considerably. When job openings waned in the first half of the year growth of the adult female labor force stopped ; when employment opportunities brightened in the second half of the year the participation of women rose strongly accounting for million of the unusually large million increase ( seasonally adjusted ) in the total labor force The rise in demand for labor and in employment during was unevenly spread among occupations and sectors reflecting the pattern of economic activity. Manufacturing employment after rising by about percent between and declined by nearly percent in the first half of the year and at the end of was still percent below a year earlier There was also a small reduction in mining employment. But in the service sectors employment rose slightly more between and than between and Employment in the professional technical and salaried managerial categories continued to increase rapidly On the whole the balance between the composition of labor demand and of labor supply improved in In particular the metalworking skills which had been in such short supply in were no longer so scarce. This mainly reflected the easing of demand pressures on the industries which are the largest employers of men with these skills. Total employment actually declined in in the machinery and equipment industries In part the easing of shortages also reflected the fact that the structure of the labor force had another year and the assistance of greatly expanded private and public training programs to adjust to the job requirements of a high-employment economy The number of long-term unemployed declined significantly indicating that many previously " hard-core " unemployed were moving into the mainstream of employment Moreover the geographical balance of labor supply and demand also improved. For example the number of " major " labor market areas classified as having " persistent " unemployment fell from in December to in December The number of " small " labor market areas with persistent unemployment fell from to and the number of " very small " labor market areas from to over the same period But while specific shortages were reduced and the over-all balance in the labor market was improved labor markets remained tighter than they had been for many years prior to the surge of demand in late and Even in manufacturing where employment was not growing labor turnover remained relatively high. And the continuing rapid growth of demand in the professional technical and managerial occupations produced severe competition for workers with these abilities and skills Wages The faster rise in wages that had begun in continued throughout Though marked shortages were not widespread employers continued to compete to attract or retain experienced well-qualified workers. Workers in relatively low-wage industries and occupations continued to have opportunities to move to better jobs and their wages rose particularly rapidly Unions negotiating in had the background of two years of rising living costs low unemployment especially for adult men and relatively high profits to support their negotiating positions. Moreover in union bargainers had many more large settlements by other unions and in some cases large awards to unorganized workers to point to in support of their demands. They sought to catch up with and if possible to surpass the pattern of wage increases established by other unions in earlier settlements Thus collective bargaining settlements in averaged about } percent a year well in excess of settlements in and far above those earlier inthel960 's ( Table ) TABLE Wage and benefit changes in collective bargaining situations Median percentage change negotiated or effective during Type of change Most important collective bargaining situations annual rate of increase over life of contract : Wage and benefit changes negotiated during specified year : Equal timing Actual timing Wage changes negotiated during specified year : Equal timing All important collective bargaining situations : * First-year wage adjustments negotiated during specified year : All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing- idjustments effective during specified year regardWage adju less of date of negotiations : All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Based on preliminary data available in early January Possible increases in wages resulting from cost-of-living escalator adjustments are omitted except for any part of the escalator increase guaranteed in the contract The estimate is based on key contracts which affected million workers in major industries. The estimate covers most settlements affecting workers or more in all industries excluding construction services finance and government. The and estimates cover all settlements affecting workers or more in all industries except government Annual rate of increase assuming equal spacing of wage and benefit changes over life of contract Annual rate of increase taking account of actual effective dates of wage and benefit changes during contract period The estimates for to cover most settlements affecting workers or more in ail industries excluding construction services finance and government. The and estimates cover all settlements affecting workers or more in all industries except government All contracts affecting or more workers. From to construction services finance and government are excluded. All industries except government are covered in the and estimates Includes changes in wage rates negotiated during specified year plus increases decided upon in earlier years cost-ofliving escalator adjustments and no wage changes Source : Department of Labor An important influence on both union and nonunion wage increases in was the 12-percent increase in the Federal minimum wage and the extension of coverage to millions of additional workers As a result of all these factors wage increases in most sectors unorganized and organized accelerated between and Gross average hourly earnings for nonsupervisory employees in the private nonfarm sector increased percent between and up from percent in ( Table ) Gross hourly earnings in manufacturing were held down by a decline in overtime hours. Changes in the proportion of workers in high and low wage industries the interindustry " mix " within manufacturing also held down the average increase in earnings. Corrected for changes in overtime and for interindustry mix average straight-time earnings for production workers in manufacturing increased percent in considerably above the percent increase in gross average hourly earnings based on actual employment weights and far in excess of the percent corrected increase in The acceleration in wage rates in therefore was even more marked than the table indicates As has been the case in each of the last several years increases in hourly earnings were largest in low-wage industries. Indeed every sector shown in Table with below average wage levels had above average wage increases ( although the reverse was not uniformly true ) Even within manufacturing T A B L E Changes in average gross hourly earnings by industry Percentage change per year Industry to to to to Agriculture Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities : Communication Electric gas and sanitary services. Trucking and warehousing Local and suburban transportation. Wholesale trade Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellaneous : Hotels tourist courts and motels.. Laundries and drycleaning plants <_ Durable goods Nondurable goods Manufacturing Total private nonagricultural employees Preliminary Includes industries not shown separately Includes eating and drinking places Prior to January data relate to production workers Note. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining for construction workers in contract construction and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries ( except as noted ) Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Labor IO9 some of the most notable advances were achieved in such low-wage industries as textiles apparel shoes and furniture The faster wage increases for the lowest paid industries reflects the general tendency for differentials to narrow at least in percentage terms when labor markets are relatively tight. During such periods many employees in low-wage industries can find a ready market ) for their services in higherpaid sectors forcing employers to raise wages rapidly in order to retain their workers. The narrowing of differentials was further reinforced in by the increase in the level and coverage of the minimum wage However the tendency for wage differentials to narrow was partially offset in a number of areas by new collective bargaining agreements. There was considerable variation in the size of new contracts in One-fifth of all workers affected by new major settlements received annual increases in compensation exceeding percent. Particularly large gains were secured by workers in the automotive rubber pulp and paper railroad farm imple-ment and construction industries all high-wage industries Average hourly compensation ( which includes wages fringe benefits and employer contributions for social insurance ) for all employees in the total private economy rose percent in ( Table ) The difference between the over-all increase in hourly compensation and the increase in hourly T A B L E Changes in compensation productivity unit labor cost and output price in the private economy since Percentage change per year Sector and item to to to to Total private : Average hourly compensation2 Output per man-hour Unit labor cost Implicit GNP price deflator._ Private nonfarm : Average hourly compensation Output per man-hour Unit labor cost.. Implicit GNP price deflator Manufacturing : Average hourly compensation2. Output per man-hour Unit labor cost Implicit GNP price deflator ( ) Preliminary Wages and salaries of all employees and supplements to wages and salaries such as employer contributions for social i nsurance and for private pension health unemployment and welfare funds compensation for injuries pay of the military reserve etc. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payment part of the income of the selfemployed Not available Note. Data for each sector relate to all persons Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers IIO earnings of production workers reflects in part a decline in the proportion of man-hours worked by production workers whose average pay is lower than that of supervisory employees. Fringe benefits grew more rapidly than wages and in addition a small increase in in employer contributions for social insurance accounts for some of the difference Real Income Gains About half of the 6-percent increase in current-dollar compensation per man-hour was eroded by the increase in consumer prices. In real terms compensation per man-hour rose by percent somewhat less than in but above the average gain in recent years. Real weekly earnings of production workers which do not include employer contributions for social insurance and other fringe benefits increased less than percent partly as a result of lower weekly hours. This was the smallest rise since the late 's ( Table B-31 ) Productivity Unit Labor Costs and Profits Along with the greater increase in hourly compensation there was a marked slowdown in the growth of output per man-hour in In part this reflected the reduced efficiency that occurs when capacity utilization falls. During the early part of output per man-hour actually declined but it more than recovered as expansion resumed. For as a whole output per man-hour for the entire private economy increased about iy2 percent. For the private nonfarm sector and in manufacturing the rise was slightly less than percent The large rise in compensation and the small gain in productivity resulted in an unusually sharp increase in unit labor cost amounting to 4l/2 percent for the entire private sector and to percent for manufacturing ( Table ) Analysis of earlier periods suggests that short-run fluctuations in the growth of productivity are not as immediately or fully reflected in prices as are changes in compensation. Thus business especially in manufacturing tends to absorb higher cost resulting from temporary reductions in productivity as well as other cost increases due to reduced capacity utilization. In this absorption meant a sizable fall in unit profit margins not fully offset by a rise in volume. Corporate profits ( before taxes ) fell about 4j/i percent in but remained well above and earlier years. The drop in profits was largely concentrated in manufacturing PRICES OF CONSUMER SERVICES The importance of service prices is illustrated by the fact that in they accounted for nearly half the total rise in the consumer price index. Following an increase of percent during prices of consumer services continued to advance in though somewhat less rapidly. The percent increase in the cost of consumer services during remained far in excess III TABLE Changes in consumer prices for services Percentage change Type of service December to December December to December Contribution to total change in ( percent ) Interest and property insurance and taxes Public transportation and labor-intensive services Consumer prices all services Public transportation.. Medical care services. Skilled labor services K Other2 Rent and utilities. Rent Utilities. All other services Includes repair and maintenance services barbers and beauticians Includes hotels and motels domestic services babysitters laundries drycleaning and shoe repair Includes postal charges recreational services legal and banking services etc Source : Department of Labor of the average annual advance of about percent between and ( Table ) The principal source of the modest slowdown in was a considerably less rapid increase in the average cost of insurance finance and taxes. This in turn reflected the fact that interest costs on new mortgages on homes did not repeat in the very sharp percent advance recorded in the previous year although they were rising again as the year ended. Most other consumer services continued to rise at much the same rate during as in the previous year In many service occupations increases in productivity are not nearly rapid enough to offset increases in wage rates or professional salaries. The available data on average hourly earnings of service employees in some lower paid industries indicate that they received larger than average wage increases in ( Table ) Moreover shortages of skilled personnel in other services notably medical care combined with strong demand to produce higher than average increases in earnings. So long as these forces continue to push service industry wages up at a rapid rate the prices of services will continue to advance substantially Medical Services Over the years the cost of medical services has been rising more rapidly than that of other consumer services ( Table ) The increase accelerated sharply in and when the average price of these services rose at about percent a year T A B L E Changes in medical care components of consumer prices for services ) Percentage change per year Item December to December December to December to Consumer prices all services Medical care services Hospital daily service charges. Physicians ' fees to Includes items not shown separately Source : Department of Labor Hospital daily service charges which had been rising strongly in the 's and the early 's spurted in and Between and the large annual increase in nonpayroll expense per patient-day ( percent ) and the actual decline of percent a year in the number of patients per hospital employee reflected in part more elaborate and expensive hospital equipment and the increased variety and intensity of care. While measured labor productivity declined hospital wages kept pace with other service industry wages and consequently payroll costs per patient-day increased rapidly. The result of all these cost pressures was that hospital daily service charges increased percent annually from to while all consumer prices were rising at a percent rate Physicians ' fees rose percent annually between and Combined with a small increase in productivity this enabled physicians ' earnings to rise about percent a year. The demand for physicians ' services increases steadily the most important reason being simply the rising incomes of their patients. There is a definite tendency for higher-income families to purchase more physician visits than lower-income families. Another factor has been the growth of insurance coverage. Even before the introduction of Medicare the portion of consumer expenditures on physicians ' services that was covered by insurance more than doubled from percent in to percent in From December to December medical service prices rose percent a sharp increase over the percent annual increase from to The increase from December to December was percent. The new elements were the intensification of inflationary pressures in the economy generally and the entry into force of Medicare and Medicaid. Hospital daily service charges rose percent during and percent during These price increases must have considerably exceeded the rise in hospital costs. The concurrent enlargement of the insured hospital clientele who are less immediately sensitive to price increases because much of their costs are prepaid made it easier for hospitals to raise their charges Prices for physicians ' services moved sharply upward beginning in the first quarter of and then tapered off toward the end of The increase early in may have reflected a revision of fee schedules in anticipation of the introduction of Medicare and Medicaid Public Utilities Prices of utility services have risen much less than those of other major services ( Table ) Table discussed more fully below shows that communication and electric gas and sanitary services are also the sectors where output per man-hour has grown most rapidly and unit labor cost has fallen rather consistently The comparison between price changes and unit labor costs suggests however that public utilities have not passed the full benefit of improved productivity on to their customers. Although their capital costs per unit of output have undoubtedly risen their profits have increased at an exceptional rate In fact the two utilities sectors are the only ones in Table for which profits as a share of corporate output increased from to These are of course regulated industries substantially protected from competition PRICES OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS Prices in the industrial sectors of the economy reflected with reasonable fidelity the interplay of the market forces which prevailed during During the first half of the year the influence of rising production costs was largely masked by the easing of demand pressures and prices showed relatively little change ; in the second half with gradually rising demand cost pressures were more readily translated into substantial advances in prices. This pattern is observed in a wide range of manufacturing industries and in construction Industrial Materials Among the industrial sectors cost factors were least immediately significant in the case of industrial raw materials. There the trend of demand in relation to supply was most dominant. In general demand pressures eased supplies were adequate and prices moved lower for such materials as hides and skins natural rubber hardwood lumber and zinc. There were however important exceptions for which supplies were not adequate ; some prices such as those of sulfur copper and nickel rose sharply Nonfood Manufactures The imbalance between supply and demand which had characterized major sectors of the economy between mid-1965 and late had been especially marked and widespread in manufacturing industries. By the same token these industries were most affected by the easing of demand pressures in late and the first half of Over-all demand for manufactured products grew more slowly in than in yet plant capacity grew about as rapidly. Moreover the com- position of demand was better balanced with productive capabilities. The easing of demand pressures coupled with the completion of new facilities showed up in a notably lower rate of capacity utilization ( Table B-38 ) In the fourth quarter of manufacturing output averaged percent of capacity as compared with percent in the last quarter of The strain on available facilities was reduced in almost all industries. By'the end of capacity utilization was again rising but remained generally well below the rates of While demand pressures in were weaker than in costs in manufacturing were rising rapidly. In addition to the pervasive rise in unit labor costs there were also increases in other elements of production cost including construction and equipment prices interest costs and freight rates for rail highway and inland waterway transportation During the first half of the year the average price of nonfood manufactures showed little change rising about percent between December and June With increasing demand in the second half manufacturers in virtually all industries sought to raise prices to compensate for higher costs and to restore profit margins For nonfood manufactures as a whole prices rose percent in the second half of more than twice as fast as in the preceding six months Differences in the size of price increases among industries reflected the differing strength of demand the incidence of increased costs the extent of intra- and inter-industry competition as it affected the degree of discretion available to individual firms and the degree to which business firms with discretionary pricing power gave weight to the public interest in their pricing decisions As may have been expected the effects of changing demand were most clearly and promptly evident in the less concentrated highly competitive industries in which individual manufacturers enjoy little discretion in their pricing decisions In the textile industry for example the decline in demand during the first half was quite severe partly as a result of heavy overbuying during Inventories rose sharply despite a substantial drop in the operating rate. As a result manufacturers had to cut prices in the face of rising labor costs The average price of cotton products fell percent between December and June ; synthetics also declined. In the second half as demand increased and inventories were gradually worked off prices rebounded and prices of cotton products registered a net advance of percent during the year In other highly competitive industries the decline in demand and output during the first half of the year was not generally reflected in price reductions but rather in some deferment or moderation of price increases to cover rising costs. For example prices were not cut but indeed raised for household furniture apparel and shoes. In each case the advance accelerated in the second half of the year and for as a whole the rise in prices exceeded that for all nonfood manufactures. These are all labor-intensive " industries and hence strongly affected by rising wages. They are also lowwage industries which experienced above-average increases in compensation In more concentrated industries in which sellers enjoyed a greater degree of discretion in their pricing policies the record varied in part reflecting the use made of that discretion In the tobacco industry for example prices were raised percent in on top of a percent boost in Labor costs are relatively minor in this industry and return on equity is among the highest for any industry group An even larger increase was recorded in the rubber industry. In December wholesale prices of tires and tubes were percent above a year earlier ; those of miscellaneous rubber products were percent higher. One element in the price increase was higher labor costs the result of a very large settlement granted after a prolonged strike. But price increases appear to have far exceeded the rise in unit labor costs. Moreover a sharp decline in the cost of natural rubber and a small decrease for some types of synthetics offset some of the higher costs for other materials labor and transportation In a number of other highly concentrated industries in which manufacturers ordinarily enjoy significant discretion in their pricing policies price increases in were somewhat smaller although above the average for nonfood manufactures. Manufacturers ' prices of automobiles were raised about ^ percent late in the year. Prices of electrical machinery rose 5/2 percent during Average prices of steel mill products also rose nearly percent. Steel is less profitable and has slower productivity growth than the other industries mentioned but unlike the others had the advantage of still operating under a moderate labor settlement negotiated in FARM AND FOOD PRICES To a far greater extent than for industrial commodities and services prices of farm products are very highly responsive to relatively small changes in the supplies available for domestic consumption. And these supplies are greatly influenced by weather conditions Federal farm programs and developments abroad that affect the level of U.S. exports During and much of domestic supplies of several major commodities were curtailed primarily because of poor weather. In the important case of hogs the drop in supply was a consequence of large marketings and low prices in and In the last months of and all of supplies of most farm commodities were relatively abundant the combined result of changes in Federal farm programs of generally excellent growing conditions and of the response by farmers to the higher prices obtained in ( One major exception was cotton which had the smallest crop since ? Civilian consumption of food in the United States increased in and as both population and incomes grew while military food purchases increased from the late summer of to the end of and remained Chart Food Prices = //v \ CONSUMER PRICES FOR FOOD AT HOME \ \ I * * * * * * \ / \ V / ^ \ / < * * * ' \ / * * \ A ' * * * * * ^ \ ^ \ / / / V \ \ J \ f \ ~ \ v y V i/ \ / WHOLESALE PRICES FOR CRUDE FOODSTUFFS AND FEEDSTUFFS I I I I I I i i i i I i I I I I I I I i I I I i I I I I i I1M V A V / / K \ A V v/ ^ ^ / / WHOLESALE PRICES FOR CONSUMER FOODS ] / ^ V y / \ A M.IMM.I M M M II INCLUDES CONSUMER CRUDE FOODS AND CONSUMER PROCESSED FOODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR high throughout Foreign demand was strong during and but weakened in when larger crops abroad reduced the demand for U.S farm products As a result of these supply and demand conditions prices received by farmers advanced sharply between early and August reaching their highest level since the Korean conflict. They then fell rapidly and remained below year earlier levels throughout RETAIL PRICES The impact of price increases for nonfood commodities at the manufacturing level on the consumer was aggravated by an appreciable widening of distributive margins reflecting rising costs of wholesale and retail distribution. As indicated in Table average hourly earnings of wholesale and retail employees rose more than those of manufacturing workers. Higher commercial rents rising freight rates and interest charges imposed a further burden. As a result of these factors prices at retail generally rose somewhat faster than those at wholesale for comparable goods. In fact during the sec- ond half of retail prices of nonfood commodities were rising at the rate of percent per year In the face of the decline in farm prices in retail food prices for use at home rose slightly and restaurant prices increased sharply. As seen in Chart the spread between farm and retail food prices widened in Unit labor costs rose for food processing and marketing firms as they experienced above-average wage increases. Prices of intermediate goods and services purchased by these firms were also higher. The wider margins also reflect the long-term trend of improved quality and increased refinements in processing preparation packaging and distribution of foods available to consumers CONSTRUCTION The measurement of construction costs presents difficult problems but the statistics record an average annual advance of percent since The rate of increase fluctuated somewhat during the last two years with a slowdown in late and early when demand eased. As housing starts recovered construction costs also resumed their usual trend The rise in construction prices thus has generally exceeded the advance in most other industrial sectors by a substantial margin. This is due principally to the fact that wages of construction workers have been rising more rapidly than those of other industrial workers while improvement in construction practices and techniques has lagged seriously While construction activity has been expanding steadily with the exception of the downturn during late and early the supply of skilled workers has not kept pace. Entrance requirements and apprenticeship rules in some construction unions have not been adequately adjusted to the requirements of a rapidly growing economy. For this and other reasons the bargaining strength of unions in the construction industry is generally strong At the same time the resistance of contractors to high wage demands is reduced by the fact that construction contracts are generally let by bid with all contractors in a given area operating under the same wage scales. During this bargaining strength was reflected in the annual wage increases of percent or more provided in a number of important construction settlements At the same time changes in construction techniques which would improve productivity and afford at least a partial offset to rapidly rising wages have been slow in coming. This has been especially true in many urban areas where standards are rigidly controlled under local building codes. These codes originally intended to protect the public against inferior design materials and workmanship have been slow to adjust to the opportunities afforded by new materials and methods. They have thus retarded the advances made possible by developing technology and have preserved high-cost techniques. Both the smaller specialized contractors and the construction trade unions have resisted changes in these codes. The latter have been espe- u8 cially opposed to changes in the allocation of work among different categories of craftsmen and to the use of prefabricated parts PRICE AND WAGE POLICY The magnitude of the stakes involved in moving promptly toward restoration of reasonable price stability is abundantly clear. It is equally evident that the steps taken to achieve this objective must not impair our other essential goals : maintaining high employment ; preserving the effectiveness of free markets in allocating productive resources ; and encouraging efficiency and minimizing waste The various policies available to improve price stability must be evaluated in the light of all these goals DIRECT CONTROLS The most obvious and least desirable way of attempting to stabilize prices is to impose mandatory controls on prices and wages. While such controls may be necessary under conditions of an all-out war it would be folly to consider them as a solution to the inflationary pressures that accompany high employment under any other circumstance. They distort resource allocation ; they require reliance either on necessarily clumsy and arbitrary rules or the inevitably imperfect decisions of Government officials ; they offer countless temptations to evasion or violation ; they require a vast administrative apparatus. All these reasons make them repugnant. Although such controls may be unfortunately popular when they are not in effect the appeal quickly disappears once people live under them FISCAL AND MONETARY MEASURES Fiscal and monetary policy always plays a central role in price stabilization efforts. When over-all demand threatens to outrun supply restrictive fiscal and monetary measures can reduce the growth of demand to keep it in line with the growth of productive capacity Once a wage-price spiral has developed from whatever source a sufficiently restrictive fiscal and monetary policy can stop it but only at the cost of creating a rather wide margin of underutilization of resources. It is possible for a spiral to slow down gradually without a retreat from high employment But the existence of the spiral makes it particularly important to use fiscal and monetary restraints to minimize the risk of upsurges in demand which would give the spiral new momentum Most economists believe that the rate of price increase would be significantly lower than it now is if we had attained the present level of unemployment more gradually. Nevertheless few would disagree that at the present level of resource utilization prices would in any event rise somewhat faster than in the early 's. Clearly we can not afford to attempt to achieve price stability by returning to the unemployment conditions of those years " Equally clearly we need to find other policies which will serve to reduce the rate of price increase that occurs at high levels of employment IMPROVING MARKET EFFICIENCY In its Report the Council discussed at some length the possible contributions to price stability of programs to upgrade labor skills especially of the disadvantaged groups and to bring about a closer match between the capacities of the labor force and the needs of a changing economy It also discussed efforts to strengthen competition break bottlenecks and raise the rate of productivity gains especially in sectors where the productivity trend is now low Over time these and similar measures should gradually reduce inflationary bias and thus permit the economy to achieve higher levels of utilization and lower rates of unemployment without increasing pressures on the price level Such programs are highly important for many reasons. They offer substantial benefits over the long run and are an essential part of our efforts to combine price stability with full employment INCOMES POLICIES In seeking still further ways to reconcile high employment with reasonable price stability the governments of most industrial countries have concluded that it is necessary to develop specific policies aimed at the tendency under conditions of high employment for money incomes to rise faster than production so-called " incomes policies. " These policies seek to induce industry labor and possibly other groups to avoid the irresponsible and self-defeating use of market power when the demand for their products or services increases temporarily. It is recognized that shifts in relative prices or wages should occur to bring about a needed reallocation of resources. But incomes policies encourage business and labor not to take full advantage of every opportunity to charge what the traffic will bear in their own longer run interest and in the general interest of the economy The Council 's Guideposts The Council 's well-known " guideposts " first presented in January represent a form of incomes policy for the United States. The guideposts do not merely appeal for general restraint but in addition try to provide guidance to individual unions and firms as to the specific behavior of wages and prices which would be consistent with general price stability as well as with efficient allocation of resources The genesis objectives and principles of the guideposts were reviewed in detail in the Council 's Report and need not here be elaborated. In general the wage guidepost calls for increases in hourly compensation to be limited to the trend rate of productivity growth for the economy as a whole. The price guidepost emails for prices to remain stable in industries in which the trend gain in productivity approximates the average rate for the economy ; it points to price declines where productivity gains exceed this average ; and it recognizes the need for prices to be increased as required where the improvement is lower than average The Council recognizes that many sellers of commodities and services have little or no discretion over the prices they can charge. In these cases however the workings of competitive markets may be expected to yield results similar to those prescribed by the guideposts so long as the general movement of wages and prices is consistent with the guideposts. It is also recognized that many wages are not set by collective bargaining. But in an environment of general price stability these wages may be expected to move in line with the productivity guidepost especially since many nonunion wages are tied more or less automatically to union wages There are of course many commodities whose price movements are not directly determined by the domestic wage level or by discretionary decisions of firms with market power. Imports and farm products are the most important examples. But imports though significant in some industries do not have a major direct impact on the general trend of costs and prices And farm prices show no marked long-term trend although they display wide short-term fluctuations. To be sure such fluctuations can cause a temporary bulge in the average level of consumer prices. But that bulge would not necessarily become permanent if labor unions recognized the nature of the situation and avoided seeking immediate long-term compensatory increases Thus if the guideposts were essentially observed by those firms and unions that possess discretion with respect to prices and wages the inflationary bias inherent in a high-employment economy should be largely overcome Economic Validity of the Guidepost Logic In their simplest form the guideposts rest on three basic propositions : While changes in wage rates in any particular year reflect special conditions in specific segments of the labor market they tend to be broadly similar throughout the economy. Existing wage differentials largely reflect a whole set of institutional factors and basic differences in skill requirements or other attributes of the job and it is reasonable that they should change rather slowly Price changes in any industry or sector are strongly influenced by unit labor costs and also reflect the influence of the value of capital used per unit of output and the prices of materials and services purchased from other industries. For the economy as a whole the influence of purchased materials and services essentially cancels out so that prices depend largely on wages and returns to capital profits interest and depreciation. If prices move in proportion to unit labor costs the relative shares of wages and returns to capital will remain constant. Moreover since the capital employed per unit of output shows little trend in most sectors the rate of return on capital will remain stable Simple arithmetic requires that for the average of unit labor costs in the entire economy to be stable it is necessary that the average change in hourly compensation match as a percentage the average change in output per man-hour in the entire economy ; and for the average of prices to be stable the movements of prices should conform to the movements of unit labor costs In defending the first two of these propositions the Council has frequently asserted not only that they reflect the ways in which wages and prices " ought " to behave but that they basically reflect the way in which wages and prices tend in the long run to behave under free-market conditions. Data have recently become available which provide additional evidence that in fact they do behave in such a manner The data in Table show average annual rates of change in output compensation productivity unit labor costs and prices for major sectors of the nonfarm economy during the postwar period and for each of three subperiods : and The beginning and ending years of each of these subperiods were years of relatively high employment chosen so as to mimimize the influence of cyclical fluctuations. The prices used are " value-added " prices that is selling prices adjusted for changes in the prices of goods and services purchased from other sectors These data are subject to qualifications largely because of difficulties in the measurement of the real output originating in a sector. Thus in finance insurance and real estate much of the output is imputed rather than actually sold. In the construction sector the nature of the available price data may lead to an understatement of the growth in real output and hence of output per man-hour. For similar reasons there may be some understatement of real output in the service sector. However any error in the price deflator would also affect unit labor cost and need not distort the measured difference between the rates of change in price and in unit labor cost The three subperiods covered in the table vary markedly in their economic characteristics. Both the first and the last periods show considerably stronger growth both in output and in productivity than the middle period. Moreover with relatively few exceptions the rate of increase of compensation declined from the first to the third period as did the rate of increase in prices. Yet in each subperiod and for the postwar period as a whole the following facts stand out : Changes in hourly compensation were markedly similar in all sectors Productivity changes on the other hand varied widely among the sectors. In some sectors they also varied somewhat among the three time periods reflecting longer-term trends or structural changes For the economy as a whole the data indicate that when wages rise TABLE Changes in selected economic indicators by industry division Percentage change per year Industry and period Outputl Private domestic nonfarm economy : to to to to Output per man-hour Compensation per man-hour Unit labor cost Implicit gross product deflator Manufacturing : to to to to Transportation : to to to to Communication : to to to to 4.C Mining : to to to to Contract construction : to to to to Electric gas and sanitary services : to to to to Wholesale and retail trade : to to to to Finance insurance and real estate : to to to to Services : * to to to 1959_ to Gross product in constant dollars Wages salaries and supplements Includes government enterprises Includes private households agricultural services forestry and fisheries Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers faster than output per man-hour prices rise correspondingly with little effect on the distribution of income. With certain exceptions notably mining the regulated utility industries ( as discussed above ) and construction price movements in the various sectors and in the several subperiods for a given sector conformed closely to the movements of unit labor costs. Moreover as Chart illustrates the agreement between changes in unit labor cost and changes in prices is particularly close for the subperiod This analysis thus supports the guidepost conclusions that price stability can be achieved and maintained only to the extent : ( ) that increases in hourly compensation generally conform to the average economy-wide improvement of output per man-hour ; and ( ) that changes in prices in individual sectors generally conform to changes in unit labor costs in those sectors The former requirement was clearly violated beginning in and there have been notable exceptions to the second requirement in a few major industries throughout the 's. The crucial problem for and the years ahead is to find means to achieve both requirements without sacrificing other essential objectives Chart Prices and Unit Labor Costs Private Domestic Nonfarm Economy CONTRACT CONSTRUCTION SERVICES _ FINANCE INSURANCE TOTAL A N R E A L ESTATE o a WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TRADE ELECTRIC GAS AND SANITARY SERVICES * ^ MANUFACTURING TRANSPORTATION COMMUNICATION MINING UNIT LABOR COSTS-PERCENTAGE CHANGE PER YEAR SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS WAGE-PRICE POLICY FOR Meaningful progress toward the restoration of price stability will not be easy to achieve in The policy choices must be assessed in the light of current and prospective pressures on prices and wages The basic forces working on wages and prices this year will be similar in many ways to those at work in Unemployment and capacity utilization will show relatively little change In the areas not directly affected by the market power of unions and business the available evidence does not point to a significant net reduction in price pressures. Farm prices are likely to rise a little instead of declining as they did in Strong demand pressures will continue to pull wages up rapidly in several areas including engineering scientific and technical occupations ; State and local governments ; and medical and hospital services though in some markets supplies may begin to catch up with demands with a consequent reduction in wage pressures. Moreover the 14-percent increase in the minimum wage in will have an even greater impact than did the increases which mainly restored the minimum wage to a more typical relationship with the average wage level in the economy Responsible Private Decisions Major union settlements in provided wage and benefit increases averaging about ^ percent a year over the life of the contracts while average hourly compensation in the entire private economy increased by percent. ( These two figures are not strictly comparable. Average compensation reflects new and continuing contracts in organized sectors as well as all compensation in nonunion areas ; it also reflects changes in employers ' contributions for social insurance. Moreover it is influenced by shifts in the composition of the labor force. ) If new collective bargaining settlements reached in should again average 5/2 percent the rise in average hourly compensation for the economy as a whole would be appreciably larger than in One reason is that the second- and third-year provisions of contracts negotiated in and will provide larger increases on the average in than were inherited in from similar provisions of earlier contracts Despite the favorable prospect that productivity gains in should exceed those of the pressure of rising unit labor costs on prices would continue to be strong in on the assumption of a / -percent average for new union settlements. And stronger demand conditions will make it easier for cost increases to be passed on in prices. Thus there would be no prospect of any slowing down in the rate of increase of consumer prices In fact several prominent settlements last year substantially exceeded percent a year and some unions have already taken this figure as their target to meet or beat in negotiations during If new union settlements were to average even higher in than in a clear acceleration of price increases would be likely in f ~ Such an acceleration in or even a continuance of the rate of price increase would have a major impact on the prospects for prices in and even It would push the ultimate restoration of reasonable stability farther into the future. And as the momentum of the spiral became built into attitudes expectations and practices of business labor and consumers the restoration of stability would not merely be pushed farther into the future but would become progressively more difficult to achieve On the other hand if the rise of prices slows down in there is the clear possibility of restoring reasonable price stability in subsequent years Hence every effort must be made to slow down the rate of price increase in This surely can only be achieved if the average of new union settlements is appreciably lower than the * /s>-percent average of and if business firms avoid any widening of their gross margins over direct costs and indeed absorb cost increases to the extent feasible. A decisive slowing down from the recent rate of price advance could then take place in This would be the first step toward our target of essential stability of prices The Government will continue in to urge both business and labor to exercise the utmost restraint in their decisions. Such restraint will demand some immediate sacrifices. The rewards of such restraint lie in the assurance of continued high employment a steady rise in real compensation and healthy expansion of markets sales and profits. These gains may be less immediately perceptible than the costs but no less certain and far greater in the end Productivity Principle In calling for restraint in wage and price decisions the Council recognizes that in as in it would clearly be inappropriate to set the trend of productivity as a numerical target for wage increases. In the face of the 3-percent increase of consumer prices that occurred during it would be patently unrealistic to expect labor to accept increases in money wages which would represent essentially no improvement in real hourly income Nevertheless despite the justification for compensation increases in excess of the productivity trend such increases are inevitably inflationary. As the Council stated in its Report : " The only valid and noninflationary standard for wage advances is the productivity principle. If price stability is eventually to be restored and maintained in a high-employment U.S. economy wage settlements must once again conform to that standard. " In the discussion above the Council has outlined the pattern of price and wage decisions required in to begin progress toward the target of price stability. That target can not be achieved in It will be achieved only when wage settlements once more conform to the productivity standard and only when business engages in responsible price-making which means that prices in each industry should conform to the trend of unit costs with no widening of margins Government Organization To Promote Price Stability The discussion of this chapter should make clear that the task of reconciling price stability with high employment will require sustained efforts of public policy on many fronts. The full resources of the Government should be enlisted to deal effectively with structural problems that impede economic efficiency and contribute to inflation The machinery of Government policymaking and administration should be adapted to keep the objective of over-all price stability clearly in focus and to give it a high priority in the formulation and administration of Government programs throughout the entire range of Federal activities Consequently as his Economic Report has indicated the President has established a Cabinet Committee on Price Stability consisting of the Secretaries of Treasury Commerce and Labor the Director of the Budget and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. The heads of other agencies will participate in the Committee 's work as required. This Committee will be coordinated by the Council Chairman and will be served by a small professional staff. It will meet on a regular schedule and hold special meetings to deal with urgent problems Its activities will include the following : The Committee will prepare and publish from time to time studies in depth of economic conditions in those industries which are a persistent source of inflationary pressure either because of inappropriate exercise of market power by labor or business or because of inefficient or ineffective institutional arrangements trade practices or market institutions The Committee will study intensively and make constructive recommendations concerning all aspects of Government policy that affect prices in particular sectors including among others policies related to Federal procurement and construction ; manpower and labor market programs ; imports and exports ; competition and trade practices ; research development and technological changes ; and the supply of natural resources to particular markets. Where appropriate it will develop and coordinate interagency programs to deal with the structural problems of particular industries which make them a source of inflationary bias The Committee will work with representatives of business labor and the public to enlist cooperation toward responsible wage and price behavior and structural improvements that promote the achievement of over-all price stability. However it will not become involved in specific current wage and price matters In line with these objectives the Committee will shortly begin a series of conferences both with representatives of business labor and the public interest at large and with representatives of particular industries or particular segments of labor to attempt to reach some consensus on appropriate general standards to guide private price and wage decisions ; to identify remediable problems that inhibit price stability in particular areas and attempt to design cooperative programs for private and governmental action to deal with these problems The Committee will occasionally recommend to the President and the Congress suitable legislation which would advance the objective of price stability in a free market economy Chapter Economic Development and Individual Opportunity T HE unprecedented prosperity of the past seven years has brought great economic progress to most Americans. Poverty has been significantly reduced ; educational attainment is rising ; the quality of public services has improved ; and far more jobs are available to the previously disadvantaged But not all Americans have shared in the Nation 's prosperity. About oneseventh of the population remains in poverty. And the plight of the poor is ever more sharply contrasted with the comfortable standards of living most Americans enjoy in an era of growing and widening abundance. This contrast has awakened the social conscience of the Nation ; at the same time the Nation 's ability to assist the disadvantaged minority has reached new heights. The majority of our people have now achieved incomes which make the elimination of poverty a concrete realistic and attainable goal in our generation. For the first time in any society the United States can afford to eliminate poverty ; indeed it can not afford to do otherwise The reduction of poverty has been a continuing process in our society fundamentally reflecting the long-term growth of output per worker which in turn has derived from progress in technology and management from a labor force ever better educated and more adaptable and from the provision of more and better capital per worker. Economic growth brings great rewards ; but because it comes unevenly it can be a highly disruptive process Some industries some occupations some regions undergo dramatic expansion ; others decline relatively or even absolutely. Whole new industries and occupations arise ; many older ones are completely transformed or disappear entirely Many of the structural changes that lie at the heart of progress do not force individuals to change their occupations or residences. The adjustment comes as sons and daughters take up occupations different from their parents ' or move to new areas. But rapid and uneven change often can not be fully accommodated in this way. Many individuals are uprooted or find their livelihoods threatened. Some can not make the transition which provides the opportunity for improvement. And even an adjustment occurring between generations often creates hardship when childhood background and training are inadequate or unsuited to the needs of the new order Thus the process which has reduced poverty has sometimes created it It has redistributed both affluence and poverty and in many cases has concentrated them geographically occupationally and by demographic category. As those able to respond to opportunity have moved out of poverty those left behind are increasingly the ones whose opportunities were restricted : the immobile the aged the disabled the handicapped the broken family the poorly educated the victim of discrimination Significant reduction in the number of poor people has occurred only when the economy is expanding. When economic growth is slow poverty diminishes slowly and often actually increases. The years from through saw rapid reduction in poverty as have the years since By contrast the number of individuals in poverty declined very slowly during the latter half of the 's The first part of this chapter focuses primarily on the geographical aspects of the process by which poverty has been both eliminated and redistributed the transformation of agriculture the growth of the city and the redistribution of opportunity and of poverty within the city The second part of the chapter largely abstracts from the geographical dimensions of poverty. It deals with programs offering solutions to poverty wherever the poor may be found Programs for the reduction of poverty are and should be in part the responsibility of local organizations and units of government. Nevertheless even though concentrations of poverty are local the problem is national and must be a national responsibility. Indeed it is a national problem just because of its concentration. The forces which produce poverty in particular areas are largely beyond the influence of local governments. And the remedies needed to lift citizens from poverty can not be successfully applied by individual communities acting alone THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF OPPORTUNITIES The social scientist needs a yardstick to measure progress in reducing economic deprivation. For statistical purposes households are defined as poor if their income falls below the cost of a certain minimum consumption standard $ in current prices for a nonfarm couple under years of age $ for a nonfarm family of four and so on. A reduction in numbers by this definition is only a rough measure of progress since social and psychological conditions associated with poverty may persist after incomes rise above the poverty line. Moreover the income levels used in the definition can not provide for much more than minimum necessities. Nevertheless measured changes in the incidence of poverty over time provide a reasonable criterion of achievement and are employed frequently throughout this chapter Between and the number of poor declined sharply from to million or from to percent of the population. Substantial progress was recorded for almost every population group but the reduction in the number of poor farm households was especially marked This progress though encouraging should not conceal the magnitude of the remaining problems nor the fact that they fall with disproportionate severity on certain groups Geographically poverty is today concentrated in the central cities of our large metropolitan areas and in certain rural districts. While the proportion of poor farm households remains above the national average the great bulk of rural poverty today is found among the rural nonfarm population. The distribution and extent of poverty have been influenced by the changing structure of employment opportunities and the massive internal migrations encouraged by these changes. One of the most significant of these changes has occurred in farming CHANGES IN THE FARM ECONOMY The most pervasive influence affecting employment in agriculture has been a growth of labor productivity substantially in excess of the growth of markets. Between and aggregate production inputs used in farming increased by only percent while farm output increased by percent The over-all ratio of output to inputs increased percent and the ratio of output to labor input increased by a spectacular percent The demand for farm products has consistently increased less rapidly than the growth of incomes. Combined with sharp increases in productivity this fact has greatly diminished the need for labor resources in farming Further the revolutionary increase in labor productivity could be realized only through mechanization. Because many machines could be efficiently utilized only on large farms the full benefits of mechanization were not available to farms of smaller size. Since the number of farms has been reduced by almost one-half and the average size of farms has more than doubled ( Chart ) The farm population meanwhile has fallen by almost two-thirds ; after remaining virtually unchanged in the preceding years it declined from million in to million in As a result of the trends in demand and in productivity the number of farms with sales valued at $ or more per year has been increasing while the number of farms with annual sales under $ has declined almost one-third since ( Table ) There is a movement up the income ladder within farming as some operators of smaller farms acquire additional resources to expand their sales. But operators of the smallest farms have become increasingly dependent on off-farm employment to supplement their incomes. Farm incomes are benefited both by Government price-support operations and by direct payments. These benefits of course do little for farmers who have little to sell. Despite the growing prosperity of large farmers many small farmers and farmworkers can not earn a decent income in farming Industrial expansion offered many farmers and farmworkers an opportunity to raise their incomes by accepting nonfarm employment. Several Chart Changing Farm Structure MILLIONS ACRES MILLIONS : NUMEJER OF FARMS IS $ IN S ^ I8 % i ^ < SOURCE : -DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE studies show that movement out of farming is much more closely related to employment opportunities and income in the nonfarm sectors than to earnings in farming. The experience of the 's again confirms this. Rapid economic growth was accompanied by sharp reductions in the farm population Poverty in the Farm Population Farm poverty remains a serious problem especially since most of the farm poor are ineligible for income maintenance programs as presently organized As recently as percent of all farm families had less than $ in sales and averaged less than $ of total family income ( Table ) The number of farmers in this sales class has declined sharply since then and their off-farm earnings have increased. Operators of the smaller farms tend to be older than those of large farms and have on the average almost years less of formal education. The remaining poverty on farms is concentrated among these operators of small farms. By however only farm households were in poverty a sharp drop from million in Much of the reduction in farm poverty has resulted from migration. Some of those who moved have become members of the nonfarm poor but the bulk of the younger migrants have increased their income potential. It is likely that TABLE Number of farms and farm income y value-of-sales b Number of farms Value-of-sales class and year Thousands of farms All farms : Percentage distribution Cash receipts plus Government payments ; percentage distribution classes and Farm operator family income Total income Realized net farm income Off-farm income $ $ $ Sales of $ $ : Sales of $ $ : Sales of $ and over : Sales under $ : Source : Department of Agriculture many of the older farmers who left farming remain in poverty. This is reflected in the fact that between and the number of aged poor nonfarm households outside metropolitan areas remained nearly constant Hired farmworkers are also very likely to be poor. In there were persons who had hired farm work as their primary employment They averaged days of farm work and an added days of nonfarmwork with total wages from both sources averaging $ for the year. The hired farm work force contains a disproportionate number of nonwhites percent in ; this contrasts with percent of non whites in both the total farm and the total U.S. population The largest concentration of low-income farms and farmworkers is in the South. In percent of all farms with less than $ in annual sales but percent of all U.S. farms were located in the South. Moreover in that year more than percent of the hired farmworkers lived in the South Despite the revolution in agricultural technology and the attendant migration the transformation of agriculture is not complete. The farm population will continue to decline creating serious problems for some rural communities. The young rather than the older farmers will continue to be the primary migrants. This will leave behind a progressively aging population especially among the farm poor. As a result the natural rate of increase of the farm population will continue to fall. In the natural increase of the farm population totaled and net emigration came to million. By the natural increase had been reduced to and net emigration to THE GROWTH OF NONFARM JOBS The decline of employment opportunities in farming has been accompanied by a rapid growth of jobs in manufacturing and service industries Initially concentrated in or near the large northern cities these jobs attracted millions of migrants from rural areas During the economic expansions accompanying World War II and the Korean war manufacturing employment remained highly concentrated in the heavily metropolitan areas of the industrialized States of the North Massachusetts New York New Jersey Pennsylvania Ohio Michigan and Illinois. With less than percent of the U.S. population these seven States provided about percent of manufacturing employment in about the same share as in when the national total was approximately half as large The pattern of growth in manufacturing employment changed significantly during the late 's. Technological advance in transportation construction of interstate highways expansion of trucking construction of long distance pipelines and the extension of coordinated electric power grids reduced the advantage of potential manufacturing sites in the large metropolitan centers. This trend was accelerated by the rapid growth of industries such as technical instruments electronics and small consumer appliances whose products have high value per unit of weight and volume and thus can be shipped at relatively low transport cost. As a result the location of industry was increasingly determined by other factors such as relative wage rates labor availability local taxes climate and land costs These developments shifted the growth in manufacturing employment away from the North. Between and U.S. manufacturing employment increased ( percent ) Meanwhile in the seven industrialized States mentioned above manufacturing employment increased only ( less than one-half of percent ) By contrast during the same period manufacturing employment grew ( percent ) in the West and ( percent ) in the South Nonfarm job opportunities have grown less rapidly in metropolitan areas especially in the giant ones than in the rest of the Nation. From to private nonfarm employment grew percent a year or more in nonmetropolitan counties regardless of the size of the largest urban center ; in comparison it rose percent yearly in metropolitan counties. In the same period total nonagricultural employment increased less than percent in the largest metropolitan areas While these figures show a general relative improvement in nonagricultural employment opportunities in the less densely settled areas many nonmetropolitan areas were stagnant or declining. Between and there were nonmetropolitan counties in which private nonfarm employment either declined or increased by less than jobs. Large contiguous blocks of counties with declining populations are found in Appalachia the northern portions of the Lake States the Great Plains and the Southwest The process of economic growth has been and continues to be very uneven in rural areas and in smaller cities. These are the areas where because of dependence on one or two industries frequently resource-based industries such as agriculture forestry or mining the greatest adjustments are needed in response to shifts in the pattern of demand technological change or the exhaustion of resources. This uneven growth has been responsible for major shifts in population REGENT CHANGES IN POPULATION DISTRIBUTION In the past ten years significant changes have occurred in the pattern of migration and in the growth and distribution of population in the United States. These changes have both affected and been affected by the changing pattern of demand and productivity in an expanding economy. They have served both as an engine whereby poverty has been reduced and as a force contributing to its redistribution Migration The shifts in the geographical distribution of jobs noted above have been paralleled by changes in the pattern of migration. Migration to the North and to the largest metropolitan areas soared during the economic expansion of the 's and early 's but has slowed markedly in the last ten years Since the largest metropolitan areas ( those with more than population in ) have grown only slightly more rapidly than their natural excess of births over deaths. In the North-Central States the largest metropolitan areas grew percent a year during the 's but only percent a year so far in the 's. They are now experiencing more emigration than immigration. In most regions the metropolitan areas under population are growing considerably more rapidly than the largest ones Net domestic migration to metropolitan areas declined from a year during the 's to a year in the first half of the 's. As Table indicates during the latter period domestic migration contributed less to the growth of metropolitan area population than did foreign migration. Metropolitan areas are still growing faster than nonmetropolitan areas but the difference in growth rates is narrowing. Furthermore in the 's the nonfarm population was growing about as fast outside as inside metropolitan areas From to only the North-Central region lost more migrants foreign and domestic combined than it gained ( Chart ) This was the result of a large net loss of whites through domestic migration which was offset only sightly by the much reduced net domestic immigration of nonwhites. During the same period the Northeast gained population through migration although the region experienced a net emigration of domestic whites. The West continued to receive the largest gains from migration and was the only region to gain more domestic migrants than it lost. The r TABLE Components of population change by area Population changes ( thousands of persons ) Period and area Percentage increase per year in population Net gains from migration Natural increase Total Foreign i Domestic to : Total Metropolitan areas < Nonmetropolitan areas to : Total Metropolitan areas * Nonmetropolitan areas Distribution of net foreign migration is estimated to be the same as distribution of gross migration from foreign countries during Estimated migration among States and the District of Columbia April to April < Metropolitan areas as defined in April to July Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers South was the only region in which emigration exceeded immigration among nonwhites. The South 's gain through total migration was due to a large inflow of white foreign immigrants which offset a net outward movement of both domestic whites and nonwhites The growth of the nonwhite population in metropolitan areas averaged percent a year in the 's but it slowed to percent a year in the 's. Nonetheless this latter rate was about twice as fast as the rate of increase of the white population partly because the nonwhite rate of natural increase was double that of the white. In the 's percent of the increase in nonwhite population in these areas was attributable to migration compared with percent in the 's. Not since the 's has migration accounted for more than half of the growth of nonwhite population in metropolitan areas Racial Distribution Within Metropolitan Areas Like the European immigrants of earlier times the Negroes from the South came to the cities looking for better jobs housing and schools for their children. To a greater degree than their immigrant predecessors Negroes met severe discrimination in housing. Because most of them were poor the housing they could afford was usually in the older sections of the metropolitan area and usually in the central city. And because of discrimination this area became a segregated ghetto. The only way in which the segregated but rapidly growing Negro community could obtain additional housing was through encroachment on the white neighborhoods at the borders of the ghetto Racial tensions increased as the process continued. The more affluent whites moved to the suburbs where Negroes were largely excluded Chart Average Annual Net Migration by Regions THOUSANDS OF PERSONS NORTH CENTRAL S OUTH NONWHITE \ w l : : : : : : : : : > : : : : : : TOTAL i P WEST NORTHEAST I I I I to to to to to to NOTE.-DATA FOR PERIOD I960 TO NOT STRICTLY COMPARABLE WITH OTHER DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Thus within metropolitan areas the nonwhite population has become increasingly concentrated in the central cities while the white middle- and upper-income population has become increasingly suburban. Since the white population in central cities has declined while the nonwhite population has grown by percent a year. Meanwhile the growth rate of suburban populations has been 6/ times the rate for central cities and that growth has been overwhelmingly among the white population. Less than one suburbanite in is nonwhite and the white suburban population is growing more than twice as fast as the nonwhite. Between and there was an exodus of more than million whites from central cities. Over the same period net migration added million to the nonwhite population of central cities and natural increase added another million. As a result of these shifts not only particular city areas or neighborhoods but entire cities and counties are becoming increasingly segregated by race Economic Aspects of the Transformation Businesses as well as the white middle class have found suburban locations increasingly attractive. Cheaper land permits manufacturing firms to construct one- or two-storied buildings which are usually more efficient The suburbs also provide some escape from central city traffic congestion Following the shift of population and manufacturing other industries construction retail trade and other services have also grown rapidly in the suburbs. Employment gains in central cities have been largely limited to clerical managerial and professional positions The decline of the central city as a place of employment relative to the suburbs has been most typical of large northern metropolitan regions. New York City is a case in point. Between and manufacturing employment declined percent in the city but increased percent in the New York State suburbs. In the city only financial institutions State and local government and miscellaneous service industries experienced substantial gains in employment Redistribution of job opportunities in metropolitan areas has increased the distance between the residence of the less-skilled lower-income individual often a Negro and the potential jobs available to him. Metropolitan transit systems characteristically do not provide adequate service between central city poverty areas and the sites of suburban employment Changes in the Distribution of Poverty Many migrants to the cities in recent decades were poor when they arrived. Yet as a proportion of all households in metropolitan areas poor households declined from percent in to percent in This seven-year decline in the incidence of poverty in metropolitan areas was comparable to the reduction from percent to percent in the incidence of poor households in other nonfarm areas. Thus metropolitan areas continue to have less than a proportionate share of the poor ; they contain percent of the total nonfarm population but only percent of the nonfarm poor. Within metropolitan areas poverty is much more common in central cities than in suburbs. In the suburban population outnumbered that in central cities by percent yet there were million poor living in central cities and million in suburbs. About two-thirds of the metropolitan poor are white. While the white poor were distributed about equally between suburbs and central cities about four times as many nonwhite poor lived in central cities as in suburbs IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY In recent years public interest and concern have increasingly been focused on the magnitudes and consequences of migration on the increasing size and agonizing problems of cities and on the continuing decline of many rural communities. In particular many have suddenly become aware of the fact that the concentrations of poor families and particularly of poor Negro families in the blighted areas of major cities include large numbers who are migrants or the children of migrants from rural areas. In the light of these problems questions are often raised whether the separate decisions of millions of individuals and business firms responding to the pull of economic opportunities or the push from their absence tend to produce an " optimum " distribution of population and economic activity : as between rural and urban areas ; as among urban areas of differing size ; and as among the various portions of an urban complex POPULATION DISTRIBUTION AND PUBLIC POLICY These are surely important questions for our society and they need to be studied and discussed. However there does not appear to be available at the present time an adequate amount of information to answer them or even a satisfactory analytical framework within which their answers can be approached in a tolerably scientific fashion. One may express his own tastes as to an appropriate population distribution ; but since they are only tastes they should not be imposed on others Presumably there are few who suggest that governments should undertake to " plan " the distribution of population and economic activity and to use compulsion to influence that distribution. But it is properly pointed out that government policies of many kinds do in fact influence the attractiveness economic and otherwise of various locations and that these policies could perhaps be used to influence locational decisions in a manner which would move us closer to an " optimum " distribution assuming we knew what that was Many Federal activities have significant impacts on the choices of consumers and businessmen as to where they will locate their homes and places of business. Among these are the location of Federal installations ; the provision of Federal funds for sewers water supply recreation facilities and housing ; the pattern of Federal support for highways and other transportation facilities ( including intra-urban facilities ) ; urban renewal programs ; and many others In most cases the Federal Government does not deliberately seek to influence the pattern of locational decisions. But there are nevertheless important impacts. Indeed it is hard to conceive how Federal affairs might be conducted in a way that was " neutral " with respect to locational decisions Since Government action is bound to influence location the locational implications of alternative policies should surely be and to some extent are considered in developing and administering Federal programs. A complete system of priorities based on a concept of optimum geographical distribution of population is seldom required in order to recognize that the locational implications of one set of policies may be superior to those of another This is quite a different matter however from developing policy measures specifically designed to alter existing locational patterns CLARIFYING SOME ISSUES Despite the absence of a complete framework or analytical system for dealing with locational problems it seems possible to clarify some of the issues frequently raised with respect to existing or proposed public policies that affect location or that are aimed at the problems of particular local areas ( ) In light of the preceding sections it is clear that any meaningful discussion of the problems created by migration must take into account the fact that migration is an essential part of the process by which economic growth occurs and individual incomes expand. Migration does not simply redistribute poverty ; it also serves to reduce poverty. By far the greatest part of migration is in response to income opportunities. The population tends to move from areas where incomes are lower to ones where incomes are higher. This shift of the population raises incomes for most migrants and probably on balance has a favorable effect on the incomes and job opportunities of those who do not migrate ( ) Many problems which appear to be the problems of particular cities or rural districts are not in fact local problems in any meaningful sense They represent the local outcroppings of more basic national problems reflecting such factors as : an unequal distribution among individuals of educational opportunities and health services ; the impact of technological change as it affects persons with particular skills or the lack of skills ; the incidence of family instability ; and a variety of social tensions associated with modern living conditions and current individual and social values. Many of these problems such as those of education health training income maintenance and individual disability have been properly identified and are being dealt with as national problems ( ) The most difficult and potentially explosive problems of life in urban centers are those associated with racial antipathies and prejudices. The economic and social problems of our large cities would be very different were it not for the housing segregation which confines Negroes and occasionally other national-origin or ethnic groups to particular neighborhoods Especially serious frictions are created as the frontiers of segregation are disturbed by population expansion. But racial discrimination is a national not a local phenomenon. Likewise patterns of discrimination in employment and business emerge as problems for localities ; but like housing segregation they are in fact the result of national problems of interracial attitudes ( ) One striking factor impairing the abilities of some communities to avoid or solve problems arises from artificial and obsolete political boundaries. Such jurisdictional divisions fracture the social and economic unity of many of our communities both urban and rural. For example the central cities of urban areas necessarily provide many benefits to outlying areas while being unable to assess a reasonable share of the costs of these services to residents outside the central city. The financial ability of an urban complex as a whole to solve many of its own problems may not be in question. But if inappropriate political boundaries allocate the costs unevenly the financing of essential public services may appear an almost insoluble problem ( ) The relation between the per capita cost of providing public services and the population size and density of a locality is one element in the evaluation of the costs and benefits of alternative population distributions For some public services the highest per capita cost occurs in communities which are of minimum or of maximum density. There are some services for which the per capita cost may rise steadily throughout most of the range of progression from fairly low to highest density. These include such services as abatement or control of noise pollution or crime ; and provision of adequate outdoor recreational facilities. As the size of a community increases the per capita cost of such services may at least beyond some point increase steeply. And of course there are some services or amenities such as museums and libraries for which the average cost declines almost continuously and without limit as the size of the community increases Some research has been done on the cost and efficiency of public services in communities of various sizes and densities. Much more research is needed in order to provide effective guidance for community planning ( ) Substantial research efforts are also needed to appraise the costs and benefits associated with alternative locational distributions of private production and consumption the economies and diseconomies of scale of agglomeration and association and of the geographical integration of various production processes and so on. Although economists understand the nature of many of these forces they have not progressed very far in developing the techniques of measurement ( ) The costs and benefits both public and private of alternative population distributions are not natural constants. Technological and engineering changes arising from the physical biological or social sciences can and will alter them over time. Developments in transportation pollution control and construction can modify the nature of the problems of our cities. Indeed technological expertise can and should be consciously marshalled for such purposes Despite the many unsettled questions on the implications of alternative population distributions social policy does not need to stand still while awaiting answers. There are many kinds of problems both in cities and rural areas which can be solved even though we lack an over-all scientific framework that spells out costs and benefits for all locational issues. Many of the problems which appear in particular places are as indicated national problems for which national solutions are being pursued. National policy can direct itself toward helping cities and rural areas meet their particular problems of housing pollution transportation health welfare education crime social disorganization wherever these problems may appear. A selected group of these problems centering around the broader problem of poverty is discussed in the subsequent sections of this Chapter Much as we may be able to contribute to solving community problems through these means segregation and discrimination are fundamental obstacles which must be overcome if we are to make real headway in solving our urban crisis. Local political boundaries are another obstacle which must be surmounted. Neither of these problems can be solved by Federal action alone ; indeed the basic solution of each must be found at the local level But the Federal Government can and has contributed to solving the former problem through national civil rights legislation. And it can and has contributed to the solution of the latter through support and encouragement for planning on a metropolitan or areawide basis which corresponds more closely to the economic and social reality of our communities THE DEMOGRAPHY OF POVERTY The decline of poverty and the role of shifting employment patterns in the decline have been documented. The geographic aspects of the remaining poverty have also been examined. But poverty must be viewed not only in terms of geography but in terms of demography. The incidence of poverty by family type and the policy issues relevant to each type are the concern of this section Poverty is not evenly distributed throughout the population. The aged nonwhites and members of households headed by a woman constitute larger fractions of the poor than of the general population ( Table ) Moreover the rate of progress in reducing poverty has varied widely among these and other groups. Between and the number of poor nonfarm households headed by a man declined percent while the poor nonfarm households headed by women increased by percent. As a result households headed by a woman constitute a growing proportion now nearly half of all poor households The most impressive reductions in poverty have occurred among households headed by a working-age male. The number of such households declined by one-third between and as a direct result of the increasing availability of good jobs at high wages. While the number of nonfarm households in this group declined percent there was a drop of two-thirds in the number of farm households. Among the nonfarm group the decline was as rapid for nonwhites as for whites High employment is essential to further reduction of poverty among households with an actual or potential wage earner. Yet many poor men of TABLE Number of poor households and incidence of poverty and Characteristics of head of household Number of poor households ( millions ) l Incidence of poverty ( percent ) Nonwhite White Farm Under years _ Aged ( years and over ) Female head. Under years Aged ( years and over ) Male head Nonwhite Under years Aged ( years and over ) Female head Under years Aged ( years and over ) Male head. White Nonfarm Households are defined here as the total of families and unrelated individuals Poor households as a percent of the total number of households in the category Note. Poverty is defined by the Social Security Administration poverty-income standard ; it takes into account family size composition and place of residence. Poverty-income lines are adjusted to take account of price changes during the period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health Education and Welfare working age must first receive training or other special assistance to enable them to raise their earnings. For those who can not work or who despite training and other services still can not earn enough to emerge from poverty by their own efforts adequate income maintenance programs are needed POVERTY AMONG THE AGED Social insurance is the first line of protection for households in which the breadwinner retires is disabled experiences involuntary unemployment or dies leaving dependent survivors. Over million beneficiaries are now receiving Old Age Survivors Disability and Health Insurance ( OASDHI ) payments at an annual rate of more than $ billion. For the retired aged these payments are overwhelmingly the largest single source of income The incidence of poverty among aged nonfarm households fell from percent in to percent in One reason for the improvement is that more recent retirees had higher lifetime earnings and therefore were entitled to larger social security benefits. In addition a rapidly growing proportion of the aged receive retirement benefits under private pension plans. Pension recipients and their wives now constitute percent of the total population of age or over up from percent in Increases in social security benefits also deserve much of the credit for the reduction in the incidence of poverty among the aged. The Social Security Amendments expanded benefits percent and raised to $ the monthly minimum benefit. Together these amendments will reduce the number of the aged poor by The amendments increase income protection for all covered employees not merely for those of retirement age Increased survivor and disability benefits provided for in the legislation will reduce poverty among those under age by Social security benefits have had several important side effects. The average retirement age has fallen and a growing number of aged are now able to maintain their own households. Between and as the proportion of aged persons receiving social security benefits rose from percent to percent labor force participation rates for males and over fell from percent to percent. Since when benefits were made available to males of age the participation rate for this group has declined even more rapidly than that for males and over Further benefit liberalization particularly higher minimum and widow 's benefits could sharply reduce poverty among the aged. Had Congress increased the minimum benefit to $ as requested by the Administration while increasing other benefits by percent an additional aged persons would have been freed from poverty. The additional cost of the $ minimum benefit would have amounted to less than percent 'of the increase in benefits that was provided yet it would have increased by about percent the number of individuals lifted out of poverty FAMILIES HEADED BY WOMEN The public assistance program in particular Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) is the chief source of help for poor families with dependent children and headed by women. A majority of such families is now covered either by AFDC or OASDHI. Benefit levels under AFDC are established by the States and are typically too low to lift families out of poverty Nearly all AFDC recipients either are children or are women whose family responsibilities preclude work outside the home unless child care is provided Moreover until amended in the law required that AFDC benefits be reduced by $ for each dollar of income earned by adult members of the household. This " percent tax rate " was sufficient to discourage all but the most determined from seeking jobs since earnings could not add to income so long as any assistance was received. Under legislation a welfare recipient can earn up to $ a month without any loss in benefits Beyond this level for every $ of earned income welfare benefits are reduced by $ Although this is still a tax rate of % percent these changes may encourage some welfare recipients to seek gainful employment. The i44 legislation also provides for day-care facilities and access to training for AFDG beneficiaries. Both measures are designed to make employment easier for poor mothers Although the new AFDC rules eliminated some egregious shortcomings in the welfare program many recipients can not participate in training or seek regular employment. Family responsibilities make employment impractical or unsuitable for many women. Heavy reliance must still be placed on income maintenance to ameliorate poverty within this group HOUSEHOLDS WITH A MALE EARNER In there were 10j/2 million persons in poor households headed by working-age males who were either working regularly at full-time jobs or actively seeking work About million male heads of households were poor in despite full-time employment hours a week for weeks or more ( Table ) Rising real wages will continue to reduce poverty among families with a fully employed male earner. The higher level and broader coverage of the minimum wage will also contribute. The continued industrialization of the South will give many workers an opportunity to take better-paying jobs. Others will improve their economic position by migrating. Continued efforts to eliminate discrimination in promotion will help many particularly Negroes who are poor even when fully employed Another million heads of poor families worked part time or part of the year in There were poor male household heads of working age who did not work at all but of these were disabled. Many who are poor because of unemployment or low wages could given training and opportunity earn enough to escape poverty Training the Disadvantaged Many of the workers who are earning less than an adequate income are unskilled poorly educated or as a result of irregular employment and discrimination have poor work habits. But most of these workers could improve their earning capacity if they were given remedial attention In the last four years manpower programs tailored to the needs of the economically disadvantaged have been greatly expanded. During the fiscal year close to a million persons most of whom are disadvantaged will be served by the Manpower Development and Training Act the Job Corps and similar programs. A great number of people who need skill training or work experience have not yet been reached. But the increase in the number of individuals served does point to the enormous progress made in a relatively short time. Many of the unemployed although they originally lacked a marketable skill responded to regular Manpower Development and Training Act ( MDTA ) programs and have obtained employment But there is also a substantial hard core of unemployed workers who need more than a routine training program. For these workers conventional train- TABLE The poor and their work experience [ Millions ] Age and work experience of head of household Male head Total poor households * Female head Male head Female head Ill or disabled. Other reasons. Did not work. Aged ( years and over ) Under years Worked at part-time jobs. Worked at full-time jobs. Employed weeks or less. Employed weeks Employed weeks or more i Households are defined here as the total of families and unrelated individuals Note. Poverty is defined by the Social Security Administration poverty-income standard ; it takes into account family size composition and place of residence. Poverty-income lines are adjusted to take account of price changes during the period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health Education and Welfare ing programs designed for educated workers with substantial regular work experience are entirely inadequate. Training must be supplemented with counseling health services work experience and basic education. Followup counseling may be necessary to encourage the work habits and self-discipline required in steady employment. There is growing evidence that on-the-job training for many disadvantaged workers will prove more successful than institutional training but unfortunately employers do not ordinarily make positions in these programs available to the disadvantaged For severely disadvantaged workers the cost of training placement and supplementary services may run as high as $ per trainee. The cost per worker ultimately employed is still higher since many candidates do not complete training or stay on the job after placement. But for those workers who are successfully trained the gain from steadier work at higher wages is great. In addition the children of these workers find more security and better preparation for a productive life of their own. The economic benefits for society as well as for individuals are large The business community has hired and trained the poor in the past but only on a limited basis. Business and government are coming to realize that business must play a vastly expanded role in making the hard-core disadvantaged employable. Government training programs alone can not do the job certainly not as rapidly as it must be done The President has announced a new program Job Opportunities in the Business Sector ( JOBS ) to bring the flexibility and imagination of the private sector into full partnership with Government on the broadest scale possible in order to solve the employment problems of the most deprived segments of the population. Through this program private industry will train and hire of the disadvantaged during the next months at a Federal cost of $ million Another recent innovation the Labor Department 's Concentrated Employment Program ( CEP ) has focused the efforts of Federal State and local agencies and cooperating private emplyers on the task of employing disadvantaged workers in poverty areas both urban and rural. Continued expansion of CEP together with the new JOBS program should permit a continued reduction in the number of families whose poverty derives from unemployment INCOME MAINTENANCE Despite the prospective benefits from training programs and further economic growth there will still be a need for income maintenance or income supplements for poor families headed by men of working age. In more than one-fourth of all the poor and / million poor children lived in families headed by a man employed throughout the year. An additional l/i million poor persons including I/3 million children were in families headed by men who were normally full-time workers but who suffered some unemployment Concern about the welfare and education of the young has prompted a number of proposals for providing additional financial support for poor families with children. Children 's allowances are a device used in a great many countries including Canada to provide a flat payment to each child regardless of family income. But flat allowances are a costly means of attacking poverty since most benefits do not go to the poor. Another form of income supplement the children 's minimum income allowance would provide a grant to all poor households with children with the amount of the grant diminishing as income rises. Nearly all of these expenditures would go to trie poor. Moreover as incomes rose the cost of such a program would automatically diminish For those who suffer from chronic unemployment a combination of income maintenance and an opportunity for work and training would appear to be needed if their poverty is to be eliminated. Many of the chronically unemployed will be able to lift themselves from poverty if aided by job training and placement. But even after job programs become fully effective some may still need income support. And there will always be a residual group who will not be able to fill regular jobs but who can do some useful work The present program of Aid to Families with Dependent Children-Unemployed Parent ( AFDC-UP ) provides a start in meeting these needs. As amended in the program permits States to make federally aided payments to families with an unemployed father. At the end of only States had elected to do so. Even among these States benefits are often inadequate and eligibility is severely limited. Only about families are currently benefiting from the AFDC-UP program. Under the amendments unemployed beneficiaries are to be assigned to training programs when there is a reasonable prospect that they can be employed. Those lacking such prospects are to be assigned jobs with local public agencies Eliminating poverty for those who can not work is mainly a matter of money. Eliminating poverty for those who can given training and opportunity earn a decent living is a matter of money organization the design of effective programs and cooperation between industry and Government Especially difficult problems are involved in any program designed to eliminate poverty for those who can do some useful work but whose earning capacity is limited by their abilities or by family responsibilities. An income maintenance program for any family in this in-between situation should provide some guaranteed minimum level of support. But it should also provide an incentive to work by permitting beneficiaries to retain a substantial fraction of any earnings Any income maintenance system runs into a dilemma in meeting these requirements. For work incentives to be highly effective benefits probably can not be reduced by more than about cents for every dollar earned. If in addition the guaranteed minimum support is high enough to free most beneficiaries from poverty payments would have to be made to some people above the poverty line. For example if the guaranteed minimum were $ but the support benefit was reduced cents for every dollar of earnings then a man earning $ would still receive $ of his support payment. The person who was satisfied with $ would then be under no pressure to seek or accept employment. Yet if the guaranteed minimum support were lower many beneficiaries who are willing to work but whose earning power is low or nonexistent would remain poor One possible solution would be to provide a relatively adequate base level of income support but require that every recipient whose family responsibilities permitted it must accept training for private employment. If he was not capable of training he would be required to accept work on public service projects. The recent amendments to the Social Security Act moved in that direction requiring training for AFDC recipients ( although benefit levels remain low ) Such an approach does deal with the problem of the person uninterested in earning income. But it creates a variety of other problems. First the States must make decisions concerning the personal life of the recipients such as whether a mother should care for her children herself or place them in day care and go to work. Second a difficult administrative problem arises. An overly generous program could generate a large volume of poorly supervised public employment of high cost but little value but an excessively stringent low-cost program could recreate the 19th century government workhouse These conflicts among objectives will not be easily resolved. But our present welfare system leaves so much to be desired that substantial progress can be made before these issues become critical. At present the welfare system in most States is inadequate on two counts a low support base and relatively weak work incentives. Benefit levels and incentive provisions could both be substantially improved before we would have to face the choice between generous support for the lazy and the difficulties inherent in a compulsory work program. Federal-State sharing formulas could be redesigned to reduce the wide disparities in benefits paid by different States AFDG recipients could be offered more incentive to work and more training opportunities without compulsion. AFDC-UP could be extended to all States and eligibility restrictions could be made less severe. These and related issues will undoubtedly be considered in greater depth by the new Presidential Commission on Income Maintenance A more humane and generous welfare system continued improvement in the social security system expanded training programs for the disadvantaged and a growing high-employment economy will all contribute to a continuing reduction in poverty. In addition efforts to reduce poverty and to improve economic opportunity must deal with the particular problems caused by inadequacies in housing education and health care. These topics constitute the balance of the chapter HOUSING Most Americans are aware of poverty primarily because they have seen the houses on the other side of the tracks. One view of a real slum convinces most people that " something ought to be done. " Partially because of government efforts to do something about poor housing progressively fewer people live in dilapidated housing or occupy homes with substandard plumbing. Yet urban slums remain and many rural families still have pitifully inadequate housing CHANGES IN HOUSING QUALITY Housing statistics are only indicators of progress and of the dimensions of remaining problems. They can not adequately describe the pleasures of better homes or the miseries of densely packed dirty and dreary neighborhoods. Most American families now live in adequate housing ( Table ) But million American families live in dilapidated housing dwelling units with structural defects which endanger the health and safety of the inhabitants. In addition close to million families live in units that lack basic plumbing facilities bringing the total of substandard occupied units to million Substantial progress in housing has been made since The data collected in the and censuses suggest a reduction in the number of TABLE Occupied housing units by quality and [ Thousands ] Quality by area i Standard units Dilapidated Metropolitan areas Nonmetropolitan areas Substandard units Metropolitan areas Nonmetropolitan areas Nondilapidated lacking plumbing. Metropolitan areas Nonmetropolitan areas Based on definitions of quality and metropolitan areas Because of changes in methodology data for in this table are not strictly comparable with and census data mentioned in the text Not available Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Housing and Urban Development occupied substandard units from to million units. Further improvement since is indicated by the data in Table Although a disproportionately large share of poor housing is located in nonmetropolitan areas the improvement in the quality of occupied housing in such areas has been much more dramatic than in metropolitan areas Part of this relative improvement reflects the migration to urban areas of poor farm families many of which abandoned substandard units. It also reflects the increased availability of sewer and water facilities in rural areas Housing Deterioration Improvement in the housing stock depends on rates of new construction demolition and other losses and deterioration of existing units. Since new construction has considerably exceeded the increase in the number of households. The difference has been largely offset by demolitions and other losses which totaled a year in the 's and a year in the 's. Best available estimates indicate that more than half of these losses were of substandard units Despite these developments the number of occupied dilapidated units apparently declined by less than a year in the 's and by only about a year in the 's. Moreover virtually all of this decline occurred outside metropolitan areas. Detailed data for the 's are not available for most areas but surveys of New York City and some areas in Los Angeles indicate an actual increase in the number of occupied dilapidated units in those cities. The results suggest that in large cities much of the improvement in housing quality from new building in excess of the rate of household formation is offset by the deterioration of existing housing Houses deteriorate with the passage of time but there is no natural life for a house. With sufficient expenditure on maintenance most houses can be kept in sound condition for a long period of time. The rapid deterioration of housing in metropolitan areas has many causes but poverty and racial segregation surely play major roles. When housing is occupied by families with adequate incomes expenditures on maintenance to prevent deterioration are generally considered worthwhile by the owners. But people near the poverty line can pay little rent and landlords are unlikely to find it profitable to undertake more than minimal maintenance. When segregation limits even temporarily the area occupied by a growing minority population owners can increase their profits by breaking up apartments for denser occupancy thereby hastening deterioration. Although owners may differ in their views on the most profitable maintenance policy those who fail to provide adequate maintenance for their buildings blight the neighborhood and bring down the value of neighboring properties. When a neighborhood becomes sufficiently blighted all owners find it profitable to mine their properties making occupancy as dense as possible and minimizing maintenance expenditure to obtain the largest possible short-term cash flow THE NEED FOR FURTHER FEDERAL ASSISTANCE In spite of these difficulties the amount of substandard housing has been reduced. But the pace of further progress is clearly limited by the rate at which poverty and segregation can be reduced. As incomes generally rise housing standards improve up the line : those with lowest incomes move into housing vacated by others whose incomes have risen enough to permit a move into even better housing. Most of the houses occupied today were originally built for persons in higher income classes than those who now occupy them. The process of turning over houses to the less affluent by families who move on to better often new housing will no doubt continue to be an important source of improvement in housing conditions But these market processes will work too slowly to provide by themselves a sufficiently large and prompt improvement in the quality of housing for all Americans. During the coming years the children of the post-World War II baby boom will enter the years of peak household formation. New housing construction for the private market in the next years must total approximately million units to meet the needs of these new households and to replace losses and demolitions of standard units. To produce that many units new housing construction must average one-third higher than the current rate Yet even a boom of these proportions in private construction will accomplish little reduction in the number of occupied dilapidated units. Progress will be particularly slow in areas where widespread blight reduces the incentive to build new housing. For a time at least it will be necessary to augment the rent-paying capacity of low- and moderate-income families and the supply of housing available to them if we are to make substantial progress in improving the quality of housing The recently inaugurated rent supplement program is designed for this purpose. Nearly new or rehabilitated housing units are already available under construction or committed under the program of rent supplements to low-income families. Private nonprofit or limited profit corporations offering decent housing to low-income families are paid the difference between the " fair market rent " of a new or rehabilitated housing unit and the rent paid by the tenant family percent of the family 's income Programs designed to improve the rent-paying capacity of low- and moderate-income families are very important but they can not be expected to produce a rapid increase in the supply of decent housing. The principal initial effect of a sharp increase in the demand for rental housing will be to increase rents. It will produce only a gradual response in construction of low-income housing. The response will be particularly sluggish in the near future because of the prospects of a strong middle- and upper-income private housing market For this reason the Government must take measures to increase directly the supply of low-income housing. Subsidized rental units have been provided for many years through the public housing program. The new " turnkey " public housing program turns over to private developers the planning site acquisition and construction functions in creating new public housing Local public housing authorities after approving the public housing plan and site promise to purchase the completed building when it is ready for occupancy. The approach shortens the period from planning to completion by as much as years and will double the output of public housing over the next years. The turnkey approach has recently been expanded to allow privately constructed public housing to be delivered to private management corporations. This program utilizes the talent in private business and removes barriers to extended public housing that arise from the shortage of management personnel in the local public authority The below-market interest rate ( BMIR ) program also draws nonprofit corporations into providing housing for low- and moderate-income families by subsidizing interest payments through Federal purchase of mortgages bearing a very low interest rate The Administration has recognized the scale of effort required to put decent shelter within the reach of every American family within the next decade. As the first of ten annual steps toward a national goal of federally assisted housing starts between fiscal years and the President has announced a program to start construction or rehabilitation of housing units for low- and lower-middle income families in the fiscal year beginning in July This program will build upon successful demonstration of new approaches to public housing construction location and management. With greater emphasis on the role of private enterprise the program will also require expansion of rent-supplement and interest- subsidy techniques to reduce the monthly rental and mortgage costs of decent housing for low- and middle-income families A substantial increase in the scale of Federal housing programs on top of the inevitable boom in private construction would place considerable strain upon the resources of the construction industry. A successful program to eliminate substandard housing must include sweeping measures to hold down the cost of construction and to increase the supply of manpower to the industry EDUCATION The United States was among the first countries in the world to commit itself to free and compulsory elementary and secondary education. The public school " movement " derived much of its strength from the desire for equality of opportunity and the traditional American hostility to distinctions based on birth. We have always cherished the image of the poor but talented youth whose education opens the door to wealth power and prestige. Unfortunately the evidence indicates that we have not lived up to this high ideal EDUCATION AND ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY The connection between education and economic achievement is well documented. High school graduates have much higher labor force participation rates and much lower unemployment rates than do high school dropouts. In October percent of white high school graduates of June who were not enrolled in college were employed members of the labor force. This compares to percent for white nongraduates who dropped out during the school year The correlation between education and earnings is partly attributable to the association of education with other income-producing factors : ability parental income and family social status and connections. Nonetheless formal education does increase earning potential. Studies indicate that reasoning ability mechanical ability and verbal and arithmetical skills augment earnings. These abilities are influenced by the quantity and quality of education An educational degree confers upon its holder an advantage in the labor market that goes beyond the skills represented by the degree. Employers sometimes use diplomas as screening devices for job applicants even where the skills learned in school are not important for job performance. This is because it is widely accepted that satisfactory completion of school programs indicates diligence and responsibility In view of the importance of education for earning capacity the existing wide variations in educational attainment by race social class and place of residence are disturbing. About percent of all college students come from families in the highest socioeconomic quartile while less than percent come from families in the lowest quartile. In high school completion rates for males were lower for nonwhites than for whites and lower for rural than for urban residents ( Table ) Among whites outside the South completion rates in rural areas were not far below those in urban areas. However rural students who were nonwhite or lived in the South were much less likely to complete high school than were other groups This situation has improved substantially since The high school completion rate for all nonwhite males aged rose from percent in to percent in ; for white males it rose from percent in to percent in Rural and urban figures are not available subsequent to ; but metropolitan and nonmetropolitan figures reveal a substantial advance in all categories with nonwhites in nonmetropolitan areas registering the greatest progress Nonwhites have less financial incentive than whites to complete their education. First the lower average incomes of nonwhite families places greater pressure on the children to find a job and not to make the sacrifice of immediate earnings required to continue their education. Second the income gains to be expected from completing their education are smaller for nonwhites. In among white males over those with one or more years of college earned percent more than high school graduates. Among nonwhite males over those who had attended college earned only percent more than high school graduates. These figures probably reflect a combination of deficiencies in the quality of education available to nonwhites and more severe discrimination against more highly educated nonwhites Despite the smaller payoff from additional education young Negro men have made substantial gains since in completing college. Between and the percentage of Negro males years old who had completed four years of college rose from to But this remains much below the white male college completion rate which during the same period rose from to percent for the same age group TABLE Percentage of males years old who completed high school [ Percent ! Place of residence Race and region Urbanized areas i White males : Total South Allother Nonwhite males : Total South Allother Other urban areas Rural farm Central cities and urban fringe areas of standard metropolitan statistical areas Source : Department of Commerce Rural nonfarm The academic performances of nonwhite of rural and of poor youngsters are below the national average. A study conducted by the Office of Education Equality of Educational Opportunity ( frequently referred to as the Coleman Report ) revealed that Negro students in the 12th grade are on the average more than years behind whites in verbal facility. But this disparity is not merely a Negro problem. According to unpublished data from the Coleman study rural students both white and nonwhite scored lower than their urban counterparts on verbal facility tests. Another study of high school graduates found that of students in the lowest socioeconomic quartile only percent scored in the highest academic quartile while of students in the highest socioeconomic quartile percent scored in the highest academic quartile The poor academic performance of low-income and minority-group children has many causes. Family attitudes toward education are very important. Some educators believe that the years before the child enters school are the most important for his intellectual development. By the time children enter school there are wide discrepancies in the aptitude scores of children from different social classes Another influence on educational performance is the general attitude of school companions. If students with culturally deprived preschool years are concentrated in certain schools they will tend to reinforce each other 's inadequacies With large variations in the stimulation provided by parents and companions equal instruction for all students would inevitably result in lower educational attainment for culturally deprived children. If equal or even nearly equal educational achievement is society 's goal then disadvantaged youngsters must receive instruction superior in quality to that received by middle-class children In fact nonwhite rural and poor children on the average receive no better and in many cases much worse instruction than white urban and middle-class children. In the South Negro students are still largely taught by Negro teachers many of whom in turn had received inferior education In many poor communities educational expenditure per pupil though perhaps high in relation to community income is low in comparison with other areas. Expenditure per pupil tends to be lower in central cities than in the suburbs ; moreover schools in low-income neighborhoods of central cities spend less per pupil than schools in middle- and upper-income neighborhoods. In part this is because ghetto schools frequently have difficulty retaining their staff and consequently typically have a higher proportion of inexperienced teachers than other schools within the central city It is extremely important to attract and to retain competent people into the teaching of deprived children. The Coleman Report indicates that characteristics of teachers are the most important school-related determinants of the academic performance of children. Yet the salaries of teachers are low in comparison with those in other jobs for male college graduates. In the average annual earnings of all white male college graduates aged to exceeded by percent the earnings of white male secondary school teachers of the same age and with equivalent education. The low relative salaries of teachers helps to explain why a disproportionately small fraction of students entering teaching at the elementary and secondary school levels score above the average for all college students on intelligence tests The most important goal of educational policy for the disadvantaged is the improvement of the academic performance of culturally deprived youngsters. This requires the strengthened teaching of basic skills to children in preschool elementary and secondary education. Another goal is the removal of the financial barriers that discourage poor but talented high school graduates from going to college. A third goal is more effective preparation for employment of those students not planning to go on to college EDUCATION PROGRAMS In the Federal Government initiated a massive program of compensatory education for disadvantaged children. This program Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act provides $ billion in the current fiscal year to school districts for programs for deprived children The funds are distributed in proportion to the number of children from low-income families in each district. In fiscal year million children were served at a cost per child of $ Another major program serving disadvantaged children is Head Start a large-scale experimental preschool project. Nearly million children have benefited from the program to date. Evaluation has shown that they have registered educational as well as social and health gains ; however the extent to which the educational gains are permanent is as yet unknown The Office of Economic Opportunity and the Office of Education are initiating a new " follow-through " program to determine the best way to conserve the gains of Head Start The success of these and other educational programs for disadvantaged children calls for the discovery of effective techniques in compensatory education. There remain many important unanswered questions : What curricula are most effective ; which teacher characteristics are most important ; how should new types of equipment such as educational television computerized teaching aids and language laboratories be employed ? Several Federal programs encourage experimentation in and evaluation of new teaching methods The Government has also increased substantially its programs of financial aid for college study to students from low-income families. During the Educational Opportunity Grants the National Defense Education Act loans and the College Work-Study programs provided nearly separate loans and grants averaging $ to college students most of whom were from poor families. This year the Administration is proposing consolidation of these programs to enable colleges to administer the programs together and to tailor aid more closely to the needs of the particular student The Guaranteed Loan program of began slowly in part because of tight money markets but expanded rapidly during Private loans averaging $ were extended to approximately students. The Administration is planning to expand the program further by amendments permitting lenders to charge a flat service fee for each loan The Upward Bound program in the Office of Economic Opportunity has provided summer school training and financial aid for high school students from poor families ; the program is designed to encourage students with substantial potential but low achievement to finish high school and go on to college. In addition the Administration is proposing a new program of tutorial and guidance services for low-income college students High schools need to revise their curricula in order better to serve the occupational needs of students not planning to go to college. Schools could do much more to make their vocational training and job information services more relevant to contemporary occupational opportunities. For example though the percentage of vocational education expenditures devoted to agriculture has declined in recent years only a small proportion of those receiving vocational training in agriculture enter farming. Courses related to future occupations could be designed so as to capture the interest of nonacademically inclined youngsters. One promising approach is to permit high school students to receive credit for part-time jobs directly related to school courses. The Administration is proposing to further these objectives in a new consolidated Vocational Education Act stressing State manpower planning innovative schoolwork programs and counseling and occupational information for all junior high school students Efforts to provide adequate supplies of trained educational manpower underlie all the programs in preschool elementary secondary and vocational education. Summer institutes for teacher training and retraining student loan forgiveness for those entering teaching and fellowships for experienced teachers to return to the university for further training have been financed by the Government in recent years. Under the Education Professions Development Act passed by Congress in measures are being taken to attract qualified people into teaching to train teachers ' aides and to strengthen teacher education HEALTH There are striking discrepancies in the health status of Americans of different races regions and income classes. The death rate of nonwhites is percent higher than that of whites of the same age ; life expectancy at birth is years shorter. For the white population alone infant mortality is percent * higher in nonmetropolitan than in metropolitan counties And poor adults suffer considerably more activity-limiting chronic illness work loss and days of restricted activity than other adults of the same age ECONOMIC STATUS AND HEALTH CARE These health discrepancies are due to various deficiencies in our system of medical care. For children the number of physician visits per year varies sharply with family income ( Table ) And on the occasions when poor children do see doctors it is usually for treatment of an obvious ailment and rarely to receive a routine medical examination. Medical experts are firmly convinced that children who do not receive regular checkups and prompt treatment of ailments run substantially higher risks of being permanently handicapped Adults who are poor are more likely to have serious health problems than other adults. Ill health is linked with poverty in part because illness leads directly to decreased earnings. But low earnings through the inadequate nutrition and shelter that accompany them also cause ill health. Thus poor health is both a cause and result of poverty ; the two constitute a selfperpetuating cycle The ill health of the poor adult is not solely the result of inadequate medical care. In fact the indigent sick person in most States can go to a free public clinic for medical attention and many poor persons receive free or low-cost care in physicians ' offices. As a result the number of physician visits per year is not much lower for poor adults than for other adults Nonetheless full equality in the number of visits to physicians would be insufficient to make poor adults as healthy as the rest of the population Moreover the quality of care available to the indigent may be lower than that available to middle class paying patients. Although standards differ enormously from State to State clinics serving the poor are often inadequately staffed and equipped with the usual consequences long waits hurried and fragmented medical attention and the absence of medical records and continuity of care The available statistics on health care and health status by race suggest that medical care for nonwhites is substandard. Nonwhites suffer considerably higher mortality rates than whites from medically curable illnesses such as tuberculosis influenza and pneumonia. Infant and maternal morTABLE Routine medical checkups and number of physician visits for children by selected age groups Percent of children receiving a routine medical checkup during the past year Physician visits per year by children Family income Under years Under $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ and over to years Note. Data are based on household interviews during the period July to June Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare Under years to years tality rates which are profoundly affected by medical care are respectively percent and percent higher for nonwhites than for whites Rural residents obtain fewer medical services than metropolitan residents regardless of race. The ratio of doctors to population is substantially lower in isolated rural counties than in counties located in or near metropolitan areas The reluctance of doctors to practice in rural areas is understandable. Because the population is dispersed doctors have less opportunity to specialize and to employ advanced medical techniques. They enjoy fewer cultural attractions and they may earn less. The result is that many rural communities have too few doctors MEASURES TO IMPROVE HEALTH CARE Considerable improvement in the health care of medically deprived groups has been achieved by governmental finance of medical services for those too poor to pay for them. Major increases in public funds for this purpose were approved by the Congress in under two far-reaching pieces of legislation. The first Medicare provides for the aged a hospital insurance plan requiring no premium and offers an optional insurance plan covering doctors ' fees and other services in which the premium ( currently $ a month but rising to $ in April ) is matched by the Federal Government. About percent of the aged are enrolled in this optional plan. Federal outlays for benefits under Medicare in fiscal year estimated at $ billion will cover about half the medical care costs of the aged The second program Medicaid provides matching funds for State medical services for the poor and medically indigent. Unlike previous Federal aid through public assistance Medicaid stipulates minimum standards of benefits for State plans which receive Federal support. Federal funds under the previous medical assistance legislation are scheduled to terminate in The Medicaid legislation left it to the States to set upper limits to the incomes of persons eligible for payments. But rapidly rising Federal outlays caused the Congress in to limit Federal reimbursement to payments made to families with incomes below a ceiling. By the ceiling in each State will be one-third above the highest amount ordinarily paid to a family of the same size under the State program for AFDC The legislation required State plans to provide inpatient and outpatient hospital services physicians ' services laboratory and X-ray services and skilled nursing home services for qualifying adults. Amendments passed in continue this requirement for persons receiving cash assistance but for the medically indigent the States can elect to provide any of specified services Forty-three States and jurisdictions are expected to have Medicaid plans by July and by the end of Total medical assistance expenditures by Federal State and local governments for fiscal year are estimated to be $ billion of which $ billion is from the Federal Government Present health care programs probably provide less than the optimum amount of health care to the young. In fiscal year less than percent of the $ billion in health care outlays of the Department of Health Education and Welfare were directed toward children and youth under Health care confers direct economic benefits through the prevention and cure of ailments which interfere with earning capacity. These benefits are especially large for children because they have their whole working lives ahead of them. Inasmuch as the enhancement of earning capacity implies greater participation in other aspects of life the noneconomic benefits of health care expenditures may also be larger for children than for persons in other age groups In recent years the Federal Government programs in the area of maternal and child health have been expanding rapidly. Mothers and children in lowincome families receive a variety of services under the Maternity and Infant Care School and Preschool Crippled Children Maternal and Child Health Services programs and under the health programs of Head Start and of Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. These services include free physical examinations diagnostic services and advice on preventive care. The amendments to Medicaid require States participating in the Crippled Children 's program to make greater efforts toward early diagnosis and treatment of handicapping illnesses in young children. Treatment of illness is now provided under several of the programs but eventually these expenses should be taken care of by Medicaid. In another area the unusual barriers to adequate health care for migratory farmworkers are being attacked through the migrant health program. Finally the Neighborhood Health Centers operated by the Office of Economic Opportunity provide readily accessible comprehensive and continuous health care and other social services to low-income families. Legislation will be proposed to provide over the next years comprehensive medical services to needy mothers and their infants from the prenatal period through the child 's first year These Government programs on behalf of groups now medically deprived will increase the demand for the services of physicians and other types of medical manpower. If the care received by the rest of the population is not to be reduced the supply of these services must be increased. To augment the number of physicians the Federal Government has been giving large financial support under the Health Professions Education Act of to medical schools undertaking expansion of their enrollment. Funds for new medical schools have been provided under this program. The annual number of medical school graduates is expected to rise from in to around in Increasing the supply of physicians is of highest priority for the longer run ; but to achieve greater efficiency in the short run emphasis must be placed on improvement in the utilization of physicians ' services. There appear to be significant efficiency gains from group practice from the use of more auxiliary personnel and from use of more and better equipment including automated laboratories and other computer-based innovations The trend toward group practice is being encouraged by legislation passed in which provides Government mortgage insurance for group practice facilities. The training of increased numbers of auxiliary personnel under the Allied Health Professions Personnel Training Act of the Vocational Education Act and the Manpower Development and Training Act will also permit greater efficiency in the use of physicians and of other highlevel medical manpower THE COMPREHENSIVE APPROACH TO COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT The preceding pages have touched on some of the more pressing economic and social problems facing American communities. They have stressed that many of these problems are not merely local problems but rather national problems which appear in concentrated form in certain communities. In particular all are aware that there are large districts usually within the central cities of major metropolitan areas in which the incidence of a number of these problems is particularly high. Some rural districts show similar concentrations Over the years the Federal Government has developed programs designed to share with State and local governments the costs of attacking the problems of the disadvantaged. Typically each program was designed to deal with a specific problem. There has been growing recognition however that ill health inadequate education absence of motivation lack of marketable skills dilapidated housing inadequate community and social services and crime can interact with one another. By feeding on one another these problems create blighted districts and areas. The more recent approach has therefore been to undertake a coordinated and simultaneous attack on all the problems in a particular locality. The Model Cities program is the newest and most promising illustration of this approach The goal of the Model Cities program is to transform a number of the Nation 's most blighted urban areas into redeveloped communities which will demonstrate the potentalities of the coordinated approach. Last fall cities were selected to participate in the first round of Model Cities planning grants. Each city is using its grant to map out a comprehensive program to deal with poor living conditions unemployment and inadequate access to social services in its most blighted area. The plans must include workable mechanisms to marshal all the resources of Federal State and local governments voluntary agencies local business firms and residents of the area. These coordinated plans will include a wide variety of Federal aids manpower training urban renewal federally assisted housing education health and poverty programs. These programs will continue to be available individually on a national basis. But when they are integrated and supplemented by local resources in an approved comprehen- sive program for physical and social redevelopment the Federal Government will make available supplemental grants for costs not covered by other Federal programs. The President has requested that the Congress appropriate for fiscal year the full $ billion which is presently authorized for the Model Cities program Somewhat similar efforts have been undertaken to support the coordinated redevelopment of nonurban communities through the Rural Community Development Service of the Department of Agriculture and the Economic Development Administration of the Department of Commerce. Both assist smaller communities to plan comprehensive approaches to the solution of community problems in low-income areas This Chapter has extensively reviewed the status of the American poor and the obstacles which must yet be surmounted in our efforts to combat economic deprivation. Poverty in the United States has been declining at an appreciable rate. With continued over-all prosperity and with welldesigned comprehensive programs to broaden the opportunities of all our citizens poverty can be reduced even more effectively in the future to the point where it will survive only as an unpleasant memory Chapter The International Economy FT ! HE EVENTS OF dramatized the importance of economic develJL opments around the world to the progress and health of the U.S. economy. They also demonstrated both the need for international cooperation and the possibilities for achieving it. After highlighting the major developments of this chapter reviews the principles of balance-of-payments adjustment surveys the U.S. balance-of-payments situation and policies in the light of these principles and discusses problems and progress in the international monetary system and in the trading relations of the United States with both developed and developing nations A YEAR OF MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS Developments during left a lasting imprint on the international economy. The headlines in the closing months of the year recorded the strains on the international monetary system generated by the sterling crisis and the subsequent devaluation of the pound. Anxieties and speculation in world financial markets contributed to a sharp widening of the U.S. deficit in the fourth quarter. The U.S. Government responded decisively with a major program to move our balance of payments strongly toward equilibrium Events earlier in paved the way for strengthening the future expansion of trade and the foundation of the international monetary system. The completion of the Kennedy Round negotiations marked the most successful effort toward reducing tariffs ever conducted under the aegis of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) A major step was also taken toward the creation of a new form of international liquidity as the Special Drawing Rights ( SDR ) plan was agreed upon at the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Participating countries in the tariff negotiations displayed the enlightened statesmanship required to overcome particular interests for the greater general welfare of their own citizens and those of less-developed countries which were not required to reciprocate in full. The same spirit ruled in the negotiations on liquidity where substantial differences were resolved in the interest of international monetary progress During the difficult period preceding and following sterling devaluation international consultations were conducted in the best postwar tradition ; they permitted Britain to devalue without similar actions by major competing countries which could have denied her the intended and needed benefits of the move. When nervousness and speculation threatened to disrupt world finance the central banks of most major industrial countries expressed their determination and pledged their resources to defend the stability of the world monetary system The United States and other countries will continue to work cooperatively toward strengthening the foundation of world finance and expanding the network of international trade. There is a long agenda of unsolved and urgent problems. Payments adjustment still challenges the best efforts of all countries. The United States must insure the effectiveness of its balance-of-payments program and the proper management of its domestic economy. Meanwhile countries with balance-of-payments surpluses have obligations and responsibilities to insure that they too move toward balance All member countries of the IMF are called on to render promptly a clear verdict in favor of the creation of supplemental liquidity through the new Special Drawing Rights plan as an unmistakable alternative to a shortage of reserves or to pressures on the price of gold. The year will be a period of testing for international financial cooperation but it will also be a time of opportunity ADJUSTMENT PROCESS Countries draw on international reserves mostly in gold and U.S. dollars to meet balance-of-payments needs when their payments to foreigners exceed their receipts. A country 's reserve position is weakened when it incurs such deficits. On the other hand its reserves will increase with balance-ofpayments surpluses. Thus reserves change hands as countries have payments imbalances Apart from the flow of gold to private holders a deficit on the part of any country tends to have a counterpart in surpluses elsewhere in the world. Thus a loss of reserves by the United States is usually a gain for another nation ; and an increase in our liabilities to official dollar-holders represents a gain in dollar reserves by some other nation. During the past decade while the U.S. accounts have been persistently in deficit many countries have had surpluses from time to time. But the European Economic Community ( EEC ) alone has had persistent surpluses of the same order of magnitude as U.S. deficits MUTUAL RESPONSIBILITIES While moderate and clearly temporary deficits or surpluses need not cause concern large and prolonged payments imbalances are normally undesirable for the proper functioning of the international monetary system Unilateral actions by deficit countries if forceful enough generally can succeed in moving such countries toward balance. But the payments pattern that results from unilateral action may not always be compatible with the broad economic objectives that all nations hold such as high employment sustained worldwide economic growth a high degree of freedom of international trade and capital movements and an adequate flow of capital to the less-developed countries Indeed unless special precautions are taken to prevent such an outcome much of the burden of corrective measures by any one deficit country could fall on countries that are already in weak payments positions causing such countries to suffer unnecessarily and making it doubtful whether the new payments pattern could be long sustained. And there is also a danger that unilateral actions such as tight monetary policy or restrictive budget measures could impart a general deflationary bias to the world economy. Likewise if corrective action is limited to surplus countries it could in some cases add unduly to inflationary pressures In the light of such considerations it is now generally recognized that the interest of all countries can best be served if payments adjustment is brought about through cooperative efforts by both deficit and surplus countries. Both types of countries bear major responsibility for such adjustments ; both must seek to insure that their actions are mutually compatible and consistent with the broader aims that they share PRINCIPLES OF ADJUSTMENT The particular policies and combinations of policy instruments that countries should appropriately use to achieve adjustment were outlined in the Report on the Adjustment Process by Working Party of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) The findings were described in the Council 's Report. These policies vary depending on the circumstances and the particular characteristics of the countries involved. There is no question however that deficit countries must seek to avoid excessive internal demand for balance-of-payments as well as domestic reasons. Surplus countries similarly have a special responsibility to maintain an adequate pace of domestic economic expansion. The Adjustment Process Report stresses moreover that fiscal policy needs to be given a major role in the achievement of domestic economic balance and that there is a special need to avoid inappropriately high levels of interest rates There are many situations in which the choice of policies is especially difficult because measures taken to satisfy domestic goals may run counter to international objectives or vice versa. In such cases it may be necessary to employ new types and combinations of policy instruments. In particular countries whose competitive position and domestic demand levels are satisfactory may have deficits due to excessive capital outflows. Such countries may find it necessary to use selective measures to limit these outflows. As the Adjustment Process Report indicated however " Wherever possible it is desirable that adjustment should take place through the relaxation of controls and restraints over international trade and capital movements by surplus countries rather than by the imposition of new restraints by deficit countries. " The next section outlines the major actions which the United States has taken to move its payments position decisively toward equilibrium. A number of these actions are clearly of a temporary nature. While they have been designed to hold the possible damage to individual nations to a minimum there was no choice but to move in part in ways that are restrictive and thus not fully compatible with the long-run aims of expansion and efficiency of the world economy. Achievement of a viable payments adjustment consistent with these goals must in part be based on the positive element of the U.S. program which aims at a strengthening of the U.S. economic position through appropriate fiscal monetary and incomes policies. But it must also rest on more decisive actions by surplus countries and particularly those in the EEC : to assure adequate economic expansion ; to encourage capital outflows and increased aid to less-developed countries ; to reduce barriers to trade ; and to share more fully in the cost of the common defense THE U.S. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS Current policies of the United States are designed to fulfill our responsibilities in the adjustment process and to the stability of the international monetary system The American dollar is the major reserve asset other than gold of world central banks ; and it is the major transaction currency of international business and finance. The ability of the United States to carry out its responsibilities as the major world bank depends on the strength of its reserve position which has been slowly diminished by continuing large deficits These balance-of-payments deficits arise when the sum of U.S. expenditures abroad on imports travel foreign securities and loans direct investment and other items exceeds the inflow of such payments by foreigners The U.S. balance-of-payments deficit records the change in our reserve position measured as the sum of ( a ) losses in our reserves and ( b ) increases in selected dollar claims of foreigners. The balance is statistically measured by two alternative concepts which differ in their treatment of foreign claims The liquidity deficit counts increases in the liquid claims on the United States of all foreigners private and public as well as losses in reserves. The official settlements deficit counts increases in all claims of foreign official monetary authorities but not in private holdings of dollars in addition to reserve losses Many of the transactions which contribute to the deficit involve the acquisition of productive foreign assets. The Nation does not lose wealth by such transactions but it does sacrifice liquidity much like an individual drawing down his bank account to buy promising growth stocks. A nation which holds its international assets primarily in liquid form loses opportunities for productive investment. On the other hand every nation particularly the one that serves as the world 's bank needs an adequate margin of liquidity THE REGENT RECORD The United States has had a balance-of-payments deficit almost continually since During the early part of that period the entire U.S. deficit was beneficial to the rest of the world because it helped replenish the depleted reserves of other countries ; and it could be tolerated by the United States because we had started the postwar era in an extremely strong reserve position Beginning in the situation changed. The U.S. deficit increased while the acute shortage of dollars abroad was easing. From to the deficit was reduced progressively ( Table and Chart ) But a deficit TABLE United States balance of payments [ Billions of dollars ] Type of transaction Balance on goods and services Balance on merchandise tradeMilitary expenditures net3 Balance on other services Remittances and pensions Government grants and capital net U.S. private capital net Foreign nonliquid capital net Errors and omissions BALANCE ON LIQUIDITY BASISPlus : Foreign private liquid capital net3 Less : Increases in nonliquid liabilities to foreign monetary authorities5 BALANCE ON OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS Gold ( decrease ) Convertible currencies ( decrease ) IMF gold tranche position ( decrease ) Foreign monetary official claims ( increase ) first quarters x ( ) ~ '.3 \ \ ~ ! < * Average of the first quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted Military expenditures less transfers under military sales contracts 3Includes changes in Treasury liabilities to certain foreign military agencies during and to international nonmonetary institutions Average of the first quarters on an unadjusted annual rate basis Included above under foreign nonliquid capital Less than $ million Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Chart U.S. Balance of International Payments BILLIONS OF DOLLARS EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES EXPORTS I I I < 19671/ NET CAPITAL FLOWS U.S. PRIVATE J I I I ~ ^ ^ * * ^ I I I I 1967V BALANCE OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS LIQUIDITY BASIS J/FIRST QUARTERS AT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ^ EXCLUDING OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS i/EXCLUDING LIQUID CAPITAL SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE | 1967J/ continued. The improvement came from automatic adjustment forces and from judicious use of policy measures. New measures were required from time to time as fundamental factors changed. Foreign demands on our capital markets burgeoned with the return of currency convertibility in Europe Trade and direct investment flows were influenced by the creation of the EEC and the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) The improvement in the U.S. balance of payments was arrested in by the greatly increased foreign exchange costs of the Vietnam war and indirectly through the strains placed on our domestic economy. However the impact on the payments position was largely offset by the inflow of interestsensitive funds in response to the tightening of domestic money markets. The liquidity deficit of $ billion in essentially matched the $ billion of In the unfavorable forces that had operated in persisted while monetary conditions eased and the deficit widened ( Table ) Measured on the liquidity basis the deficit was at an annual rate of $ billion during the first three quarters of the year The U.S. payments position in the fourth quarter deteriorated sharply reflecting a decline in the merchandise surplus the British devaluation and the foreign exchange and gold speculation which it set off. Preliminary estimates indicate a liquidity deficit of about $ billion for the year as a whole. As measured by official settlements the deterioration in the U.S payments position was even more pronounced ; the balance shifted from a $ million surplus in to a deficit of about $ billion in reflecting the especially marked effect of changing monetary conditions While shifts in payments can be readily identified in an accounting sense their causes are more difficult to trace. A great deal of caution is required in making analytical judgments based on the accounts especially while the estimates are still provisional To assess the underlying forces cyclical and special factors must be disentangled from trend elements Cyclical Forces in Even though expansion slowed down last year the American economy was closer to its high-employment growth path than were our major trading partners which on average fell substantially below their normal growth performance. From to industrial production abroad rose rapidly only in Japan increased moderately in Italy sluggishly in Canada hardly changed in Britain or France and declined in Germany. The depth and persistence of the German recession dampened the total performance of continental Europe significantly with cumulative effects on world trade Cyclical factors affected a number of balance-of-payments accounts including merchandise exports and imports income from investments abroad and capital outflows for direct investment The U.S. merchandise balance improved during but the increase was held down by the sluggish state of demand abroad. Exports gained about percent for the year as a whole but they declined after midyear primarily because of the weakness of demand in some of our largest foreign markets Reflecting the slowdown of U.S. economic activity imports remained at the level reached in the fourth quarter of and showed little tendency to increase until the fourth quarter of For the year as a whole they rose about } percent. The comparison between and demonstrates the sensitivity of imports to the rate of change of U.S. economic activity and to the degree of pressure on our productive capacities. In when rapid expansion and shortages prevailed imports increased by percent of the gain in GNP ; in the somewhat more relaxed economic conditions prevailing for most of imports increased by only about percent of the advance in GNP Income from U.S. direct investments abroad expanded somewhat in after having increased only slightly in This disappointing performance reflected an actual decline in income from investments in Western Europe during the last two years despite the further substantial buildup of assets there. The gradual narrowing of European profit margins that has been occurring for a number of years was aggravated by the cyclical situation a phenomenon not confined to American-owned firms. U.S. income from private assets other than direct investments and from Government assets abroad continued to increase however about in line with previous years Some of the effects of the economic weakness in Europe and the slowdown in Canada on the other hand were favorable to the U.S. payments position. Along with other influences the cyclical forces contributed to an indicated total drop in U.S. direct investment outflow during of about $ million ( Table ) This was the first decline in the level of outflows since although the $ billion level remained substantially above that of all years prior to In addition to the slowdown abroad the substantial increase of borrowing abroad during the last two years in response to the voluntary program reduced considerably the outflow from the United States Special Factors in While the payments structure is always influenced by many special factors produced a bumper crop. The list of those significant to the U.S. balance of payments includes Expo the Middle East crisis Vietnam intensification and sterling devaluation TABLE United States balance of payments : Capital transactions [ Billions of dollars ] Type of capital transaction first 3l quarters U.S. private capital net Direct investment New foreign security issues Other transactions in foreign securities 2_ U.S. bank claims Other claims Foreign nonliquid capital net Direct investment U.S. securities ( excludin Long-term U.S. bank lis Other * Foreign nonliquid capital net Plus : Foreign private liquid capital net Less : Increases in nonliquid liabilities to foreign monetary authorities Equals : Foreign capital excluding official reserve transactions net Average of the first quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted Includes redemptions Less than $ million Includes certain special Government transactions Includes changes in Treasury liabilities to certain foreign military agencies during and to international nonmonetary institutions Average of the first quarters on an unadjusted annual rate basis Included above under foreign nonliquid capital Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Expo. U.S. travel expenditures which had been increasing on the average about percent a year jumped about percent ( or $ million ) in The acceleration was accounted for by tourist spending in Canada which rose more than percent reflecting the attraction of Expo Meanwhile U.S. receipts from travel expenditures which has been increasing about percent a year rose only about percent last year. There was no increase in receipts from Canadians who usually contribute onethird of U.S. travel earnings Middle East. The Middle East crisis and its aftermath also on balance had some adverse effects. While not of great magnitude the contrast with the favorable balance-of-payments consequences of the Suez crisis is very marked. Net payments increased as the result of lower merchandise exports to the area higher payments for transportation greater personal remittances and larger new issues of foreign securities in the U.S. market These outweighed the gains in petroleum trade and some increase in earnings of American-owned international oil companies Southeast Asia. The intensification of the hostilities in Vietnam had an additional impact on the U.S. balance of payments. U.S. overseas military expenditures increased further by about $ million in to a level more than $ billion above the plateau prior to mid-1965 Sterling. The events surrounding the devaluation of sterling had many immediate consequences for the U.S. balance of payments. Some are easily identified but others harder to evaluate. Prior to the devaluation speculation against sterling forced the United Kingdom to liquidate all of its remaining long-term government-owned assets in the United States in order to reconstitute official reserves. This action increased the U.S. liquidity deficit by about $ million in the fourth quarter. The deficit may have been increased further indirectly by the flurry of private gold purchases ; it was also widened to whatever extent funds moved out of the United States for purposes of speculation or hedging in the period of stress and uncertainty In combination cyclical and special factors account for much of the deterioration in the U.S. balance of payments during particularly in the fourth quarter. However against the history of a persistent U.S. deficit the sterling devaluation and its aftermath posed a threat to the stability of the dollar and consequently to the stability of the international monetary system. Thus new U.S. balance-of-payments measures became necessary in order to strengthen the international monetary system insure that the deterioration of the U.S. balance of payments is decisively reversed and improve the underlying strength of the U.S. payments position enough to bear the heightened military costs in Southeast Asia THE PROGRAM The monetary and fiscal measures outlined in Chapters and and the continued efforts to increase efficiency and to encourage responsible price and wage behavior discussed in Chapter provide the broad base for improvement in our international payments position and are an integral part of our balance-of-payments program. In addition the President set forth on New Year 's Day a major new program of measures specifically directed at the balance of payments The new program is directed at improvement in five separate areas : ( ) capital outflows for American direct investments abroad ; ( ) loans to foreigners by American financial institutions ; ( ) Government net expenditures abroad ; ( ) net travel expenditures ; and ( ) merchandise trade. Most of the measures included in the program will have an immediate impact on the balance of payments. Some are intended to be temporary ; others are long term in character. Some have been put into effect by administrative actions others require legislation by Congress and still others require cooperative action by our allies and trading partners Regulations on Foreign Direct Investment On January the President issued an Executive order which basically transformed the Commerce Department 's previously existing Voluntary Direct Investment program into a mandatory program with much lower levels of permitted capital outflows. The voluntary program which began in called on the business community to reduce capital transfers for direct investment in developed countries ; it also sought additional contributions to the balance of payments through such means as expanding exports and remittances of earnings abroad. The program stressed the desirability of financing investments abroad through foreign borrowing The largest needs for cash by American affiliates abroad are for financing plant and equipment expenditures. Foreign plant and equipment outlays by American firms in were an estimated $ billion up from $ billion in These expenditures are financed out of many sources. In capital outflows for direct investment accounted for about percent of the total ; reinvested earnings were percent ; long-term borrowings abroad amounted to percent ; short-term borrowings abroad and depreciation allowances on existing foreign assets represented the remainder about percent. As had been the case previously the new program is directed only at new outflows of funds from the United States and reinvested earnings It does not aim to curb plant and equipment expenditures as such although they are bound to be affected. Long-term funds borrowed abroad are specifically exempted Despite excellent business cooperation with the voluntary program a mandatory program is necessary to achieve the large improvement required in and to insure equality of burdens among all direct investors The new program provides three basic limitations on direct investors : ( ) annual limits are placed on their new direct investment capital outflow plus reinvested earnings in foreign subsidiaries or branches ; ( ) a minimum share of total earnings from their direct investments must be repatriated generally equal to the same percentage that they repatriated during ; and ( ) their short-term financial assets held abroad must be reduced to the average level of and held at or below that level The annual limits on direct investment are determined in the following way : ( ) For less-developed countries as a group new capital transfers and reinvested earnings in combination may not exceed percent of a direct investor 's average new direct investment in less-developed countries in ( ) For developed countries to which U.S. capital inflow is essential including Canada Japan Australia New Zealand the United Kingdom and some oil-producing countries the maximum permitted allowance is percent of the annual average of capital outflow plus reinvested earnings in O- ( ) For all other countries principally continental Western Europe a moratorium is imposed on any new capital outflows for direct investment. However a direct investor may normally plow back each year into his existing direct investments in these countries as a group the same percentage of his earnings as he reinvested in the years ^ The program exempts small direct investments not exceeding $ in the aggregate. It also establishes administrative procedures whereby the Secretary of Commerce may authorize in exceptional cases direct investments in excess of those allowed under the general rules The direct investment program is designed to achieve a $ billion improvement in the balance of payments. The impact is to be concentrated on the surplus countries of continental Europe with a minimum effect on other countries. It requires an important sacrifice by U.S. international corporations but it is designed to keep interference in the details of business decisions to a minimum. Normal international trade among affiliate companies will not be restricted nor will other usual business transactions be disturbed The program is intended to be temporary subject to relaxation as soon as world payments conditions permit Foreign Credits by Financial Institutions The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System issued new suggested guidelines on foreign credits of financial institutions. The President gave the Board authority to make the guidelines mandatory if that should prove necessary. The new guidelines covering both banks and other financial institutions represent a major tightening of the program begun in They aim at a substantial inflow of $ million in credits subject to the program in There was an outflow of such credits of about $ million in Three types of restrictions were placed on the extension of foreign credits by banks. ( ) Ceilings on credits for most large banks were reduced to percent of foreign credits outstanding on December Priority within the ceiling is to be given to credits for financing American exports and for supplying capital to less-developed countries. ( ) In addition banks are called on not to renew at maturity outstanding term loans to developed countries of continental Europe and not to relend the repayments of such loans to residents of those countries. ( ) Banks are also to reduce the amount of short-term loans outstanding to developed countries of continental Europe by percent of such credits outstanding on December bringing them down at a minimum rate of percent a quarter Parallel restrictions were also placed upon activities of nonbank financial institutions such as insurance companies finance companies trust companies and employee retirement and pension funds. It is expected that all financial institutions will continue to cooperate fully in the program Government Expenditures Abroad The impact of the Government 's own expenditures abroad will be reduced as part of the new program while still maintaining essential functions. The President has directed the Secretary of State to negotiate with our NATO allies to minimize the foreign exchange costs of keeping our troops in Europe ; the Secretary of Defense to take steps to reduce further the foreign exchange impact of personal spending by U.S. forces and their dependents in Europe ; the Director of the Bureau of the Budget and the Secretary of State to reduce by at least percent the number of Government civilian personnel working overseas and to curtail overseas travel abroad to the minimum consistent with the orderly conduct of Government ; and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development to reduce expenditures abroad by $ million and take measures to insure that goods exported from the U.S. under AID loans are additional to U.S. commercial exports These measures are aimed at saving $ million in the balance of payments Travel Account In order to reduce the net travel deficit by $ million the President has asked Americans to defer all nonessential travel outside the Western Hemisphere for two years ; he also directed the Secretary of the Treasury to explore with the appropriate congressional committees legislation to help achieve that objective. Long-term efforts to attract more foreign visitors to the United States are being intensified Trade Expansion The new program also includes several long-range measures of improved export financing and export promotion. Congress will be asked to earmark $ million of the Export-Import Bank 's lending authority for a new export expansion program designed to guarantee insure and make direct loans for exports which do not fall under the Bank 's existing criteria. The Bank will also expand and liberalize its rediscount program to encourage private banks to increase their financing of exports. Congress will also be asked to support a five-year $ million program in the Department of Commerce to promote the sale of U.S. goods abroad. The Department plans to initiate a program of joint export associations to provide direct financial support to American firms joining together to sell abroad PROSPECTS FOR The new program will have a major impact in reducing the U.S. deficit this year. It should cut private capital outflows by more than $ l * /2 billion from levels. It aims to reduce net travel outflows by $ million The impact of Government expenditures abroad will be reduced and American exports stimulated. Moreover the prompt and decisive action taken by the United States should help to halt the speculation and anxiety that led to some short-term capital outflows in the closing months of last year. Long-term capital outflows in the form of security purchases will continue to be restrained by the Interest Equalization Tax which was extended in with new authority for the President to vary the rate of tax within specified margins The condition of the U.S. domestic economy will have very great importance for the balance of payments. Prompt enactment of the tax surcharge by the Congress and responsible wage and price decisions by American labor and management are essential to insure that the growth of imports will be moderate and that American business firms will have incentives to market exports actively and competitively General business conditions abroad will also have a significant influence on the balance of payments in As appraised by OECD and leading private experts European economic growth is expected to improve from the disappointing sluggishness of To be sure the new U.S. program will tend to reduce investment demand and to tighten monetary conditions in Europe. However most countries on the continent are in a position to counter this tendency effectively with more expansionary monetary and fiscal policies. Both balance-of-payments conditions and the state of domestic demand call for more stimulative policies on their part. As indicated in the discussion of the adjustment process surplus countries have a world responsibility to manage their economies in such a way as to insure growth and to encourage expansion The possibility of a major improvement in U.S. trade this year however is limited by several factors including the improvement in the competitive position of Britain provided by devaluation the indicated forthcoming bulge in steel imports in anticipation of a possible strike and the recent good agricultural harvest in many countries which will limit the growth of exports of farm products. Furthermore a number of European countries including Germany the Netherlands and Austria are instituting major changes in their border tax arrangements this year in ways likely to encourage exports and inhibit imports contrary to the needs of world payments adjustment Diplomatic consultations have been initiated to mitigate the disadvantages to our trade which arise from differences in national tax systems The Administration is preparing legislative measures in this area ; their scope will depend on the outcome of these consultations Finally the Common Market at midyear is scheduled to remove all remaining internal tariffs and to complete the adoption of a common external tariff. The consequences of this action on U.S. trade will be moderated however by the simultaneous implementation of the first tariff cuts by the EEC under the Kennedy Round LONG-TERM PROSPECTS A key element in the balance-of-payments outlook for the long run is our ability to maintain and improve the competitive position of the United States. It is difficult to trace the connection between competitive changes and trade movements but there is little doubt that an increase in relative costs which in turn raises relative prices can impair a country 's trade performance while reductions in relative costs can enhance its trade surplus Empirical evidence on costs is limited to manufactured goods and even there it is far from satisfactory. The data do make clear that during much of the decade of the 's U.S. costs and prices rose faster than those of our major competitors. We lost ground in international markets during that period. Within recent years however the situation with respect to costs was reversed. In manufacturing U.S. unit labor costs ( the largest element in total costs ) declined between and while costs in other countries except Canada increased substantially ( Table ) As a result our share of foreign markets in manufactured products stabilized when intraEEC and intra-EFTA trade are excluded. In our costs increased about as rapidly as the average of other countries. Comprehensive data are not yet available for but our costs continued to rise probably at a rate exceeding that of most European countries TABLE Unit labor costs in manufacturing for selected industrialized countries since [ = ] Country United States. Canada France Germany Italy Japan United Kingdom * Ratio of wages salaries and supplements to production ; national currency basis Preliminary Note. Data relate to wage earners in Italy and to all employees in other countries Sources : Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers Many of our trading partners are facing fundamental structural changes in their economies. The labor supply situation that permitted the period of extremely rapid growth in Europe has altered fundamentally. The growth of the European labor force in the next decade will be much smaller than in the recent past and less scope remains for shifting European labor out of less efficient pursuits such as agriculture or out of unemployment into industrial activity. This will mean greater European demands for labor- saving machinery in which U.S. producers hold a marked competitive edge ; it may also increase pressures in the European labor market and strengthen the bargaining power of European workers. Finally with the elimination of all tariff barriers this year internal EEC trade will no longer receive the further benefit of periodic duty reductions. Therefore with proper economic management at home the United States has an excellent opportunity to strengthen its trade surplus over time The development of European capital markets has proceeded at a substantial pace in the past few years spurred partly by the U.S. voluntary programs and the Interest Equalization Tax. The new program will provide added incentives for the mobilization of long-term funds in European capital markets. This should in the years ahead tend to moderate the basic demand for capital from the United States. The recent vast expansion in U.S. business holdings overseas should also help by increasing the inflow of earnings dividends royalties and fees in the years ahead THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM Because dollars are used as reserve assets the U.S. balance of payments is closely linked to the stability of the entire international monetary system THE GOLD-EXCHANGE STANDARD In major part existing international monetary arrangements are based on the rules and institutions developed at the Bretton Woods Conference in which established the IMF. The basic principles underlying the Bretton Woods system call for the convertibility of one currency into another at essentially fixed exchange rates with fluctuation around declared parities limited to a narrow range. Changes in parities are to be made only in cases of fundamental payments disequilibrium and upon prior consultation with the Fund Because demands for a nation 's currency vary from time to time and thus receipts and payments do not balance exactly a nation needs monetary reserves to support the value of its currency in a fixed exchange rate system. Under the so-called gold-exchange standard these " owned " reserves are held both in gold and in certain foreign currencies. In fact the dollar is the principal reserve currency for most nations of the world although the pound sterling and the French franc also serve this purpose on a smaller scale. Currencies are useful as reserve assets because they are convertible amongst themselves are claims on the real resources of issuing countries and can be held in interest-yielding but still highly liquid form. All countries other than the United States meet their IMF obligations by buying and selling currencies mostly dollars. The United States meets its basic commitment under the Fund rules by freely buying and selling gold to foreign monetary authorities at a fixed price of $ an ounce. Gold maintains its reserve asset status by being linked to the dollar and the IMF and by tradition Reserves are the main line of defense for any nation which is seeking to correct a payments deficit through an orderly adjustment. Multilateral credit facilities serve as a further line of defense. The Fund provides mediumterm credits to assist members in overcoming temporary payments deficits without resort to unduly restrictive international or domestic measures. This system has been strengthened by the recent creation of a network of shortterm credit facilities among central banks and by the development of the General Arrangements to Borrow which enlists additional resources from major industrial nations to help the Fund meet large credit needs These various credit facilities supplement but are not a substitute for owned reserves. As has been clearly demonstrated in the past in a world of growing trade and payments nations desire to hold a growing quantity of monetary reserve assets. In order to increase their reserves nations aim for payments surpluses. If successful the efforts of some countries to attain surpluses must be reflected in deficits for other countries. Under present arrangements such a competitive effort to build reserves can lead to undesirably restrictive actions on domestic economies and on trade and capital flows In fact world trade and output have grown rapidly in recent years. But monetary reserves have increased slowly. If that sluggish pace continues it could inhibit the growth of economic activity. Total world reserves have grown at an annual rate of percent since ( Chart ) far below the percent annual rate of expansion of world trade Of the major types of reserves the dollar has contributed most of the increase in the total stock of monetary reserves. Gold has made very little contribution in the 's and none at all in the past two years. Certain drawing rights in the IMF which are created as a byproduct of the credit operations of the Fund are automatically available to member nations and are thus properly classified as reserve assets. These " super gold tranche " reserve assets have achieved some quantitative importance in recent years but they are also extinguished through specific credit operations A survey of future prospects makes it clear that neither gold nor the dollar can be counted on to add substantially to total world reserves in the years ahead GOLD RESERVES Gold constituted percent of total world monetary reserves in ( excluding the Soviet Union and other Communist countries ) a decline from percent in The supply of newly mined gold has been small in relation to existing monetary stocks and a large portion of new supplies has been absorbed into private uses and holdings Chart World Monetary Reserves BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( end of period ) TOTAL RESERVES I ^ J/lNCLUDES IMF GOLD HOLDINGS 2/DATA ARE FOR END OF THIRD QUARTER SOURCE : INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Historical Background In many respects the recent decline in the importance of gold is an extension of a trend that began after World War I. That trend in turn reversed the developments of the preceding half century when gold first achieved a preeminent role Following the discovery of important new deposits in the middle of the 19th century gold replaced silver as the standard of international finance and became the predominant basis of the monetary system of most major trading countries. Even in this period the slow increase in monetary gold threatened to act as a brake on economic development. However new dis- coveries chiefly in South Africa provided enough additional gold to keep the system going After World War I the gold standard was transformed into a less rigid system. Gold holdings were increasingly concentrated in the hands of central banks while the public relied increasingly on paper currency and checking accounts for domestic transactions. Many central banks kept all or part of their international reserves in the form of claims on " key currencies " primarily the pound sterling and the dollar themselves convertible into gold. This system is the gold-exchange standard which after an interruption during the 's has survived to the present day Private Demands By developing the use of financial claims as reserves the world has learned to avoid the constraints imposed by the slow growth of gold stocks In the last few years the importance of this development has become especially great because gold production has leveled off while the nonmonetary consumption of gold has increased rapidly. The physical properties of gold such as electrical conductivity and resistance to corrosion have proved to be increasingly attractive in industrial applications. The use of gold in jewelry and dentistry has more than kept pace with the rise in world income. Commercial gold consumption in the United States amounted to $ million in and is rising at an annual rate of more than percent. While there are no accurate worldwide data gold consumption in industry and the arts appears to be absorbing about $ % billion a year. Production of newly mined gold ( outside of Communist countries ) now amounts to about $ ^ billion a year intermittently augmented by Russian gold sales Hoarding and speculation also contribute to the private demand for gold. Even if it were not illegal most Americans would find gold an unattractive asset because it earns no interest and is expensive to store safely or to insure. But many foreigners have reasons for thinking otherwise. Gold can be more easily carried in emergencies or hidden ( especially from the tax collector ) than bulkier assets. Also in some parts of Asia gold is the only asset that a wife may own beyond the control of her husband. Furthermore there has also been some net acquisition of gold by private speculators who were betting on an increase in the price of gold Quite apart from speculation it is clear that gold can supply at most a small fraction of the needed growth in world monetary reserves. The monetary gold stock could grow no more than percent a year on the basis of present rates of mining less consumption in industry and the arts. Given the prospect of growing commercial use even that rate of growth may not be achievable over time. Indeed the world can not count on any sustained increase in monetary gold reserves in the long run. In fact it is possible that over time gold may gradually lose even its present importance as a monetary reserve asset DOLLARS AS RESERVES At the present time liquid dollar holdings of foreign monetary authorities amount to about $ billion and are larger than the U.S. gold stock. The United States could provide substantial further increases in foreign reserves only by running continued large deficits. The persistence of such deficits would impair confidence and thus endanger the link between gold and the dollar which is the essence of the gold exchange standard. The U.S. commitment to move toward payments equilibrium is designed to assure the strength of the link preserving the high quality of the dollar as a reserve asset by limiting the increase in the quantity of dollars held abroad As another step to insure the strength of the dollar and thus of the gold exchange standard the President has proposed legislation to remove the current " gold cover " requirement on domestic currency Removal of the Gold Cover Under existing legislation the Federal Reserve System is required to hold a 25-percent reserve in gold against Federal Reserve note liabilities. Increasing amounts of gold are brought under the gold cover as the volume of Federal Reserve notes expands to meet the needs of a growing economy. As a domestic requirement the gold cover is an anachronism. Appropriate monetary policy is related to the over-all needs of the economy ; and the Federal Reserve Board exercises its authority in relation to those needs not in relation to our gold holdings The only real purpose for the United States to hold a gold stock is to insure the international convertibility of the dollar. The growing amount of gold needed to satisfy the gold cover requirement is approaching the level of U.S. gold holdings. While there are provisions permitting the gold stock to dip below the gold cover requirement the retention of this statutory limit serves no useful purpose. And its removal will make unmistakably clear that our entire gold stock is available to defend the international convertibility of the dollar at its present parity MEETING RESERVE NEEDS In view of the limited possibilities for gold and the dollar to provide additional international monetary reserves it is clear that positive action must be taken to assure the growth in reserves essential to support expanding world trade That need must be met in a more constructive way than by an increase in the price of gold. As the President has repeatedly stated the United States is unalterably opposed to a rise in the price of gold. Such an action would be both inefficient and inequitable. Its primary impact on reserves would be achieved by a large " one-shot " write-up of the nominal value of gold reserves rather than by an assurance of continued steady growth. It would stimulate a limited increase in gold production but only by diverting scarce resources into the production of a commodity for which there is no shortage in nonmonetary use. It would give unearned windfall gains to major gold producing nations such as South Africa and the Soviet Union while penalizing those countries such as Japan and Sweden which have supported the gold exchange standard by holding reserves in dollars. It would not only reward speculators but more important would encourage them in the belief that further price rises were inevitable In rejecting an increase in the gold price as a means of expanding reserves the United States can point toward a far more constructive alternative. Just as the gold exchange standard added key currencies as reserve assets supplementing gold now the key currencies must be supplemented by appropriate new reserve assets. The decision to create such new reserve assets is needed promptly. The threat that total reserves may not grow adequately in the future is a source of strain and uncertainty in the international monetary system and an encouragement to speculation in gold and foreign exchange markets To encourage the orderly progress of world trade and economic growth and to maintain confidence in international monetary arrangements the nations of the world must show decisively and promptly their determination to meet the need for growing reserves by creating an adequate supplement to gold and the dollar. The development of a supplemental reserve asset backed by the full faith and credit of participating nations is the ideal way to solve the problem. Such an asset can be universally accepted as a supplement to gold and dollars and can be issued in quantities sufficient to insure adequate growth of total monetary reserves. The outline plan for international monetary reform unanimously endorsed at the annual meeting of the IMF in Rio de Janeiro is a major forward step toward a solution THE RIO AGREEMENT The plan agreed upon in Rio represents the outcome of four years of intensive study and negotiation involving the major industrial countries in the so-called " Group of Ten " as well as the wider forum of the Fund. It provides for the establishment within the IMF of a new reserve facility for the creation of Special Drawing Rights ( SDR 's ) designed to " meet the need as and when it arises for a supplement to existing reserve assets. " SDR 's will be created by deliberate decision of IMF members and will be distributed to all participants in proportion to their Fund quotas. Countries receiving these rights will be able to count them as part of their reserves Subject to certain rules described below they can use them to settle balanceof-payments deficits or satisfy reserve needs by drawing on ( i.e. exchanging them for ) convertible currencies of other countries. An amendment to the Fund 's Articles of Agreement that will express the new scheme in precise legal terms is to be prepared by the Executive Directors of the IMF not later than the end of March of this year and will be submitted to member countries for ratification As President Johnson has indicated the Rio agreement constitutes the greatest forward step in the improvement of the international monetary system since the creation of the Fund itself. For the first time in history the great majority of the world 's nations comprising all the members of the IMF has agreed to cooperate in the conscious and deliberate creation of a new and permanent reserve asset in amounts and at a pace systematically geared to assure adequate growth of total international reserves Nature of the New Reserve Asset Essentially SDR 's are claims giving their holders the unconditional right to obtain convertible currencies from other members of the Fund to meet balance-of-payments needs or unfavorable developments in a country 's total reserves. These claims are backed by the obligation of member countries to accept them in exchange for convertible currencies up to certain limits In the design of the new asset every effort has been made to assure that it will be a true supplement to existing reserve assets and will in fact add to the total of world reserves. In line with these considerations SDR 's will carry a gold value guarantee and will be " as good as gold " for the settlement of international payments. Indeed since they can be used only for such settlements any newly created SDR 's constitute a permanent addition to the world 's official monetary reserves. Unlike gold they can not be drained into private hoards and unlike super gold tranche drawing rights they can not be extinguished as the by-product of other Fund operations The new reserve asset will also have an advantage over gold in bearing interest ; at the same time the rate will be much lower than is available on dollars and other reserve currencies. And they will of course not share the dollar 's unique role of serving simultaneously as a reserve asset and as the world 's principal transactions currency While SDR 's will have all the essential characteristics of reserve assets the framers of the plan realized that it may take some time until participating countries become fully accustomed to this new asset. The plan therefore places certain limitations on the ability of individual participating countries to use SDR 's and on their obligation to accept them. As the new asset becomes more familiar to the world through experience it should become increasingly possible to reduce or even eliminate such limitations The initial rules are designed to assure that the new reserve asset will be smoothly integrated into the monetary system with existing assets. Under them the Fund will frequently act as a traffic policeman guiding transfers The rules require first that SDR 's should be used only for balance-ofpayments needs or to meet reserve losses and not merely for the purpose of shifting from one reserve asset into another Second when SDR 's are used for the acquisition of convertible currencies the countries drawn upon should normally be in a solid balance-ofpayments position as a result of either surpluses or strong reserves. And the drawings are to be guided toward such countries in a way that will over time provide a more or less proportionate relationship of the new asset to total reserves. Thus it is assured that the holdings of the new asset will be widely dispersed among participating nations Third each participating country is obligated to accept SDR 's in exchange for convertible currency only up to the point where its total holdings are three times the amount of such reserve assets that have been cumulatively allocated to it. This limits the obligation of any individual nation while insuring ample scope for the effective use of the new asset Fourth countries which have used SDR 's in large amounts over an extended period will have a limited obligation to reconstitute their holdings over time. The rule provides that during the first five years of the operation of the plan a country 's average holdings should be at least percent of its average allocation over this period. In a very rough way this requirement can be compared to a minimum average balance that a bank may require on checking accounts Decisionmaking and Distribution Following ratification of the Rio plan the activation of the new facility will require a separate set of decisions. Activation can only occur when the Managing Director of the Fund after careful study and upon consultations with Fund members to assure him of the need for additional reserves makes a specific proposal as to the timing and the amount of SDR 's to be created Final approval of the proposal requires an 85-percent majority of the voting power of the participating countries somewhat more than the 80-percent vote required for quota increases in the Fund. In effect it gives a veto power not only to the United States but also to the countries of the Common Market should they choose to vote as a group Since SDR 's are designed to assure an adequate over-all growth of international reserves over time decisions regarding the amount of SDR 's to be created will normally be made for a basic period ahead ( such as five years ) with equal amounts to be issued during each of these years. The task of satisfying short-term variations in liquidity needs will thus continue to be left to such existing mechanisms as the credit facilities of the Fund and the network of central bank swap arrangements The new facility will be universally available to Fund members without discrimination an important principle on which the United States placed great stress during the course of the negotiations. Under this arrangement the United States would receive about $ million out of each $ billion of SDR 's created. The share of the Common Market countries as a group would be about $ million ; of the United Kingdom $ million ; of Canada and Japan about $ million each ; of other developed countries $ million ; and of the less-developed countries $ million In effect the new drawing rights are to be created by the stroke of a pen but that stroke will commit the full faith and credit of participating countries behind the asset that they have jointly established. As is true in the case of domestic money the general and unconditional acceptability of such monetary assets reflects confidence in the issuing agent. No one could ask for a stronger issuing agent than the nations of the IMF banded together Paper monetary reserves are by no means new sterling and dollars have served as reserves for generations. What will be new is the reliance on a reserve asset backed by a group of nations rather than a single one and capable of being created by international decision The ratification of the Rio plan is still to come. And the implementation and actual creation of SDR 's are a further step away. Even when they are created it will take time for them to become established as a customary usable reserve asset. But the world is now taking the decisive step of choosing to travel this route. It is adopting as a means of meeting the need for growing reserves a clear alternative to a rise in the monetary gold price The potentialities for this reserve asset are obvious and enormous. It need not and will not displace gold and the dollar as reserve assets. But it will free the world from concern about the supply and demand for gold While the creation of SDR 's will not in itself solve the balance-of-payments problems of the United States or any other country it will enable countries to increase their reserves without pursuing mutually incompatible payments goals. Thus it should facilitate an orderly adaptation of other countries ' payments positions as the United States reduces its deficit and contribute to the general health and strength of the international monetary system The Tasks Ahead The developments of late have given special urgency to the early ratification of the SDR facility. Indeed activation of the facility in the relatively near future may prove highly desirable to insure that the international monetary system will function with full effectiveness Several aspects of the current situation point toward the need for early action. The world 's monetary gold stock actually declined in There are indications that inadequate reserve expansion may already be inhibiting economic growth and the freedom of international transactions. Moreover successful implementation of the British devaluation will require a sharp shift in Britain 's payment position from a large deficit to a sizable surplus ; this will in turn call for reductions in surpluses and the incurring of deficits by other major countries. Additional adjustments in the payments positions and structures of major surplus countries will also be needed as a counterpart to improvements in the U.S. balance of payments. These difficult adjustments will be greatly facilitated if an adequate growth of total world reserves is assured TRADE POLICIES World trade has grown spectacularly in recent years. Between and it expanded by almost two and a half times while world output of primary and manufactured products doubled. The growth of trade relative to output has been an important factor in making this period the most prosperous one in recorded history. It was fostered by the progressive liberalization of the commercial policies of the major trading nations The United States can take pride in its leading role in this liberalization KENNEDY ROUND The Kennedy Round was the sixth venture at multilateral trade negotiations undertaken by the GATT since its creation in The growth of regional trading blocs in Europe and elsewhere introduced a special urgency and significance to the latest negotiations. The major nations of Europe had divided themselves into two trading groups the EEC and the EFT A. Each group provided for eventual free trade among its members accompanied by a continuation of tariffs and other restrictions against nonmembers. While these organizations have many desirable features they can pose a threat to the development of more liberal trading relations among nations that belong to different groups and between group members and nonmembers like the United States The United States ' response to this challenge was the passage of the Trade Expansion Act of which became the stimulus for the Kennedy Round. This act permitted the President greater flexibility in bargaining for lower tariffs and provided for adjustment assistance to American workers and business firms that might be injured as a result of tariff concessions. The negotiations were formally begun in May and were concluded after many difficulties on June Although some problems could not be adequately overcome within the Kennedy Round a remarkable degree of tariff reduction was achieved. The results have been widely and accurately acclaimed as a major accomplishment Features of the Agreement The agreement includes tariff concessions covering about $ billion of world trade ; the United States gave concessions on about $ billion of its imports while concessions by others cover the same amount of U.S exports. Tariff reductions of percent were applied to numerous manufactured products and significant but smaller reductions were applied to many others. For the four largest participants the United States the EEC the United Kingdom and Japan the weighted average reduction of tariffs on manufactured products was about percent. The U.S. tariff reductions will generally take effect in five equal annual installments the first of which became effective on January Some of our trading partners took a similar step at the same time but others will wait until midyear and then make percent of their reductions Certain manufactured products required special negotiations ; these included chemicals cotton textiles and iron and steel. Chemical products posed a particularly difficult problem which was resolved by making two separate agreements. The first is incorporated in the multilateral tariffreducing agreement providing for a stipulated unconditional reduction of chemical tariffs by the United States and other countries The second is conditional upon legislative action by the United States to remove the special valuation method now applied by U.S. tariff regulations on benzenoid chemicals. Under legislation adopted in when the American chemical industry was still in an " infant " stage the U.S. tariff rate for competitive benzenoid chemicals is applied to the price of similar products made by domestic producers rather than to the actual price of imports. If the United States adopts the normal valuation practice on these items certain of its major trading partners will further reduce chemical tariffs and will also lower some nontariff barriers Agricultural products were also considered in the Kennedy Round and proved to be especially troublesome. However significant tariff concessions were finally agreed upon. Those by other nations cover about $ million of U.S. exports. Our concessions covered about the same amount of U.S imports. The other major accomplishment in agriculture was the negotiation of a grains agreement. It provides for a higher minimum price for wheat than existed under the old International Wheat Agreement and involves an increase of about percent in U.S. export prices. It also provides for a multilateral food aid program equivalent to million tons of cereals a year of which the United States would contribute percent While these steps are encouraging the degree of restriction remaining on international trade in agricultural products particularly through nontariff barriers still greatly exceeds that on manufactured goods. Nevertheless the Kennedy Round went further than previous negotiations in the agricultural area. Furthermore the principle embodied in the food aid agreement may have great significance over the long run because it recognizes that responsibility in the international war on hunger extends to all countries not just to the United States and the other major food exporting nations. If the world 's need for food should outrun supplies in the years ahead this agreement could become the pattern for an international corrective program The United States made particular efforts to reduce tariffs on products of special interest to less-developed countries. It granted concessions on more than $ million of such products without attempting to obtain full reciprocity Another element in the Kennedy Round package was the successful negotiation of an international antidumping code. This accord is consistent with existing American laws which safeguard our industry and it commits our trading partners to insure fair procedures to American exporters. Also as part of the negotiation a three-year extension of the long-term cotton textile arrangement was concluded Consequences of the Tariff Reductions The amount of existing trade covered by tariff cuts in the Kennedy Round does not reflect the potential expansion of trade which is one of the key benefits of the tariff reductions. New U.S. export opportunities will be created. Moreover American producers will experience lower costs as a result of reduced tariffs on many inputs. The welfare of American consumers will be enhanced by lower prices of goods of both domestic and foreign origin Exports. American exports will be stimulated from two sources. First as tariffs abroad are reduced our exporters will have an opportunity to compete on a more equal footing in the domestic markets of foreign producers. Second the tariff advantage in favor of member nations over nonmembers within the EEC and EFTA will be reduced thereby enabling American exporters to compete more effectively in these large markets. For example because the EEC tariff on pumps and compressors will be reduced from to percent when the Kennedy Round reductions are completed German pumps will have only a 6-percent preferential edge over American pumps in the Dutch market as compared to the percent they now enjoy Inputs. A second major gain from the Kennedy Round will come from the reduction of American tariffs on materials and components used by American manufacturers. Both the imported items and the competing domestic materials will be cheaper and production costs will thereby be reduced. As a consequence the competitive position of American manufacturers using these inputs will be improved in both export and domestic markets To cite only one example tariffs on a wide range of steel alloying materials will be progressively reduced. This should reduce the costs of producing alloy steels and of machine tools machinery and equipment manufactured from such steels thus strengthening the competitive position of our machinery industries in export markets Consumer Goods. The Kennedy Round also provides benefit to American consumers from U.S. tariff reductions. Consumers will enjoy reduced prices on imported goods and also on American products that compete with imports. If the full reduction is passed on for instance the 50-percent drop in tariffs on wooden furniture is the equivalent of price reductions of to percent. Further in the climate of more liberal trade foreign producers will be encouraged to market new products to American consumers Adjustment Strains. A full evaluation of the impact of the Kennedy Round must recognize that there may be some adverse effects as well. The increases in imports resulting from reduced U.S. tariffs can cause discom- O fort for certain American industries. Imports however still amount to only percent of our GNP and can hardly pose insuperable adjustment problems even in the short run. The overwhelming majority of American industries that face brisk competition from imports can adjust in stride. American business knows how to respond to shifting domestic and international competitive pressures and its responses are generally beneficial to the entire economy. But a few American industries may need help to meet the competitive challenge ; and that aid should be given through temporary Government support to improve efficiency. Adjustment assistance is essential to meet the limited costs the Kennedy Round may impose in a few areas while maintaining its large benefits for the entire Nation Legislative Tasks The act provided for adjustment assistance in cases of injury arising from tariff reductions but the legislated criteria for eligibility have proven to be excessively restrictive. These criteria can and should be liberalized without opening the door to possible abuse and the President is asking for the necessary congressional action to this effect Assistance for workers includes the payment of readjustment allowances directly to those who are obliged to seek alternative employment as a result of tariff reductions. The allowances can also be paid while workers are taking part in on-the-job training. The Government can also provide for testing counseling training and placement services to promote a swift and smooth transfer. Adjustment assistance can be provided to injured firms to permit them to adapt their product lines or lower their costs in order to meet new competitive conditions. Such a solution within the affected firms is particularly desirable because it avoids dislocation in the employment of workers and in the use of capital. The offices of the Department of Commerce can make technical assistance available. Financial aid can be provided through loans or loan guarantees. Tax relief is offered through extension of the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code for the carryback and carryforward of business losses A second urgent legislative requirement is the elimination of the American selling price system. This action is needed to assure the full benefit of lower chemical tariffs abroad and to win important concessions on certain foreign nontariff barriers as well as to provide the United States with a uniformly rational valuation system It is essential that Congress not enact legislation that would reverse or jeopardize our long-term efforts and policies to promote liberal trade. Bills were introduced into the Congress in to impose new legislated quotas on textiles apparel steel meat and meat products mink furs lead and zinc groundfish fillets baseball gloves and mitts consumer electronic products scissors and shears hardwood plywood ferro-alloys potash flat glass ball and roller bearings and stainless steel flatware. Other bills sought to tighten restrictions on petroleum and petroleum products and dairy products. The value of the imports covered by specific bills amounts to over $ billion. If general quota provisions were adopted along lines proposed in some bills $ billion or more of imports would be affected If enacted quota bills could severely harm our economy in several ways. Quotas would deprive American producers and consumers of flexible import supplies that help to moderate shortages. Quotas also would exert upward pressures on prices at a time when price stability is a critical national objective. Furthermore protected American industries would be insulated from competitive forces abroad. Many of these industries need the invigorating influence of foreign competition and should not be permitted to relax behind high protective barriers Finally and perhaps most seriously our exports would certainly suffer from quota restrictions on imports. Some exports would be lost simply because importing countries would have less foreign exchange. But more importantly foreign governments would surely take advantage of their rights under the GATT to retaliate against whichever American products they may choose. In the end we would have sacrificed the interests of more efficient industries and businesses for the sake of protecting less competitive elements in the economy ; we would have jeopardized the creation of higher paying jobs in order to preserve low-wage jobs ; and we would have traded international cooperation for international economic warfare. A move toward protectionism would also hurt our balance of payments. The rising trade surplus counted upon to help achieve payments equilibrium would be impossible in a world of widespread trade restrictions. For all of these reasons a liberal commercial policy is the only rational policy for the United States TRADE WITH LESS-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES It is of vital interest to the United States and other developed countries that less-developed countries achieve an adequate rate of economic growth Probably the most important way that the developed countries can support this goal is to maintain healthy rates of growth of their own economies The higher rate of growth of the industrialized nations in the 's as compared with the 's was a major factor in the more rapid growth of less-developed countries ' exports ( Table ) But the developed countries can also promote development of poor nations through their trade and aid policies TABLE Growth of exports of less-developed countries in two selected periods Percentage change per year in export value Export group All commodities Primary products Manufactured products Source : General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade UNCTAD The United States will soon participate with about other nations in the second session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) in New Delhi. This conference takes as its starting point the recognition that access to the markets of the industrialized countries is essential to the economic growth of less-developed countries The industrialization of a poor country enlarges its need for foreign exchange. It generates increased demands for goods which can be produced domestically only at great cost. This is especially true of countries with small markets which can not support the efficient production of many manufactures such as basic metals machinery and transport equipment Only seven less-developed countries have gross national products in excess of $ billion less than the output of the State of Connecticut. But even the larger less-developed countries must look abroad for their supplies of most technically complex manufactured goods The export performance of less-developed countries depends in part on the policies followed by these countries themselves. In the area of manufactured exports a few developing nations have been quite successful particularly in those goods requiring relatively large amounts of unskilled labor. Other countries could probably follow suit if they pursue well-designed policies to provide education and training for labor and to encourage investment in export-oriented industries Realization of the potential also depends on commercial policies of the developed countries. According to calculations made by the research staff of the UNCTAD secretariat the average tariffs on manufactured products of particular interest to the less-developed countries are somewhat higher and were reduced somewhat less in the Kennedy Round than the average rates of duty on other products. Furthermore some of the manufactured exports of interest to less-developed countries are restrained by quantitative restrictions and other nontariff barriers In order to improve the access of the less-developed countries to the markets of the industrial nations the OECD countries have approved the outline of a scheme of generalized nonreciprocal tariff preferences to be granted by all developed member nations to all less-developed countries This outline will be presented to the less-developed countries at the meeting in New Delhi. It is hoped that the task of working out the elements of such a preferential scheme can then be undertaken. The adoption of a system of generalized preferences would help to check the proliferation of discriminatory preferences and to keep the world trading community from fragmenting into preferential trading blocs The proposed trade preferences should be viewed as a supplement to other efforts by advanced nations to assist the development of poor countries. For many countries economic growth and export capabilities require foreign aid in the form of developmental capital as well as improved trading opportunities. Foreign aid from the United States and the encouragement of increased aid by others particularly countries in balance-of-payments surplus is and will continue to be an important aspect of U.S. foreign policy. The replenishment of the capital funds of the International Development Association is currently being negotiated and the United States hopes that its resources will be increased substantially Stabilizing Export Earnings The development programs of less-developed countries have often been hampered by the uncertainties arising from wide variations in earnings from primary products. The uncertainties can be reduced by commodity agreements and by special financing arrangements to meet temporary reductions in export earnings Commodity Agreements. Most underdeveloped countries have relied on primary products for the bulk of their export earnings. A number of these countries have had unfortunate experiences with their primary product exports either because of export instability or because of slow long-term growth or even long-term decline of export receipts from particular products New exports are frequently not introduced even when the value of traditional exports is declining. In part this is because the natural resources ( agricultural land mineral deposits ) on which certain primary exports are based have few alternative uses. The low skill level of workers and the technological backwardness of industry make it difficult for these countries to break into the market for manufactured goods and some primary products. Exchange rates and monetary policies may also discourage development of new exports. It is encouraging to note however that in the 's some less-developed countries whose main export products have been stagnant have achieved high rates of growth of other exports Countries experiencing highly fluctuating or declining prices for their exports have attempted to set up commodity agreements. A typical agreement creates a buffer stock which purchases the commodity when the price falls below a predetermined floor and sells from the stock when the price rises above a predetermined ceiling. Such agreements can help primary producers achieve more stable prices although they can not insure stable export proceeds for individual countries when supplies vary. The United States favors commodity agreements designed to stabilize prices and stands ready to support efforts by less-developed countries to move resources out of the production of commodities in chronic surplus Primary producers sometimes attempt through commodity agreements to raise prices above the long-term equilibrium level. They rarely succeed Maintenance of a price above long-run cost requires restrictions on supply ; the necessary export quotas are extremely hard to negotiate and to enforce Financing. Multilateral financing facilities can help less-developed countries formulate and carry out development plans in the face of export uncertainties. A step in this direction was taken in when the IMF created its compensatory finance facility. Under this program as liberalized in a less-developed country may borrow for a term of three to five years up to percent of its IMF quota when its exports fall below a medium-term trend for reasons beyond its control. Under new proposals for " supplementary finance " which will * be discussed at UNCTAD countries experiencing deep or protracted shortfalls disruptive of development could receive longer term loans on concessional terms CONCLUSION The course of international economic relations in the postwar period justifies a basic optimism about the future but it also suggests that careful action is needed if this favorable experience is to continue. The gold exchange standard reinforced by the Bretton Woods agreements has proved to be flexible enough to support a prodigious expansion of world trade which was also stimulated by a gradual reduction in tariffs and other restrictions Under present circumstances there is a clear need for a new demonstration of the flexibility of the system. The creation of adequate reserves has come to depend on a deficit in the U.S. balance of payments which has long been a matter of concern but which now has to be dealt with decisively. This will reqjuire a resolute and continuing attack on inflationary pressures in our domestic economy and various measures in the field of international transactions. The present situation calls for the cooperation of all countries especially those with persistent surpluses in bringing about better equilibrium in international payments. It is also essential to provide for new reserve assets to supplement gold and the dollar There are still many obstacles to overcome before the international monetary system is fully adapted to the needs of the present and the foreseeable future but fortunately there is increasing awareness that these obstacles can and must be surmounted through multilateral cooperation. The hopes of the free world depend on our success in meeting this challenge Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL JANUARY T H E PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this Report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully GARDNER ACKLEY Chairman JAMES S. DUESENBERRY ARTHUR M OKUN Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The year was one of intensive activity for the Council of Economic Advisers. The period of economic readjustment between the inflationary boom of and the renewed advance that became so clearly evident late in demanded careful watch and continuous analysis of the sometimes uncertain economic signals. Convinced through this watch and analysis that a second-half recovery was developing along the lines of its forecast of last January which threatened to become too exuberant in the Council contributed in a major way to the development of the President 's fiscal program of last August as well as the budgetary program for fiscal year Late in the year it participated intensively in developing the balanceof-payments program announced on January Throughout the year its studies contributed to the development and evaluation of programs to deal with emerging problems in employment and unemployment manpower training and utilization farm problems and policies energy resources environmental protection income maintenance consumer problems monetary policy and financial markets tax structure export expansion housing and urban affairs the war on poverty budgetary concepts stockpile policy Federal statistics international economic cooperation international monetary reform and many others As in earlier years the Council continued to give leadership to the Government 's efforts to induce responsible restraint on the part of business and labor in price and wage decisions. Although its failures to obtain desired cooperation were obvious to all it also had significant successes which must remain confidential COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP Gardner Ackley Arthur M. Okun and James S. Duesenberry continued to serve as Council members in with Mr. Ackley as Chairman. Messrs Ackley and Duesenberry were on leave from the University of Michigan and Harvard University respectively. As the President announced on January Mr. Ackley has been nominated as Ambassador to Italy and will be leaving the Council shortly. Mr. Okun has been designated to succeed to the Chairmanship and Merton J. Peck of Yale University has been nominated as the new member of the Council Following is a list of all past Council members and their dates of service : Position Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling JohnD. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner. Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Joseph S. Davis Raymond J. Saulnier Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich James Tobin Kermit Gordon Walter W. Heller John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein _ Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member _.. Member Member Chairman Member Member Oath of office date August August November 2t May August May June September8,1952 March September December May 2t April December December November May January January January May September Separation date November January February August January December February April October January January January January July December November August February COUNCIL STAFF At the end of members of the Council 's professional staff were John F. Burton Jack W. Carlson Christopher K. Clague Thomas F Dernburg Peter P. Dorner Catherine H. Furlong Raymond W. Goldsmith Hendrik S. Houthakker Saul H. Hymans Frances M. James Lawrence B. Krause David W. Lusher Carey P. Modlin Joseph D. Mooney Saul Nelson Roger G. Noll Frank W. Schiff and Charles B. Warden Jr Each year a number of staff members who have joined the Council on a temporary basis return to their posts in private life or in Government Those leaving the Council in were Henry J. Aaron Shirley M. Almon G. Paul Balabanis Guy Black Donald E. Cullen Stanley L. Friedlander Stephen M. Goldfeld David T. Kresge Wilfred Lewis Jr. and Alfred Reifman Continuing its practice of asking leading members of the economics profession to assist in the analysis of economic problems the Council in called on the following consultants : Henry J. Aaron James T. Bonnen William H. Branson Richard N. Cooper John T. Dunlop Otto Eckstein Stephen M. Goldfeld Kermit Gordon Walter W. Heller Myron L. Joseph David T. Kresge Susan J. Lepper Wilfred Lewis Jr. Paul W. MacAvoy Edwin S. Mills Richard A. Musgrave Joseph A. Pechman Merton J. Peck George L. Perry Melvin Rothbaum R. Robert Russell Paul A. Samuelson Warren L. Smith Robert M. Solow Daniel B. Suits Charles A. Taff Paul J. Taubman Lester C. Thurow James Tobin Robert C. Turner and Lloyd Ulman The Council continued its graduate student intern program which was started in Those working with the Council for various periods in were Glenn Brewster Albert J. Eckstein Lawrence J. Fulco James J Heckman Dale W. Henderson Peter Isard Robert I. Lerman Stephen P. Magee Myron G. Myers Ralph E. Pochoda Dennis M. Roth Richard L. Schmalensee Courtenay M. Slater Earl M. Unger and Andrew J Winnick. Research assistants included Carol S. Burke Charlotte Fremon Claudia D. Goldin Helen Reynolds and Elizabeth A. Rothman As in the past the Council received loyal and energetic assistance from its nonprofessional staff. Members of this staff at the end of were Dorothy Bagovich Teresa D. Bradburn Louis P. Brighthaupt Gladys R Durkin Catherine Fibich James W. Gatling Elizabeth F. Gray Laura B Hoffman Christine L. Johnson Bessie M. Lafakis Betty Lu Lowry Eleanor A. McStay A. Keith Miles Joyce A. Pilkerton Earnestine Reid Gail Roberts Lucille F. Saverino Bettye T. Siegel Daisy M. Sindelar Nancy F Skidmore Margaret L. Snyder Carolyn T. Welch and Elizabeth A. Zea COUNCIL ACTIVITIES The Council of Economic Advisers was established as an agency of the Federal Government nearly years ago by the Employment Act of Under the Act the Council is charged with the responsibility of analyzing and interpreting economic developments and of recommending economic policies that will promote the goals of " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The Council 's chief responsibility is to keep the President fully informed of economic developments and emerging problems which may affect the Nation 's economy. To meet this responsibility the Council continuously reviews economic conditions undertakes special studies of particular problem areas and makes recommendations concerning Government programs and policies. The Council confers regularly with all major Government agencies having responsibilities in the economic field The Secretary of the Treasury the Director of the Bureau of the Budget and the Chairman of the Council and their respective staffs ( the " Troika " ) provide the President with a continuous joint assessment of the economic and budgetary outlook for the current and subsequent fiscal years. The heads of the " Troika " agencies and their associates together with the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System meet periodically as the " Quadriad " with the President to discuss domestic and international monetary problems In addition to its regular and informal consultations with other Government agencies the Council and its staff in participated with other agencies in a large variety of more formal committees task forces and studies The Council and its staff represent the United States in a number of important international conferences. The Council Chairman heads the U.S delegation to the meetings of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and mem- bers of the Council and its staff this year participated in a dozen or more other international meetings under the auspices of the OEGD. The Chairman was a member of the U.S. Cabinet-level delegations which meet annually with similar delegations of the Canadian and Japanese Governments. The Council also was involved in activities of the U.N. Economic Commission for Europe An important responsibility of the Council is to explain and clarify the Administration 's economic policies both within the Government and to the public at large. This is done through numerous speeches articles press briefings statements congressional testimony its Annual Report and by assisting the President in the preparation of his Economic Report. The Council meets frequently and informally with many individuals and groups both from the United States and abroad including businessmen bankers labor leaders government officials university scholars and students members of the press corps and interested private citizens and more formally with a number of advisory groups including the President 's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy and the Business Council 's Liaison Committee with the Council of Economic Advisers The Council prepares two documents for publication. One is the Economic " Report of the President together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. Over copies of the Report were distributed to Members of the Congress Government officials the press depository libraries or sold to the public by the Superintendent of Documents. The second is the monthly Economic Indicators. This important compilation of current economic statistics has been prepared since at the Council under the direction of Miss Frances M. James and is published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. More than copies are furnished to Members of Congress and depository libraries or sold to the public every month Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National B-l B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 income or expenditure : Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in prices Implicit price deflators for gross national product Gross national product by major type of product Gross national product by major type of product in prices B-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-7. Gross national product by sector B-8. Gross national product by sector in prices B-9. Gross national product by industry in prices B-10. Personal consumption expenditures B-l Gross private domestic investment B-12. National income by type of income B-l3. Relation of gross national product and national income B-14. Relation of national income and personal income B-15. Disposition of personal income B-l6. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices B-17. Sources of personal income B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving B-19. Financial saving by individuals B Number and money income of families and unrelated individuals Population employment wages and productivity : B-21. Population by age groups : Estimates and projections B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-23. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B-24. Selected unemployment rates B-25. Unemployment by duration B-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-28. Average weekly hours of work in selected nonagricultural industries B-29. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries B-30. Average gross weekly earnings in selected nonagricultural industries B-31. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and prices B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices B-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy page Production and business activity : B-35. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B Industrial production indexes market groupings B-37. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate B-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and B-40. New construction activity B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing B-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-43. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-44. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Prices : B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 B-49 Consumer price indexes by major groups Consumer price indexes by special groups Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Money supply credit and finance : B-50. Money supply B-51. Bank loans and investments B-52. Selected liquid assets held by the public B-53. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-54. Bond yields and interest rates B Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding B-56. Instalment credit extended and repaid B-57. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-58. Net public and private debt Page Government finance : B-59. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt B-60. Federal budget receipts and outlays B-61. Relation of the receipt-expenditure account of the Federal Government to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts B Receipts and expenditures of the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts B-63. Federal finances under the old concepts fiscal years B-64. U.S. Government debt by kind of obligation B-65. Estimated ownership of U.S. Government obligations B-66. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt B-67. Receipts and expenditures of the Government sector of the national income and product accounts B-68. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Corporate profits and finance : B-69. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations B-70. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) by industry group B-72. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-73. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations B-74. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-75. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit B-76. Business formation and business failures Agriculture : B-77. Income from agriculture B-78. Farm production indexes B Farm population employment and productivity B-80. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-81. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-82. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture International statistics : B-83. United States balance of payments B-84. United States merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-85. United States merchandise exports and imports by area B-86. United States overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years B-87. International reserves and B-88. United States reserve assets : Gold stock holdings of convertible foreign currencies and reserve position in the International Monetary Fund B Price changes in international trade B Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current prices Symbols used : v Preliminary __ Not available ( also not applicable ) * Amount insignificant in terms of the particular unit ( e.g. less than $ million where unit is billions of dollars ) Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Total gross national product Government purchases of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures ^ Gross private domestic investment2 Net exports of goods and services Federal4 Total Total National defense5 Other State and local * I960. * : I II. III IV. : I II. III IV. : I II.. III.. ! ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates IV p See Table B-10 for major components 2See Table B-ll for detailed components See Table B-6 for exports and imports separately Net of Government sales This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in 1958prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Total gross national product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services Total J Total Structures /producers ' durable equipment Total Residential structures Change in businessinventories i950 I960. i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II... III... IV... : I ll_.. Ill IV * _ See footnote at end of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Year or quarter Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal i State and local v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II III IV v : | | III IV Net of Government sales Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Gross private domestic investmentl Personal consumption expenditures Total gross national product ^ Year or quarter Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential structures ' * II Ill IV : | | III IV : II III IV v See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and imports 1of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product by sectors Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Private2 General government \ 1967i : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV p Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Gross national product less compensation of general government employees. See also Tables B-7 and B-8 Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-4. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Total gross Total InvenFinal natory tional sales change product Total Final Year or quarter goods sales Durable goods II c to Final Total sales Nondurable goods Final Total sales Serv- Strucices tures Gross auto product 5.S C _ f C ! b * o * I960. v _ ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L I II.. Ill IV.. : I II.. Ill IV.. : l _ II.. III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-5. Gross national product by major type of product in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Goods output Year or quarter Total gross Total na- Final Inventory tional sales change product Total Final goods sales v Durable goods II Final Total sales Serv- Strucices tures Final Total sales 2-S Gross auto product If Nondurable goods L4 Seasonally adjusted annual rates IV... : I II.. III. IV.. : I II.. : I I I III.. III.. IV p Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups { Billions of dollars ] Government Persons Disposable personal income Year or quarter Less : Interest paid and Total i transfer payments to foreigners Equals : Total excluding interest and transfers Net receipts Expenditures Surplus or PerPerdeficit sonal sonal ( ) Less : Tax conLess : Equals : nasump- saving and TransTransor tion nonfers Equals : Total fers chases tional disinextax interNet of ex- intercome pendi- saving reest rependiest goods and tures ceipts and ceipts tures and and prodor ac- subsubservuct accruals sidies sidies ices counts 194L I960... v -L8 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.__ III... IV. : I I I III IV v. : I II.. Ill IV. See footnotes at end of table 2l6 TABLE B-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Business International TransNet exports of goods Gross Excess fers to Gross naand services of forpriTotal Statis- tional Gross Excess trans- income tical of in- eigners revate prodfers distained domes- vest- by peror reuct or crepment earn- tic insons Less : Equals : of net ceipts ancy or exings vestand pendiExNet Imexment * Govture exports ports ports ernports ment Year or quarter * : II Ill IV : II III IV .'4 _ l * Seasonally adjusted annual rates * IVP Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by government net interest paid by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and wage accruals less disbursements Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing See Table B l l Net foreign investment with sign changed Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics : II III TABLE B-7. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private product1 Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Total Nonfarm Total Farm Households Rest of the world Gross government product 1935.._ ? * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II III. IV : I Ill IV : I III IV v.... * Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Gross private product l Total gross national product Year or quarter Business Total Nonfarm Total Farm Households Rest of the world Gross government product ^ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV * >.-.- : L II III IV Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are at least to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. Government enterprises in other words conduct operations essentially commercial in character even though they perform them under governmental auspices. The Post Office and public power systems are typical examples of government enterprises. On the other hand State universities and public parks where the fees and admissions cover only a nominal part of operating costs are part of general government activities Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-9. Gross national product by industry in 1958prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Year AgriTotal culture Congross fores- tract nacontry tional strucand product fishtion eries Manufacturing Total Transporta- Whnla tion sale comNon- muniDurand able durable cation retail goods goods trade and indus- indus- utilitries tries ties GovFinance erninsurment ance Servand All and ices govern- other i real ment estate enterprises * Mining rest of world and residual ( the difference between gross national product measured as sum of final products and gross national product measured as sum of gross product by industries ) Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-10. Personal consumption expenditures y- 3> O a : : c ther o rans portation CJ oo c ihold operation o f ousi ood excluding alcohoi ic beverages i u_ otal otal t- ther ther o Services asoliine and oil u ing and shoes < Nondurable goods ture and housed equipment H- Year or quarter utonnobiles and parts Durable goods otal otal personal consump tion expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] o P. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : I. II III IV : L. II. II IVP Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics ( except as noted ) T A B L E B Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross private domestic investment Nonresidential Total Structures Residential structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonfarm Nonfarm Farm Nonfarm " '.S I960. v ~ 4i7 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III.... IV... : I II III.... IV... : II III IV P.. Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-12. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Compensation of employees Corporate profits and inventory valuation idjustment Business and professional income Income Rental inSupInNet of plecome Inven- farm come Corpo- Inven- interOf rtf est Wages ments of tory protory perand to unin- valuvalupriesala- wages Total corpo- ation tors sons Total profits ation ries and rated adjustbefore adjustsalaenter- ment taxes * tavoc ment ries prises Total national income i Total : * p Year or quarter * * * ! i -.i * -A * * * * ! j Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II.. ML IV.. : ! : I I I I L IV p IIL IV. National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-13 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items Includes change in inventories < See Table B-69 for corporate tax liability and profits after taxes Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics T A B L E B Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Year or quarter Less : Capital consumption allowances Plus : Subsidies Equals : less Net current surplus tional of govprodernuct ment enterprises Less : Indirect business taxes Total Federal State and local Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income * * ? * i.3 T * * * * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II III IV : II. III IV * Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics T A B L E B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : Year or quarter National income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Contri- Wage Govbutions accruals ernment less for transfer social dispayments insur- burseto perance ments sons Equals : Interest paid Government ( net ) and by consumers Dividends Business transfer Personal payincome ments '.S I960 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I.. IIIII IV. : I.. II. I V : L II._ III V Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-15. Disposition of personal income Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total Equals : PerPerPersonal Interest sonal sonal contransfer saving sump- paid by paycontion ments expend- sumers to foritures eigners Personal outlays Total Billions of dollars Consumption expenditures Personal saving Percent I960... ' 1967P 3.'7 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. III IV. : I II.. Ill IV.. : I II.. III. Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Current prices prices Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current prices Total ( billions of dollars ) prices Current prices prices Per capita ( dollars ) Current prices Population ( thousands ) * prices p Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : l II III IV i Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-17. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Wage and salary disbursementsl Year or quarter Total personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Service industries Proprietors ' income Government Other labor income Business and professional Farm I960 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I : : I III IV See footnotes at end of table T A B L E B Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Year or quarter Rental ncome Diviof per- dends sons Personal interest income Total Old-age and survivors insurance benefits State unemployment insurance benefits Veterans ' hpnpfitc Uvllclllo Less : Personal contributions Other for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income ; v * * * ! * ^ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II III The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-12 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Includes change in inventories Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Year or quarter Total Total Gross investment Personal saving Gross business saving Total Federal State and local Statistical dis- Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment i ancy ! ( ) W l * * ( ) * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV v Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B Financial saving by individuals 67l [ Billions of dollars ] Private insurance and U.S. Other sav- Gov- rate pension ings and rebonds ment3 other serves Securities Year or quarter 1967P : I I II I IV : 1II III I V : II Il l Total Currency Savand ings bank shares deTotal posits oo GovLess : Increase in erndebt Non- ment ininsursured ance penand sion pen- Mort- Con- Secugage rities funds sion debts sumer loans7 debts re- serves * ! ? '.2 Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified Includes shares in savings and loan associations and shares and deposits in credit unions " Other government " includes U.S. Government issues ( except savings bonds ) State and local government securities and nonguaranteed Federal agency issues * Includes civil service railroad retirement and State and local retirement systems Mortgage debt to institutions on one- to four-family nonfarm dwellings Consumer debt owed to corporations. Policy loans on Government and private life insurance have been deducted from those items of saving Change in bank loans to brokers dealers and others for the purpose of purchasing or carrying securities Note. In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce are derived as the difference between personal i ncome ( after taxes ) and personal outlays. For a reconciliation of the two series see Securities and Exchange Commission " Statistical Bulletin " August and " Survey of Current Business " July The flow-of-funds system of accounts of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System includes estimates of gross saving and net financial investment of households Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-20. Number and money income of families and unrelated individuals,1947-66 Families ^ Median income ( prices ) Number ( millions ) With incomes under $ ( prices ) Total Year Number ( millions ) Percent of total I960 $ Unrelated individuals With incomes under $ ( prices ) Total Number ( millions ) I960 Median income ( prices ) Number ( millions ) Percent of total $ The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family The term " unrelated individuals " refers to persons years of age and over ( other than inmates of institutions ) who are not living with any relatives Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-21. Population by age groups : Estimates and projections [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under Estimates : and over : Series A Series D_._ : Series A Series D : Series A Series D : Series A Series D Projections : l i Two of four series projected by the cohort method and based on different assumptions with regard to completed fertility which moves gradually toward a level of children per women for Series A and children per women for Series For further explanation of method of projection and for additional data see " Population Estimates Current Population Reports Series P-25 No. " December Note. Data for Armed Forces overseas included beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Total labor force ( including armed forces ) Employment Armed forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Total labor force as percent of noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. JuneJuly Aug. Sept OctNov. Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Noninstitutional population Year or month Total labor force ( including armed forces ) Employment Armed forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Total labor force as percent of noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Percent : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. 3'. | 3.7J Mote Labor force data in Tables B-22 through B-25 are based on household interviews and relate to calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings and Monthly Report on the Labor Force " February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employment Males Unemployment Females Females Males Year or month Total Total years years and over Total years years and over Total Total years years and over Total years years and over ; _ " " " ._ " \ ; ! ) ; ) ; I960 : " ; ! ! ! Seasonally adjusted ~ ~ ._ _ : Jan... '2,410 Feb... '2,3414 Mar... '2,266 Apr... May... June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. '3,195 Oct... Nov.. " * D e c : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec 43i ',477 \ i,934 ; " L_ ~ 'V25 ! Note.-See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-24. Selected unemployment rates [ Percent ] By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years Men years and over Women years and over By color White Nonwhite By selected groups Experienced wage and salary workers Married men * Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers Labor force time lost ' Seasonally adjusted May. " " " " " " June July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March Data for are for May Includes craftsmen operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October * Man-hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force man-hours Note. See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ( TABLE B-25. Unemployment by duration Duration of unemployment Year or month Total unemployment weeks and under weeks weeks Over weeks Thousands of persons years of age and over Seasonally adjusted Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Feb : Jan l'371 Note. See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employ-1 ment Insured Total unem- benefits Insured paid ployunem ( milment ploy ( weekly lions ment ^ of dolaverage ) lars ) Thousands * : Jan. Feb. MarApr. MayJune July. Aug__ Sept. Oct.. NovDec : Jan. Feb. MarApr. May. June July. Aug. * >54,678 * P55 P55,591 * Nov Exhaustions Unadjusted Weekly average thousands Initial claims M,806 Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of Seasondolally ad- lars ) * justed Average weekly check ( dollars ) e Percent Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State programs for temporary extension of benefits from June through June expiration date of program Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Includes benefits paid under extended duration provisions of State laws beginning June Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July s Preliminary ; June is latest month for which data are available fnr all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Employment Security TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Year or month Total wage and salary workers Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellaneous Government Federal ate and local * See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Service and miscellane- ous Government Federal State and local Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June._ July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec June.. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct__ Nov * Dec * : J a n Feb.. Mar. AprMay. Note. Data in Tables B-27 through B-33 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-22 through B-25 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers and which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings and Monthly Report on the Labor Force " February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Average weekly hours of work in selected nonagricultural industries Year or month Total nonagricultural private i Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods Contract construction Retail trade v Seasonally adjusted Wholesale trade Bituminous coal mining Class I railroads Telephone communication Unadjusted : Jan... Feb Mar. Apr May41.4 June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct..42.9 Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug... Sept.. Oct... Nov " Decp_ * In addition to industries shown separately total includes other mining ; other transportation and public utilities ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places. Comparable figure excluding eating and drinking places is hours for Eleven-month average ; excludes data for July Note. Hours and earnings data in Tables B-28 through B-33 relate to production workers in manufacturing and mining to construction workers in contract construction and generally to nonsupervisory employees in other industries. See Table B-31 for unadjusted weekly hours in manufacturing. See also Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-29. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Total nonYear or month agricultural private Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods Contract construction Retail trade Wholesale trade Bituminous coal mining $ $ $ $ Class I railroads Telephone communication Agriculture $ $ $ $ $ $ $ * : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr May. June. July. Aug. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. MarApr.. MayJune. July. Aug._ Sept. Oct._Nov v Dec p T67 ~ '.998 For coverage see footnote Table B-28 Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places. Comparable figure excluding eating and drinking places is $ for Eleven-month average ; excludes data for July Note.-See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Department of Agriculture TABLE B Average gross weekly earnings in selected nonagricultural industries Year or month Total nonagricultural private i Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods $ $ $ % : J a n Feb. MarApr. May. June. Retail trade Wholesale trade $ Contract construction Bituminous coal mining Class I railroads Telephone communication $ $ $ $ $ $ July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : J a n Feb. MarApr. May. June_ July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct... Nov p. Dec p. For coverage see footnote Table B-28 Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places. Comparable figure excluding eating and drinking places is $ for Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries Durable goods manufacturing industries All manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Year or month Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Average hourly earnings Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Excluding overtime ExExExExExExand cludcjudcludcludcludcludinter- Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing Gross ing overover- indusoveroveroverovertime time time try shift time time time ( = ) $ v $ ) $ U0.8 $ L762 $ $ : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May_ June July. Aug. Sept. Oct. NovDec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr_ May_ June Nov v. Dec p Annual average not available ; April used Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 See Table B-28 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics July.. Aug... Sept.. Oct... period TABLE B-32. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings1 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current prices prices2 Workers with no dependents Current prices prices Workers with three dependents Current prices prices2 $ $ $ $ $ $ : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. AprMay. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov * Dec p v * Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index Note. " Total private " consists of manufacturing ; contract construction ; retail and wholesale trade ; mining ; transportation and public utilities ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services See also Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing- industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings * Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current prices Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices2 $ I960 * Jan Feb Mr a Apr May June July Aug SeDt Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov * Dec $ $ $ $ $ prices2 Worker with no dependents gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy [ = Output per man-hour Nonfarm industries Year Total private Farm Total Manufacturing Man-hours2 Output i Nonmanufacturing Nonfarm industries Total private Farm Total Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Nonfarm industries Total private Total Manufacturing Nonma nufacturing Farm Establishment basis * Labor force basis4 I960. * * Output refers to gross national product in prices Hours worked by all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Man-hours estimates based primarily on labor force data Note. For information on sources methodology trends and underlying factors influencing the measures see Bureau of Labor Statistics Department of Labor Bulletin No. " Trends in Output per Man-Hour in the Private Economy " December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY T A B L E B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable * Seasonally adjusted July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June C C : Jan Feb Mar Apr May._ June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-36. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods l Total Total Materials Equipment Automotive products Home goods Total including defense Total Business Durable goods Nondurable goods P Seasonally adjusted Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. MarApr_ May. June Jan.. Feb.. Mar_ Apr__ May_ JuneJuly. Aug. s July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec p Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E B Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ] Durable manufactures Year or month FabriPricated mary metal metals products Nondurable manufactures Machinery Transportation equipment Instruments and related products Clay glass and lumber Textile Furni- apparel ture Paper and and and miscel- leather printing laneous products Chemical petroleum and rubber products Foods beverages and tobacco * Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar_. Apr.. May.. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec v. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate Utilization rate Output Capacity i Period Total output = Advanced products Primary products Percent _ * Seasonally adjusted IV : I II III IV : II III IV : II III IV : II III IV : I v II v III v IV p IV II Ill II III : For description and source of data see " A Revised Index of Manufacturing Capacity " Frank de Leeuw Frank E.Hopkins and Michael D. Sherman " Federal Reserve Bulletin " November pp. See also McGraw-Hill surveys on " Business Plans for New Plants and Equipment " for data on capacity and operating rates Output as percent of capacity ; based on unrounded data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( output ) and sources in footnote ( capacity and utilization rate ) TABLE B-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Total Year or quarter Total i Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and other I960 Seasonally adjusted annual rates | | III IV : II III IV : II | | | _ IV : i s ' ^ Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction Estimates based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and November The quarterly anticipations include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures These figures do not agree precisely with plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and of certain outlays charged to current account These series are not available for years prior to and for to Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-40. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential building ( nonfarm ) Public construction Nonresidential building and other construction Total Total Total i New housing units Total Commercial Industrial Others State Fedand erally locally owned owned New series New series See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-40. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential building ( nonfarm ) Total Total i New housing units Public construction Nonresidential building and other construction Total Commercial Industrial Total Others State Fedand erally locally owned owned4 Seasonally adjusted annual rate ; > Sept Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb_.. Mar..-_ Apr..._ May... June % N O V P : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May..-June.- July Aug July... Aug Sept... Oct * Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Farm institutional public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and locally owned projects New series in reflects differences due to the new higher level series of housing starts and farm construction expenditures and the reduced level value in place series for public utilities. See " Construction Report C30-61 ( Supplement ) " for a description of the differences New series differs from old in that it reflects differences in due to the introduction of new series for private nonresidential buildings and differences in due to the introduction of new series for State and locally owned public construction. See " Construction Report C30-65S " for a description of the differences Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Proposed home construction s Private i Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Type of structure Nonfarm Government home programs Total Total One family Two or more families FHA3 VA New private housing AppliReunits cations quests authorfor for ized * FHA VA comap : mit ) raisments als 1967i New series Monthly totals unadjusted May " " " June.. July.. Aug.. Sept Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : : Jan.... Feb.. Mar... See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Proposed home construction PrLvate Private and public i Nonfarm Type of structure Nonfarm Government home programs New private housing units authorized * Total Total One family Two or more families FHA3 VA Applications for FHA commitments Requests forVA appraisals Monthly totals unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb. Mar. Apr. MayJune July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug_ SeptOct Nov. Dec L. i ; Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly financed starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Not available prior to except for nonfarm for Units are for family housing Data beginning cover approximately permit-issuing places. Data for are based on reports from approximately places. In the additional permit-issuing places accounted for almost new privately owned housing unit authorizations Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction FHA program approved in June : all activity included in Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) except as noted TABLE B-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Sales Inventories Inventories * Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month Ratio Sales i Ratio Sales i ; " 88J338 Inventories Ratios Sales Inyentories2 Ratio Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb. Mar Apr May May June. ' July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec___ % : J a n _ Feb Mar. Apr.. May. June. | l37,351 July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov p_ Dec p Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month * where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-43. Manufacturers * shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ] Shipments i Inventories Durable goods industries Year or month Total DuraNonble durable goods goods indus- industries tries MateWork Finrials in and ished sup- process goods plies Total Total Nondurable goods industries Total Materials Work Finand in ished sup- proces : goods plies ! Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb Mar.. AprMay. June. 44,12L ! ' July. Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov__ Dec. ! ! ' ! 4,126j : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. ! t,346 July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov * Dec p i,362 i,412 i,429 year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-44. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] New orders1 Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Machinery and equipment Unfilled orders Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Unfilled orders-shipments ratio Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries il,142 I960. Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. MayJune July. Aug_ SeptOct Nov. Dec : Jan.. July. Aug. SeptOct.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June. Dec * Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December <Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-45. Consumer price indexes by major groups For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] All items Year or month Housing Food Total Rent Apparel and upkeep Transportation Medical Personal care care Reading Other and goods recreaand services tion June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan_ Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics 26l TABLE B-46. Consumer price indexes by special groups For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Commodities All items Year or month All items less food All items less shelter All commodities Services Commodities less food Food All Durable Nondurable All services Rent All services less rent I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan.. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Services less rent NonHouse- Trans- MedHouse- House hold porta- ical Apparel durables Used hold fur- Total comless Total servcare Other * tion modcars dura- nishices food serv- servities bles ings less and ices ices rent apparel Total New cars : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec. : Jan.. Feb. Mar.. AprMay.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Industrial commodities All commodities Year or month Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related Chemicals products and allied products and power : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec I960 * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups } [ = ] Continued Industrial commodities ContinuecJ Year or month Pulp Metals paper and and metal allied products products Machinery and equipment Transportation FurniNonme- equipture and ment : Misceltallic houseMotor laneous mineral vehicles products hold durables products and equipment ^ Rubber and rubber products Lumber and wood products Sept Oct Nov Dec * Index for total transportation equipment not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug TABLE B Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = } Intermediate materials supplies and components * Crude materials Materials and components for manufacturing Year or month All commodities Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Total Fuel Materials for food manufacturing Total Mate- Materials rials for non- for durable durable manu- manufactur- facturing ing Materials and Com- components ponents for for conmanu- struction facturing : Jan.. Feb.. Mar__ AprMay. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov-_ Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May May. " June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued = Special groups of industrial products Finishec1 goods Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Producer finished goods Crude materials InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods exand com- cluding ponents3 foods : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see Table 2B " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " ( BLS Bulletin ) Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-50. Money supply { Averages of daily figures billions of dollars ] Year and month Total money supply and time deposits adjusted Money supply Total CurDerency mand com- deposit pocomnent ^ ponent Time deposits adjust- Total money supply and time deposits adjusted Money supply Time Total Seasonally adjusted deCurDeposits rency mand adcom- deposit justed pocomnent ponents U.S Government demand deposits Unadjusted : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : D e c : D e c : Dec p : Jan.. Feb. MarApr. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec : J a n Feb. Mar_ AprMay June July Aug. Sept Oct. Nov Dec * Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve System and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve banks s Time deposits adjusted are time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government Deposits at all commercial banks Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans are reclassified for reserve purposes and are excluded from time deposits reported by member banks. The estimated amount of such deposits at all commercial banks ( $ billion ) is excluded from time deposits adjusted thereafter Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-51. Bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting large commercial banks3 All commercial banks Investments End of year or month 1930s Total loans and investments Loans U.S. Government securities Seasonally adjusted Other securities Business loans4 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Octp Nov v Dece Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates used for all commercial banks ) Adjusted to exclude interbank loans beginning Loans by weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning and formerly weekly reporting member banks. See " Federal Reserve Bulletin " March < Commercial and industrial loans and prior to agricultural loans. Beginning July loans to financial institutions excluded. Prior to published data adjusted to include open market paper June data used because complete end-of-year data not available Commercial bank data are estimates for December Effective June balances accumulated for paymen1 of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-52. Selected liquid assets held by the public [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Time deposits End of year or month Total Demand deposits and currency Commercial banks Mutual savings banks Postal savings system Savings and shares U.S Government savings bonds * U.S Government securities maturing within year4 P : Jan.. Feb_ Mar. Apr.. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. s M53.9 : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June- July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.- Dec p. Excludes holdings of the U.S. Government Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial banks and Federal Reserve banks. Adjusted wherever possible to avoid double counting Agrees in concept with the money supply Table B-53 except for deduction of demand deposits held by mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data are for last Wednesday of month Time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government ( same concept as in Table B-50 ) Data are for last Wednesday of month except that June and December call data are used where available < Excludes holdings of Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial and mutual savings banks Federal Reserve banks and beginning February savings and loan associations s Effective June balances accumulated for the payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from time deposits at all commercial banks and from total liquid assets Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E B Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings Member bank reserves All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec U,822 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec1949 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec M8,932 : : : : : : : : Dec. Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan Feb. Mar. Apr. MayJune JulyAug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec p * Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-54. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i month issues year issues Taxable bonds4 Aaa Baa Average High- rate on Prime Fedgrade shorteral FHA comterm municReserve new ipal bank Bank home cial mortbonds loans disgage ( Stand- to busi- paper count yields ard & nessrate Poor 's ) selected months cities ) C ) I960 io 1965'Jan Feb Mar May " June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-54. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i Taxable month year issues issues3 bonds Aaa Baa Average Highrate on FedPrime grade shorteral communicterm Reserve meripal bank Bank cial bonds loans dis ( Stand- to busi- paper count ard & nessrate Poor 's ) selected months cities : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June i1.611 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June i1.759 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec M % FHA new home mortgage yields s Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) Selected note and bond issues. Issues were partially tax exempt prior to and fully taxable thereafter First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissable interest rate ( percent beginning October ) and thru July 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages paid in years Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years s From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Beginning series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial institutions Beginning February series revised to incorporate changes in coverage in the sample of reporting banks and in the reporting period ( shifted to the middle month of the quarter ) Note. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service Standard & Poor 's Corporation and Federal Housing Administration TABLE B-55. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of year or month Total Total Automobile paper Addendum : Policy loans by life inOther surance companies Noninstalment credit Repair Other conand sumer moderngoods ization paper loans * Personal loans Total Charge ac- counts * : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov_ Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec ; Holdings of financial institutions only ; holdings of retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit Year-end figures are annual statement asset values ; month-end figures are book value of ledger assets. These loans are not included in consumer credit series Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) T A B L E B Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Automobile Total Other consumer goods paper Repair and modernization loans Extended Personal loans Year or month Extended Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid I960. Re Repaid Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.. : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec * i Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-57. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Multi-family and commercial properties to 4-family houses End of year or quarter All properties Government underwritten Total Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Conventional * Total Multifamily Commercial properties Farm properties _ P * : II III IV.-- : ll_.. III. IV... : l -_-- l | p._ll | p_._ IVP.. : | p_.. l | p__ll | p__ IVP.. Derived figures Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B-58.--Net public and private debt 1929-67l [ Billions of dollars ] Private End of year Total FedState eral and Govlocal erngovment ernand agency ment2 Individual and noncorporate Corporate Nonfarm Total Total Longterm Shortterm Total Farm3 Tnfal Old Mortgage CommerConcial and sumer financial ^ I960.. Net public and private debt outstanding is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after elimination of certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see " Survey of 2Current Business " October Data for State and local government debt are for June Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to 5life insurance companies by policyholders Estimates Note. Revisions for and in the consumer credit data of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System have not yet been fully incorporated into this series Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) Treasury Department Department of Agriculture Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Home Loan Bank Board GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-59. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Receipts expenditures and net lending : i Receipt-expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) Expenditure deficit ( ) Budget financing : * Borrowing from the public Reduction in cash balances etc Total budget financing Outstanding debt end of year : l Gross a mount outstanding Held by the public Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repay me nts Net lending Total budget : Receipts Expenditures and net lending Budget deficit ( ) See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-59. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ) Actual Estimate Description Receipts expenditures and net lending : Receipt-expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) Expenditure deficit ( ) Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending Total budget : Receipts Expenditures and net lending Budget deficit ( ) Budget financing : * Borrowing from the public Reduction in cash balances etc Total budget financing Outstanding debt end of year : * Gross amount outstanding Held by the public i Data represent results of preliminary adjustments to new budget concepts used in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " and may be revised later Sources : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget TABLE B-60. Federal budget receipts and outlays [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Receipts I ndividual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes Unemployment insurance Premiums for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs Other receipts MEMORANDUM : ( Excluded above ; offset against expenditures ) Interfund and intergovernmental transactions Proprietary receipts from the public Expenditures National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Commerce and transportation Housing and community development Health labor and welfare Education Veterans benefits and services. Interest General government Special allowances Undistributed adjustments to amounts above Net lending National defense I nternational affairs and finance Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Commerce and transportation Housing and community development Health labor and welfare Education Veterans benefits and services General government .Total expenditures and net lending * See Note at end of table TABLE B-60. Federal budget receipts and outlays Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Estimate Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes Unemployment insurance Premiums for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs Other receipts Receipts MEMORANDUM : ( Excluded above ; offset against expenditures ) Interfund and intergovernmental transactions Proprietary receipts from the public ExpendituresNational defense International affairs and finances Space research and technology Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Commerce and transportation Housing and community development Health labor and welfare Education Veterans benefits and services I nte rest General government Special allowances Undistributed adjustments to amounts above Net lending National defense International affairs and finance Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Commerce and transportation Housing and community development Health labor and welfare Education Veterans benefits and services General government Total expenditures and net lending } Note. New budget concepts in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " are used in this table Sources : Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department T A B L E B-61. Relation of the receipt-expenditure accounts of the Federal Government to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] actual Receipts and Expenditures estimate estimate RECEIPTS Total receipts budget Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts. Employer share employee retirement. Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other EXPENDITURES Total expenditures budget. Employer share employee retirement._ Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment. Lending in the expenditure account.. Dollar expenditures to finance agricultural exports Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures.. Note. See Special Analysis B " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " for description of these categories Sources : Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) T A B L E B-62. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Year or quarter Fiscal year : Total Expenditures Indirect Per- Cor- busi- Consonal poness tributax rate tax tions and and for non- profits non- social Total tax tax actax insurreceipts cruals ac- ance cruals Calendar year : Transfer payments Purchases of goods and services To per- Grantsin-aid to State and To local foreign- governers ments ( net ) 25L1 Net interest paid Surplus or Subsi- deficit dies less curnarent tionsural plus inof come gov- and ern- prodment uct enter- acprises counts '.S ' _ * Calendar quarSeasonally adjusted annual rates ter : : I II.. III. IV. : j if. " " ' ML I V : I I I III. IV p i Estimates Note. Includes the transactions of the trust accounts and excludes certain financial transactions. Corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery ; and CCC guaranteed pricesupport crop loans financed by banks are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them See Table B-61 Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Bureau of the Budget TABLE B-63. Federal finances under the old concepts,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Cash receipts from and payments to the public Administrative budget Fiscal year Net receipts Cash receipts Cash payments Excess of receipts or of payments ( ) Expendi- Surplus or tures deficit ( ) Gross public debt at end of year and guaranteed issues Estimates Note. The old concepts in this table are those used in budgets of the U.S. Government for years prior to fiscal Sources : Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department TABLE B-64. U.S. Government debt by kind of obligation { Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Gross public debt and guaranteed issues * End of year or month Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov Dec : Jan Feb... Mar Apr... May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Marketable public issues Short- term issues Treasury bonds Nonmarketable public issues United States savings bonds Investment bonds Special issues * Total includes non-interest-bearing debt fully guaranteed securities ( except those held by the Treasury ) Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds. Armed Forces leave bonds Rural Electrification Administration series bonds foreign series certificates and notes foreign currency certificates notes and bonds Treasury certificates and U.S. retirement plan bonds not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Series A bonds through September and beginning April series B convertible bonds * Issued to U.S. Government investment accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Note. See Note Table B-66 Source : Treasury Department O TABLE B-65. Estimated ownership of U.S. Government obligations [ Par values,i billions of dollars ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues End of year or month Total Held by U.S Held Governby ment Federal invest- Reserve ment banks accounts Held by " the public " Total Mutual savings State Combanks Other and Indimercial and in- corpo- local viduals banks surance rations govern5 comments panies Miscellaneous investors : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. ? May. June. July.. Aug.. s e Nov.. Dec United States savings bonds series A-F and J are included at current redemption value Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures excjude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in 4Table B-51 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund the International Development Association the Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Note.-See Note Table B- Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) o c ? ! : TABLE B Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Average length Within year to years to years to years years Millions of dollars Years Months Fiscal year : I960 : Jan. Feb. Mar. May " June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) The concept of the public debt in this table is that used in budgets of the U.S. Government for years prior to fiscal Detail for the new concept are not yet available Source : Treasury Department T A B L E B-67. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Federal Government * Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Surplus or deficit Receipts v : II III IV : Expenditures national Reincome ceipts and product accounts State and local government Expenditures national income and product accounts -L3 -12.'5 L4 -12.'6 Seasonally adjusted annual rates Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts -A j Ill IV : II III IV v See Note Table B ^ Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-68. State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal yearl Total Property taxes Sales and gross ceipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function Corpo- ReveAll nue ration other from net Federal reveincome nue s taxes Government Total Education Highways Public welfare All otheri s s Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and other unallocable expenditures s Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-58 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE T A B L E B Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate profits after taxes CorpoTransrate portaproftion All its comDur- Nonother beable dur- muniinfore able goods goods cation dus- taxes Total and intries induspublic tries dus * utilities tries Manufacturing Year or quarter All industries * * Corporate tax liability i DiviTotal dend payments Undistributed profits Corporate capital consumption allow-2 ances Profits plus capital consumption allowances Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I IV : I II...Ill IV.. : L II. III Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes depreciation and accidental damages s Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances Note. Beginning data reflect the new depreciation guidelines issued by the Treasury Department July and the investment tax credit provided in the Revenue Act of Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-70. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Profits Sales ( net ) Before taxes After taxes Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Stockholders ' Sales equity * ( net ) Profits Before taxes Profits Stockholders ' Sales After equity i ( net ) Before After taxes taxes taxes Stockholders ' equity * : I II III. IV... : I II III... IV : I Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities x and Exchange Commission : J : Data are not necessarily comparable frr " J x- L classifications sampling procedures etc. : visions is contained in the following issue first quarter and first quarter Comparability for certain industries was affected by changes noted in the following reports : fourth quarter first quarter second quarter third quarter fourth quarter and second quarter Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) by industry group t ) urable goods All manufactur- Electrical ing Ma corMoma- rIYI3- Fabhin poraAir- chin- cninritor tions Total vehi- craft ery ery cated ( exdurcles and equip- ( ex- metal cept able i and parts ment cept prodnewsequipand elec- ucts trical ) papment supers ) plies Year or quarter Primary iron and steel in- dustries industries rri- mary nonfar rerrous metal inin dustries Miscella- Lum- Dri Stone clay and glass prod- ucts Fur rur- ber and In- neous stru- manments ufacand turing re- wood products ( ex- lated fjy tures cept prodfurni- ucts ture ) niture and TIX- ( including ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent ^ : II III IV : II Ill l Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents : : II III..IV II III..- ~ ~ ~ ~ See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-71. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers ) by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Year or quarter Total nondurable ^ Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products Leather and leather products Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent : I II... III.. IV... : II... III.. Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents ii i i : II... 3.C III.. 3.C IV.. : II... III.. Includes certain industries not shown separately Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Ratios based on data in millions of dollars For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission. See also Note Table B-70 Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B Sources and uses ojfunds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Sources total Internal sources1 Undistributed profits L Corporate inventory valuation adjustment. Capital consumption allowances1 External sources Stocks Bonds Mortgages Bank loans n.e.c.. Other loans Trade debt Profits tax liability Other liabilities... Uses total Purchases of physical assets Nonresidential fixed investment Residential structuresChange in business inventories Increase in financial assets Liquid assets Demand deposits and currency Time deposits U.S. Government securities Open-market papers- * ~ * * '.5 * * * * Consumer credit Trade credit Other financial assets.. Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) * 8'. ! The figures shown here for " internal sources " " undistributed profits " and " capital consumption allowances " differ from those shown for " cash flow net of dividends " " undistributed profits " and " capital consumption allowances " in the gross corporate product table in the national income and product accounts of the Department of Commerce for the following reasons : ( ) these figures include and the statistics in the gross corporate product table exclude branch profits remitted from foreigners net of corresponding U.S. remittances to foreigners ; and ( ) these figures exclude and the gross corporate product figures include the internal funds of corporations whose major activity is farming Includes some categories not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-73. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Cur Current assets Receivables from U.S Govern-1 ment Advances Fedand Notes eral preand inpayaccome ments counts tax U.S Pay- liabiliable Govties ern- ment U.S Cash Govon hand ernTotal and ment in securibanks ties End of year or quarter Current liabilities Notes Other and Incuracrent Total vencounts tories asreceivsets ' able Net Other workcurrent capital liabilities \ " _ V. New series " : I II III IV : I II III IV : I.. II Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations ' books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books Includes marketable securities other than U.S. Government Generally reflects definitions and classifications used in " Statistics of Income " for Note. Data relate to all United States corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations insurance companies and beginning with the new series for investment companies. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B State and municipal and corporate securities offered ^ 67l [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Qtota and municiYear or quarter curities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Proposed uses of net proceeds Sross proceeds ^ lew money Total Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Total Total Plant and equipment Working capital Retire- Other ment purof se- poses curities P : II.. III IV : II III IV : II III IV v 64C 50C These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions sales of investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as offerings under employee-purchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price * Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit Stock market credit Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price index Year or month Total ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) Public utilities ( stocks ) Railroads ( stocks ) Dividend yield ( percent ) Price/ earnings ratio Customer credit ( excluding U.S. Government securities ) Total Net debit balances Bank loans to " others " Bank loans to brokers and dealers6 Millions of dollars = ' : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec s Annual data are averages of monthly figures and monthly data are averages of daily figures Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by the aggregate monthly market value of the stocks in the group. Annual yields are averages of monthly data Ratio of quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day in quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U.S. Government obligations are excluded. Data are for end of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) for purchasing or carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday of period Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange TABLE B-76. Business formation and business failures Business failures l Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) New business incorporations ( number ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Business failure rate ^ Liability size class Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Total Under $ and $ over Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estateinsurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B Income from agriculture Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Net to farm operators Realized gross Year or quarter From From nonall farm farm sources sources1 sources2 ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- Includreceipts penses ing net ing net Total from inven- inventory markettory ings change change4 Net income per farm including net inventory change Current prices prices Dollars Billions of dollars v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : L II III IV v Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to 2social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms Includes net change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at the average price for the year Income in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-78. Farm production indexes [ = Crops Year Farm output Livestock and products Hay Food Vege- Fruits Feed Total grains and grains tables and forage nuts Cotton ToOil bacco crops Total Meat animals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs S8 P. Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of feed for horses and mules Includes production of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E B Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April l ) i Number ( thousands ) Year As percent of total population Farm employment ( thousands ) * Farm output Family Hired workers workers Total Per unit of total input Crop production per acre * Per man-hour Total Crops Livestock Livestock production per breedunit ndex = 10C ; 10G I960. v Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July includes Armed Forces abroad o farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Includes r persons doing ._ fan Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-22 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected For further explanation see monthly report on " Farm Labor " September h A rr r > t _ _ * Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B Indexes of prices received and prices paid byfarmers and parity ratio [ = ] Prices received by farmers Crops Year or month All farm prod- Feed grains and hay Al l Food crops * grains Total Feed grains Livestock and products OilCotbeart n bacco ing o crops To- All livestock and products ^ Meat mals Dairy Poultry ucts and eggs e I960 ' Jan Febl5 Mar Apr May June July Augl5 Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec ? ? ? See footnotes at end of table T A B L E B-80. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Continued [ = 100J Prices paid by farmers Year or month All items interest taxes and wage rates ( parity index ) Commodities and services FamAll All items living items production items Production items Feed Motor vehicles Farm machinery Inter- Taxes3 Wage ests rates * Parity ratio Fertilizer ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr ) May ( ) Junel5._ ' ( ) July Augl5.. Sept Oct Nov Dec ( ) : Jan ( ) Feb ( ) Mar ( ) Apr ( ) May ( ) June July ( ) Aug ( ) Sept ( Oct ( Nov ( Dec ( Includes items not shown separately Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index on a = base. The adjusted parity ratio ( shown in parentheses in the table ) reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Includes wartime subsidy payments Source : Department of Agriculture T A B L E B-81. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) Year Total Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Livestock breeding Excluunits sive of ( 1957use for feed for = horses ) and mules Manhours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm labor MechaniFarm cal power real estate and machinery Fertilizer and lime Feed seed and livestock purchases Miscellaneous v Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Animal units of breeding livestock excluding horses and mules Includes service buildings and improvements on land * Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers ' purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-82. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year Total MaHousechinhold DeReal ery furnish- posits estate Liveand Crops ings and stock i motor and curvehiequip- rency cles ment ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' ment U.S debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives Financial assets l ? v '38.5 ? Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes ail crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-83. United States balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Total Merchandise ^ Military sales Income on investments Private Imports of goods and services Other services Total Merchandise ^ Government Balance Remiton tances Miliand tary Other goods penand ex- serv- serv- sions pend- ices ices itures 15J770 I960 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II Ill IV : I II Ill IV : I II See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-83. United States balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter U.S. private capital net U.S Government grants Direct Other Shortand capi- invest- longterm ment tal term net a Balance Foreign capital net Errors and unreOfficorded cial Litrans- quidity reserve actions basis transactions basis * Changes in selected liabilities ( decrease ( ) ) To foreign official holders Liquid Nonliquid Changes in gold convertible currencies and To IMF other gold foreign tranche holdposition ( increase ( ) ) i Seasonally adjusted annual rates Quarterly totals unadjusted : II ML IV.. : II IIL IV.. : II III l f " Adjusted from customs data for differences in timing and coverage Includes certain special Government transactions Equals changes in liquid liabilities to foreign official holders other foreign holders and changes in official reserve assets consisting of gold convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF * Equals changes in liquid and nonliquid liabilities to foreign official holders and changes in official reserve assets consisting of gold convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF Includes short-term official and banking liabilities foreign holdings of U.S. Government bonds and notes and certain nonliquid liabilities to foreign official holders o Central banks governments and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the U.S. Data for years before include estimates of official transactions in marketable U.S. Government bonds and notes Private holders ; includes banks and international and regional organizations excludes IMF Not reported separately Includes change in Treasury liabilities to certain foreign military agencies ; excluding these changes data ( $ millions ) are ( I960 ) ( ) ( ) Includes changes in liabilities to international nonmonetary institutions Average for the first quarters on a seasonally adjusted annual rates basis Note. Data exclude military grant-aid and U.S. subscriptions to International Monetary Fund Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B United States merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise exports i Total including reexports Year or quarter Merchandise imports Gross merchandise trade surplus Food Crude seabever- mate- Manufac- sonally ages rials tured adand to- and goodse justed bacco fuels General imports Domestic exports Total * Food Crude Seabever- mate- Manufacsonally Unad- Total * ages rials Seatured adjusted and and togoods sonally Unadjusted bacco fuels s adjusted justed v : II Ill IV : II III IV : II III IV v Beginning I960 data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Totals exclude Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments Exports excluding military grant-aid less general imports ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census. Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Export values are f.a.s. port of export and include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments. Import values are defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excluding the U.S. import duty and transportation costs such as ocean freight and marine insurance Because of revisions subgroups do not include all data in the totals Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE B United States merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] JanuaryNovember Area Exports ( including reexports and special category shipments ) : Total Developed countries Developing countries Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western HemisphereWestern Europe i Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries Canada Other Western Hemisphere Western Europe i Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa General imports : Total Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Consists of certain low-valued shipments and some uranium imports not identified by country Note. Developed countries include Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and the Republic of South Africa. Developing countries include rest of the world except Communist areas in Eastern Europe and Asia and unidentified countries Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE B-86. United States overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Net obligations and loan authorizations Type of program and fiscal period Total economic and military loans and grants : average Loans Grants Loans Grants Total economic loans and grants : average Loans. Grants Loans Grants Developed countries : average Loans Grants Loans Grants Less developed countries : average Loans Grants Loans Grants Economic loans and grants for less developed countries by program : Total Near East and South Asia Latin America Vietnam East Asia Africa Europe Other and nonregional * Agency for International Development : average * : : : " " Food for Freedom : average Export-Import Bank longterm loans : average Other economic programs : average Addendum Repayments and interest on economic and military loans : average Includes military loans and grants averaging $ million for and totaling $ million in Of these amounts $ million and $ million respectively were to developed countries ; and $ million and $ million respectively were to less developed countries. Military loans and grants include grant-aid and credit assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act ( FAA ) on a delivery basis direct military loans by the Export-Import Bank and military grants under other acts. FAA military data are from the Department of Defense The data for military loans and grants under the Foreign Assistance Act and several minor economic programs under " Other " are preliminary Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. On this basis " less developed " countries include all countries receiving U.S. loans or grants except the following which are considered " developed " : Japan Australia New Zealand Republic of South Africa and all of Europe except Malta Spain and Yugoslavia Includes capital subscriptions and contributions to the Inter-American Development Bank the International Development Association and the Asian Development Bank ( average for the three recipients $ million ; $ million ) ; and Peace Corps ( average $ million ; $ million ) Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Department of Defense Source : Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE B-87 International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country September December All countries Developed areas United Kingdom Other Western Europe. Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Finland Norway and S w e d e n ) _ Spain Switzerland Other2_ United States Canada Japan Australia New Zealand and South Africa x % ( Less developed areas Latin America Middle East Other Asia Other Africa Not available separately In addition to other Western European countries includes unpublished gold reserves of Greece and an estimate of gold to be distributed by the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold Includes unpublished gold holdings not allocable by area < Estimate Note. Includes gold holdings reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange of all countries except U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Communist China Cuba ( after March ) and Indonesia ( after July ) Beginning when most of the major currencies of the world became convertible data exclude known holdings of inconvertible currencies balances under payments agreements and the bilateral claims arising from liquidation of the European Payments Union Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-88. United States reserve assets : gold stock holdings of convertible foreign currencies and reserve position in the International Monetary Fund [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month Gold stock Total reserve assets Total Treasury Convertible foreign currencies Reserve position in International Monetary Fund M3,806 : Jan. Feb_ Mar_ Apr. May. June M3,811 July_ Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund with the right of repurchase which amounted to $ million on December Beginning September also includes gold deposited by the IMF to dlllUUIIlCU Ivl O U IIIIIIIUII Ull L/GlrGIIIUGI J l J U / P U UGgllllllllg O J ginning O J mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas. Amount outstanding was $ million on December The United States has a corresponding gold liability to 2the IMF Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System In accordance with Fund policies the United States has the right to draw foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund virtually automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could draw additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a US quota increase which became effective on February In figures published by the Fund from June through January this gold subscription was included in the U.S. gold stock and excluded from the reserve position Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Treasury Department and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-89. Price changes in international trade [ = Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Exports Terms of trade is Total : United States Exports Terms of trade Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade Latin America Exports Terms of trade L Southern and Eastern Asia Exports Terms of trade l World export price indexes5 Coffee tea and cocoa. Cereals OOO Other agricultural commodities _ Fats oils and oilseeds. Textile fibers Wool Rubber Manufactured goods : Total Nonferrous base metals _ Primary commodities : Total Foodstuffs Minerals Metal ores. * Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Includes foreign trade of Alaska Hawaii and Puerto Rico Data are for second quarter * Excludes Japan Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Includes nonfood fish and forest products Note. Data exclude trade of Communist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Commerce ) TABLE B-90. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries [ = = ] Period United States Canada Japan France Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom 9S.7 1966.._ IV II. Ill IV : I II III. IV : II III IV : : II Ill Eleven month average except United States For other than United States data are averages of October and November Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O