ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT MM ' " Transmitted to the Congress January Together With THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents. U.S. Government Printing Office ^ CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT T H E RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT Contribution of Policy Gains in years DEVELOPMENTS IN T H E PROGRAM FOR The Budget Economic Outlook TOWARD PRICE-COST STABILITY The Roads to Avoid The Roads to Follow REINFORCING THE FISCAL-MONETARY FRAMEWORK Budget Policy and Procedures Monetary Policy After Vietnam T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY Balance-of-Payments Adjustment World Monetary System Trade Aid K E Y AREAS OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY Quality of the Environment Community Development and Housing Education Consumer Protection Worker Protection Social Security OUR COMMITMENT TO ELIMINATE POVERTY Employment Opportunities Education Health and Nutrition Housing Income Support CONCLUSION in Page ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATION OF PROSPERITY CHAPTER POLICIES FOR BALANCED EXPANSION CHAPTER PRICE STABILITY IN A HIGH EMPLOYMENT ECONOMY. CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY CHAPTER COMBATING POVERTY IN A PROSPEROUS ECONOMY REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT FROM THE CABINET COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR THE END OF VIETNAM HOSTILITIES. APPENDIXES APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page IV ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : I regard achievement of the full potential of our resources physical human and otherwise to be the highest purpose of governmental policies next to the protection of those rights we regard as inalienable I cited this as my philosophy in my first Economic Report in January I reaffirm it today In the past years this Nation has made great strides toward realizing the full potential of our resources. Through fuller use and steady growth of our productive potential our real output has risen nearly percent Most important of all are our human resources. Today the vast majority of our workers enjoy productive and rewarding employment opportunities. For those who lack skills we have made pioneering efforts in training. We have improved education for the young to enhance their productivity and their wisdom as citizens of a great democracy Our capital resources plant and equipment are being used intensively and have been continually expanded and modernized by a confident business community This has all been accomplished in an environment that preserved indeed enlarged the traditional freedom of our economic system. In today 's prosperous economy our people have more freedom of choice among jobs consumer goods and services types of investments places to live and ways to enjoy leisure I look upon the steady and strong growth of employment and production as our greatest economic success. In recent years prosperity has become the normal state of the American economy. But it must not be taken for granted. It must be protected and extended by adopting sound and prudent policies for this year and by improving procedures for fiscal and monetary policymaking to meet our needs for the long run I shall discuss these tasks in this Report. I shall also consider how we might deal with some of our key unsolved economic problems We must find a way of combining our prosperity with price stability. Reconciling these two objectives is the biggest remaining over-all economic challenge facing the Nation We must more fully secure the foundations of the world monetary system and of our own balance of payments. The international monetary system has undergone important evolutionary improvements but we must seek more effective ways of coping with the stresses that can still develop We must fulfill our many unmet public needs such as good education efficient transportation clean air and pure water. Quality as well as quantity is the key to a better life We must share more equitably the fruits of prosperity among all our citizens. A Nation as prosperous as ours can afford to open the doors of opportunity to all. Indeed it can not afford to leave any citizen in poverty The achievements we have made and the lessons we have learned point the way for further progress THE RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT The Nation is now in its 95th month of continuous economic advance Both in strength and length this prosperity is without parallel in our history. We have steered clear of the business-cycle recessions which for generations derailed us repeatedly from the path of growth and progress This record demonstrates the vitality of a free economy and its capacity for steady growth. No longer do we view our economic life as a relentless tide of ups and downs. No longer do we fear that automation and technical progress will rob workers of jobs rather than help us to achieve greater abundance. No longer do we consider poverty and unemployment permanent landmarks on our economic scene CONTRIBUTION OF POLICY Our progress did not just happen. It was created by American labor and business in effective partnership with the Government Ever since the historic passage of the Employment Act in economic policies have responded to the fire alarm of recession and boom In the 's we have adopted a new strategy aimed at fire prevention sustaining prosperity and heading off recession or serious inflation before they could take hold In and tax reductions unleashed the vigor of private demand and brought the economy a giant step toward its full potential In and restrictive monetary and fiscal policies offset the strains of added defense spending. The adjustment was far from ideal however because of the delay in increasing taxes to pay the bills for the defense buildup and for continuing urgent civilian programs In our Nation 's finances were finally adjusted to the needs of a defense emergency. The Revenue and Expenditure Control Act strengthened the foundation of prosperity GAINS IN YEARS Aided by these policies in the past years the Nation 's total output of goods and services our gross national product has increased by more than $ billion after correcting for price changes. This is as large as the gain of the previous years The prosperity of the last years has been accompanied by benefits that extend into every corner of our national life more than 8J/2 million additional workers found jobs over-all unemployment declined from percent of our labor force to percent unemployment of nonwhite adult males dropped particularly dramatically from percent to percent the number of persons in poverty declined by about I2/2 million progress greater than in the entire preceding years the average income of Americans ( after taxes and after correction for price rises ) increased by $ more than one-fifth and again more than in the previous years combined corporate profits rose by about percent wages and salaries also went up by percent net income per farm advanced percent the net financial assets of American families increased $ billion more than percent and Federal revenues grew by $ billion helping to finance key social advances Meanwhile a solid foundation has been built for continued growth in the years ahead Through Investment in Plant and Equipment. In the last years the stock of capital equipment has grown by nearly a third. Only percent of manufacturing corporations report that their capacity is in excess of currently foreseen needs Through Investment in Manpower. More than a million Americans have acquired skills in special training institutions or on the job as a result of new Federal efforts Through Investment in Education. College enrollment has risen by * million since Expenditures on all public education have increased at an average of percent a year ; Federal grants have almost quadrupled Through Investment in Our Neighborhoods. Our urban centers are beginning to be restored as decent places to live and initial steps have been taken to help ensure construction of million new or rehabilitated housing units by DEVELOPMENTS IN Our economy had an exceptionally big year in Our gross national product increased by $ billion to $ billion. Adjusted for price increases the gain was percent Payroll employment rose by more than two million persons Unemployment fell by The after-tax real income of the average person increased by percent An estimated four million Americans escaped from poverty the largest exodus ever recorded in a single year Our balance-of-payments results were the best in years In some ways was too big a year. Even our amazingly productive economy could not meet all the demands placed upon it. Nearly half of the extra dollars spent in our markets added to prices rather than to production. The price-wage spiral turned rapidly Consumer prices rose by percent and wholesale prices by * /2 percent Both union and nonunion wages increased about percent responding to higher costs of living and causing higher costs of production Some of the extra demands for goods were met out of foreign production and imports soared percent The main source of the overheating was the excessive and inappropriate stimulus of the Federal budget in late and the first half of In January I pointed to the need for a tax increase. In the summer when the upsurge was even more clearly foreseen I urged im- mediate enactment of a 10-percent income tax surcharge. The subsequent delay in enactment resulted in a massive budget deficit of $ billion for fiscal year which accelerated the economy beyond safe speed limits weakened confidence in the dollar abroad and placed a heavy burden on credit markets at home pushing interest rates sharply higher Ultimate passage of the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of at midyear brought a much needed swing to fiscal restraint. The budget now shows a surplus of $ billion for fiscal Because of both greater revenues and reduced expenditures this picture has changed dramatically since last January when we estimated a deficit of $ billion Just as the overly stimulative effects of the huge budget deficit of fiscal were unmistakable so there can scarcely be doubt that the reverse swing of even larger size will improve balance in our economy But just as inappropriate fiscal stimulus took a while to cause obvious problems so needed fiscal restraint is taking time to work its full beneficial effects on the economy By the time the surcharge was enacted the forces of boom and inflation had developed great momentum. Our economy continued to advance too rapidly throughout but growth did slow from a hectic 6/2 percent rate early in the year to about percent at yearend. The budget is now in harmony with the needs of the economy and its welcome effects are gradually emerging THE PROGRAM FOR The challenge to fiscal and monetary policies this year is difficult indeed. Enough restraint must be provided to permit a cooling off of the economy and a waning of inflationary forces. But the restraint must also be tempered to ensure continued economic growth. We must adopt a carefully balanced program that curbs inflation and preserves prosperity T H E BUDGET My final budget is designed to meet this demanding assignment. It is a tight and prudent program for fiscal It holds total Federal expenditures within the bounds of available revenues yielding a surplus of $ billion It finances our continued military efforts in Vietnam while we strive to bring about peace It provides funds for our continuing national campaign against poverty injustice and inequality It limits increases in expenditures to programs of highest priority : the encouraging JOBS program and other manpower training Model Cities and key housing programs law enforcement and education It trims lower priority programs wherever possible The budget calls for the extension of the income tax surcharge at its current rate of percent for year from July to June My economic and financial advisers unanimously agree that this fiscal restraint is essential to safeguard the purchasing power of the dollar and its strength throughout the world. Indeed the need for continued fiscal restraint is agreed upon by all informed opinion in both of our political parties In today 's economic and military environment an immediate lowering of taxes would be irresponsible. The American people would be poorly served by a small short-run gain that would endanger their enormous long-term stake in a steady and stable prosperity. I hope and I believe that Members of the Congress of both parties will support timely action on taxes to continue on the course of fiscal responsibility which we have worked together to achieve I asked for the surcharge as a temporary measure and that is the way I regard it. My proposal for a 1-year extension preserves the option of the new Administration and the Congress to eliminate the surcharge more rapidly if our quest for peace is successful in the near future. It is my conviction that the surcharge should be removed just as soon as that can be done without jeopardizing our economic health our national security our most urgent domestic programs or international confidence in the dollar. Clearly that time has not yet arrived The extended surcharge will continue to take percent of the income of the average American less than half of the tax cut he received in In return he will receive improved protection against the ravages of inflation world financial crisis and neglect or mismanagement of our priorities. It is the best investment in responsible fiscal management that the United States can make in Including this budget I have been responsible for years of fiscal planning. From fiscal to fiscal the Federal Government will have spent $ billion on programs and received $ billion in revenues. The total deficit for that period amounts to $ 33/ billion. The bulk of that total deficit occurred in fiscal when action on taxes was long delayed By comparison these six budgets provided $ billion of net tax reductions even allowing for higher social security taxes and carried $ billion of outlays to cover the special costs of the war in Vietnam ECONOMIC OUTLOOK With this budget and appropriate monetary policy our gross national product for should rise about $ billion Increased expenditures on new plant and equipment will help expand and modernize our productive capacity State and local governments will continue to increase their spending rapidly to meet public needs. But Federal purchases will rise little Consumer spending and homebuilding activity should advance less than last year The over-all gains will not and should not be as large as those in but they will still make for a highly prosperous year For the fourth straight year unemployment should be less than percent of the labor force Because fiscal policy is soundly planned monetary policy should not be overburdened. It will need to support firmly the objective of moderating economic expansion. But homebuilding and other credit-sensitive areas need not be subjected to the sharp and uneven pressures of a credit squeeze. Monetary policy should be flexible and prepared to lessen restraint as the economy cools off As pressures of demand moderate our trade performance in world markets should improve. We should also see a gradually improving trend in prices and costs although the wage-price spiral will continue to be troublesome TOWARD PRICE-COST STABILITY The immediate task in is to make a decisive step toward price stability. This will be only the beginning of the journey. We can not hope to reach in a single year the goal that has eluded every industrial country for generations that of combining high employment with stable prices There is no simple nor single formula for success. But this combination can and must be achieved by the United States and within the next several years. Now that we have learned to sustain prosperity we can surely not allow inflation to erode or erase that victory T H E ROADS TO AVOID We stand at a critical turning point for national policy. We can meet the challenge or we can try to evade it Price stability could be restored unwisely by an overdose of fiscal and monetary restraint. This has been done before and it would work again. But such a course would mean stumbling into recession and slack losing precious billions of dollars of output suffering rising unemployment with growing distress and unrest. It would be a prescription for social disaster as well as for unconscionable waste Or we could conceivably travel the route to mandatory controls on prices and wages. But the vital guiding mechanism of a free economy is lost when the Government fixes prices and wages. We did not impose such regulations on our businessmen and our workers during the recent years of military buildup and hostilities. We surely must not turn down this path a dead end for economic freedom and progress Or we could throw up our hands and allow the price-wage spiral to turn faster and faster. This counsel of despair would eventually undermine our prosperity and our financial system wrecking the strong international position of the dollar and imposing unjust burdens on millions of our citizens T H E ROADS TO FOLLOW Price stability in a prosperous economy must be pursued by a coordinated program involving a wide range of actions The fiscal and monetary program I outlined earlier is our first line of defense against inflation. The Nation has surely learned that inflation will emerge unless responsible budget and credit policies keep demand within the bounds of the economy 's productive capacity Even then advances in prices and wages at high employment can prove troublesome. No free economy can escape these tendencies entirely. But it can keep them from developing when unemployment is too high and it can moderate the pressures that do emerge. To do so effectively requires reinforcing other important measures to reinforce fiscal and monetary policies Productivity and Efficiency First although the productive efficiency of our industries and of our workers is already the envy of the world we must keep striving for further improvements Productivity can be raised even more rapidly and manpower can be employed more effectively through many methods in which Government can lend a hand by training programs that better match skills to job requirements by developing the potential of the disadvantaged by using the wasted abilities of those who are out of work seasonally or intermittently by providing better information about job opportunities and by encouraging research and investment in better technology Government business and labor can work together to improve industrial efficiency. We can strengthen our dedication to the competitive principles and practices that have made American industry preeminent Impediments to efficiency must be identified and tackled industry by industry wherever they exist as they do particularly in medical care and construction The Government should look at its own programs and policies to ensure that they do not add an unnecessary penny to the costs of production. To fulfill this goal public policies must be reviewed continually in many areas procurement regulation international trade commodity programs and research and development Voluntary Cooperation Second both in their own interest and in the public interest business and labor should exercise the utmost restraint in price and wage decisions It is understandable that with living costs rising sharply labor can not now accept wage agreements limited to the rise in productivity. It is also understandable that with production costs increasing business can not now hold prices entirely stable But the process of deceleration must take hold for both prices and wages. The demands for incomes by business and labor combined must be brought more closely into line with the amount of real income the economy can generate. A decisive step toward price stability in requires labor and business to accept some mutual sacrifices in the short run to preserve their enormous long-term interest in prosperity and a stable value of the dollar In recent years business labor and Government have been discussing the big economic issues sometimes debating but often agreeing The dialogue should go forward and should explore new forms of labormanagement cooperation to ensure greater fulfillment of common interests A year ago I established the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability to coordinate efforts within the Administration to help improve efficiency enlist voluntary restraint and contribute to public education and dis- II cussion on the wage-price problem. In its recent Report the Committee made many important recommendations which deserve the most serious consideration. The work of the Committee has proved its value and should be continued in some appropriate form The stakes are enormous in our efforts to combine high employment and price stability. We can sacrifice neither goal. The challenge can be met if we have the will REINFORCING THE FISCAL-MONETARY FRAMEWORK The unparalleled economic expansion of the past years testifies to the accomplishments of our fiscal and monetary policies. Yet the blemishes on that record show plainly that further improvements are needed BUDGET POLICY AND PROCEDURES The budget is the keystone of Federal Government operations. It is a plan developed within the Executive Branch and a recommended program for action by the Congress. It is a blueprint for fiscal and economic policy In my many years in Washington I have worked intensively on the budget on both the legislative and executive sides. I know the difficulties of coordinating a host of appropriation requests into a total program that accurately reflects national priorities making the dollar sum of the parts equal a whole that remains within prudent bounds and ensuring that decisions on tax revenues go hand in hand with those on expenditures The Executive Branch coordinates its budgetary decisions through the Bureau of the Budget with extensive cooperation from the Department of the Treasury and the Council of Economic Advisers. The Congress has no parallel process. I urge the Congress to review its procedures for acting on the annual budget and to consider ways that may improve the coordination of decisions among Federal programs and on Federal revenues in relation to expenditures My experience has thoroughly convinced me of the fundamental wisdom of our system of checks and balances. The system works well because both the President and the Congress subject their own operations continually to careful scrutiny and review in light of experience Costly delays in enacting recent tax legislation demonstrate the need for a review of procedures in this area. Congress should ask : How can a prompt response to a Presidential request for tax action be assured ? When such a recommendation takes a simple form ( like the current income tax surcharge ) and when it is made to head off a threat to prosperity the Nation is entitled to a prompt verdict To provide the fiscal flexibility needed in our modern economy the Congress might be willing to give the President discretionary authority to initiate limited changes in tax rates subject to Congressional veto I believe that the President should have such authority. Alternatively the Congress might choose to establish its own rules for ensuring a prompt vote up or down on a Presidential request for tax action The Nation should never again be subjected to the threat of fiscal stalemate MONETARY POLICY Our institutions allow monetary policy to adjust promptly and smoothly and the value of this flexibility has become evident. When fiscal action has been delayed monetary policy has been able to continue the battle against inflation. But tight credit soaring interest rates pressures on homebuilding and nervous financial markets are the unhappy results of an overburdened monetary policy. Greater fiscal flexibility would help to ensure that monetary policy is not asked to carry an undue share of the load in restraining or stimulating the economy The Administration and the Federal Reserve have learned to work together closely and to coordinate effectively while preserving the appropriate independence of the Federal Reserve within the Government. Our monetary institutions are working well and I see a need for only a few reforms to enhance their effectiveness The term of Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board should be appropriately geared to that of the President to provide further assurance of harmonious policy coordination The rigid requirement that no more than a single member of the Federal Reserve Board may be appointed from any one Federal Reserve District should be removed so that the President with the advice and consent of the Senate may choose the very best talent for the Board The Congress should review procedures for selecting the presidents of the Reserve Banks to determine whether these positions should be subject to the same appointive process that applies to other posts with similarly important responsibilities for national policy O AFTER VIETNAM Despite some encouraging signs of progress toward peace hostilities in Vietnam continue. In planning our budget we must assume continuation of the war. But we must also be ready to adjust to peace whenever that welcome day arrives Early in to ensure our readiness for peace I established the Cabinet Coordinating Committee on Economic Planning for the End of Vietnam Hostilities The Report of that Committee emphasizes the demanding task that will confront fiscal and monetary policies once a secure peace permits demobilization. The resources freed from war must not and need not be squandered in idleness. Rather this manpower and material should be promptly enlisted in the service of peaceful progress In addition to its immeasurable human benefits peace will provide an economic dividend to the Nation and to the Federal budget. But that dividend is dwarfed by the urgent needs of our society. The Nation will have to weigh the priorities among attractive programs carefully and wisely to take full advantage of this dividend. High on the list of priorities is the commitment to provide equal and full economic opportunities for all our citizens THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY BALANCE-OF-PAYMENTS ADJUSTMENT Our international accounts were in balance in for the first time since Much of the improvement came from the program I announced in an atmosphere of world financial crisis a year ago. The contrast today is striking and gratifying The excellent results of last year were aided by temporary factors Hence we can not relax our efforts to achieve fundamental improvement especially in our disappointing trade performance. To strengthen our trade surplus and achieve a healthy balance of payments we must restore price stability at home encourage our farms and factories to become ever more competitive in quality and price so that they can export more intensify efforts to secure the removal of barriers to freer trade bring more foreign tourists to our shores to enjoy America with us and minimize the foreign exchange cost of our military commitments and economic aid overseas Our temporary programs to restrain capital outflows worked well in American businesses showed remarkable ingenuity and cooperation in pursuing their activities abroad while drastically cutting the drain on the Nation 's balance of payments. These programs clearly aided in preserving the strength of the dollar Capital restraints should never become permanent features of our economy. They should be ended as soon as possible But the war continues and the movement toward noninflationary prosperity has just begun. We can not now scrap our defenses against large capital outflows. For the present we must renew the Interest Equalization Tax before it expires on July maintain the direct investment control program in the more flexible form recently announced and continue the Federal Reserve program of voluntary restraint of foreign lending To maintain our gains ever closer international cooperation is needed among the highly interdependent nations of the world. Countries in deficit must meet their responsibilities. And countries in surplus must also pursue appropriate policies striving especially for rapid economic expansion and giving world traders greater access to their markets WORLD MONETARY SYSTEM The international monetary system was strengthened in An historic international agreement was reached creating in the International Monetary Fund a new reserve asset the Special Drawing Right We spent years studying exploring and negotiating with our commercial partners in order to reach this agreement. I eagerly await the day that actual distribution of SDR 's will begin. They can meet the future needs of the world for international liquidity in the proper amounts and in a usable form. I am proud that the United States acted so promptly to ratify this agreement with such overwhelming bipartisan support in the Congress Some did not believe that such an agreement was possible arguing that a rise in the official price of gold was the only way to increase international reserves. We and our trading partners rejected this futile course ; it would have offered a ransom payment to speculators and would have failed to provide for the orderly growth of reserves. I have carried out my pledge that the United States would sell gold to official holders of dollars at $ an ounce. There is clearly no need to change that price Myths about gold die slowly. But progress can be made as we have demonstrated. In the Congress ended the obsolete gold-backing requirement for our currency Another major step in freeing the international monetary system from disturbances by gold speculators was taken in March when the United States and the other active gold pool countries agreed to cease supplying gold to the private market. The resulting two-price system for gold is working successfully The international economy has made major strides in the past. But we must recognize the problems that remain. The financial crises of stimulated constructive discussion of many proposals for further evolutionary improvements in the international economic system These proposals are not an agenda for action in a week or a month or even a year. The issues posed can not be resolved in a summit meeting or by a superplan. But they can be tackled effectively with the same kind of careful study and negotiation that led to the successful SDR plan. The United States should actively participate in such a procedure in order to strengthen the foundation of the world economy TRADE World trade has continued to expand briskly virtually unaffected by the sporadic crises in financial markets. Tariff barriers that once stifled international commerce have been substantially lowered most notably by the Kennedy Round reductions which began in and will continue until We must reinforce this success by devoting equal energy to the removal of nontariff barriers. On our part Congressional action to rescind the American Selling Price provision is essential for achieving reductions of nontariff barriers offered by several of our trading partners Other nontariff barriers also need revision Agriculture has been the stepchild of trade negotiations and deserves prompt and proper attention The international rules governing border tax adjustments should be revised so that they no longer give a special advantage to countries that rely heavily on excise and other indirect taxes While we work to reduce trade barriers we must not drop our guard against the advocates of protectionism at home and abroad. We will never neglect the legitimate concerns of any citizen. But the only real solutions are ones that improve our economy not ones that erect new barriers that could provoke retaliation or insulate producers from the invigorating force of world competition. To provide the right kind of aid to those seriously hurt by import competition present provisions for temporary adjustment assistance must be liberalized as I have repeatedly recommended AID Important economic progress is being made in the world 's less developed countries. The beginnings of spectacular advances in world agriculture are now clearly evident. Family planning is gaining widespread support The United States can and should help to promote further progress in world agriculture and family planning and the achievement of more rapid economic growth in the less developed countries. Only if funds for foreign aid programs are restored to an adequate level can we do our part The United States has long supported multilateral assistance as an equitable and efficient means of channeling aid from wealthy to poorer nations. We must reaffirm this support by promptly authorizing the U.S contributions to the replenishment of the International Development Association and to the Special Funds of the Asian Development Bank KEY AREAS OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RESPONSIBILITY The bountiful output of the American private enterprise system has made our high standard of living possible. Yet this same abundance has created a growing need for public action to improve the quality of life in our cities towns and countryside. The Federal Government must continue its partnership with the private sector and with State and local governments to provide better public services Increased efforts are needed to improve the environment by ensuring clean air pure water and the conservation of natural resources assist in community development and in education protect the consumer against unfair practices and unwholesome products ensure safe employment conditions and provide a more comprehensive social insurance system to protect against the financial impacts of retirement unemployment job accidents and long-term illness of a breadwinner l QUALITY OF THE ENVIRONMENT More than ever Americans realize that purposeful action is required to ensure an environment we can all enjoy. In the last years legislation has been enacted to abate air and water pollution and to control the disposal of solid wastes. Despite progress many of our rivers still are open sewers our atmosphere often unfit to breathe and much of our land littered with discarded junk. We must develop new methods for financing water treatment plants attack oil pollution of harbors and beaches strengthen laws for clean air and solid waste disposal stop the ravages of strip mining and preserve more parks and wilderness areas COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING Rapid population growth in our cities and rising living standards have created a backlog of community and housing needs Local governments are finding it increasingly difficult to finance essential community facilities schools parks hospitals and transportation systems. The Federal Government must develop new ways to help communities raise capital for public facilities The capacity of the housing industry must be enlarged and updated to meet the Nation 's goal of adding million decent homes and apartments over the next decade To improve our communities and meet our housing needs I recommend an independent federally established Urban Development Bank to provide low-interest loans to State and local governments increased Federal research and development to improve construction technology a Federal program to test housing materials and to improve building standards and practices the training of more construction workers through federally assisted manpower programs in cooperation with trade unions and contractors and an urban mass transportation trust fund financed by a portion of the automobile excise tax EDUCATION Providing good education is a national responsibility in which the Federal Government must do its part. Great progress has been made in recent years toward our goal of providing every child all the education he wants and can absorb. But continued and expanded efforts will be needed. This Nation must strive to provide every child with year-round opportunity for preschool education offer every teacher assistance for continuing education bring the cost of higher education within the means of every qualified student through expanded loans and grants and provide funds for higher education adequate to ensure instruction of finest quality CONSUMER PROTECTION The confidence of consumers in the American marketplace is vital for a healthy economy. In the past years the Congress has ushered in a new era of consumer protection by enacting major measures in this field. We have made great strides toward our goals of ensuring that all products are safe and wholesome providing full and fair disclosure in the marketplace and eliminating fraud and deception by the few who prey on the unsuspecting the elderly and the poor To carry on the work so well begun legislation is needed to prevent deceptive sales practices by giving new authority to the Federal Trade Commission reduce the likelihood of massive electric power failures which can paralyze our cities ensure that the small investor shares in the benefits of our thriving mutual fund industry and complete the circuit of Federal inspection for foods commonly served at the family dinner table WORKER PROTECTION American workers are the most productive in the world and they have made our high standard of living possible. They and their families deserve a safe working place and adequate protection against the loss of income from on-the-job accidents disability and unemployment Safety The human costs of accidents are immense people killed on the job each year million workers injured. The monetary cost alone is a staggering $ billion. Recent tragedies in our factories mines and other work places have dramatized once more the need for better safety practices. Must we wait for tragedy to strike again ? The Congress failed to act last year on an urgently needed Occupational Safety and Health Bill and on the Coal Mine Safety Bill. We can delay no longer. This Nation must put an end to this senseless waste from job accidents through comprehensive legislation that will ensure the best job safety and health practices in all American work places Workmen 's Compensation Workmen 's compensation should ensure that no victim of a job-related accident lacks the funds to pay his medical bills and support his family Currently one employee in five has no workmen 's compensation protection. Benefit levels are too often tragically low. The Federal Government should act now to ensure that the States provide adequate workmen 's coverage and benefits Disability Insurance Today disabled workers wait as long as months before receiving benefits and their disability must be expected to last more than year. In addition disabled workers are too often unable to pay for the medical care they need. To meet these shortcomings I recommend that the waiting period for benefits be reduced from to months the minimum duration of qualifying disability be reduced to months and the totally and permanently disabled be eligible for Medicare Unemployment Insurance Even in the height of prosperity during two million workers were out of work for a period of weeks or longer. About a million workers spent at least half the year fruitlessly looking for work Congress should strengthen the Federal-State Unemployment Insurance system by extending coverage to five million more workers raising benefit levels lengthening payment periods and providing special federally financed benefits for the long-term unemployed with recipients required to accept job training and other employment services under appropriate circumstances SOCIAL SECURITY Social security is one of the oldest and best social programs. Currently million people one out of every eight Americans receive a social security check every month. Largely because of social security two-thirds of the beneficiaries the elderly widows orphans and the disabled are above the poverty line. Yet we need to do more. I recommend an average increase in benefits of percent including a rise of at least percent for every beneficiary a percent increase from $ to $ for the five million Americans receiving the minimum benefit a $ monthly minimum benefit for those who have contributed to social security for years or more and a liberalization of benefits for the elderly who choose to work OUR COMMITMENT TO ELIMINATE POVERTY No achievement gives me greater pride than the advances in the war on poverty. No social challenge gives me greater concern than the elimination of poverty Since the passage of the Economic Opportunity Act which established the Nation 's commitment to eliminate poverty the number of poor Americans has been reduced by about million. Still million Americans remain poor The effective programs of the Office of Economic Opportunity must be preserved and strengthened. For this purpose I am recommending a 2-year extension of the Economic Opportunity Act EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES In recent years our national prosperity has rapidly expanded job opportunities for the poor. To maintain progress we must not retreat from high employment. The doors to opportunity are bound to be locked to the disadvantaged and to new workers if senior and skilled employees are being laid off At the same time we can not count on normal economic growth to create as many jobs for the poor as were created when we moved out of a slack economy. We must therefore increase the emphasis on manpower programs in order to provide effective aid to the disadvantaged In we launched a major new partnership with private industry the National Alliance of Businessmen. Job Opportunities in the Business Sector is a promising route for providing jobs and training for the hard-core unemployed. The JOBS program has reached its initial target months ahead of schedule. My budget provides for major expansion of this program The experience with JOBS encourages us to develop a similar program for employment in the rapidly growing public sector EDUCATION HEALTH AND NUTRITION The poor are often handicapped by inferior education ill health and inadequate diets. Federal Government programs have begun to attack these roots of poverty. Head Start Follow Through and Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act help in educating disadvantaged children. These should ultimately be expanded to meet the needs of all poor children Medicaid has a high proportion of poor beneficiaries and should ultimately free the needy from the bonds of inadequate health care Good health is essential for a good start in life. Expectant mothers and infants in poor families should be provided comprehensive health care America blessed with agricultural abundance should not tolerate hunger among its people. The Food Stamp program should be expanded and a cooperative Federal-State effort launched to protect all Americans against hunger and malnutrition HOUSING With the Housing and Urban Development Act of we set the goal of eliminating all substandard housing in the next decade. We must back that commitment with the needed resources financial technical and human. First priority must be given to the needs of the poorest of the poor through the Model Cities program rent supplements home ownership and public housing. And all families must be assured full and fair access to housing with no discrimination INCOME SUPPORT No matter how well we succeed in other efforts cash assistance will be needed by many of the poor the elderly the disabled and some mothers with sole responsibility for the care of young children. Although such funds do not directly remove the causes of poverty they sustain life and hope and help prevent poverty from being bequeathed from one generation to the next Income support programs need a thorough review. The public discussion required to illuminate this area is well under way and will benefit from the report of the Commission on Income Maintenance due at the end of this year. Americans will soon have to decide how best to help those who can not earn enough to escape from poverty Whatever strategies we choose the effort to reduce poverty must be redoubled. Victory in the war on poverty can be won with only a modest share of the Nation 's income gains. The total shortfall of income below the poverty line amounts to only percent of our gross national product one-fourth of our normal growth in a single year. A fully effective antipoverty program would initially cost more than that but would not be out of range. Surely Americans will make the investment needed to eliminate poverty CONCLUSION The American economy has been steadily on the march in the 's It has shattered all records for progress toward the Employment Act 's goals of " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " It has bestowed great blessings of abundance on the vast majority of Americans in all walks of life Economic growth has provided the resources for urgent defense needs and has still permitted a major expansion of civilian production both public and private. It has allowed us to send a youngster to Headstart and a man to the moon When our economy was less prosperous many of our social problems were neglected eclipsed by the struggle of families to make ends meet The plight of the poor was fatalistically accepted when the majority of Americans were vulnerable to unemployment and deprivation. Our needs for improved schools better cities and a healthier environment were pushed into the background As the average American 's standard of living soared we could afford to focus on new challenges. Facing these issues squarely has in itself been a great accomplishment. We have marshaled our determination to provide a good job a decent standard of living quality education and a pleasing environment for everyone We have begun to make progress toward these new aspirations. But we have only begun. And because we have so far to go many of us are impatient. This feeling is in the great American tradition. High aspirations and impatience have constantly spurred us to greater achievements And they will again. Our economy will not rest on the laurels of the 's. We will not relax to count or consolidate our gains. We will not retreat from the unprecedented prosperity we have achieved. This Nation will remain on the march January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C.January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ARTHUR M. O K U N Chairman MERTON J. PECK WARREN L. SMITH CONTENTS Page CHAPTER STRENGTHENING THE FOUNDATION OF PROSPERITY Economic Gains in '...... Production and Productivity Employment and Income The Composition of Demand Economic Policy in Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy and Financial Developments Pattern of Activity During the Year Upsurge During the First Half of Expansion in the Second Half Key Sectors in Retrospect Wages and Prices in Wages and Compensation Real Earnings and Unit Labor Costs Prices in Balance of Payments in Goods and Services Capital Account Economic Policy for Anti-Inflationary Strategy Fiscal Program for Monetary Policy Economic Outlook for Outlook by Sectors Price Outlook Outlook for the Balance of Payments CHAPTER POLICIES FOR BALANCED EXPANSION Realizing the Economy 's Potential The Choice of a Target Potential Output Economic Gains of the Expansion The Problem of Economic Fluctuations Short-Run Instability Automatic Stabilizers and Fiscal Drag The Record of Policy Strategy for Expansion : to Mid-1965 Fiscal Problems of Defense and High Employment : Lessons of the Policy Record POLICIES FOR BALANCED EXPANSION Continued Formulating Fiscal Policy The Role of Economic Forecasting Preparing the Annual Budget Congressional Procedures Adjusting to New Developments Some Issues of Monetary Policy The Conduct of Monetary Policy Monetary Policy and the Money Supply Looking Ahead Page CHAPTER CHAPTER PRICE STABILITY IN A HIGH EMPLOYMENT ECONOMY. Prices Wages and Employment The Record in the Sixties The Task for Policy Improving Labor and Product Markets Improving Labor Mobility Efficient Use of Manpower Manpower Training Programs Competition and Antitrust Policy Legal Restrictions on Competition Improving Consumer Information Regulated Industries Government Procurement Agriculture International Trade and Price Stability Voluntary Restraint in Prices and Wages Role of Private Decisions Standards for Decisions Application of Standards Future Role of Cooperation Conclusion CHAPTER T H E INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY Economic Growth and World Trade Trade and Trade Barriers Less Developed Countries The Bretton Woods System The Liquidity Problem Types of Reserves Special Drawing Rights The Need for Reserve Growth The Confidence Problem Private Shifting Among Currencies Private Demand for Gold Shifts Among Official Reserve Assets Proposals for Improving Reserve Management The Adjustment Problem Causes of Disturbances Ill Page CHAPTER THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY Continued The Adjustment Problem Continued Internal Adjustments Measures Directly Affecting International Transactions The Adjustment Problem of the United States Exchange Rate Adjustments Present System Proposals for Exchange Rate Flexibility Conclusion CHAPTER COMBATING POVERTY IN A PROSPEROUS ECONOMY The Extent of Poverty Definition of Poverty Poverty Trends Strategies for Reducing Poverty Prosperity and the Reduction of Poverty Effects of Prosperity Prospects for Further Progress Income Distribution Education Jobs and Training Education and Poverty Hiring Standards Training and Job Access Improvements in Income Maintenance Welfare Programs Benefits in Kind Social Insurance Systems Major Reform Special Problems of Poverty Pockets Strategies for Attacking Ghetto Problems Strategies for Reducing Rural Poverty Fulfilling the National Commitment List of Tables and Charts Tables Gross Saving and Investment in Selected Years of Relatively High Employment Changes in Various Measures From the National Income and Product Accounts Since Second Quarter Allocation of Disposable Personal Income in Selected Periods Changes in Compensation Productivity Unit Labor Cost and Output Price in the Private Economy Since Wage and Benefit Changes in Collective Bargaining Situations United States Balance of Payments Tables Measures of Economic Activity During the Current Expansion Federal Fiscal Actions in T h r e e Periods Since Fourth Q u a r t e r N e t Funds Raised by Nonfinancial Sectors Changes in Employment to Changes in Hourly Earnings of Production a n d Nonsupervisory Workers on Private Nonagricultural Payrolls to Growth of Gross National Product in Developed a n d Less Developed Countries Growth of World Exports Poverty a n d Near-Poverty Income Lines N u m b e r of Poor Households a n d Incidence of Poverty Selected Years N u m b e r of Near-Poor Households a n d Incidence of NearPoverty by Age a n d Sex of H e a d of Household a n d Selected Major Income Maintenance Programs Fiscal Year Major Federal Income-in-Kind Programs Substantially Benefiting the Poor Fiscal Year Charts Changes in Gross National Product Since Wholesale Prices Consumer Prices U.S. Balance of International Payments Gross National Product Actual and Potential and Unemployment Rate Unemployment Rates Selected Interest Rates Price Performance and Unemployment World Trade and Reserves Number of Poor Persons and Incidence of Poverty Taxes and Transfer Payments as Percent of Income ( Excluding Transfers ) by Income Class Pag e CHAPTER Strengthening the Foundation of Prosperity HE AMERICAN ECONOMY achieved large gains in output and employment in as it continued to expand through an unprecedented eighth consecutive year. The value of the Nation 's total output of goods and services gross national product ( GNP ) rose by $ billion from to ; after adjusting for price increases the gain amounted to percent. Employment grew by I/2 million persons and in December the unemployment rate was down to percent the lowest since the early 's. The number of persons below the poverty income line declined by million the largest such reduction in any year on record. Meanwhile our over-all balance of international payments improved markedly In part however this exuberance was too much of a good thing. The productive capability and adaptability of the American economic system were once more demonstrated ; but the economy was severely tried by all of the demands placed upon it. The pressures of excessive demand pushed up the price level at the unacceptable rate of nearly percent. Imports were drawn in from abroad at a very rapid pace easing some domestic supply shortages but causing a sharp deterioration in the Nation 's international trade surplus. And domestic financial markets came under renewed heavy pressure producing sharp increases in interest rates The excessive buoyancy reflected in large part the extended delay in enacting the percent income tax surcharge which had been proposed by the President in August While the fiscal program was pending restrictive monetary policy took some of the steam out of the economy. But by the time the appropriate fiscal restraint went into effect in mid-July the underlying forces of expansion had attained great momentum more than was realized at the time. As a result the needed moderation in the pace of advance developed slowly With inflationary pressures still strong economic policy should continue to exert restraint in Total demand must be brought into better balance with the Nation 's productive capacity to permit a slowing of price and cost increases. But the restrictiveness of policy should be tempered to preserve our basic prosperity ; it should ensure that output continues to grow although at a rate somewhat less than the growth of the economy 's potential The Administration 's fiscal program is designed to meet these objectives T The remainder of this chapter reviews developments in in more detail sets forth the Administration 's fiscal program for and finally summarizes the outlook in for economic activity prices and wages and the balance of payments. The other four chapters of this Report review some of the lessons of economic policy derived from recent experience and discuss some of the challenges of the future. The evolving role of fiscal and monetary policies in the 's is discussed in Chapter The challenge of achieving price stability in a high employment economy is the subject of Chapter International economic progress and problems are dealt with in Chapter while Chapter is concerned with the reduction of poverty This volume also contains a report on economic planning for the end of hostilities in Vietnam ECONOMIC GAINS IN The record of reflects both sides of the performance of an overly buoyant economy : the benefit to most Americans from large gains in real income and output and the substantial cost of inflationary pressures PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTIVITY The percent growth of real output achieved in was impressive in view of the already high level of resource utilization at the beginning of the year. But inflationary pressures were accentuated and as shown in Chart higher prices accounted for $ J/i billion of the $ billion rise in total GNP The rise in total real output was accomplished in part by a strong recovery of productivity growth in the private sector over the previous year percent compared with percent in In early many business firms had maintained high levels of employment in the expectation that the then emerging slowdown in production would prove temporary. Thus the diminished pace of the expansion was reflected in a slowing of productivity growth rather than a sharp rise in unemployment. Accordingly with the resurgence of economic activity late in and in it was possible to meet some increased demand by fuller use of the existing work force EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME As a result of the expansion the unemployment rate fell to a 15-year low of percent in compared with percent in both and and the number of unemployed declined by Workers on nonfarm payrolls increased by million in The largest gains occurred in State and local government payrolls which increased by nearly workers and in trade and private services which together added workers. Manufacturing employment rose a relatively moderate The Federal Government 's civilian work force remained practically unchanged from while persons were added to the Armed Forces Chart Changes in Gross National Product Since CHANGE IN BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO TOTAL GNP PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES GOVERNMENT PURCHASES BUSINESS FIXED INVESTMENT OTHERi/ TO TO TO ^ RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES CHANGE IN BUSINESS INVENTORIES AND NET EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE With higher employment and more rapid wage increases total wages and salaries increased by $ billion in A sharp $ billion rise in transfer payments plus gains in dividends interest and rental income added further to household purchasing power. Thus over-all personal income registered a large increase of $ billion over On an after-tax basis and after correcting for price increases income per capita increased by percent in well above the average annual increase for the postwar years as a whole Corporate profits also rebounded sharply from their decline in Before-tax profits increased by more than $ billion. The percent Federal income tax surcharge enacted in June and made retroactive to January for corporations held the after-tax gain to $ billion. Particularly large gains were recorded by the manufacturing sector THE COMPOSITION OF DEMAND In contrast to the experience in many other years the excessive expansion in was not attributable to any particular component of expenditures Most components advanced and they added up to a total of too much demand what has been called a " well-balanced excess. " Investment Sectors Residential construction outlays rose by $ 5/2 billion in As shown in Table the proportion of total GNP accounted for by residential building TABLE Gross saving and investment in selected years of relatively high employment Percent of gross national product Source or use of saving Private sector : Gross investment Business fixed investment Residential structures Change in business inventories Net foreign investment Gross saving Personal saving Gross business saving Excess of private saving or investment ( ) Government sector : Federal surplus or deficit ( ) State and local surplus or deficit ( ) Government surplus or deficit ( ) Statistical discrepancy Preliminary Less than percent Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers recovered notably in although it remained far below the percent average of the period Business fixed investment increased ll/i percent but was not a strong stimulative force in Its share of GNP fell slightly from to in contrast to its usual rise in a year of rapid expansion Inventory accumulation played a relatively passive role in at least in comparison with the very sharp swings that were experienced in late and early Inventory-sales ratios were at a fairly normal level throughout much of the year The net export balance declined to its lowest level since Exports of goods and services rose $ billion. But imports of goods and services surged by $ billion in response to the expansion of domestic demand. The increase in imports amounted to nearly percent of the increase in GNP about twice the normal share of total imports in GNP Government The growth of Federal purchases for national defense slowed substantially The $ 6/ billion rise from to was far below the average of $ billion a year between and Nondefense purchases of goods and services increased by $ billion Purchases of goods and services by State and local governments continued their rapid growth of recent years with a $ billion increase. These expenditure increases were heavily concentrated in higher employee compensation payments reflecting the growth of State and local employment Personal Consumption Expenditures Consumer expenditures turned out to be an important expansionary force in the economy in in contrast to The over-all rise of $ billion ( percent ) was marked by a strong $ billion advance in durable goods purchases. Automobile sales rebounded from the mild decline of with total sales of million new cars exceeding the previous million record of The rate of consumer saving fell to percent of disposable personal income from the unusually high percent reached in ECONOMIC POLICY IN The buoyancy of public and private demand and the resulting buildup of inflationary pressures that developed after mid-1967 accentuated the urgent need for fiscal restraint. However enactment of such restraint was long delayed complicating the management of monetary policy and enabling inflationary tendencies to become entrenched FISCAL POLICY The economic background of fiscal policy in had its roots in developments in early Although over-all economic growth was proceeding only slowly at that time because of an inventory adjustment it was apparent that underlying forces of expansion were strong. These were expected to become more dominant in the second half of the year once the inventory adjustment had run its course. Accordingly the President proposed in his Budget Message of January a temporary percent surcharge on individual and corporate income taxes to take effect on July By the second half of the prospect that excessive expansion was on the way became more apparent. Accordingly in early August the formal message requesting prompt enactment of the surcharge revised to percent was sent to the Congress. However the economy was not actually expanding at an excessive rate during the summer and early autumn and the Congress was reluctant to take major action on the basis of a forecast of acceleration. No action was taken and the fiscal impact remained strongly and inappropriately expansionary The pace of economic expansion did in fact accelerate and the President renewed the request for a percent tax surcharge in January The evidence of excessive demand rising prices deteriorating trade performance and growing financial pressures at home and abroad became compelling. An international financial crisis developed in March and by mid-May accelerating credit demands had pushed interest rates to record high levels. Even after a rather general consensus on the need for fiscal restraint developed there were further delays in reaching agreement on the form of restraint. Some legislators were prepared to vote for higher taxes only if accompanied by cutbacks in Federal spending ; others only if a tax increase would serve as a means of avoiding such cutbacks Congressional approval finally came with passage of the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of signed into law by the President on June The Act provided for the percent surcharge as requested by the President in January with effective dates made retroactive to January for corporations and April for individuals. Since the withholding rate under the personal income tax was raised on July many individuals will receive reduced refunds or have to make additional final tax payments early this year to cover the retroactive portion of the tax The Act also established specific limitations on Federal budget outlays for fiscal year Certain programs support for Vietnam operations interest on the public debt veterans benefits and services and social security benefits were exempted from the limitations. Expenditures in the remaining categories were required to be reduced by $ billion below the levels contained in the January Budget As a result of the enactment of this fiscal program the Federal budget ( as measured in the national income accounts ) has shifted from a deficit of $ billion in fiscal to one of only $ billion ( annual rate ) in the second half of calendar The tax surcharge alone is currently withdrawing about $ 105/2 billion ( annual rate ) from the income stream The enactment of the surcharge and expenditure cutbacks immediately strengthened international confidence in the dollar and caused some relaxation in domestic financial markets. Economic activity continued to expand too strongly in the second half of but at a less feverish pace than in the first half MONETARY POLICY AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS The Federal Reserve tightened credit in the first half of when little progress was made toward passage of the tax bill. In doing so however it attempted to steer a narrow course. There was hope for the enactment of fiscal restraint and hence good reason to avoid an extremely tight credit policy. On the other hand it was necessary for monetary policy to help in cooling off the feverish economy in the short run and also to be ready to assume the full burden of restraint if the fiscal program should fail. Within these limitations a series of actions did in combination achieve significant restraint Two half-point increases brought the Federal Reserve discount rate to a modern high of 5/2 percent by late April. Regulation Q was also changed in April to raise the maximum allowable interest rates that banks could pay on time certificates of deposit. Open market operations brought pressures on bank reserve positions sufficient to slow bank credit growth to a 6/2 percent annual rate in the first half of the year compared with an II/2 percent increase in In the first half of total funds raised in credit and equity markets were percent below the volume of the last half of Interest rates in the open market moved sharply upward. By late May the rate on 3-month Treasury bills reached percent and highgrade corporate bonds commanded more than percent above the highs during the credit crunch Interest rates fell for a time after the logjam on the tax bill broke in late May. The Federal Reserve followed this with some relaxation of its grip on bank reserve positions in June and July. In mid-August the discount rate was reduced to * percent largely in technical realignment to lower market rates The initial easing of pressures on the banking system set off widespread expectations that monetary policy would soon be eased still further. The resulting increased demand for securities to capture potential capital gains drove interest rates sharply downward. Meanwhile the demands for credit to finance security purchases were added to the already heavy credit demands from the Treasury and the private sector with the result that growth of bank credit accelerated sharply after midyear Federal Reserve policy continued to accommodate a good part of the rising demands for credit but not to the extent of preventing further increases in market interest rates. By early October most rates had climbed more than half way back toward their May peaks. Then in mid-December the discount rate was restored to 5/2 percent. Toward yearend the rate on 3-month Treasury bills was up to a new high of about percent a full percentage point above the level prevailing at the year 's start and most other market rates were at their highs for the year and for recent times PATTERN OF ACTIVITY DURING THE YEAR The record of expansion during the year reflects substantial adjustments in the behavior of the various sectors of the economy UPSURGE DURING THE FIRST HALF OF GNP increased by $ billion ( annual rate ) between the fourth quarter of and the second quarter of As shown in Table that surge was fueled by an extraordinary increase of $ ^ billion in final sales This was in contrast to the last half of when an important stimulus had come with a rise in inventory investment from its very low rate earlier in the year. In the first half of increases in inventory investment contributed only $ J/2 billion much of which reflected a buildup of stocks in anticipation of a possible strike in the steel industry Government expenditures were the most important expansionary force during the first half of Federal purchases of goods and services rose $ 65/2 billion ( annual rate ) from the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of reflecting a renewed acceleration in defense spending State and local purchases increased more rapidly than usual rising $ ^ billion over the period. A liberalization of Federal social security benefits took effect in March and contributed a major part of the $ billion increase in transfer payments during the period. The Federal fiscal impact remained strongly expansionary even though revenues rose sharply with the booming advance of economic activity Most areas of private demand made relatively little contribution to the expansion. Business fixed investment rose $ billion barely keeping pace with price increases. After its strong advance during residential construction leveled off reflecting a tight monetary policy. Net exports declined as imports expanded rapidly. Personal consumption expenditures grew nearly in pace with disposable personal income between the fourth quarter of and the second quarter of Real GNP expanded at an annual rate of 6yi percent during these two quarters far outpacing the rate of growth of about percent in the economy 's potential. Unemployment declined from levels and averaged percent of the civilian labor force. In sharp contrast with the vigor of expansion was not concentrated in industrial areas. Indeed industrial production rose at a / percent annual rate during the first half of less than the pace of real GNP EXPANSION IN THE SECOND HALF During the final two quarters of the growth of real GNP was ^ percent still above the rate of growth of potential although only by a narrow margin. In current prices GNP rose $ billion ( Table ) The growth in final sales decelerated and inventory accumulation after dipping in the third quarter ended the year at a rate little different from the peak attained in the second quarter TABLE Changes in various measures from the national income and product accounts since second quarter ( Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] II n IV ft IV Item Gross national product. II to IV i ! Other expenditures. Surplus or deficit ( ) _ Change in business inventories. Final sales Personal consumption expenditures Business fixed investment _ Residential structures Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services : Federal State and local Consumer sector : Personal income Disposable personal income Personal outlays Personal saving Federal Government sector : Receipts Expenditures Purchases of goods and services : National defense Other Preliminary Includes $ billion of retroactive liability from corporate tax surcharge Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers In contrast to the first half of the year the government sector did not propel the advance. Federal purchases of goods and services rose only $ billion and other Federal expenditures increased $ billion. Meanwhile the percent surcharge on corporate and personal income taxes withdrew over $ billion ( annual rate ) from the private income stream. By the fourth quarter the Federal budget was essentially in balance Both homebuilding and business fixed investment on the other hand picked up steam in the second half and ended the year on a particularly strong note. Net exports made a modest recovery. Consumer expenditures advanced $ ^ billion between the second and fourth quarters much less rapidly than in the first half of the year The unemployment rate fell to a 15-year low of percent in the fourth quarter with exceptionally low rates for adult men KEY SECTORS IN Two components of demand consumer expenditures and residential construction were subject to special influences in and therefore require further examination Consumer Spending and Saving Consumer spending was important in determining the pattern of activity throughout the year. It was particularly stimulative in the third quarter jumping $ billion ( annual rate ) at a time when the surcharge was first affecting paychecks. Some delay in the adjustment of consumer spending patterns to the marked change in the growth of disposable personal income was expected. A lagged response was apparent for example in the behavior of consumption outlays following the tax reductions of The increase in withheld taxes stemming from the tax surcharge was expected to lead to a similar gradual response of consumption. Some decline in personal saving could be expected to absorb part of the tax for a while In fact saving declined far more than had been anticipated in the third quarter falling $ billion from the second quarter more than could conceivably be attributed to the $ billion of additional taxes from the surcharge. But this was immediately followed by an unusually small rise in consumer spending in the fourth quarter with a consequent increase in the saving rate. During the second half of the year the saving rate averaged % of a percentage point lower than in the first half nearly twice the decline that would have been consistent with both an unchanging basic strength of consumer demand and the anticipated lagged response to the tax increase The third quarter surge in consumption continued to have a strong impact on economic activity through the end of the year as producers stepped up their rates of production in response to the increases in sales. With production proceeding vigorously the moderation of consumer spending in the fourth quarter was translated into a substantial accumulation of inventories by yearend The marked movements of consumer expenditures during continued the pattern of late and The ratios of consumer purchases of various categories of goods and services and of consumer saving to disposable personal income for the past several years are shown in Table During the period consumer spending behavior maintained a fairly consistent relationship to disposable personal income. The saving rates in excess of percent that prevailed in and the first half of represented an unusually large fraction of disposable income by comparison with although not with The saving rate has also been subject to substantial quarterly fluctuations about its recent high level TABLE Allocation of disposable personal income in selected periods [ Percent ] Category average Disposable personal income average First half Second halfi Saving Interest paid and transfer payments to foreigners Services Food and beverages Other nondurables.. Nondurable goods Autos and parts Other durables. Durable goods Personal consumption expenditures. i Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers There is no clear explanation for the extra saving in the period from late to mid-1968. But the high saving did contribute to a sharp buildup in consumers ' holdings of financial assets and to a slowing in the growth of consumer debt. Together these developments meant that households had achieved relatively favorable financial positions which permitted them to increase expenditures markedly whenever they chose to do so. Why they happened to pick the third quarter of to exercise this option can not be adequately explained Residential Construction As was the case in the preceding years monetary policy again had a significant impact on homebuilding activity in After rising sharply in the second half of outlays for residential construction remained essentially flat over the first quarters of despite the fact that household formation and other factors were creating a tremendous underlying demand foi> new houses. Only in the fourth quarter did such outlays show an appreciable rise The factor that limited homebuilding was a curtailment in the availability of mortgage credit. The net flow of funds into mortgages fell by about percent between the fourth quarter of and the second quarter of To some extent this reflected a slowdown of deposit inflows to major mortgage lenders as savers were attracted by the high interest rates available in the open market. But there was also a marked shift away from mortgage lending by mutual savings banks which invested heavily in high-yielding corporate bonds The effects of tight credit on residential construction were however far less severe in than during the credit squeeze and were also less than most observers had expected. Indeed the number of new housing units started was at a depressed level in only months May and June and then showed unexpected strength during the second half of the year In part of course the stronger performance of homebuilding in reflected the fact that credit tightening early in the year was only shortlived and occurred against a background of continued hope for relief with the enactment of the tax surcharge. Builders and mortgage lenders thus tended to stretch a bit to keep operations going Steps taken over the past few years to improve the mortgage market also helped to mitigate the effects of tight credit on homebuilding. As a result of legislation providing for improved coordination of the administrative ceilings applicable to interest rates that thrift institutions may pay on time and savings deposits the severe competition among the various institutions for each other 's deposits that occurred in was not repeated in Legislation passed in May suspended the statutory percent interest ceiling on federally insured mortgages until October replacing it in the meantime with an administrative ceiling controlled by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. This administrative ceiling was raised to % percent thereby increasing the availability of these types of mortgages The legislation of May also provided for the appointment of a Commission to reexamine the interest rate ceiling and make recommendations for a permanent solution to the problem There were also two important reforms affecting the operation of the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) in that enabled it to support the mortgage market more effectively than in the past. In May FNMA began auctioning commitments to purchase mortgages in the future which builders and others could exercise at their option. By the year end outstanding commitments under this program totaled $ billion bringing FNMA 's total net participation in the mortgage market during the year to a record $ billion This increased volume of operations was in part due to the other reform provided for in the Housing Act which split the old FNMA into two corporations one private ( still designated FNMA ) and the other a new Government enterprise the Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) FNMA which conducts the auctions mentioned above has repaid the Government 's investment and its operations have accordingly been removed from the Federal budget. It is now free of the budgetary constraints that had sometimes limited the role of the old Government enterprise in the mortgage market. GNMA has powers thus far unused to help private lenders tap the capital market for additional funds that can flow into mortgages RETROSPECT In retrospect is seen as a year of excessively rapid expansion throughout. Yet there was a noticeable difference between the pace of advance in the first half of the year and that in the second half. The growth rate of real GNP slowed markedly from 6J/2 percent early in the year to percent by yearend Still a much more pronounced change of pace in activity was expected as well as desired. As of midyear many Government and private economists expected that the advance of GNP in the second half of the year might be roughly half of the $ billion gain for the first quarters. The enactment of the fiscal program was one but only one of the elements underlying that expectation. Most of the slowdown was expected to result from a lessening of demand in the private sector steel and other inventories and homebuilding In point of fact several elements of private demand showed unanticipated strength. The sluggishness of consumer buying in the early spring months proved to be temporary and misleading. Business fixed investment began to move up sharply from its previous plateau. Homebuilding rebounded very strongly and promptly following the easing of credit conditions. And as noted earlier the strength of consumer demand in the summer contributed to a stepup in production and ordering and subsequently to rising inventory accumulation. All of these elements taken together amounted to an unexpected buoyancy in private demand and production While there is no clear way to tell how much the fiscal program moderated these forces it is perfectly plausible that in the absence of fiscal restraint there would have been no deceleration whatsoever in the second half ( unless of course the alternative of severe monetary restraint had been applied ) WAGES AND PRICES IN As the economy resumed its vigorous advance in the last half of inflationary pressures reasserted themselves strongly and continued throughout O WAGES AND COMPENSATION Spurred by rising living costs and growing tightness in many labor markets both union and nonunion wages turned up sharply. Average hourly earnings of production workers in private nonagricultural establishments rose percent between December and December compared with percent in the preceding months. The hourly wage increases during the year for construction manufacturing and wholesale trade were all of about the same magnitude while those in mining and retail trade were somewhat larger Average hourly compensation in the private sector including fringe benefits and employers ' social security contributions rose percent from to as compared with percent from to ( Table ) TABLE Changes in compensation productivity unit labor cost and output price in the private economy since Percentage change per year Sector and item to to to i Total private economy : Average hourly compensation : * Current prices Constant prices a Output per man-hour Unit labor cost Implicit GNP price deflator Private nonfarm : Average hourly compensation : Current prices Constant prices ' Output per man-hour Unit labor cost Implicit GNP price deflator Manufacturing : Average hourly compensation : Current prices Constant prices Output per man-hour Unit labor cost Implicit GNP price deflator * Preliminary Wages and salaries of all employees and supplements to wages and salaries such as employer contributions for social insurance and for private pension health unemployment and welfare funds compensation for injuries pay of the military reserve etc. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payment part of the income of the self-employed Adjusted for changes in the consumer price index * Not available Note. Data for each sector relate to all persons Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers Wage increases negotiated in all important collective bargaining situations covered five million workers an unusually large number in Multiyear settlements covering or more workers had a median increase of percent a year in wages and benefits weighted over the life of the contract ( Table ) In most cases settlements were heavily " front loaded * ' that is a disproportionate share of the increase was concentrated in the first year. The average first-year wage settlement was percent substantially above the percent increase in This front-loading of new contracts may contribute to a substantial acceleration of economy-wide wage increases during periods of concentrated collective bargaining activity Many of the settlements replaced contracts negotiated in or which had yielded very little gain in real hourly earnings because of the accelerating advance in prices. The unions naturally sought to restore their relative positions as quickly as possible and hence insisted on concentrating a substantial part of the gains under new contracts in the first year TABLE Wage and benefit changes in collective bargaining situations Median percentage change negotiated or effective during Type of change Most important collective bargaining situations annual rate of increase over life of contract : * Wage and benefit changes negotiated during specified year : Equal timing * Actual timing Wage changes negotiated during specified year : Equal timing Ail important collective bargaining situations : Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Wage adjustment effective during specified year regardless of date of negotiations : * All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing First-year wage adjustment negotiated during specified year : All industries Based on preliminary data available in early January Possible increases in wages resulting from cost-of-living escalator adjustments are omitted except for any part of the escalator increase guaranteed in the contract The estimate is based on key contracts which affected million workers in major industries. The estimate covers most settlements affecting workers or more in all industries excluding construction services finance and government. Subsequent estimates cover all settlements affecting workers or more in all industries except government * Annual rate of increase assuming equal spacing of wage and benefit changes over life of contract Annual rate of increase taking account of actual effective dates of wage and benefit changes during contract period The estimates for to cover most settlements affecting workers or more in all industries excluding construction services finance and government. Subsequent estimates cover all settlements affecting workers or more in all industries except government ^ All contracts affecting or more workers. From to construction services finance and government are excluded. All industries except government are covered in subsequent estimates Includes changes in wage rates negotiated during specified year plus increases decided upon in earlier years costof-living escalator adjustments and no wage changes Source : Department of Labor REAL EARNINGS AND UNIT LABOR COSTS The acceleration of money wages in was nearly matched by the acceleration of consumer prices so that the increase of percent in real hourly compensation in the private economy was only slightly greater than the increase of percent ( Table ) Output per manhour in the private economy rose percent in and this helped offset part of the cost to employers of the increase in hourly compensation. Nevertheless unit labor costs still rose by percent between and PRICES IN The general price level advanced sharply in Wholesale prices increased percent in the months ended December compared with only percent during ( Chart ) Part of the spurt reflected the fact that farm prices rose percent during reversing their decline during the preceding years. However industrial prices also rose on a broad front advancing percent during compared with percent during Chart Wholesale Prices = ~ PROCESSED FOODS AND FEEDS V / v./ ^ / -A COMMODITIES A L L COMMODITIES \ \ A \ ^ / / A ^ / NX FARM PRODUCTS t tii Ml I i i i i I i i i i i I i I i,,,, SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The consumer price index rose at an annual rate of percent during the first months of ( Chart ) This increase was led by a rise of percent in consumer services including a percent jump in the cost of medical services. But prices of consumer commodities also moved up strongly. Partly because mortgage interest and homebuying costs rose particularly sharply the deflator for personal consumption expenditures in the Chart Consumer Prices = / s SERVICES y y ^ A L L ITEMS ^ ^ FOOD ^ ^ ^ COMMODITIES LESS FOOD i i I i1 i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR GNP which excludes these elements increased considerably less rapidly than the consumer price index. It rose by percent during the quarters of The behavior of prices in represented a further intensification of the upward pressures that developed late in After rising percent during consumer prices slowed to a ^ percent annual rate of increase during the first half of when economic activity moderated But with the resurgence of over-all demand spurred by fiscal stimulus late in the rate of price increase again accelerated BALANCE OF PAYMENTS IN Although excessive economic growth generated a surge in imports and a sharp deterioration in the trade surplus in the overall balance of payments improved markedly. This primarily reflected a dramatic shift in the direction of capital flows. In the U.S. balance of payments as measured on the liquidity basis registered a deficit of $ billion ; the deficit was reduced to $ billion at an annual rate during the first quarters of ( Table and Chart ) For the full year preliminary estimates TABLE United States balance of payments [ Billions of dollars ] Type of transaction Balance on goods and servicesBalance on merchandise trade. Balance on investment income. Balance on other services Remittances and pensions first quarters ' Q __ Government grants and capital net U.S. private capital net <5> * Direct investment U.S. bank claims Other U.S. private capital Foreign private capital net.. U.S. securities ( excluding Treasury issues ) Foreign private liquid capital net Other foreign private capital * Errors and omissions BALANCE ON OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS Plus : Increases in nonliquid liabilities to foreign monetary authorities Less : Foreign private liquid capital net BALANCE ON LIQUIDITY BASIS. Average of the first quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rates Includes redemptions of foreign securities Includes changes in Treasury liabilities to international nonmonetary institutions Includes certain Government transactions associated with special transactions Less than $ million Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce show a liquidity surplus for the first time since The balance on the official reserve transactions basis improved dramatically achieving a surplus of $ billion during the first quarters of partly as a result of a marked shift in the holdings of liquid dollar assets abroad from foreign central banks to private investors. Such a shift improves the official settlements measure but does not affect the liquidity balance The improvement in the balance of payments can be attributed to the President 's program announced on January ; to some special factors affecting primarily capital flows ; and to the continuation of some longer term trends GOODS AND SERVICES The merchandise trade surplus deteriorated markedly from $ billion in to an annual rate of only $ billion during the first quarters of Imports rose about percent above Exports reflecting mainly the vigorous growth of income abroad grew by percent The U.S. trade balance during was influenced by strikes in the copper and aluminum industries and a threatened strike in the steel industry Chart U.S. Balance of International Payments BILLIONS OF DOLLARS EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES EXPORTS ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ IMPORTS o \ I I I I I \ I J/ NET CAPITAL FLOWS OTHER FOREIGN CAPITAL U.S. PRIVATE J I I I ^ BALANCE OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS s LIQUIDITY BASIS i i i J/FIRST QUARTERS AT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES i/SECURITIES OTHER THAN TREASURY ISSUES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ^ all of which stimulated metal imports and reduced the trade surplus by perhaps $ million Nonagricultural goods accounted for the entire growth of merchandise exports during with exports to Western Europe and Latin America expanding especially rapidly. Agricultural exports the most rapidly growing category between and declined rather abruptly in and remained depressed in While this decline was partially the result of a reduction of sales and donations to less developed countries it also reflected a sharp decline in commercial exports to the European Economic Community greatly influenced by EEC restrictions on agricultural imports The service account in the balance of payments improved reaching a surplus of $ billion annual rate ( during the first quarters of ) as compared to $ billion in ( Table ) The major gain came in net income from foreign investments which continued its upward trend. Some improvement also occurred in the travel account in reflecting the reduced attractiveness of the Canadian exposition CAPITAL ACCOUNT The capital account improved markedly swinging from a net outflow on private account of $ billion in to a net inflow of $ billion in ( first quarters at annual rate ) The new balance-of-payments programs had their major impact on the capital account. Mandatory controls on foreign direct investment imposed January greatly stimulated efforts by American firms to raise money abroad. During the first months of $ billion of new U.S. corporate securities were sold abroad to finance foreign investments compared with less than $ million during all of Firms also borrowed other funds totaling $ billion about twice the total for These borrowings permitted direct investment abroad to increase slightly apparently proceeding in accordance with original intentions Thus the target of $ billion of balance-of-payments savings from the controls over direct investment was achieved without reducing American participation in the economies of other countries Operating under new directives issued by the Federal Reserve Board American banks reduced their claims on foreigners by $ million during the first months of compared with an increase of about $ million during The swing of $ million in bank lending exceeded the target of $ million set in the January program There were other improvements in the capital account that were not directly related to the balance-of-payments program. By the end of September foreigners had already purchased $ billion ( net ) of American securities in the open market ( in addition to the $ billion of new issues previously mentioned ) In all of foreign purchases in the market amounted to only $ billion as a $ million liquidation of holdings by the United Kingdom held down the total. The greater foreign interest in U.S. stocks and bonds during can be attributed to rising prices of U.S. equities and high yields on U.S. bonds as well as to political developments in France and Czechoslovakia that made European securities seem less attractive. Moreover long-term forces continued to work including the basic strength of the U.S. economy the growing affluence of other countries and the shortage of foreign corporate securities A major inflow of liquid funds resulted from borrowings by American banks from their foreign branches. During these borrowings increased by $ billion compared with only $ million in The major causes of this increase were the existence of relatively tight monetary conditions in the United States and fears about the stability of some European currencies American banks also seem to be strengthening their ties to the European money market giving them access to additional sources of funds The U.S. Government increased its special financing arrangements during the year. In part this increase resulted from greater efforts to obtain military offsets or neutralizations in line with the President 's program. Some portion also resulted from a bilateral agreement with Canada whereby that country was exempted from the mandatory controls on direct investment ECONOMIC POLICY FOR Although economic expansion is expected to moderate during the first half of a continuing policy of restraint is essential to curb inflationary pressures and to strengthen our international trade performance ANTI-INFLATIONARY STRATEGY Checking inflationary forces that are deeply embedded in the structure of costs and prices is an extremely difficult and delicate process. One approach would be to adopt a drastically deflationary fiscal and monetary policy involving a sharp reduction in Federal expenditures or a further increase in tax rates reinforced by extreme credit restraint Such a policy could surely stop inflation in a reasonable period of time But the cost would be intolerable unemployment would rise substantially and the United States could easily experience its first recession in nearly a decade. As the over-all unemployment rate rose the rates for the disadvantaged including nonwhites and teenagers would rise even more rapidly. With heavy unemployment even among experienced workers it would be extremely difficult to sustain recent initiatives to provide training and jobs for the unskilled and the disadvantaged. The danger of serious social unrest would be greatly increased. Moreover the entire economy would suffer a huge loss of output at a time when full production of goods and services is urgently needed to fulfill national goals In any case halting the current wage-price spiral is only the first step in the longer term task of maintaining reasonable price stability. Once a stable price performance had been achieved through a drastic policy of deflation a decision would be required concerning the next step. If that choice should be to prolong the slack performance of the economy it would extend inequity and waste for years to come. If on the other hand there was a decision to shift to expansionary policy there is no reason to believe that the period of deliberate deflation would have contributed to the longer run solution of the problem. Indeed a rapid recovery to the economy 's potential would probably involve more serious dangers of inflation than would a steadier movement that remained close to the path of potential output In view of the intolerable costs of a drastic deflationary policy a more moderate approach is required. The aim should be to slow down the growth of demand to a rate less than the growth of capacity while consistently maintaining forward motion Once the rate of price increase has moderated fiscal and monetary policy can be gradually adjusted toward stronger expansion. How soon that will prove appropriate can not be foretold now. Nor can the proper target for utilization in the longer run be stated with assurance. If fiscal-monetary policy can succeed in avoiding spurts of expansion such as those experienced in and again in it should be possible to improve somewhat upon our recent price performance. But it is doubtful whether acceptable levels of unemployment and reasonable price stability can both be achieved without the successful implementation of structural anti-inflationary measures and of voluntary cooperation in wage and price decisions along lines suggested in Chapter In any case it is clear that for stabilization policy should be designed to hold the rate of expansion of real output below percent but to keep it on a distinctly rising path FISCAL PROGRAM FOR The President 's Budget is designed to fulfill these objectives for economic activity in Federal expenditures are expected to rise by about $ billion in compared with an increase of $ billion in Defense purchases are expected to increase by about $ billion while nondefense purchases are scheduled to rise by about $ billion. About half of these increases for the full year are accounted for by a pay increase at midyear for Federal civilian employees and the Armed Forces. This increase is designed to make Federal civilian pay scales comparable with those in private industry Increases of $ billion and $ billion respectively are anticipated in Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments and in domestic transfer payments. Most of the increases are either required by existing legislation or designed to help solve problems of highest national priority To preserve the needed posture of fiscal restraint in the face of these minimal necessary increases in Federal expenditures the President is asking the Congress to extend the percent tax surcharge on personal and corporate income for year beyond its present expiration date of June In addition the President is requesting a further extension at present levels of the excise taxes on automobiles and telephone service which are now scheduled to decline on January With these tax actions it is estimated that the Federal budget ( national income accounts basis ) will show a surplus of about $ billion during calendar compared with a deficit of $ billion in The percent tax surcharge was enacted as a temporary measure in June and is to be extended for year as a temporary measure. Indeed the President is urging the new Administration and the Congress to give serious consideration to coupling the extension of the surcharge with authority for the President to remove it entirely or partially subject to Congressional veto if warranted by developments in Vietnam in the domestic economy or in Federal outlays MONETARY POLICY Monetary policy should remain flexible in In the environment prevailing at the start of the year it is appropriate that monetary policy reinforce the effects of fiscal restraint to assure the needed moderation of pressures on the Nation 's resources. The recent increase in the Federal Reserve discount rate and increased pressures on bank reserve positions are pursuing that objective. A slowing from the recent rapid growth of bank credit is appropriate in early But with fiscal restraint continuing through fiscal year monetary policy may gradually be able to shift to a less restrictive stance than presently prevails. Flexible and alert responses to a moderation of economic activity would permit a timely de-escalation of interest rates from their currently high levels and hence a more adequate flow of funds to savings institutions and the mortgage market A decline from present peak levels of nominal interest rates would be desirable for the long run as well to avoid restricting capital formation and economic growth in general and homebuilding in particular. The continuation of the surcharge through fiscal should permit a gradual movement toward a more desirable mix of monetary and fiscal policies ; with fiscal policy better adjusted to the needs of economic stabilization the need for restrictive monetary policy and relatively high interest rates should gradually abate ECONOMIC OUTLOOK FOR The fiscal restraint contained in the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of will have its major impact on the economy early in Assuming the fiscal program outlined above and appropriate monetary policy GNP is expected to rise by $ billion in from the $ billion now estimated for This projection should not be viewed as an exact estimate but rather as the midpoint of a range of possible outcomes This forecast of an increase of approximately percent in GNP means a continuation of prosperous conditions and economic expansion though as desired at a considerably more moderate rate than in The unemployment rate should remain below percent The expansion within is expected to be considerably less rapid than during and the increase in GNP from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of should be about percent smaller than the yearover-year increase. The rise in real output during the four quarters of should be less than percent while the rate of increase of over-all prices may be a little more than percent The first part of should see a slowing of economic expansion. Consumer spending should rise moderately influenced by the continuing impact of tax withholding extra final settlements of about $ ^ billion on taxes and a $ billion increase in social security taxes which became effective January Federal Government purchases will change little while State and local government expenditures are expected to increase at a normal pace Inventory investment should retreat from the high rate of the fourth quarter of On the other hand a strong rise in business fixed investment is expected early in in line with recent surveys of business plans and new orders for machinery and equipment. All in all a significant slowing in the pace of expansion is now likely At mid-1969 a substantial pay increase for Federal Government employees is scheduled. Beyond that only a slight increase in Federal purchases is anticipated. The tax burden on consumers will also be reduced at that time as final settlements on taxes are completed in the first half of the year although consumer spending should continue to feel the lagged effects of the final settlements. These fiscal elements together with a continuing increase in private investment are expected to lead to slightly more rapid economic expansion in the second half of the year Thus the year promises continued prosperity for the American economy. The slowing of the expansion should provide welcome relief from the excessive demand pressures of and offers the prospect of some deceleration in the upward movement of prices OUTLOOK BY SECTORS A brief survey of the outlook for specific categories of expenditures will help to clarify the projection of over-all economic activity Business Fixed Investment Private and public investment surveys compiled recently indicate a substantial rise in business fixed investment in The Commerce Department-SEC survey reports that businessmen plan to increase their plant and equipment spending by about percent in the first half of above levels prevailing in Such a sharp increase in investment is already reflected in orders for durable equipment and in construction contracts This marked prospective expansion of investment follows a year when industrial production has reached new peaks and when business cash flows have been at record levels but when there has been relatively little pressure on existing industrial capacity. The dimensions of the rise in investment are still difficult to evaluate in view of uncertainty about the possible impact of economic developments during the first half of the year and of monetary policy on business plans later in For the year as a whole the increase in business fixed investment over is expected to be about $ or $ billion Inventories At the end of ratios of inventories to sales were at normal levels both for manufacturing and for retail and wholesale trade. Barring unforeseen changes in economic conditions over the year inventory investment in may show a slight decline from the average rate of Homebuilding Demographic trends and the relatively low level of residential construction in recent years have created a very strong underlying demand for new homes. Housing starts rose sharply in the second half of and residential construction activity should advance further early in Because of the important role in the housing market of the availability of mortgage financing considerable uncertainty attaches to estimates of home construction beyond the next few months. Given the prospective monetary policy for this year as outlined above private nonfarm housing starts in may be expected to fall somewhat below their recent rate of approximately million per year. Residential construction expenditures for the year may rise by approximately percent over the average level reflecting a larger number of new housing units and increased outlays per unit. But this would mean only a modest rise from the rate of activity at the end of Government For the year an increase of State and local government purchases of goods and services of about $ billion can be anticipated in line with the growing needs for public services and facilities. This estimate assumes that monetary policy will not significantly curtail expenditures for public construction projects Federal Government purchases are expected to remain at approximately their present levels during the first half of in accordance with expenditure restraint applied under the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of However an increase in Federal Government salaries will add $ billion at annual rates to Federal Government expenditures beginning in the third quarter of and the Budget for fiscal in- eludes other modest increases in purchases. For the calendar year Federal purchases of goods and services including the pay increase are expected to be approximately $ billion higher than in Consumption Consumer spending in will be greatly influenced by the continuing adjustment of consumers to the changes in their disposable incomes resulting from the pace of advance in private and Government activity and from changes in their tax obligations Consumer spending slowed in the closing months of Retail sales have not increased significantly since midsummer and the pace of automobile purchases has moderated In the first half of increased tax burdens will further slow the growth of disposable personal income although this may be reflected in part in a renewed decline of the saving rate. Consumer expenditures are thus expected to grow rather slowly during the first half of Surveys of consumer buying anticipations tend to confirm this prospect Personal disposable income may grow somewhat more rapidly in the second half of in part because of the Federal pay increase and the completion by mid-year of final tax settlements. Thus consumer spending may advance more strongly For the year as a whole it is anticipated that disposable personal income will increase nearly $ billion and consumer expenditures should increase approximately the same amount reflecting a small decline in the saving rate PRICE OUTLOOK The excessive rate of price and wage advance during will inevitably influence wages costs and prices during Unit labor costs will continue to increase as will the costs of materials supplies and capital equipment. Financial costs are also likely to remain relatively high Gradually however fiscal restraint coupled with restrictive monetary policy should moderate the excessive market pressures that prevailed during most of Present indications point to slightly lower farm prices during assuming normal weather conditions. Allowing for a continued increase in the costs of food processing and distribution food prices at retail may remain approximately stable Wage increases may have somewhat less impact in than they did in Second year increases in the union contracts negotiated in and the last half of will generally be less than for the first contract year Collective bargaining activity will also be relatively light since expiring major contracts up for wage negotiations cover only about half as many workers as in And finally as restraint takes hold more firmly lessened market pressures provide a prospect for some moderation in nonunion wages as well Wage-Price Policies for If substantial progress is to be made toward the restoration of price stability in restraint in private decisions is essential to complement responsible fiscal and monetary policies. Intensive consultations involving representatives of business labor and Government are required to explore practical and equitable ways in which such restraint might be achieved. Mutual shortterm sacrifices are needed to protect the great long-term interest of business labor and all Americans in noninflationary prosperity It would be unrealistic to expect the full restoration of price stability in the immediate future. Given the recent history and the outlook for the cost of living labor can not be expected to accept wage increases in limited to the trend growth of productivity. Nor can businessmen be expected to absorb substantial cost increases without any adjustments in prices Nevertheless the process of price and wage deceleration must begin. In their own and in the public interest business and labor should undertake a pattern of voluntary restraint that will carry the Nation a substantial distance back toward the goal of price stability in New wage agreements would move halfway back to the ultimate productivity standard next year if labor accepted wage settlements that would bring the average increase in money wage rates a little below percent. Business would display comparable restraint in pricing if it intensified its efforts to offset rising costs through greater efficiency and if it absorbed a share of unavoidable increases in costs through acceptance of lower profit margins This could be translated into a general rule that business agree to absorb increases of up to percent in unit costs and accept as a guide in price decisions a profit target no higher than the average achieved in the years Responsible pricing requires that businessmen focus on margins before tax and not attempt to pass the temporary corporate tax surcharge on to consumers. It is also appropriate to ask those who depart from these standards to bear the obligation of demonstrating that special circumstances render the standards grossly unreasonable These standards for price-wage restraint in were suggested by the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability in its December report to the President Combined with responsible fiscal-monetary policy ajid continued efforts to improve the structure of the economy acceptance of these standards for by key private decision-makers would carry the Nation a long way on the road to price stability OUTLOOK FOR THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS With the anticipated slowing of economic growth only a modest increase in imports is expected in The special strike situations which adversely affected trade in should not be repeated although new problems of this kind could arise. Continuation of the rising trend in earnings on foreign investment should be another source of improvement in our current account position U.S. exports should increase in line with the expansion of foreign markets. The restrictive measures taken by France and the United Kingdom to safeguard their payments positions have reduced our export prospects but these are likely to be offset by the German measures in the opposite direction The capital account is unlikely to show improvement and indeed may deteriorate. The restraint on bank lending can not provide another large swing in net loans. Foreign purchases of U.S. securities can hardly be expected to continue at present rates. Even more important will be the state of financial markets at home and abroad. If European monetary conditions remain fairly relaxed relative to those prevailing in the United States capital inflows can be expected even if not on the same scale as in In view of the uncertain prospects for the balance of payments the measures for controlling capital movements must be maintained for the present. The Interest Equalization Tax which expires at mid-year must be continued to assure against a major rise of new foreign security issues in the United States. Moreover the program for controlling bank lending and the direct investment controls should be maintained. Both have been modified to make them more responsive to needs and more equitable. While further modifications will be possible as the balance of payments improves the defenses provided by these programs can not be lowered without risking the destabilizing effects of substantial refinancing of previous years ' borrowings. Ultimate dismantling of the controls should proceed as soon as this can be accomplished without impairing the strength of the dollar Chapter Policies for Balanced Expansion The Congress hereby declares that it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations and other essential considerations of national policy to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power OR THE PAST YEARS these forthright marching orders in the Employment Act of have firmly committed the Federal Government to an active role in promoting high standards of over-all economic performance. Federal fiscal and monetary policies have contributed to a much improved record of stability and growth in the U.S. economy throughout the postwar era In particular during the past years national policy has been designed not merely to counter cyclical fluctuations but to promote steady expansion of economic activity in pace with productive potential. While fiscal and monetary policies have not always been appropriate to the needs of the day their general success in fulfilling the lofty promises of the Employment Act is clearly demonstrated by the unparalleled prosperity achieved during the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations. Eight consecutive years of economic expansion the longest and largest sustained advance in the annals of U.S. history have dispelled the doubts that prevailed in the late 's about the vitality of the American economic system The lessons of this experience are worth reviewing. Such a review together with some suggestions for improvements in the formulation and implementation of stabilization policies is the subject of this chapter F REALIZING THE ECONOMY 'S POTENTIAL How much the Nation 's economy can produce its supply capability depends on the quantity and quality of its productive resources including manpower plant and equipment and natural resources. The economy 's aggregate demand is the total of spending for final output by all groups consumers businesses government and foreign buyers. When aggregate demand matches supply capability resources are fully utilized and production equals the economy 's potential. If aggregate demand should fall short of supply capability part of the output that the economy is capable of turning out 6i would not be produced and some resources would be wasted in idleness. On the other hand excessive demand too much spending in relation to potential output would generate inflationary pressures on prices and costs The vbasic task of fiscal and monetary policies is to help ensure a match between demand and productive potential. These measures operate primarily by affecting the demand side of the balance. Government purchases of goods and services are directly a part of total demand ; increases or decreases in such purchases change total spending in the same direction In addition other government expenditures indirectly influence total demand through their impact on private incomes. Social security benefits for example are " transfer payments " which add to the purchasing power of individuals and thus encourage additional private spending especially for consumer goods and services Taxes on the other hand reduce the ability and willingness of families and business firms to spend by drawing purchasing power out of private hands. By raising ( or lowering ) tax rates the Federal Government can hold down ( or add to ) the flow of private spending Monetary policies affect private spending primarily by changing the cost and availability of funds required to finance certain types of expenditures If borrowing becomes expensive and difficult expenditures for new homes business machinery and other things may be discouraged or postponed The economy 's potential output is continually expanding as a result of the growth of the labor force and increases in productivity. Economic policy must therefore aim at a moving target helping demand to grow in pace so that an appropriate balance with potential is maintained. If demand does not expand or if it grows only sluggishly men and machines become unemployed THE CHOICE OF A TARGET Economic potential or capacity is not an absolute technical ceiling on output. It allows for some margin of unused human and physical resources Even in the most extreme boom there are always some people unemployed some who could be attracted into the labor force some who would be willing to " moonlight " or work overtime. Similarly there are always some plants that could be operated more intensively or for longer hours. To operate the economy at its utmost technical capacity would require demands far in excess of supply in most markets with resulting rampant inflation The relevant concept of capacity therefore must allow for some margin of idle resources. The choice of a specific margin involves an appraisal of the behavior of prices and costs in a high-employment economy. But this appraisal involves more than a technical evaluation. If potential output is to be viewed as a target for policy the choice of the ideal level of utilization is a social judgment that requires a balancing of national goals of high employment and reasonable price stability Balances of this sort are never simple. Both unemployment and inflation involve social and individual costs. The severe economic burden borne by those who have no jobs is obvious. At the bottom of the recession there were more than five million workers out of jobs ; and during more than million workers experienced one or more spells of unemployment. Still others were forced to accept part-time employment or were relegated to jobs beneath their capacity. Some in resignation abandoned the search for jobs. The loss of income was tremendous. The costs in frustration despair and bitterness can not be measured Some of the costs of unemployment linger on because skills and supplies of labor are impaired. When over-all unemployment is excessive employers have little incentive to provide job training programs for the unskilled or to upgrade workers to better paying jobs. Labor unions become increasingly concerned about the job security of existing members and often take measures that limit the supply of available labor for the longer run Although the burden of a slack economy falls most heavily on the unemployed the loss of production associated with underutilized resources imposes serious costs on nearly all groups. The incomes lost by the unemployed represent far less than half of the total shortfall of output and income. A slack economy sharply reduces the profits of large and small businesses and cuts government tax revenues. Moreover part of the burden falls on future generations because underutilization of capacity weakens investment incentives slowing the rate of capital accumulation and limiting future productivity gains It is difficult to balance the costs of inflation against those of an absolute loss of output and employment because they are quantitatively and qualitatively different. Inflation has highly arbitrary and inequitable effects on the distribution of income and wealth. It benefits debtors at the expense of creditors ; it hurts persons such as some pensioners whose incomes and asset values are fixed in money terms and benefits those whose incomes and asset values increase more than in proportion to the over-all rise in prices. Since the impact of inflation on the welfare of an individual depends on the way in which both his income and the value of his wealth respond to the change in prices its effects on broad classes of the population can not be easily characterized. But there are many persons in nearly all walks of life who experience significant losses as a result of inflation. In general financially sophisticated persons who foresee the consequences of rising prices can take steps to protect themselves while the less sophisticated may lose There is also a danger that inflation can set in motion speculative behavior that will cause further acceleration of price increases with serious consequences for economic and social stability. There are even extreme examples in history of the breakdown of financial and economic systems as a result of galloping inflation Finally inflation may have adverse consequences for our balance of payments. If prices rise more rapidly in the United States than in other countries our competitive position in world markets can be seriously undermined As a collective social decision the choice of an employment objective can and should be the subject of continuous reexamination. Chapter suggests a number of structural measures that can help to lessen the conflict between high employment and price stability. When combined with an improved performance of fiscal and monetary policy along lines discussed in this chapter these measures may make it possible to achieve progressively lower rates of unemployment with reasonable price stability POTENTIAL OUTPUT In light of the considerations discussed above a 4-percent unemployment rate was established as an " interim " target for national policy early in the Kennedy Administration. In each of its last seven Annual Reports the Council of Economic Advisers has based its estimates of potential output on a 4-percent rate of unemployment. This Report continues to make use of this definition The resulting estimated path of potential output for the period to together with the path of actual gross national product ( GNP ) is shown in Chart Actual GNP was approximately equal to potential in but fell gradually below potential in the following years. The gap widened sharply in the recession it failed to close fully in the ensuing expansion and it widened again in the recession of In the first quarter of the gap amounted to about $ billion ( in prices ) and the unemployment rate was percent From the first quarter of until the end of when the unemployment rate reached percent actual output was consistently below potential But actual output grew more rapidly than potential catching up and finally closing the gap. Since then actual output has exceeded the calculated potential most of the time as the unemployment rate has been below percent It is estimated that potential output grew about / percent a year from the mid-1950 's to the early 's. After that its growth appears to have speeded up gradually ; for the last few years it is estimated at percent a year Growth of potential output reflects the combined effects of expansion of available man-hours of labor and rising output per man-hour Available Man-Hours Sustained growth of the labor force has resulted in a substantial rise in potentially available man-hours despite a gradually declining trend in average hours of work. Over the long run the labor force has increased roughly in line with the working-age population ( years old and over ) This tendency has continued in the 's. The rising participation of women in the labor force has been roughly offset by the effects of a shift e4 Chart Gross National Product Actual and Potential and Unemployment Rate BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( ratio scale ) * GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES yS POTENTIAL. ! / y S / \ ^ ^ ^ y ^ GAP yS S ^ / / \ / * " ^ ^ / ^ ATA CU L / PERCENT PERCENT [ ] GNP GAP AS PERCENT OF POTENTIAL ( Left scale ) UNEMPLOYMENT RATE2/ ( Right scale ) J L J L J J L I I I SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES -I/TREND LINE OF 3'2 % THROUGH MIDDLE OF TO IV L \ % FROM IV TO IV AND % FROM IV TO IV I/UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE ; SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I in the composition of the working-age population toward teenagers and older people who have relatively low participation rates Average hours worked per employed person have declined slowly over the long run reflecting the secular trend toward more holidays longer vacations shortening of the workweek and increasing participation of people who want to work only part time Growth of the potential labor force has accelerated from * percent a year in the early 19605s to a present rate of about % percent reflecting the upsurge in births immediately after World War II. This has been partially offset by the secular decline in hours worked of about l/ of percent a year. The net result has been an acceleration of the growth of available man-hours from to 11/2 percent a year over the period Productivity Many factors contribute to growth in output per man-hour the productivity of labor. These include increases in the stock of productive capital and improvements in its quality ; better educated better trained and more experienced labor ; and advances in technology production methods and management techniques Since output per man-hour in the private economy has expanded at an average annual rate a little above percent. For the entire economy the calculated trend is somewhat lower because improvements in the efficiency of Government workers are not measured statistically and are arbitrarily taken at zero. Thus the trend rate of increase in aggregate productivity private and public has been about * /2 percent a year. When added to the growth of available man-hours this results in the ] /2 percent annual growth of potential output for the late 's and the percent current growth rate Actual and Potential GNP Over the entire period from the recession trough in the first quarter of to the fourth quarter of actual GNP rose by $ billion ( in prices ) reflecting the combined result of keeping up with the growth of potential GNP and of closing the gap. Potential GNP rose by $ billion an increase of percent. Thus the Nation is presently earning a huge additional bonus of $ billion a year in output as a result of having eliminated a great waste of idle resources The unemployment rate in the first quarter of stood at percent At current levels of the labor force the reduction of this rate to the percent that prevailed in the fourth quarter of below the percent rate that is used to define potential output represents a gain in employment of million. On the basis of current average productivity this number of workers can be credited with a $ billion contribution to output ( annual rate ) However the reduction of percentage points in the unemployment rate accounts directly for only a portion of the gain in output associated with the closing of the gap. There were four other important factors involved : In a slack economy firms are often reluctant to lay off certain types of workers particularly foremen semi-professionals and the highly skilled The result is considerable on-the-job underemployment which depresses measured labor productivity. As the economy moves back toward potential productivity increases more rapidly than the long-term trend. Since early output per man-hour has risen at an average annual rate of percent l /i of a percentage point more than trend Labor force participation has risen since as people who had not been looking for work responded to the greater availability of job opportunities The increased pace of economic activity slowed the secular decline in the length of the workweek The proportion of the labor force reporting involuntary part-time employment for economic reasons declined from percent in early to percent in the fourth quarter of Together these four factors contributed an additional $ billion to the output gain associated with the reduction of the unemployment rate The $ billion of extra GNP resulting from reducing the unemployment rate amounts to about percent of potential output at the start of the period that is there was about a percentage point bonus of annual production for each percentage point reduction in the unemployment rate ECONOMIC GAINS OF THE EXPANSION The chief over-all measures of the progress of the American economy during the past years are presented in Table The benefits of economic expansion have permeated nearly every corner of the economy and every aspect of our national life. From the recession trough in early to the end of the expansion of output created more than ^ million jobs This was enough to provide work for the 8J/2 million net increase in the labor force while at the same time reducing the pool of unemployed workers by more than two million Living standards have substantially increased. On an after-tax basis and after adjusting for price increases total disposable personal income per capita the purchasing power of households has risen by percent since early Personal consumption expenditures per person have risen in step Meanwhile net financial assets of households the excess of their financial assets over their debts have grown from $ billion at the end of to an estimated $ billion at the end of TABLE Measures of economic activity during thecurrent Percentage change1 Amount Series expansion Unit or base Per year IV i = Billions of dollars do Dollars prices3 Total Production : Gross national product2 Personal consumption expenditures Business fixed investment Residential structures Government purchases Federal. State and local Industrial production Billions of dollars prices.3 do do do- do do _do Income : Disposable personal income Corporate profits after tax Per capita disposable personal income Employment : Civilian employment Nonagricultural payroll employment.. Millions of persons do Preliminary Total includes change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services not shown separately Annual rates * IV not available ; III used Note. All data are seasonally adjusted Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Labor and Council of Economic Advisers Corporate profits have more than doubled during the past years both before and after taxes. In addition to permitting sharply increased dividend payments to stockholders these rising profits have provided the financing for a wholesale expansion and modernization of the Nation 's productive capacity. Indeed business has increased its real stock of capital goods by more than percent since the end of and has progressively reduced the average age of existing capital The decline in the over-all unemployment rate since early has been accompanied by equally impressive gains by specific categories of the labor force as shown in Chart In particular the unemployment rate for white adult males had fallen to percent by the fourth quarter of a level last achieved in For nonwhite adult males the decline in unemployment has been especially dramatic from an intolerable percent rate in early to percent in late This represents a significant narrowing of the differential between white and nonwhite unemployment rates for men from percentage points at the beginning of the period to about percentage points by the fourth quarter of On the other hand there has been little progress in reducing the unemployment rates of teenagers especially nonwhites The progressive tightening of the over-all labor market during this period has made a substantial contribution to the elimination of employment barriers based on race and sex. While these are significant gains the unemployment rates for some groups of workers still remain appallingly high. As Chapters and make clear additional efforts are needed to Chart Unemployment Rates PERCENT ( Seasonally adjusted ) ! / A L L CIVILIAN WORKERS NONWH1TE MEN WHITE WOMEN NONWHITE WOMEN WHITE TEENAGERS NONWHITE TEENAGERS I/PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE IN EACH GROUP WHO ARE UNEMPLOYED SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR assist such workers who often suffer from such disadvantages as inadequate training and job discrimination The strong advance in the economy has also permitted rapid progress in many social fields. As discussed more fully in Chapter the number of Americans in poverty declined by million during the past years. Rates of infant and maternal mortality have been reduced school enrollment and school completion rates have been raised and millions of additional young people have been able to attend college Many of these advances would have been impossible to achieve if rising tax revenues had not been generated by a vigorously expanding economy Federal revenues expanded from $ 92/2 billion in fiscal to an estimated $ billion in fiscal while State and local government revenues more than doubled. School construction urban development low-income housing and many other programs at all levels of government have expanded correspondingly THE PROBLEM OF ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS There is nothing inherent in the U.S. economy to ensure that total demand will grow consistently in pace with the economy 's productive potential. The sum total of millions of decentralized spending decisions by households businesses and governments at all levels will not automatically and necessarily match potential output The historical record is marked and marred by a pattern of fluctuations in which the economy often took two steps forward and then one step back According to the National Bureau of Economic Research the United States suffered business-cycle contractions between and an average of one every years. At other times especially in periods of active hostilities sharp surges in demand have strained the economy 's potential generating inflationary pressures SHORT-RUN INSTABILITY All of the elements of demand have at times been sources of economic fluctuations. In the private sector variations in the strength of demand have most often been concentrated in investment inventory accumulation business outlays for fixed capital and residential construction expenditures Elements of Demand Inventory stocks serve primarily as a buffer to ensure a smooth and efficient flow of material supplies and production and to guard against unforeseen increases in sales. Once inventory stock has been built up to a level adequate to cover a few months ' production or sales further accumulation is necessary only insofar as increases in sales are anticipated Thus inventory investment can be sustained only by a steady expansion of sales Even relatively small variations in the rate of growth of sales can have sizable effects on inventory investment. An unexpected slowdown in demand for example will initially leave unsold goods on the shelves. Businessmen will wish to work off these excess inventories and if they expect sales to continue at a slower pace they will reduce their desired levels of future inventories. Cutbacks in production will then follow. As illustrated by the $ 17j/2 billion drop in the annual rate of inventory accumulation in early such fluctuations can be a major source of instability Businessmen invest in new plant and equipment to increase and modernize their productive capacity. The rate of current capacity utilization anticipated growth in demand corporate cash flow relative costs of capital and labor and borrowing costs all influence investment decisions. Responses to changes in these factors are neither smooth nor readily predictable ; and because of the long leadtimes generally involved in the production of capital goods such responses may be spread out over a considerable period of time. But fluctuations in capital spending have often been an important source of instability. For example real investment ( constant prices ) rose by percent between and contributing to a strong expansion of aggregate demand but then leveled out in The third component of investment homebuilding is dependent upon family formation and income with the availability of mortgage funds often acting as a major constraint particularly in the short run. Because credit conditions generally tighten when the economy is expanding rapidly and ease when growth slows down residential construction has frequently moved opposite to the path of over-all economic activity contracting when the rest of the economy has been booming Consumer outlays normally follow the path of household incomes fairly closely. But such spending has also occasionally been an independent source of economic instability. Because consumption accounts for more than percent of GNP relatively small shifts in consumer demand have large impacts. The increase of percentage point in the personal saving rate that occurred between and for example directly reduced consumer expenditures by more than $ billion. Fluctuations are particularly pronounced in consumer purchases of automobiles and other durable goods The volatility of expenditures that makes for economic instability is by no means confined to private demand. Sudden changes in Federal spending have on occasion seriously disrupted the stability of the economy. Indeed the rapid expansion of defense expenditures early in the Korean war the rapid decline in and the upsurge of outlays for Vietnam in challenged economic policy as much as any change in the strength of private demand during the past years Multiplier Process An autonomous increase in demand and production in any sector can be expected to work through the economy by raising disposable income and hence consumer expenditures by encouraging greater inventory accumulation and by creating incentives for additional investment in plant and equipment. This cumulative expansion is known as the " multiplier process. " The results of this multiplier process are affected by the amount of unused resources available in the economy. At times of high unemployment and extensive unutilized capacity an initial stimulus in demand is likely to be reflected primarily in a rise in real output with very little additional pressure on prices. But in an economy already operating at or above potential where additional resources are not readily available the main result may be upward pressure on prices with relatively little gain in real output Developments in financial markets may influence the magnitude of the multiplier. Increases in demands for goods and services will tend to enlarge credit demands. Unless monetary policy permits supplies of funds to expand correspondingly interest rates will rise and credit will become less readily available. In that event some offsetting reduction is likely to take place in residential construction and other credit-sensitive expenditures. Generally this will be a partial offset varying according to how much the supply of credit is permitted to expand AUTOMATIC STABILIZERS AND FISCAL DRAG The potential sources of instability discussed above produced four recessions between and By prewar standards these recessions were all relatively short and mild though nevertheless costly. They were limited in intensity and duration by several elements built into the fiscal system which serve to moderate economic instability in an automatic and passive fashion. These so-called " automatic fiscal stabilizers " operate to bolster income flows to households and business firms in periods of declining output and conversely to slow down the growth of income in periods of expansion Almost every tax including State and local taxes responds in some degree to changes in economic activity. Federal personal income tax collections are particularly responsive to such changes. They are the most important automatic fiscal stabilizer cushioning take-home pay against fluctuations in the before-tax incomes of individuals. Another important stabilizer is the automatic expansion of unemployment compensation benefits when unemployment increases. The corporate income tax serves to reduce fluctuations in after-tax profits and hence in business investment outlays and dividend payments By reducing the size of secondary effects on consumer and business outlays these stabilizers reduce the severity of economic fluctuations. With the present tax system and schedules of unemployment compensation benefits a decline in GNP automatically produces a reduction in government receipts and an increase in transfer payments. This limits the decline in private after-tax income disposable personal income and retained corporate profits to about cents for each $ of reduction in GNP During the postwar period the automatic fiscal stabilizers have been a major factor in reducing economic instability. They go to work at once and avoid the delays inherent in discretionary action. But valuable as these automatic stabilizers are they work only to limit not prevent swings in economic activity. For example they become operative in a recession only after the decline has begun and can not by themselves generate a recovery If the factors causing a downturn are strong and persistent automatic stabilizers may not be powerful enough to prevent a long and severe recession The automatic stabilizers also operate without regard to the over-all level of economic activity. If the economy has fallen substantially below the path of potential output the return to that path is made more difficult by the retarding effects of automatic fiscal stabilizers. The existence of the automatic stabilizers in such a situation means that a larger amount of fiscal or monetary stimulus increased expenditures reduced tax rates or easing of credit conditions will be required to achieve the needed increase in aggregate demand In addition automatic stabilizers work in a fashion that may inhibit the long-run expansion of demand. As the economy moves along the potential output path with reasonably stable prices the Federal tax system generates an increase in revenues of about percent a year. Unless this revenue growth is offset by reductions in taxes or by increases in expenditures it acts as a " fiscal drag " by siphoning off income. Actions by the private sector can conceivably offset this effect if businesses increase investment expenditures faster than the growth of internal funds or if households reduce their rate of saving. But under normal conditions needed expansion may be prevented In interpreting the economic impact of fiscal policy it is essential to distinguish between the automatic changes in revenues and expenditures resulting from the operation of the automatic stabilizers on the one hand and discretionary changes brought about by changes in tax rates and expenditure programs on the other. In order to measure the impact of discretionary fiscal policy it is useful to prepare estimates of revenues and expenditures at a given or " standardized " level of income. When the difference between revenues and expenditures is estimated at the level of potential output the result is sometimes referred to as the " full employment surplus. " The full employment surplus was a particularly enlightening measure of fiscal policy in the early 's when the economy was far below its potential Actual Federal budgets were then in deficit. But after taking account of the large shortfall in tax revenues associated with the gap between potential and actual output there was a large full employment surplus. It meant that the economy could realize its potential only if private investment far exceeded private saving. By that standard discretionary fiscal policy was highly restrictive The vigorous and unbroken expansion of the last years is in dramatic contrast to the 30-month average duration of previous expansions. No longer THE RECORD OF POLICY is the performance of the American economy generally interpreted in terms of stages of the business cycle. No longer do we consider periodic recessions once every or years an inevitable fact of life The forces making for economic fluctuations have been contained through the active use of fiscal and monetary policies to sustain expansion. The record of these policy actions is briefly surveyed in this section. A detailed review of the objectives and effects of monetary and fiscal actions from through was presented in last year 's Annual Report. The discussion below summarizes some particularly pertinent aspects of the magnitude and scope of these actions. Subsequent sections discuss some of the problems of economic diagnosis and policy formulation in light of experience STRATEGY FOR EXPANSION : TO MID-1965 A series of deliberately stimulative fiscal measures was undertaken from to mid-1965 to bring the economy up to full potential. The net magnitude of these actions is summarized in Table The $ ^ billion total of expansionary actions expenditure increases and net tax reductions more than offset the $ 30yi billion estimated normal growth of revenues Early actions on the expenditure side included an acceleration of a scheduled increase in social secu-rity benefits in liberalization of public assistance payments and a step-up in defense purchases as part of a general TABLE Federal fiscal actions in three periods since fourth quarter [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] IV to Item Federal expenditure increases2 to IV IV to IV i Defense purchases Other purchases OASDHI3 benefitsAll other2 __ Federal tax reductions 5_ Corporate Personal OASDHI s payroll taxes Indirect business Total expansionary actions8 Normal revenue growth at full employment- Change in full employment surplus * Preliminary Includes adjustment in unemployment insurance benefits for change in unemployment rate Old-age survivors disability and hospital and related insurance ( OASDHI ) Consists of transfers other than OASDHI grants interest and subsidies Minus sign indicates an increase in tax Sum of expenditure increases and tax reductions Normal revenue growth minus expansionary actions Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers realignment of our military forces. On the revenue side stimulus to private investment was provided by a revision of depreciation guidelines and enactment of an investment tax credit of percent on purchases of machinery and equipment in These measures were partially offset by increases in social security taxes in and The net stimulus from these actions worked in the right direction but was inadequate to the major task of reaching potential output. In the middle of business investment demand proved disappointingly weak and the pace of economic expansion slowed. In the absence of Congressional action on President Kennedy 's tax reduction program in the budget again moved toward an unduly restrictive position Tax reduction finally became a reality in the Revenue Act of which was President Johnson 's first major legislative victory. This tax cut was unprecedented in many respects. When fully effective in it added more than $ billion to private purchasing power the largest stimulative fiscal action ever undertaken in peacetime. It was enacted while the Federal budget was in deficit and while expenditures were rising. It was designed explicitly to sustain and invigorate expansion up to potential output rather than to combat an existing or imminent recession. This major action was followed by the enactment of a phased reduction in excise taxes in the spring of Monetary policy also made an important contribution to the economic expansion by consistently accommodating growing credit demands at remarkably stable interest rates. A vigorously expansionary monetary policy which would have pushed interest rates to very low levels might of course have helped bring the economy to high employment more quickly. But such a decline in interest rates could have caused increased capital outflows from the United States further impairing our balance-of-payments position A series of actions by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury did actually raise U.S. short term interest rates during this period to bring them more into line with rates abroad. As shown in Chart however the upward pressure on short term rates did not spill over into long term markets Decisions by the Federal Reserve at the beginning of in mid-1963 and in late to increase the maximum interest rates commercial banks could pay on time and savings deposits gave banks greater freedom to compete for funds. This enabled the banks to play an aggressive role throughout the period in tapping the market for liquid savings and rechanneling the funds into loans and investments FISCAL PROBLEMS OF DEFENSE AND HIGH EMPLOYMENT : By mid-1965 the unemployment rate had been reduced to about / percent and the gap between actual and potential output was being narrowed gradually and steadily. At this point defense orders and expenditures Chart Selected Interest Rates PERCENT y ..A I n n i h i i i i li ii n i l ii i i I i ii i il M i n i NOTE.-DATA PLOTTED ARE QUARTERLY THROUGH MONTHLY THEREAFTER SOURCES : FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND TREASURY DEPARTMENT began to build up rapidly and the task of economic policy became considerably more complicated. The increase in defense activity reinforced a strong expansion of business spending on plant and equipment. The result was an excessively rapid growth of economic activity which generated inflationary pressures Some fiscal action to restrain the economy was taken in A previously enacted rise in payroll taxes of $ billion took effect at the start of the year. This was followed by prompt enactment of a series of tax measures proposed by the President in January the reinstatement of some excise taxes that had been reduced and the introduction of a system of graduated withholding of individual income taxes and of accelerated payments of corporate taxes. But even with these actions fiscal policy remained strongly and inappropriately expansionary in large part because defense spending continued to outrun expectations. As the President has recently made clear in reviewing the record he discussed a recommended general rise in taxes privately with business and Congressional leaders early in and became convinced that a tax increase could not be enacted. In the fall added fiscal restraint was provided by a temporary suspension of the investment tax credit and cutbacks in nondefense spending In the absence of a full measure of timely fiscal restraint an undue share of the burden of dampening the excessive expansion fell on monetary policy. In December the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate from to 4J/2 percent and increased the maximum allowable interest rate on time deposits of commercial banks. As interest rates on bank time deposits and in the open market rose sharply savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks experienced a sharp drop in their deposit inflows and thus had to cut back their lending to the homebuilding sector. These developments are described in more detail later in this chapter The result of these actions was a marked slowing in the growth of final demand. But homebuilding bore a disproportionate share of the restrictive impact. Moreover interest rates ratcheted sharply upward to the highest levels in several generations and a near-crisis atmosphere developed in financial markets in August Because production continued to advance when final demand initially slowed inventories increased rapidly late in The ensuing turn-around in inventory investment sharply accentuated an economic slowdown early in and the rate of price increase also slowed notably. Rising Government spending helped to maintain over-all expansion in the face of the large inventory adjustment in early And with easier credit stimulating homebuilding strong expansionary forces reasserted themselves in the second half of that year. In August President Johnson urged enactment of a 10-percent income tax surcharge. Delay in the passage of this measure intensified inflationary pressures and placed monetary policy in an awkward position as discussed in Chapter LESSONS OF THE POLICY RECORD In most respects the economy has performed extremely well in the last years and vigorous use of fiscal and monetary policy has contributed to this good performance. But the record could have been better and it provides several lessons that should serve as guides for the future First the fiscal and monetary policy actions that were taken deliberately to influence economic activity generally worked in the right direction with effective results. Most of the shortcomings of the period were errors of omission rather than commission. This applies both to the delays in taking adequate stimulative action in and to the more recent delays in achieving fiscal restraint Second the experience of demonstrated that an effective fiscal policy to stimulate the economy could be carried out without adding unnecessarily to the size of the Federal budget. Since the aims of stabilization policy can be implemented either through tax changes or expenditure changes decisions regarding Federal expenditures can be properly based on the desired allocation of resources between the public and private sectors Third the record testifies to the effectiveness of a restrictive monetary policy in slowing down the economy but also to its substantial undesirable side effects in bearing down on homebuilding and straining the financial system. The side effects point to the need for active fiscal policy to avoid placing a disproportionate share of the burden of economic stabilization on monetary policy The major shortcomings of economic policy in recent years can be traced to difficulties in achieving prompt and appropriate adjustments in fiscal policy to offset variations in the strength of private demand and substantial changes in defense spending. The next section discusses some improvements that might be made in the formulation and implementation of fiscal policy FORMULATING FISCAL POLICY The focus of fiscal policy in the United States is the annual Federal budget which is presented in the Budget Message of the President in January. This budget covers the fiscal year starting months later on July Any analysis of fiscal policy must begin with a consideration of the way in which this budget is formulated in the Executive Branch and the procedures by which the Congress acts on the President 's recommendations The requirements of economic stabilization are not always fully met however by the fiscal program incorporated in the annual budget no matter how carefully this program is formulated. Conditions may change during the course of the year in such a way as to call for a significant policy response after the annual budget has been planned. Some degree of continuing flexibility is therefore necessary One important forward step in budgetary practice was taken when the Federal budget for the fiscal year was presented. In accord with recommendations contained in the October Report of the President 's Commission on Budget Concepts a single unified budget was adopted which covers in a comprehensive way all of the financial activities of the Federal Government. This unified budget provides a much improved statistical basis for formulating fiscal policy and evaluating its economic impact THE ROLE OF ECONOMIC FORECASTING A certain amount of time is required for the economy to respond fully to changes in fiscal and monetary policies and the actions taken at one point in time have effects that are felt over a considerable subsequent period Whether a policy action will help or impair economic performance depends on the state of the economy in the period following the action. It can not be judged adequately just by the facts of the economic situation at the time the decision is taken. It must be assessed in light of a forecast The responsibility within the Administration for projections of Federal revenues expenditures and economic activity rests jointly with the Department of the Treasury the Bureau of the Budget and the Council of Economic Advisers. Liaison is maintained with the Federal Reserve Board which must also forecast economic activity as a basis for its decisions concerning monetary policy These projections are particularly important in formulating the annual budget and they are set forth regularly in the Council 's Annual Report. But the evaluation of the economic situation and outlook must be kept up to date during the year. Thus the forecasts are revised for internal use as new information becomes available indeed the process of assessing the economic outlook is essentially a continuous one. The projections are frequently supplemented by quantitative estimates of the probable effects of alternative policy actions which might be taken. Quantitative evaluations of the outlook have been prepared for the President essentially on a quarterly schedule ever since This procedure assures a regular review by the President with his chief economic and fiscal advisers of the suitability of the budget program for the needs of the economy The techniques used in preparing the Administration 's economic projections have changed considerably over the years ; but in general they depend on a set of quantitative relationships among economic magnitudes over time The relationships that are relied upon may be based on formal statistical procedures subjective expert judgment or survey data To a considerable extent forecasting relies upon the timely availability of data relating to the economy 's past performance which can be used as a basis for projecting its future behavior. Although there are still gaps in economic statistics considerable progress has been made in recent years by the Department of Commerce the Department of Labor and other Federal Government agencies in increasing the quantity and improving the quality of statistical data available for assessing the performance of the economy Government agencies also collect valuable information on the anticipated future behavior of some categories of expenditures. For example the quarterly survey of investment anticipations provides a useful indication of the probable behavior of this highly volatile element of private demand. The Bureau of the Budget prepares up-to-date estimates of future Federal expenditures. Estimates of Federal tax revenues are prepared and kept current by the Treasury Department Forecasting was notably successful in gauging in advance the rapid expansion of and the upsurge from late into On some occasions however difficulties have been encountered. The strength of the boom was not fully foreseen. Unexpected increases in the personal saving rate intensified the slowdown in economic activity that occurred in the first half of In the second half of private demand was stronger than had been anticipated as noted in Chapter Nevertheless the whole record makes clear that explicit quantitative projections are superior to extrapolations or hunches which are the only alternative ways of guiding policy decisions that affect the future The need for greater precision in both forecasting and policy formulation has increased greatly in recent years. Between and when actual output was consistently below potential there was little threat of a serious rise in prices and the risks of excessive expansion were small. Thus emphasis could be placed upon achieving a growth of actual output in excess of that of potential in order to close the gap. Since however as actual output has remained relatively close to potential the need to anticipate and to offset fluctuations in demand has correspondingly increased PREPARING THE ANNUAL BUDGET The Federal budget should be formulated with two objectives in view One is to provide the amount of fiscal stimulus or restraint needed to keep the economy moving along the potential output path or to move it back toward that path if a departure has occurred. The other is to choose a level of Federal expenditures that provides the appropriate allocation of national resources between private and public uses. In principle these two objectives can be pursued independently since fiscal stimulus or restraint can be provided either by adjusting public expenditures or by adjusting tax rates to influence private spending Determining the Extent of Expansionary Action In developing a budget that is appropriate in terms of fiscal impact it is necessary at the outset to prepare an economic forecast for a period extending a year and a half beyond the time of budget presentation. The forecast covering the first months of this period for which the budget outlook has already been fairly well determined provides the point of departure for viewing economic prospects in the ensuing fiscal year. From that point on forecasts of private demand are used to determine the appropriate degree of fiscal stimulus or restraint to be provided by the budget This determination takes account of the growth of Federal revenues when GNP grows in line with potential m a noninflationary environment at unchanged tax rates. When the economy is in reasonable balance on the path of potential output and private demand is expected neither to weaken nor to accelerate the forecast will point to the need for expansionary fiscal action sufficient to offset the fiscal drag exerted by normal revenue growth If the projection suggests that private demand will weaken or if the economy is operating below potential at the beginning of the year expansionary fiscal action will be called for in an amount more than sufficient 8o to counteract the restraining effects of normal revenue growth. Conversely if private demand is expected to strengthen or if the economy is operating above potential at the beginning of the year an amount of expansionary fiscal action less than sufficient to offset the restraining effects of normal revenue growth will be required or in an extreme case some additional restraint beyond that provided by normal revenue growth may be necessary The desired amount of expansionary ( or restrictive ) fiscal action as indicated by the forecast can be provided either by increasing ( reducing ) Government expenditures by reducing ( increasing ) tax rates or by some combination of the two. A decision therefore has to be made whether to adjust taxes or expenditures or both. This decision involves difficult choices about the allocation of resources between public sector programs and the private sector Public Expenditures and Tax Changes In order to make these choices intelligently it is necessary to examine carefully the proposed Federal expenditures having the highest priorities whether they be for the expansion of existing programs or for new initiatives and judge whether the public needs that would be met by these programs are more or less urgent than the demands of the private sector that would be satisfied by tax reduction Allowance ordinarily has to be made for a virtually unavoidable increase in expenditures sufficient to keep pace with rising costs and rising workloads under existing Federal programs. The decision would however still have to be made whether any needed restraint or additional stimulus over and above that provided by this built-in expenditure growth should come from changes in tax rates or in expenditures All of this suggests that there is no reason to suppose that the proper allocation of resources between public sector and private sector activities would be achieved by keeping tax rates constant and adjusting Federal expenditures to meet the requirements of fiscal policy. It should be perfectly normal for the President to recommend a change in tax rates in his annual Budget Message. Such proposed changes have in fact been a feature of the last seven annual budgets. Indeed consideration of the appropriateness of tax rates should be a normal part of the budget program if no change is being proposed the President should explain why existing tax rates are regarded as appropriate. If Government expenditures move ahead year by year at a rate about equal to the growth of tax revenues changes in tax rates may not need to be made very often. However it would be a remarkable coincidence if a steady growth in Government expenditures at that rate simultaneously satisfied the needs of economic stabilization and the Nation 's wishes over the long run with respect to the proper allocation of resources between the public and private sectors of the economy Sharp increases in defense spending pose special issues relating to the allocation of resources between Federal nondefense programs and the private sector. A sharp increase in defense expenditures normally requires a compensating fiscal adjustment to prevent the budget from becoming undesirably stimulative. In principle any needed adjustment can be accomplished either by increases in tax rates or reductions in Federal nondefense outlays. For a number of reasons however increases in tax rates should normally be the main instrument. First sharp slashes in Federal nondefense programs are simply not administratively feasible in the short run. Second social priorities for the nonmilitary public sector would be violated if these programs carried the major burden of fiscal adjustment. The overhead cost on society of increased defense requirements should be expected to be borne primarily by the percent of GNP that represents private uses of output It seems evident that the roughly percent of GNP which Federal nondefense spending represents should not be expected to carry the major part of the load. This seems particularly compelling in a Nation which is affluent in general and yet beset by serious social problems. While it is entirely appropriate for some types of nondefense spending to be cut and stretched out in order to ease the fiscal problem there are strong grounds for avoiding reductions in social programs that deal with the urgent problems of poverty and urban blight CONGRESSIONAL PROCEDURES If fiscal policy as embodied in the annual budget is to make its maximum contribution to economic stabilization some changes in Congressional procedures for reviewing and determining the budget would be desirable General Budget Review One important problem lies in existing Congressional procedures for determining budget authority and hence Federal expenditures. In both the House and Senate budget authority is essentially controlled by separate appropriations subcommittees which determine budget authority for individual agencies and programs. Their individual decisions can lead to a total of budget authority and outlays that is not controlled nor determnied in a coordinated way. The Legislative Reorganization Act of called for a concurrent resolution on an expenditure total in advance of appropriations but this limitation was not integrated into the appropriations procedures Congress needs new machinery which ensures that the actions taken on authorizations and outlays for particular programs will add up to a total that achieves an appropriate allocation of resources between Federal programs and the private sector of the economy. This machinery should focus specific attention on the level of taxes required in conjunction with any given total of outlays in order to achieve an appropriate fiscal policy. In making its judgments on these matters the Congress would presumably begin with the Administration 's expenditure and tax recommendations as con- tained in the January Budget. Then assuming no major disagreement with or change in the basic economic outlook any proposals to change the expenditure total substantially from that recommended in the Budget should be accompanied by a corresponding proposal for adjusting taxes. If such machinery could be satisfactorily introduced it would help produce a more coordinated Congressional decision on both expenditures and taxes Procedures for Tax Changes Procedures for a general review of the economy 's fiscal needs along lines suggested above should expedite whatever specific action on taxes might be needed for fiscal policy purposes. In most circumstances normal Congressional procedures for enacting the needed tax legislation would probably be satisfactory especially if the Congress were to agree in advance on a form of tax adjustment that would be judged appropriate for this purpose. A proportional change in individual and corporate income taxes like the current surcharge might be a suitable form of adjustment However the experience of the 's including the costly delays in the passage of the tax cut and the tax surcharge suggests the desirability of some other standby arrangement for obtaining prompt adjustments in tax rates to achieve fiscal policy objectives in case of a delay in reaching a decision through normal Congressional procedures. As noted in Chapter the Administration has requested that the Congress consider giving the President discretionary authority subject to Congressional veto to remove the current surcharge entirely or partially if warranted by developments. A more permanent arrangement to provide the desirable flexibility could take various forms including : Presidential discretion to propose temporary changes in personal income tax rates within certain specified limits such as percent in either direction subject to veto by the Congress within ( say ) days. This year 's Budget Message contains such a proposal A streamlined Congressional procedure for ensuring a prompt vote on Presidential proposals for changes in tax rates within certain specified limits This would not shift any of the traditional powers of Congress to the President ; the Congress would simply change its own rules Since changes in tax rates required for fiscal policy objectives would probably take the form of simple modifications of the basic schedule of rates it would be necessary also to ensure opportunities for a thoroughgoing review of the over-all structure of the revenue system including the tax base and rates. A structural review of rates would be especially appropriate if rates should drift downward ( or upward ) consistently for a period of several years as a result of fiscal adjustments. It is important however that the issues of tax reform be treated and considered separately from the annual tax decisions related to fiscal policy ADJUSTING TO NEW DEVELOPMENTS Under the procedures outlined above it would surely take several months for full legislative response to the President 's January Budget. During that period both the Congress and the Administration would be alert to any major unanticipated developments in the strength of private demand in Federal defense needs and in the desired mix of fiscal and monetary policy Any such developments could and should be reflected in the implementation of the budget program If the annual budget is carefully formulated and implemented the need for a significant subsequent revision of the budget program later in the year should be the exception rather than the rule. Stabilization requirements could largely be met by reliance on automatic stabilizers and monetary policy Much of the success of these stabilization efforts would depend upon the Federal Reserve 's flexibility in adjusting monetary policy to circumstances as they unfold. In the development of the annual budget there should be close consultation and coordination with the monetary authorities. A tentative projection of monetary and credit conditions should be prepared as part of the forecast underlying annual budget decisions. The fiscal program should minimize the risk of putting an excessive share of the burden of economic stabilization on monetary policy as happened in But monetary policy should not be bound by the projections made at budget time if conditions change it should be adjusted accordingly. Indeed given a reasonably appropriate fiscal policy the further adjustments needed to keep the economy reasonably close to potential output should normally be within the capability of the Federal Reserve It should be recognized however that major unforeseen developments may significantly modify the path of demand anticipated in the annual budget. As mentioned earlier private demand has on occasion exhibited substantial unexpected strength or weakness A major problem in recent years has stemmed from the uncertain path of increases in defense spending during the Vietnam buildup. While it is to be hoped that such a military buildup will not again be necessary there can be no assurance in an insecure world that this will be the case. Accordingly it is essential to be prepared to deal with such contingencies. Moreover there could be similar and equally challenging problems of gauging the magnitude and timing of a demobilization when peace is established. A special report to the President discussing the challenges and opportunities that will confront policymakers when peace comes in Vietnam is included in this volume The path of defense orders and outlays is inherently difficult to predict in a period of military flux. Through intensified efforts of the Department of Defense considerable progress has nevertheless been made in providing an improved flow of information relating to both the current and prospective economic impact of defense spending. Some of this information is now being made public by the Bureau of the Census in a monthly digest entitled Defense Indicators. Further efforts are needed together with a full awareness of the importance of accurate information especially at critical turning points in the trend of defense spending SOME ISSUES OF MONETARY POLICY The record of the past years demonstrates that flexible discretionary monetary policy can make an effective contribution to economic stabilization The economy 's gradual return to full productive potential in the early 's was partly attributable to a monetary policy which kept ample supplies of credit readily available at generally stable interest rates. And in early the prompt recovery of homebuilding after the slowdown was the direct result of timely and aggressive easing of credit conditions by the Federal Reserve The most dramatic demonstration of the effectiveness of monetary policy came in however when a dangerously inflationary situation was curbed primarily by a drastic application of monetary restraint. Credit-financed expenditures at the end of that year appear to have been as much as $ billion below what they might have been had monetary policy maintained the accommodative posture of the preceding years. And there were substantial further " multiplier " effects on GNP as these initial impacts reduced income and consumption spending THE CONDUCT OF MONETARY POLICY The primary guides for monetary policy are the various broad measures of economic performance including the growth rate of total output the relation of actual to potential ouput employment and unemployment the behavior of prices and the Nation 's balance-of-payments position. Extensive research together with the experience of the last few years has increased our knowledge of the complex process by which monetary policy influences these measures. While there are still major gaps in our knowledge of the precise chain of causation some conclusions seem well established Like fiscal policy monetary policy affects economic activity only after some lag. Thus actions by the Federal Reserve must be forward-looking. In considering the prospects ahead however an assessment must be made of both the expected behavior of the private sector and of the likely future course of fiscal policy. As noted earlier the inherent flexibility in the administration of monetary policy permits frequent policy adjustments to take account of unexpected developments in either the private or the public sector Sectoral Impacts Monetary policy can affect spending through a number of channels. To some extent it works by changing the terms of lending including interest rates maturities of loans downpayments and the like in such a way as to encourage or discourage expenditures on goods financed by credit. There may also be market imperfections or legal constraints and institutional rigidities that change the " availability " of loans as monetary conditions change that is make it easier or more difficult for borrowers to obtain credit at given terms of lending. Under some circumstances purchasers of goods and services may finance their expenditures by liquidating financial assets and changes in the yields on these assets produced by a change in monetary policy may affect their willingness to engage in such transactions. Changes in monetary policy may also on occasion change the expectations of borrowers lenders and spenders in ways that affect economic conditions although these expectational effects are rather complex and dependent upon the conditions existing at the time policy is changed Monetary policy affects some types of expenditures more than others. The extent of the impact depends not only on the economic characteristics of the activity being financed but in many instances on the channels through which financing is obtained and the legal and institutional arrangements surrounding the financing procedures Residential Construction. The sector of the economy most affected by monetary policy is residential construction. Although the demand for housing and for mortgage credit does not appear to be especially responsive to mortgage interest rates the supply of mortgage funds is quite sensitive to several interest rate relationships The experience of clearly demonstrated how rising interest rates can sharply affect flows of deposits to banks and other thrift institutions and thereby severely limit their ability to make new mortgage loans. In the first half of that year the net deposit gain at savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks was only half as large as in the preceding months These institutions could not afford to raise the rates paid on savings capital to compete with the higher rates available to savers at banks and elsewhere because of their earnings situation with their assets concentrated in mortgages that earned only the relatively low rates of return characteristic of several years earlier. Commercial banks experienced a similarly sharp slowing in growth of time deposits in the second half of the year as the Federal Reserve 's Regulation Q prevented them from competing effectively for liquid funds. This forced banks to make across-the-board cuts in lending operations In addition life insurance companies had a large portion of their loanable funds usurped by demands for policy loans which individuals found attractive because of relatively low cost. High-yielding corporate securities also proved an attractive alternative for some institutional investments that might otherwise have gone into mortgages Table provides some indication of the extent of these various influences. As can be seen savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks together supplied less than percent of total funds borrowed in well below their percent share in the preceding years. This was the main TABLE Net funds raised by nonfinancial sectors average Nonfinancial sector Total funds raised ( billions of dollars ) li.7 Percent of total raised by : Private domestic nonfinancial sectors State and local governments Nonfinancial business Households Mortgages Other __ U.S. Government.. _._ Rest of world Percent of total supplied by : Commercial banks Nonbank financial institutions _ Savings and loan associations and mutual savings banks Other Federal Reserve and U.S. Government State and local governments Foreign lenders Nonfinancial business Households less net security credit i Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System factor limiting the availability of household mortgage loans. The effect on homebuilding was quick and dramatic as the seasonally adjusted volume of new housing units started fell by nearly half between December and October In as interest rates in the open market retreated from their highs the thrift institutions were able to regain their competitive position in the savings market. A good part of their funds was fairly quickly channeled into the mortgage market. By fall housing starts had recovered nearly to the level of late As noted in Chapter many factors including several significant institutional reforms sharply improved liquidity positions and the widespread expectation that monetary restraint was only temporary pending passage of the tax bill helped to moderate the adverse effects of renewed monetary restraint on mortgage lending in But the thrift institutions again experienced some slowing of deposit inflows when market interest rates rose to new heights and mutual savings banks switched a good part of their investments away from the mortgage market to high-yielding corporate bonds State and Local Governments. State and local governments also felt the effects of monetary restraint in These governments cut back or postponed more than $ billion or nearly percent of their planned bond issues that year It is difficult to determine precisely what caused these postponements. In cases involving more than half the dollar volume the reasons given related to the prevailing high level of interest rates. In some instances the interest costs simply exceeded the legal ceiling governments were permitted to pay for borrowed funds. In other cases finance officers decided to delay bond issues for a few months in the expectation that interest rates would decline This sizable cutback in borrowings had a relatively small effect on State and local government expenditures. Larger governments apparently were able to continue most of their projects about as scheduled by drawing down liquid assets or borrowing temporarily at short term. Smaller governmental units however cut their contract awards by a total estimated at more than $ million Because of the problems State and local governments often face in raising funds the Administration is proposing the establishment of an Urban Development Bank which could borrow economically in the open market and then lend in the amounts needed to individual local governments The Bank could lend at federally subsidized interest rates with the Federal Government recovering the cost of the subsidy through taxation of the interest income earned by holders of the Bank 's securities Business and Consumer Spending. The credit squeeze undoubtedly also had some effects on business and consumer spending though the amount of impact is not easily determinable. Most theoretical and empirical studies find that business firms in some way balance the cost of borrowed capital against the expected returns from their capital projects. Some small firms may also simply not be able to obtain funds during tight money periods. In bank lending to business did slow sharply during the second half of the year. Many of the larger firms shifted their demands to the open market and paid record high interest rates for their funds but some of the smaller ones probably were forced to postpone their projects Household spending on durable goods particularly automobiles has been shown to be affected by changes in the cost and availability of consumer credit as reflected in the interest rate maturity downpayment and other terms. While it is difficult to sort out cause and effect households borrowed only two-thirds as much through consumer credit in the second half of as in the preceding half year. Capital gains or losses on asset holdings accompanying changes in yields may also induce consumers to spend more or less on goods and services Active and Passive Elements Monetary policy like fiscal policy has what might be termed active and passive components. Recognition of this distinction played an important role in formulating the accommodative policy of the early 's. In the 's economic expansion had generally been accompanied by rising interest rates which tended to produce an automatic stabilizing effect somewhat similar to the fiscal drag of the Federal tax system discussed earlier. The large amounts of underutilized resources available in the early 's made such restraint inappropriate and credit was expanded sufficiently to prevent it from occurring It is especially important to distinguish between these elements in monetary policy at cyclical turning points. If for example private demand weakens and causes a decline in economic activity interest rates will generally fall as credit demands slacken even without any positive action by the Federal Reserve to push rates down. This induced fall in interest rates can help to check the decline in economic activity but may not by itself induce recovery. Similarly as the economy rises above potential the induced rise in interest rates may only moderate the expansion but may not bring activity back into line with capacity An active monetary policy during such periods requires positive effort by the Federal Reserve to produce further changes in interest rates and in availability of credit beyond those that would occur automatically Since expectational responses may either accentuate or moderate the effects of the initial action it is sometimes difficult to know in advance precisely how much of a policy change is needed. But the main point is clear at such turning points interest rate movements alone are not likely to provide an accurate reflection of the contribution of monetary policy to economic stabilization. Careful attention must also be paid to credit flows particularly those to the private sector of the economy MONETARY POLICY AND THE MONEY SUPPLY Examination of the linkages between monetary policy and various categories of expenditures suggests that in the formulation of monetary policy careful attention should be paid to interest rates and credit availability as influenced by and associated with the flows of deposits and credit to different types of financial institutions and spending units. Among the financial flows generally considered to be relevant are : the total of funds raised by nonfinancial sectors of the economy ^ the credit supplied by commercial banks the net amount of new mortgage credit the net change in the public 's holdings of liquid assets changes in time deposits at banks and other thrift institutions and changes in the money supply. Some consideration should be given to all of these financial flows as well as to related interest rates in formulating any comprehensive policy program or analysis of financial conditions Much public attention has recently been focused on an alternative view however emphasizing the money supply as the most important sometimes the only link between monetary policy and economic activity This emphasis has often been accompanied by the suggestion that the Federal Reserve can best contribute to economic stabilization by maintaining growth in the stock of money at a particular rate or somewhat less rigidly by keeping variations in the rate of growth of the money stock within a fairly narrow band There are of course numerous variants of the money view of monetary policy. The discussion below focuses only on the simple version that has captured most of the public attention Money and Interest Rates In a purely theoretical world abstracting from institutional rigidities that exist in our financial system and assuming that relationships among financial variables were unvarying and predictable it would make little difference whether monetary policy was formulated in terms of interest rates or the money supply. The two variables are inversely related and the alternative approaches would represent nothing more than different paths to precisely the same result. The monetary authorities could seek to control the money stock with interest rates allowed to take on whatever values happen to result. Or alternatively they could focus on achieving the interest rates that would facilitate the credit flows needed to finance the desired level of activity allowing the quantity of money to be whatever it had to be But financial rigidities do exist that often distort flows of credit in response to swings in interest rates. And financial relationships have changed steadily and significantly. Just since several important new financial instruments have been introduced and developed including negotiable time certificates of deposit and Euro-dollar deposits. Attitudes of both investors and lenders have also undergone marked shifts with sharp variations in the public 's demand for liquidity superimposed on an underlying trend toward greater sensitivity to interest rates There is to be sure enough of a link between money and interest rates at any given time to make it impossible for the Federal Reserve to regulate the two independently. But this linkage is hardly simple and it varies considerably and unpredictably over time. The choice between controlling the stock of money solely and focusing interest rates credit availability and a number of credit flows can therefore make a difference. This choice should be based on a judgment supported insofar as possible by empirical and analytical evidence as to whether it is money holdings alone that influence the decisions of various categories of spending units Money and Asset Portfolios The Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy primarily by expanding and contracting the supply of cash reserves available to the banking system. Such actions seek to induce an expansion or contraction in loans and investments at financial institutions with corresponding changes in the public 's holdings of currency and deposits of various kinds. The proportions in which the public chooses to hold alternative 9O types of financial assets depend upon a complex set of preferences which in turn depend upon interest rate relationships The process of expansion and contraction of money and credit stemming from Federal Reserve actions is fairly complex. But one aspect of it should be clearly understood : The money so created is not something given to the public for nothing as if it fell from heaven that is it is not a net addition to the public 's wealth or net worth. There can be an immediate change in public wealth but only to the extent that changes in interest rates generate capital gains or losses on existing assets Any change in the money stock is associated with a change in the composition of the public 's balance sheet as people and institutions are induced to exchange at a price one asset for another or to increase ( or decrease ) both their assets and their liabilities by equal amounts. Since all the items in the public 's balance sheet might be changed as a result of these compositional shifts the change in the public 's liquidity is not likely to be summarized adequately in terms of any single category of financial assets It is of course possible that decisions to spend on goods and services are affected more by the presence of one type of financial asset than another in a spending unit 's portfolio. But there is only scattered evidence of such behavior in various sectoral studies that have been undertaken to analyze the factors affecting the spending decisions of consumers businesses or State and local governments. Indeed to the extent these studies do find spending decisions systematically affected by financial variables it is often through changes in interest rates and availability of credit Money and Income and a Monetary Rule One problem with the money supply as a guide to monetary policy is that there is no agreement concerning the appropriate definition of " money. " One definition includes the total of currency outside commercial banks plus privately held demand deposits. A second also includes time deposits at commercial banks and even more inclusive alternatives are sometimes used On the other hand there is a more limited definition sometimes called " highpowered money " or " monetary base " which includes currency in circulation and member-bank reserve balances at the Federal Reserve banks These different concepts of money do not always move in parallel with one another even over fairly extended periods. Thus assertions that the money supply is expanding rapidly or slowly often depend critically on which definition is employed. In the first half of for example there was a sharp acceleration in the growth of currency plus demand deposits but growth of this total plus time deposits slowed considerably On the other hand relationships between movements in GNP and any of the money concepts have been close enough on the average especially when processed through complex lags and other sophisticated statistical techniques to be difficult to pass off lightly There is of course good reason to expect some fairly close relationship between money and income. This would be true even in a completely abstract situation in which it was assumed that the money supply per se had no direct influence on GNP and that monetary policy worked entirely through interest rates. Since interest rates and the money supply are inversely related any rise in GNP produced by a reduction in interest rates and increased credit availability would be accompanied by at least some increase in the money supply The relationship also exists in a sort of " reverse causation " form that is as income goes up so does the demand for money which the Federal Reserve then accommodates by allowing an increase in the actual money stock. This is precisely what happened during the period of accommodative policy and it is always present to some extent as the Federal Reserve acts to meet the economy 's changing credit needs. The problem of sorting out the extent of causation in the two directions still challenges economic researchers A one-sided interpretation of these relationships is sometimes used to support the suggestion that the Federal Reserve conduct policy on the basis of some fixed predetermined guideline for growth of the money supply ( however defined ) Given the complex role of interest rates in affecting various demand categories and the likely variations in so many other factors any such simple policy guide could prove to be quite unreliable The experience of the past several years illustrates the kinds of difficulties that might be encountered in using the money supply ( defined here as currency plus demand deposits ) as the exclusive guide for monetary policy. As described previously high interest rates in began affecting the nonbank thrift institutions the mortgage market and the homebuilding industry soon after the start of the year. But during the first months of that year the money supply grew at an annual rate of nearly 6/ percent well above the long-term trend. Later that year the financial situation of major mortgage lenders improved somewhat and housing eventually rebounded despite the fact that growth of money supply plus bank time deposits was proceeding at only a snail 's pace Growth of the money supply in the second quarter of was at an annual rate of percent. The reasons for this acceleration to a rate almost double the growth in the preceding quarter are not fully apparent The Federal Reserve could have resisted this sizable increase in the demand for money more than it did but interest rates in the open market would then have risen well above the peaks that were in fact reached in May Whether still higher rates would have been desirable is another issue which can not be settled merely by citing the rapid growth of the money supply These illustrations suggest that any simple rigid rule related to the growth of the money supply ( however defined ) can unduly confine Federal Reserve policy. In formulating monetary policy the Federal Reserve must be able to take account of all types of financial relationships currently prevailing and in prospect and be able to respond flexibly as changing economic needs arise. In deciding on such responses especially careful consideration must be given to likely changes in interest rates and credit availability in view of the effects of these factors on particular sectors of the economy especially the homebuilding industry LOOKING AHEAD In the future as in the past years the maintenance of full prosperity deserves high priority among the Nation 's goals because it contributes so much to so many of our other national objectives. Job opportunities provide the stepping stones out of poverty for many of the disadvantaged. As Chapter makes clear efforts to train the disadvantaged can hardly succeed in a sluggish economy. For those who have already obtained some minimum standard of living prosperity offers a ladder to higher standards of comfort civilization and security. For those high on the income scale prosperity provides the incentives and the funds for the growth of capital to strengthen our productive performance in the future. For the public sector prosperity offers the revenues that can help to repair the accumulated decay of our cities purify the environment and improve education and transportation systems Between and our civilian labor force will increase by 10J4 million persons or an average of ll/2 million a year. If the new entrants are employed and productivity continues to grow at the recent trend rate GNP will amount to about $ billion ( in prices ) in The experience of the past years should be of considerable benefit in the formulation of economic policies to ensure continued movement along the potential output path to reach this level of GNP in Economic policymakers can reasonably hope to maintain sustained growth in line with potential and to avoid the bumps of the business cycle and the unconscionable waste of a slack economy A dynamic society should not however be satisfied merely with continuing along the present path of potential. Faster growth can be achieved if ways can be found to accelerate the growth of national productivity Policies that aim at stimulating capital formation education and technological advance can play an important role. Additional gains in output and standards of living for all our citizens can be realized if ways can be found to achieve lower levels of unemployment and reasonably stable prices simultaneously. Chapter discusses a number of measures that can help to make high employment and price stability more compatible < Chapter Price Stability in a High Employment Economy T HE REMARKABLE ACHIEVEMENT of prosperity as the normal state of the American economy has been recorded in Chapter Recent price performance has been far less satisfactory Since prices have been rising too rapidly. The history of both the United States and other industrial nations shows that high employment is generally accompanied by inflationary tendencies and that when prices are reasonably stable this is at the cost of too many idle men and idle machines The record of the past poses the critical challenge of the years ahead. Reconciling prosperity at high employment with price stability is the Nation 's most important unsolved problem of over-all economic performance Though the United States has done better than most industrial countries its record is far from adequate. That record can and should be improved by measures discussed in this chapter PRICES WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT The difficulties of combining price stability and high employment in the past years are evident in Chart It reveals a fairly close association of more rapid price increases with lower rates of unemployment. In and from to when the unemployment rate was between and percent price increases ranged between and percent. In contrast between and the unemployment rate consistently exceeded percent and price increases were uniformly less than percent The historical relationship has been neither mechanical nor precise. In some periods the over-all price level has been affected by special and erratic factors such as crop failures shifts in foreign demand or bottlenecks arising from a spurt of demand in one sector of the economy. Moreover the price performance of any year is influenced by cost developments arising from conditions in prior years Still upward pressures on prices and wages are likely to be intensified when the economy is operating at high utilization of manpower and capital In a slack economy rising prices are rarely a problem. Even when demand begins to expand strongly additional output is readily provided by increases in employment and fuller use of industrial capacity. If the expansion persists Chart Price Performance and Unemployment I X # u s I 3h o y a : ^ O i # UNEMPLOYMENT RATE-PERCENTl/ J/CHANGE DURING YEAR CALCULATED FROM END OF YEAR DEFLATORS ( DERIVED BY AVERAGING FOURTH QUARTER OF A GIVEN YEAR AND FIRST QUARTER OF SUBSEQUENT YEAR ) 2/AVERAGE FOR THE YEAR SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS at a rate exceeding the growth of the economy 's productive capacity however demand will begin to press upon available capacity in some industries. As a result increases in prices will become more frequent there will be fewer offsetting decreases elsewhere and living costs will begin to rise Shortages of workers with particular skills or in certain localities may develop and wages will accelerate for these groups. Because the balance of demand and supply differs among industries these tendencies may emerge even while over-all unemployment and unused capacity are substantial If demand continues to grow strongly more industries and labor markets are strained and inflationary pressures become more pervasive. As unemployment declines wages accelerate since employers prefer to raise wages rather than jeopardize sales and profits through either strikes or inability to attract enough labor. The threat of losing markets through price increases exercises much less discipline on the pricing policies of a firm when it ( and its competitors ) are operating close to capacity. Thus prices are readily marked up both to reflect increased costs of labor and materials and to provide for higher profit margins With living costs rising wage increases are stepped up in most industries and generally exceed the economy-wide growth of productivity. Thus unit labor costs rise and in turn tend to be translated into higher prices. In this way a buoyant economy can move from price stability into a rising spiral of wage and price adjustments. And once such a spiral starts it becomes increasingly difficult to arrest even after productive capacity has caught up with demand and the initial pressures have largely subsided THE RECORD IN THE SIXTIES This sequence of events is illustrated by the performance of the U.S economy in the 's Price Stability : Between the first quarters of and rapid economic expansion took up much of the slack in the use of resources. The unemployment rate dropped from percent to percent ( seasonally adjusted ) during this 4-year period and capacity utilization in manufacturing increased sharply Yet the price and wage record was excellent. Average hourly compensation in the private nonfarm economy rose an average of percent annually but productivity increased at a rate of percent so that unit labor costs remained virtually unchanged. The average level of wholesale prices in January was the same as years earlier. Consumer prices advanced at a moderate annual rate of percent largely reflecting gradual cost increases in distribution and services where productivity gains come slowly The Price-Wage Upturn : The first significant break in relative price stability occurred early in Farm and food prices began a sharp upward climb spurred by special and erratic factors affecting supply at home and abroad. More pervasive inflationary pressures started in the second half of when the military buildup in Vietnam began. The rise in prices of consumer services accelerated as firms found it increasingly difficult to recruit and keep workers in the traditionally lower paying service jobs. With consumer prices rising more rapidly and with stronger demand for labor upward pressures on wages mounted These developments show up clearly in the price and wage record. Between the second quarters of and consumer prices rose percent During the same period average hourly compensation in the private nonfarm economy jumped percent well above the growth of productivity ; as a result unit labor costs rose nearly percent Wage and price developments were influenced by the high level of utilization of the economy. In January unemployment fell below percent of the labor force for the first time in nearly a decade and the utilization of manufacturing capacity reached the highest rate since But price pressures were also intensified by the unusually rapid speed of the advance as reflected in an annual rate of growth in the real gross national product ( GNP ) of more than percent between the second quarter of and the first quarter of Had the economy approached the neighborhood of percent unemployment more gradually there would have been more time to train and upgrade labor and to introduce newer and more efficient equipment When the rate of expansion slowed down late in and early in so did the upward movement of prices. Between August and April consumer prices continued to advance ; but the annual rate of increase moderated to percent while average wholesale prices actually declined An increase in supplies of farm products and other raw materials was especially helpful. As new facilities were completed the pressures on manufacturing capacity decreased sharply and price increases slowed down for a number of manufactured products Nevertheless higher costs had been built into the economy during and and when the economy picked up speed in the second half of prices and wages again accelerated. Union settlements which had lagged in the initial stage of the advance rose especially sharply in late and in As discussed in Chapter the problems of rising prices and wages remain intense as begins THE TASK FOR POLICY Because of the general relationship between prices and unemployment decisions of fiscal and monetary policy present a serious dilemma. Achieving price stability by accepting high unemployment involves dreadful waste and tremendous social and human costs. But historically unemployment rates of percent or below have been associated with a price performance that most Americans consider unsatisfactory. As explained in Chapter price increases at the rate recently experienced clearly impair our international trade performance cause a haphazard redistribution of income and wealth and may jeopardize sustained prosperity The first line of defense against inflation must be fiscal and monetary policies that avoid excessive pressures of demand on productive capacity. By heading off sudden surges in demand and by promoting steady and smooth growth these policies can also contribute to improved price performance at high employment. But fiscal and monetary policies alone can not ensure the simultaneous achievement of low rates of unemployment and reasonable price stability. The relationship between inflation and unemployment depends upon the workings of the Nation 's institutions and markets. There is need for a wide ranging attack on inflation that will bring about pervasive improvements in the economy 's price performance To this end the President established the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability early in The Committee has studied many aspects of the problem and has submitted its report which covers many of the issues discussed below IMPROVING LABOR AND PRODUCT MARKETS Our labor and product markets are among the most efficient and flexible in the world. Yet their further improvement is the key to making higher levels of employment consistent with price stability. These markets must be even more responsive to changing patterns of demand and they must continuously increase the productivity of our resources Measures to improve these markets are of two general but related kinds : those that facilitate the most productive use of our manpower resources and those that improve the efficiency of our product markets The efficiency of labor markets is reflected in the matching of job opportunities and available manpower. The fit is never perfect : while in some areas and for some skills " help wanted " signs prevail there are simultaneously many unemployed persons whose skills or locations do not fit the needs of employers. Continued job vacancies tend to pull wages up and thereby attract labor. In areas of excess supply however wages are rarely subject to strong downward pressures. Thus unmanned jobs and jobless men do not offset each other in influencing average wages. The better the labor markets operate the higher the level of employment and the lower the volume of job vacancies that can accompany any degree of upward pressure on average wages There are a number of ways that a better and more flexible fit of available manpower and job opportunities can be achieved. Workers can move more easily between occupations and geographical locations if they are given improved information about job opportunities and if they are not confronted with barriers to entry into certain occupations. They can be aided by training programs which are more closely oriented toward skills that are in short supply. And the productivity of employed labor can be improved by the removal of restrictive work practices Measures of these kinds can both alter the level of employment consistent with reasonable price stability and add significantly to the real output produced at a given level of employment Product markets can also be made more efficient. The major thrust must be the strengthening of competition. Vigorous enforcement of antitrust policy is essential. Opportunities can be found to remove or reduce existing re- straints on competition. Better information for the consumer can also strengthen competition. The continued pursuit of freer international trade can enhance the effectiveness of competition. Standards and policies in regulated industries in agricultural programs and in Government procurement should be kept under constant review with price stability recognized as one of the goals of policy The major measures discussed below should be viewed as elements of a comprehensive program to improve price-cost behavior. Other areas and other possible policy actions could be added to the list. The effects of the measures vary considerably in potential magnitude and no single one can ensure a significant advance by itself. Yet if progress can be achieved on most of these fronts the inflationary tendencies that accompany low unemployment should be reduced Most of these measures may be expected to yield substantial gains in other directions. Some would increase employment opportunities for the disadvantaged. Others would enhance productivity and growth over the long run It must also be recognized that many of these measures involve some social and financial costs that have to be assessed against the potential benefits. In fact some of the present problems result from past public or private policies designed to promote such objectives as job security public safety or health and the protection of small businesses. Frequently these policies were aimed at conditions which prevailed years ago ; they require reexamination in today 's high employment economy Structural improvements in our product and labor markets usually take time to institute and require time to show measurable effects. Most of the strategies can not be counted upon to assist significantly in the immediate task of moving toward price stability in But early efforts are needed to make timely progress toward the long-run objective of combining high employment with reasonable price stability IMPROVING LABOR MOBILITY Over the long term there have been dramatic shifts in the pattern of demand for labor from agriculture to manufacturing from the production of goods to the supply of services and from less to more highly skilled occupations. Agricultural workers represent only percent of the civilian labor force as compared with percent years ago. The number of white collar workers has risen from one-third to nearly one-half of total employment since World War II with an especially rapid rise in the number of professionals. The industry shifts in the past years are shown in Table The needed adjustments to both short- and long-run changes in the demand for labor have been largely accomplished by the normal operation of the market. Increases in earnings have been particularly large in those occupations for which demand has been rising rapidly. For example increased TABLE Changes in employment to Millions of persons Percentage change per year Industry group Total employment to i Percentage distribution Nonagriculture Nonagricultural payroll employment State and local government Services Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Wholesale trade Manufacturing Production workers Nonproduction workers _ Federal Government Contract construction Transportation and public utilities. Mining ._ Agriculture Preliminary Based on employment in thousands Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor needs for workers in retail trade and service occupations have been reflected in wage gains larger than those in manufacturing ( Table ) Similarly earnings in many professions have advanced rapidly Although the labor force is highly mobile and able to adjust readily to substantial shifts in demand there are still many costly barriers that workers must cross when moving among jobs and occupations. One remedy is to lower the barriers allowing workers freer access to jobs. Another is to bring work to areas of high unemployment. The benefits and limitations of making jobs available to those living where few opportunities now exist are explored in Chapter TABLE Changes in hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers on private nonagricultural payrolls to Average hourly earnings Industry group Total private nonagricultural payrolls2 $ Preliminary Total includes certain industry groups not shown separately Source : Department of Labor IOO $ Retail trade Contract construction Finance insurance and real estate Wholesale trade Manufacturing Mining to Percentage change per year Information on Job Opportunities Rapid adaptation of the labor force to changing demands can be aided by timely information regarding job opportunities. The disadvantaged in particular are likely to lack such information. Recognizing this handicap the Federal-State Employment Services in began seeking out disadvantaged workers for enrollment in training programs for job referral and for work counseling The importance of improved job information was also recognized in the Amendments to the Manpower Development and Training Act ( MDTA ) This legislation authorized the development of a comprehensive system of labor market information using electronic data processing and telecommunication systems for direct contact among recruitment job training and placement agencies Relocation Assistance The cost of moving can make it difficult for low-income workers to respond to job opportunities. The Amendments to the MDTA authorized an experimental program of relocation assistance to test the value of helping disadvantaged workers in depressed areas move to places of better employment opportunity. Thus far workers and their families have received assistance under the program. The experience from this pilot program suggests that the benefits far outweigh the $ average cost of relocation Vesting and Portability of Pension Rights By private retirement plans will cover some million workers about three-fifths of all private nonfarm employees. Nonvested plans in which the worker loses his pension rights if his employment terminates not only operate inequitably against many long-service employees but also discourage mobility Vesting would enable the worker to retain his financial stake in his pension when he changes employers. To encourage more vesting the Department of Labor has proposed a Pension Benefit Security Act. It would require full vesting after years of service to become fully effective years after passage. At present only about percent of all workers are in retirement plans which fulfill this requirement Another way to overcome the restrictive effect of pension plans on mobility would be to increase the ability of employees to transfer pension credits among employers in a particular industry. This type of portability largely found in multi-employer collective bargaining contracts enhances mobility within industries but not across industry boundaries. In construction multiemployer pension plans are common but generally limited to a particular city IOI or metropolitan area. Greater reciprocity among these plans would enhance mobility in this important sector Licensing State licensing provisions affecting some skilled trades and many professions restrict mobility to the extent that there is not full reciprocity among States. Electricians plumbers barbers and beauticians are examples of the licensed tradesmen ; physicians dentists lawyers accountants and teachers are examples of the professionals. In some cases notably physicians there is relatively full reciprocity. But in others those who have licenses in one State are required to pass new examinations or to meet different special qualifications if they want to move to other States In principle these requirements are imposed to protect public health or safety or the quality of service. Yet they may serve to restrict competition particularly in localities or States where pay scales are relatively high Mobility could be enhanced by universal reciprocity at generally acceptable standards Discrimination in Employment One of the most widespread barriers to the full use of our labor force is discrimination against women and members of minority groups. Great progress has been made in reducing these and other categoric barriers to employment ; Federal legislation now outlaws discrimination on the basis of race religion national origin sex or age. While the policy is now clear a very large job of enforcement remains In addition arbitrary barriers to employment may still be imposed by employers who maintain unnecessarily restrictive hiring standards as described in Chapter Some unions also impose unreasonable restrictions on membership Minimum Wages Minimum wage laws protect the worker against the imperfections of the labor market which lead to substandard wages. Such laws may also encourage the more efficient use of labor. Although increases in the minimum wage are likely to be reflected in higher prices society should be willing to pay the cost if this is the best way to help low-wage workers. Yet excessively rapid and general increases in the minimum can hurt these workers by curtailing their employment opportunities Since the Federal minimum has gone up about in line wTith average hourly compensation while coverage has progressively expanded to cover low-wage industries. In considering the future rate of increase for minimum wages careful scrutiny should be made of the possibility of adverse employ- ment effects. The benefits of higher minimums should be weighed against alternative ways of helping low-wage workers EFFICIENT USE OF MANPOWER Responding to the expanding employment opportunities of our economy American workers generally have accepted and even welcomed technological change. But there are exceptions ; unions have secured management acceptance of restrictive work rules in such industries as railroads printing longshoring and construction. These rules reflect a legitimate concern for job security. But where technological change does adversely affect job security it would be preferable to avoid restrictive practices and develop solutions specifically to meet that problem. Workers can be largely compensated for the loss of particular positions and of seniority protection through such provisions as severance pay attrition plans and the option of early retirement for older workers. The trend of collective bargaining agreements is in this direction but the exceptions are still costly to the economy Legal Restrictions Legal restrictions designed to protect health and safety may in some cases impose unnecessary barriers to the efficient use of labor For example local building codes sometimes prevent the use of construction labor as efficiently as technology allows according to a report of the National Commission on Urban Problems. The Commission also found that an unnecessary diversity among codes inhibits large-scale operations by contractors and manufacturers. It recommended that private and public bodies develop standards that could be accepted and applied throughout the Nation Another example is railroad full-crew laws affecting freight and road service in seven States. These laws reflect an approach that dates back to the era of the steam engine. Despite dieselization and modern improvements in communication the laws remain Seasonality Instability of work leads to inefficient use of manpower throwing persons able and willing to work into unemployment. Seasonal variations are a major source of such waste particularly in construction More than one-fourth of all wage and salaried workers in contract construction experience some unemployment during the year. This is about double the proportion in manufacturing and other nonagricultural industries. Besides the waste of valuable manpower seasonality leads to labor shortages during peaks of activity in particular occupations and geographical areas. A number of studies have indicated that for most types of construction the added costs of winter work are small and might be offset by just the savings in unemployment compensation for construction workers. More stable employment might also moderate the sharp upward trend in hourly wages for construction workers at the same time improving their annual incomes In light of these considerations the President recently instructed Government agencies to explore the possibility of scheduling more construction in winter months. Progress in this direction by the Federal Government could serve as an example to State and local governments and to private industry MANPOWER TRAINING PROGRAMS Training programs must be oriented toward two main objectives. The first and probably most important in both its economic and social implications is to assist the disadvantaged and the unemployed to acquire new skills Such efforts present special and highly important problems which are discussed in Chapter in the context of the problem of poverty. The second objective is to help increase the supply of skilled workers and professionals to keep up with rapidly rising demand Skilled Workers Federal and federally assisted training programs can make an important contribution to meet the rising demand for skilled workers in periods of high employment. The Vocational Education Act of authorized a large expansion of vocational training programs. Post-secondary day school vocational enrollments increased from in to in and enrollments of adults in part-time programs rose from to million. The total number of persons in trade and industrial programs rose from to million between and Establishing and operating flexible expanding training programs pose some difficult problems. Ideally the pattern of training should be related to forecasts of changing demand for workers in different occupations thus meshing the training with emerging needs. In practice this is not easy to accomplish There is also danger that vocational programs once established may continue unchanged despite radical shifts in the demand for skills. For example high school enrollments in vocational agriculture remained almost constant from to despite the sharp and persistent drop in agricultural work opportunities and the movement of many rural youths to other jobs. The scope of vocational education should be broadened to meet the future manpower needs of the economy. The percent of total enrollees in vocational classes preparing for health and technical occupations is much too small More training should be provided in new occupations such as automatic data processing and electronics In addition skilled workers will be needed in such traditional trades as construction. There is every indication that the demand for construction in the 's will be of unprecedented magnitude. Success in meeting the national target for housing recently adopted by the Congress will depend upon the availability of enough skilled workers Professions The demand for professionals has increased sharply. Although their number has grown at an annual rate of percent in as compared with only a percent increase in the number of production workers in manufacturing supply has not kept pace with demand. As a result earnings in many professions have risen at a substantially higher rate than those of manufacturing production workers The rise in demand for professional and technical personnel reflects numerous factors. In health care the general rise in affluence has contributed significantly along with Medicare Medicaid and the rapid increase in the elderly population. Total spending on health care rose from $ billion in fiscal to $ billion in fiscal The great technological advances of the past decade have vastly increased the demand for such professionals as physicists chemists mathematicians and engineers. Expenditures for research and development have grown rapidly. Between fiscal and the dominant factor in the expansion was Government spending for research and development which rose at the rate of percent a year before slowing markedly in For the National Aeronautics and Space Administration program alone the number of scientists and engineers directly involved increased from less than in to a peak of nearly in mid-1966. Private spending on research and development also increased at a rapid rate growing at percent annually between and Newly instituted Federal programs have helped to meet the expanding demand for professional personnel. The Education Professions Development Act of gave the Office of Education authority to assist in the training of school personnel at all levels and in various occupations. Under the Health Professions Educational Assistance Amendments of about scholarships have been awarded in medicine dentistry and pharmacy. A variety of fellowship training and grant programs is providing assistance to more than students in as compared with in Despite these advances the present programs are not adequate to meet the growing needs for trained professionals Adjusting Job Requirements In light of the high and growing demand for fully qualified professional personnel the more routine or subprofessional tasks should be performed by such paraprofessionals as teacher 's aides nurse 's aides dental technicians and engineering technicians The New Careers Program administered by the Department of Labor is helping to prepare disadvantaged adults for jobs in public and private nonprofit agencies in the fields of health education welfare neighborhood redevelopment and public service. As of mid-1968 about persons were enrolled under this program. Cooperating institutions have agreed to revise job requirements and to develop new career opportunities for subprofessional workers Future Directions for Manpower Policy Training programs under the MDTA have the potential for making a great contribution to price stability and high employment. Accomplishments thus far have been limited mainly because the programs have been small relative to need. Only an average of persons yearly have been enrolled from to In were enrolled equal to three-tenths of percent of the Nation 's labor force. Moreover only percent of the total were trained in critical skills The creation of a new system of adult job training proved complex Difficulties were inherent and experimentation necessary. But after years of experience it is evident that MDTA training and assistance can help the economy make more efficient use of manpower The Federal Government has greatly increased its support of college students and institutions of higher education. The total funds available in both grants and loans rose from an estimated $ billion in to $ billion in Federal funds for student loans increased from an estimated $ million in to $ million in Nevertheless there remains a need for additional support. When properly designed loans are a particularly suitable form of aid for college students although many youths from low-income families may require special assistance through direct grants Federal aid can also be useful in underwriting the costs of expanding the capacity of professional schools where training facilities are most critically short as in medical education. And better planning of Government programs can lessen the pressure on the limited pool of professional manpower The Federal Government directly and indirectly pays the salaries of to percent of all professionals. Because the supply of professionals can not be expanded quickly adding significantly to demand can affect salaries throughout the economy for many years COMPETITION AND ANTITRUST POLICY The prevalence of strong competitive forces in most markets of the U.S economy reflects its vast size the ability and willingness of businessmen to respond to new opportunities and a long-standing commitment of public policy to promote competition most importantly exemplified in the antitrust laws Antitrust Laws and Prices While antitrust action is an effective weapon against collusive price agreements violations still occur and continuous vigilance is necessary. For example since there have been price-fixing convictions in such diverse industries as plumbing fixtures steel and pharmaceuticals Antitrust also has a major role to play in reducing concentration. In highly concentrated industries those in which a few firms control a large proportion of sales price competition is likely to be less intense than it is elsewhere in the economy. Numerous studies have shown a significant relationship between high concentration and high profit rates an indication of weak competitive pressures. Moreover the high profits sometimes earned by firms in the less competitive industries are understandably a tempting target for large wage demands which sometimes spread to other industries Furthermore concentrated industries often maintain prices in the face of declining demand reducing output instead. As demand fluctuates among products over time prices may rise where demand increases but fail to decline where demand decreases. This results in an inflationary bias which might be substantially reduced by greater competition Vigorous antitrust enforcement helps to hold down prices by breaking up price conspiracies and reducing concentration. A continuing program of antitrust actions can increase competition and contribute to improved over-all price performance at high employment Mergers and Concentration The present levels of concentration in many industries are in large part the result of peaks of merger activity at the turn of the century and during the 's. Although the number of mergers in recent years has reached gargantuan proportions major mergers of manufacturing and mining concerns in as compared to in most of them involved firms in different industries rather than in the same industry. In part this reflects the Celler-Kefauver amendment to the Clayton Act which has severely restricted combinations that might lessen competition. In percent of the larger mergers consisted of purchases of firms in unrelated industries ; in comparison less than percent of larger mergers between and were of this conglomerate type Reducing Concentration In a few major industries concentration has been very high for many years. New approaches to reducing concentration in these industries should be examined. Competitive forces can be enhanced by modifying existing industry patterns or by promoting entry of additional competitors One approach would be to seek court decrees to promote competition by such measures as altering distribution and patent licensing practices. In industries of critical economic importance the appropriate remedy may be the divestiture of parts of the operations of the largest firms to create new competitors A second approach is to adopt measures to channel merger activity in directions that would increase competition. Mergers could have a healthy impact on concentration if acquiring firms of very large size were barred from purchasing the leading firms in other concentrated industries. The major route for entry into a concentrated industry by a very large firm then would be to build new capacity or to buy an existing smaller firm When a very large firm buys a small firm in a concentrated industry it has the resources to expand that firm 's capacity and to try to increase its share of the market. Such a merger can infuse new vigor and ideas into that market There is also need to review certain provisions of the tax laws which provide incentives for mergers. Consideration should be given to modifying the statutes so as to make the tax laws more consistent with the objectives of antitrust policy An effective program to deal with very high levels of concentration may require new legislation carefully drafted to avoid either penalizing economic efficiency or placing unnecessary restrictions on the freedom to respond to competitive opportunities. With these two limitations measures to strengthen competitive pressures in a number of highly concentrated industries could further increase the contribution of antitrust policy to price stability LEGAL RESTRICTIONS ON COMPETITION In spite of the Government 's commitment to the strengthening of competitive markets some existing laws may weaken competition. Most of these laws were adopted during the 's to relieve the especially serious impact of the depression on small firms in the distributive trades Resale Price Maintenance Major examples of these depression-born laws are the resale price maintenance statutes still in effect in States. These " Fair Trade " acts permit a manufacturer to require that all the retailers in a State observe a minimum resale price for that manufacturer 's trademarked products. Since these products generally move in interstate commerce the practice rests on exemptions from Federal antitrust laws granted under the provisions of the MillerTydings Act ( ) and the Maguire amendment ( ) Resale price maintenance contracts are used mostly in the sale of drugs cosmetics appliances and liquors. A survey by the Department of Justice in showed that prices were to percent higher on fair-traded items in States with resale price maintenance laws than in other States Some estimates place the annual cost to the consumer of resale price maintenance at $ billion One effect of resale price maintenance is to shift the focus of competition into less desirable forms. Retailers compete by providing more extensive consumer services thereby increasing business costs. Manufacturers often set resale prices at levels providing generous markups to retailers in order to induce them to favor the sale of their products The principal objective of resale price maintenance is to protect smaller concerns from their larger competitors. The prohibition of predatory practices is a valid objective of public policy. In practice however lower prices reflecting greater efficiency and lower costs can not be called predatory Moreover there is no evidence that the efficient small retailer needs such special protection which can freeze an inefficient market structure For these reasons the Administration has consistently opposed legislation designed to extend resale price maintenance. Indeed it is hard to see a continuing justification for the existing laws in today 's prosperous economy Robinson-Patman Act The Robinson-Patman Act is another important Federal law intended to protect the small from the large. The Act attempts to prevent chains mail-order houses and other huge buyers from extorting preferential price concessions from suppliers Although public policy should be concerned with preventing improper use of the advantages conferred by sheer size some evidence indicates that the Act has had the unintended effect of accentuating price rigidities in some markets. A seller may refuse to bargain on price with an individual customer by contending that under the law any concession granted to one buyer would have to be made uniformly available to all others. The law may conflict with the development of more efficient methods of distribution such as integrating wholesale and retail functions or dispensing with independent brokers. By requiring proportionally equal treatment in certain promotional practices the Act has discouraged experimentation with marketing techniques. It has been interpreted to prevent sellers from charging different prices in widely separated geographic markets A careful reappraisal of the Act might suggest ways to focus its application more sharply on those particular forms of price discrimination that constitute a truly serious threat to competition IMPROVING CONSUMER INFORMATION The effectiveness of price competition in consumer markets depends partly on the purchasing skill of the consumer. Dependable product and price information are needed to allow consumers to evaluate and compare the relative costs and merits of the enormous variety of goods and services offered for sale Legislative Achievements and Proposals In the last two Congresses bills protecting the consumer were enacted Two of the most important were the Truth-in-Packaging and the Truthin-Lending Acts The Truth-in-Packaging Act signed in November recognizes that the bewildering multiplicity of package sizes for common household products makes price comparison difficult. While the enforcement provisions are weak the Act takes important steps toward remedying the situation One provision encourages interested industry groups with the aid of consumers and government agencies to develop voluntary standards to limit the number of package sizes. Another provision requires standardization of the location and form of the quantity statements on packages The Truth-in-Lending Act requires that the finance charge on consumer credit transactions be expressed in terms of a simple annual rate At present such charges are often stated in ways that make it difficult for the consumer to know the true cost of credit Among the legislative proposals remaining from the previous Congress are those relating to deceptive sales techniques which in the home improvement field alone are estimated to cost the consumer over $ million annually. The Deceptive Sales Act passed by the Senate but not the House in would give the Federal Trade Commission authority to obtain court orders to stop fraudulent and deceptive practices promptly. Other proposals would permit cancellation without penalty for business days after the signing of a door-to-door sales contract and would authorize a Federal Trade Commission study of the home improvement industry Sometimes selling practices themselves may restrict consumer choice and lead to higher prices. Often when a promotional practice is introduced by one seller the response from competitors is not to lower prices but to introduce the same type of promotion. Trading stamps illustrate the contagious nature of sales techniques. Although many buyers can choose readily between stores that offer stamps and those that do not other buyers can do so only at substantial inconvenience. In fact almost half of all food sales in were made by merchants offering trading stamps. Therefore consideration should be given to legislation that assures consumers a choice between stamps and an equivalent cash discount Product Testing Steps can also be taken to provide more complete and reliable product information. Advertising is a major source of consumer information but it needs to be supplemented. The purpose of advertising is to stress the desirable qualities of particular items not to set forth an objective appraisal of the relative merits of competing products A few independent groups now test products and publicize their results but their ability to do so is limited partly because their financial resources are not large. These activities could be supplemented by making available HO to the public the test data which various agencies of the Federal Government have accumulated in connection with their procurement activities. As a beginning the Department of Health Education and Welfare and the Veterans Administration have recently announced that they will release the results of future product tests REGULATED INDUSTRIES Electric power most communications natural gas banking securities markets insurance and most public transportation are subject to detailed regulation by Federal State or local agencies. The economic importance of these sectors is great. They account for about percent of national income and their prices and services affect many production and investment decisions throughout the economy Problems naturally develop in regulated areas where technology and demand have changed rapidly. Existing regulatory practices need continuing review to determine whether established measures and institutions are efficiently responding to changing technology. Moreover regulatory issues increasingly span the jurisdictions of several Federal agencies or cut across the authority of Federal-State-local agencies. Some of the areas where careful review might be most rewarding are identified below Utilities Public utilities especially electric and telephone companies have made impressive economic gains through high rates of productivity and declining relative prices. Notwithstanding these gains utilities might contribute more to price stability if productivity improvement or cost savings were more promptly translated into lower rates with due regard to preserving the incentives for increased efficiency and the ability of the companies to raise new capital Electric Power * The two major characteristics of the electric power industry in the last decade have been its rapid growth now at percent a year and the lower unit costs made possible by advances in technology increased interstate system coordination and economies of scale. These complementary trends have permitted significant reductions in rates charged consumers despite increases in many costs to the industry. These trends should continue in the next decade ; the National Power Survey estimated that cost savings of as much as $ billion annually ( measured in dollars ) are possible by if full advantage is taken of technological progress and market potential and if closer coordination of planning and operations among the diverse ownership segments of the industry is achieved Regulatory programs must be reevaluated periodically and new programs designed to ensure that these potential cost savings are fully realized and promptly reflected in rates ill Natural Gas. This important fuel has almost tripled its share of the energy market in the last decades and now supplies about one-third of the Nation 's energy requirements. Natural gas is subject to comprehensive Federal State and local regulation. The Federal Government regulates entry into interstate markets wholesale rates and conditions of service and safety. In the 's Federal regulation has resulted in relatively stable rates in contrast to the steep price increases that marked the preceding decade. The new concept of setting a common price schedule for natural gas sales in each producing area offers the expectation of an improved regulatory procedure Recently rising costs particularly taxes and bond interest rates have caused natural gas companies to file a rash of applications for rate increases Some applications also assert that higher rates are necessary to stimulate exploration for and development of future reserves. These contentions must be recognized and dealt with expeditiously. Specifically careful scrutiny must be given to costing formulas evolving technology and to the future adequacy of supply Securities Markets A careful review of securities markets revealed several problems in the thriving mutual funds industry. In particular a provision of the Investment Company Act prohibits dealers from reducing sales charges fixed by the mutual fund underwriter. Many mutual funds have commission charges considerably higher than those on most other security transactions In addition stock exchange rules prescribe uniform minimum brokerage commissions. The Securities and Exchange Commission is currently investigating this practice to see whether such limits on price competition can be eliminated or modified without damage to security markets Transportation The sector that appears to offer the broadest opportunities for further regulatory improvement is transportation. Regulation was originally imposed on railroads about years ago when competition from other modes was minimal to protect shippers and travelers from discriminatory treatment With the development of new modes of transportation such as pipelines trucking and air carriers the general pattern of railroad regulation has been extended to cover them But technological change rising consumer incomes and extensive public investment in transport facilities have led to greatly increased competition among different forms of transportation. In the past two decades some regulatory decisions have insulated existing carriers and their patterns of service and rates from that invigorating competition Competition. Statutory exemptions from regulation in water and motor transport cover about percent of the ton-miles moved on inland waterways and percent of intercity ton-miles moved by truck. Free market decisions involving rates and the amount and quality of service have worked satisfactorily in these exempted areas over a long period. Current antitrust laws protect against improper carrier conduct Reliance on competition permits carriers to adjust rates freely. Regulators in contrast have often required firms to keep rates up to the level of " fully distributed costs " which reflect an arbitrary allocation of overhead. Air truck and inland water carriers do not have the large indivisible inputs characteristic of railroads and pipelines such as rights-of-way and terminals Thus railroads have relatively high fixed costs and if overhead must be allocated to each traffic unit on a rigid basis the calculated average costs and rate schedules may differ markedly from the variable expenses of additional traffic. Minimum rates based on these average costs can divert traffic from railroads even when they could offer the least costly mode of transportation A recent specific case illustrates this problem. The Interstate Commerce Commission denied a request by the railroads to reduce their rate for handling ingot molds to a level lower than that charged by the competing bargetruck service. The proposed rate was below the railroads ' fully distributed costs but above their marginal costs. On appeal the Supreme Court held that the Commission had the authority to determine which cost base to use. The decision thus left it to the Commission to base its rulings on marginal cost criteria when it thought appropriate To the extent that minimum rate regulation is continued marginal costs rather than fully distributed costs would most closely approximate the pattern which a competitive market would produce. This principle if generally applied would result in a much more efficient distribution of transportation resources and in lower costs to users of transportation services Entry. A better use of our potential transportation resources can also be achieved by lessening regulatory barriers to entry particularly for trucks A motor carrier now requires a specific grant of operating authority a procedure instituted in an earlier period of overcapacity. The problem today is to serve a growing volume of traffic which has expanded since at an annual rate of percent as measured by intercity ton-miles The Interstate Commerce Commission has issued over grants of operating rights to motor carriers mostly at the time regulation was instituted. At present securing new rights is difficult ; moreover some existing rights are restricted to specific commodities routes direction of movement and territory GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT The Federal Government the largest single buyer in our economy purchased $ billion of goods and services from the private sector in Consequently the manner and care with which the Government carries out its purchases have a significant impact not only on the prices it pays but on other prices throughout the economy Competitive Procurement Because competition normally works to improve quality and keep prices in line with costs the Government has long relied on competitive bidding whenever possible. In fiscal about three-quarters of the dollars spent by the General Services Administration the chief purchaser of general supplies for the Government involved formal bidding ; another fifth involved other procurement methods that stressed price competition. Currently percent of all Government purchases are made by the Department of Defense. Since many of these expenditures involve the development and production of sophisticated weapon systems they are less suited to conventional price competition. In fiscal only percent of defense outlays up from percent in fiscal utilized formal bidding or other methods stressing price competition. However varying degrees of competition existed for a substantial portion of the remainder of defense procurement Negotiated Procurement Competitive procurement is most difficult to achieve for specially built hardware such as major defense systems for which the Federal Government is the only buyer. When competition can not be relied upon to hold down costs contracts providing incentives for cost reduction are desirable Fixed-price type contracts in which the contractor shares in any cost reduction or cost escalation have increased from percent of all defense purchases in fiscal to percent in fiscal Cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts which provide less incentive for cost reduction have dropped from percent of the dollar volume to percent over the same period Total Package Procurement a major procurement innovation of the 1960ss has extended competition and permitted more fixed price contracts It requires a binding commitment from the contractor on as much of the production program as is feasible at the time of the initial award. This is a significant departure from the earlier practice of conducting design competitions for development followed by cost reimbursement production contracts with the developer. The new approach emphasizes the use of performance specifications and provides tightened control over design and contract changes thereby reducing expensive modifications. Since the contractor is committed to cost and performance figures for production units before detailed design begins he has a strong motive to design for economical production reliability and simplicity of maintenance Single Source Procurement Unfortunately it is not possible to introduce price competition into all purchasing. For example Total Package Procurement is unsuited for pro- grams where needs or technology are changing rapidly since technical uncertainties can not be identified in detail before major work starts From the point of view of price stability the least desirable situation is the case of a " sole source " supplier operating under a cost reimbursement ( rather than fixed price ) contract. In fiscal percent of the dollar volume of defense procurement was in this category Such awards often reflect the special experience of one firm as well as the uncertainties of technology. For example only one particular firm is considered to have the capability to develop the Sentinel antiballistic-missile system. Therefore the Department of Defense will of necessity procure from one source for this multibillion dollar program for some time. A large number of subcontractors are involved however ; and as soon as possible major items will be broken out and procured separately under competitive conditions Great progress has been made in recent years in improving procurement methods but further progress is essential for improved price performance Efforts to encourage competition and to develop new methods of procurement must be maintained AGRICULTURE Three main problems continue to confront agricultural policymakers Returns to the labor of some farmers and their workers are low particularly on smaller farms. Price fluctuations are severe as a result of weather livestock production cycles and international developments. And price instability is compounded by excess capacity and a consequent chronic tendency to produce more of certain major crops than the market can readily absorb at reasonable prices Achievements of Agricultural Policies In broad perspective past agricultural programs have been successful for commercial farmers. They have made it possible to eliminate the burdensome surpluses of They have provided higher and more stable prices than would have existed otherwise and thereby helped moderate fluctuations in farm income. They have reduced risks associated with farm planning permitted more efficient business management and encouraged a substantial increase in the capital investment per worker. These factors in turn have made possible gains in labor productivity of percent since Changing Farm Structure Profound changes have occurred in the structure of the farm economy in the years since major farm price legislation was first introduced. The number of farms has been halved. Total farm output and average farm size have more than doubled. Differences in output per farm have become pro- nounced. Fifteen percent of the farmers those grossing $ or more annually marketed two-thirds of the value of the farm output. More than half of the farmers accounted for less than percent of the total Farm income is a progressively less important part of the total income of many operators of smaller farms. In farmers selling less than $ in farm products received net farm incomes averaging only $ but had average off-farm incomes of $ Nevertheless there are many farm families without such off-farm income whose total incomes fall below the poverty line New Directions for Policy In light of the changing structure of U.S. agriculture proposals have been advanced to modify price support programs. A reasonable limit on the amount any one farmer could receive from Government payments might provide annual savings approaching $ million. Any such program however would have to be carefully designed to avoid major administrative difficulties and to preserve the incentives for acreage limitations. A Department of Agriculture study indicates that in recent years farmers with gross annual incomes at or above $ earned more for their labor and capital than they would have with the same resources in the nonfarm sector. This suggests that these highly efficient farmers have a lessening need for economic aid. On the other hand those with small farms derive less than percent of their income on the average from farm sales. Hence some gradual restructuring of farm price supports to bring market demand and supply into closer balance would have little effect on their income and payment limitations would not apply to them A better balance of equity among large farms small farms and consumers would be achieved if more market-oriented price supports were accompanied by : an expansion of the Cropland Adjustment Program ( providing for voluntary land retirement ) ; more job training programs in rural areas ; continued emphasis on community resource development ; and more effective income maintenance programs for farm families in poverty ( see Chapter ) A restructuring of farm programs along these lines could encourage large farmers to continue to increase their investments and make full use of the opportunities constantly being opened by new technology. They would also have freedom to exercise the option of conserving land resources until market competition made profitable cultivation possible INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND PRICE STABILITY Price competition is enhanced by the availability of imported products During periods of high employment increased import competition helps to offset the decline in the intensity of competitive behavior among domestic producers which accompanies high over-all demand. Rising imports also help to avoid the development of bottlenecks and shortages when demand is n6 straining domestic capacity. They thus make a vital contribution toward the moderation of inflationary tendencies There is no doubt that prices in industries subject to strong import competition would have risen faster if such competition had been restricted. For example steel prices increased by percent between and when imports were small but only ^ percent between and the end of when growing world capacity led to an expansion of imports. There is clear evidence that steel producers have been especially wary about raising prices for product lines subject to heavy import competition such as wire and wire products or hot rolled sheet To the extent that less expensive imported items enter into further processing or manufacture they reduce costs and permit lower prices for final products. Thus the availability of imported yarn and fabrics by reducing the costs of our apparel manufacturers permits them to compete more effectively against apparel imports. The competitiveness of our machinery manufacturers in export markets is similarly enhanced by their ability to obtain steel imported or domestic at prices lower than they would have to pay if imports were restricted Impact on Domestic Industries The increased flow of imports entails certain costs that must be weighed against the benefits. It has cut into the markets of some important industries ( notably steel textiles and footwear ) and a few agricultural sectors. This has resulted in pressures for import restrictions usually in the form of quota limitations. An international arrangement controlling imports has been in effect for cotton products since and a current issue is whether to extend this type of arrangement to textiles made from wool and synthetics Quotas have been imposed on agricultural imports usually to prevent the growth of Government stockpiles. For a number of products informal arrangements limiting imports are in force or are being considered as a more flexible and less onerous instrument than formal quotas While imports are an important factor in a number of domestic markets they have not prevented expansion of the industries most affected. Steel textile and apparel output has increased since and after-tax profits have risen in all three industries. The rate of return on equity for these industries has also improved considerably although it remains below the average for all manufacturing as it has for many years It is important to emphasize that increased imports in these and other industries reflect in part long-run changes in trade patterns resulting from the natural development of the industrial structures of the United States and its trading partners. The dynamic U.S. economy need not and should not be insulated from these changes. The crucial issue is not whether barriers to imports would increase employment and sales in the industries affected but rather whether our economy is offering ample employment and investment opportunities at the same or better conditions in other pursuits. If these interindustry shifts impose transitional costs such burdens should be shared and alleviated by Federal adjustment assistance. Furthermore fundamental shifts in efficiency should be carefully distinguished from special situations such as dumping practices and export incentives given by other nations. Some of these situations as well as adjustment assistance are discussed in Chapter along with other measures to ensure the two-way nature of trade by keeping world markets open and fair National Security and Trade A valid case for protecting a key industry can be made if national security would be seriously threatened by a sharp increase in imports. The national security rationale underpins the mandatory oil import program which imposes limits on petroleum imports. It may be desirable to reexamine the security rationale to determine if the present administration of the program best meets the objective. Some changes may be possible which while preserving essential security objectives would permit greater flexibility and ensure an economical supply of petroleum feedstocks for the petrochemical industry VOLUNTARY RESTRAINT IN PRICES AND WAGES The forces exerting upward pressures on wages and prices in a high employment economy are broad and impersonal. The responses of wages and prices to these pressures however are expressed through a multitude of separate decisions by employees and employers by sellers and buyers ROLE OF PRIVATE DECISIONS These decisions must be made within the constraints imposed by the market constraints which operate on even the largest businesses and the strongest unions. Nevertheless major companies in highly concentrated industries have substantial discretion in their price and wage decisions as do many unions in the determination of wages. The way this discretion is exercised by the majority of business executives and labor leaders can have a substantial impact on the trends of prices and wages even though no single business or union can by itself have a decisive influence This imposes a grave responsibility on decisionmakers who have discretionary market power. Since the economic consequences of private price and wage decisions bear so importantly on the public welfare it is appropriate for Government to point the way in which these individual decisions can best serve the public interest STANDARDS FOR DECISIONS The Government has worked to evoke a general awareness of the importance of price and wage restraint among business labor and the public These efforts date back to the Economic Reports of President Eisenhower in the late 's. A more explicit formulation was proposed in the Council 's Annual Report in the form of the wage-price guideposts. In subsequent Reports these guideposts evolved gradually a process described in detail in the Council 's Annual Report As initially set forth in the guideposts stated : The general guide for noninflationary wage behavior is that the rate of increase in wage rates ( including fringe benefits ) in each industry be equal to the trend rate of over-all productivity increase. The general guide for noninflationary price behavior calls for price reduction if the industry 's rate of productivity increase exceeds the over-all rate for this would mean declining unit labor costs ; it calls for an appropriate increase in price if the opposite relationship prevails ; and it calls for stable prices if the two rates of productivity increase are equal The guideposts were never intended to apply in highly competitive sectors where market forces determine prices and wages in an impersonal fashion They are applicable to markets in which discretionary power exists. Even in these markets short-run exceptions have always been recognized when changes in relative prices and wages are necessary to facilitate shifts in the use of labor and capital or where substandard wages exist APPLICATION OF STANDARDS Between and decisionmakers with discretionary power generally conformed to the pattern envisaged by the guideposts. There were occasional departures however. In particular some industries with higherthan-average productivity gains did not reduce prices as unit labor costs fell The extent to which the satisfactory performance was enhanced by the efforts of the Administration to urge the observance of the guideposts can not be precisely assessed. But the history of key wage and price decisions during this period indicates that these efforts did exert a distinct and significant influence The blemished price-wage record of the past years reflects primarily an excessive growth of demand. Indeed the initial departures from the path of price and cost stability were concentrated in farm products raw materials and services where guideposts have little if any applicability. The same forces also influenced price and wage decisions in areas of discretionary market power. Once consumer prices started to move up sharply increases in compensation no larger than the productivity trend would not have led to any improvement in real income. Workers could not be expected to accept such a result particularly in view of the previous rapid and consistent rise in corporate profits Recognizing this situation the Council in its and Reports did not suggest that wage increases should be limited to the trend growth of productivity. It did however continue to urge maximum possible restraint in both wage settlements and price adjustments and it continued to maintain the validity of the basic productivity principle for long-run price stability With wage increases substantially in excess of productivity it was also recognized that production costs in many industries would rise and that some price adjustments were inevitable. At the same time with profits generally at a high level many industries were in a position to absorb increases in labor costs either wholly or in considerable part. The Administration therefore continued to urge business executives to avoid or minimize price increases This stress on the economy-wide consequences of discretionary price and wage decisions has served an important educational role in addition to its direct effects on prices and wages. The discussion of standards for prices and wages has focused the attention of business labor and the public on the inflationary results of individual actions that add up to demands for income in excess of what the economy can produce. Awareness of this proposition has spread among key decisionmakers in both the business and labor communities in recent years FUTURE ROLE OF COOPERATION The cooperation of labor and business in the observance of voluntary standards of price and wage behavior is an essential part of a full program to combine high employment and reasonable price stability. Such cooperation must be viewed as a supplement to appropriate fiscal and monetary policy and to measures for improving the efficiency of the economy The task immediately ahead is to make significant progress toward restoring price stability during The public and private policies essential to this end are discussed in Chapter Once this has been achieved however the essential task for the longer run will still remain. Mandatory price and wage controls are no answer Such controls freeze the market mechanism which guides the economy in responding to the changing pattern and volume of demand ; they distort decisions on production and employment ; they require a huge and cumbersome bureaucracy ; they impose a heavy and costly burden on business ; they perpetrate inevitable injustices. They are incompatible with a free enterprise economy and must be regarded as a last resort appropriate only in an extreme emergency such as all-out war Better ways must be devised of establishing standards for voluntary restraint and for eliciting cooperation from those who enjoy discretionary market power. But if voluntary restraint is to be effective better means must be found of focusing the attention and eliciting the cooperation of all private groups concerned business labor the public in dealing with the issue of maintaining reasonable price stability at high employment. The task will not be easy since it requires that each group accept some sacrifice of its apparent short-run interest in order to serve its own and the public 's longrun interests In the past neither labor nor business played a major role in the development of the guidepost approach. In the future effective cooperation is much more likely if those to whom the standards will apply participate in their development. Persuasion can be helped by representation In view of such considerations the President instructed the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability to : " Work with representatives of business labor and the public to enlist cooperation toward responsible wage and price behavior " The institutional arrangements for increased business and labor participation can take many forms. This past year the Labor-Management Advisory Committee has begun the dialogue necessary to develop standards that business and labor leaders might be willing to accept jointly. The development of standards by such a cooperative effort would strengthen the educational role of voluntary restraint and increase its effectiveness It is essential that the system remain on a voluntary basis. The principal sanction consistent with voluntary restraint is the force of public opinion This means that decisions which significantly threaten the public interest must be spotlighted. Since many wage and price decisions are complicated and difficult to analyze some competent authority must call attention to flagrant departures from standards of responsible decisionmaking. Unpleasant as such a task may be it is inescapable. The precise way in which this task is carried out is less important than public acceptance of the necessity equity and reasonableness of the procedures used to review price and wage decisions CONCLUSION This chapter has reviewed some of the programs which may improve the ability of the economy to maintain reasonably stable prices at high levels of employment. It has also reviewed the contribution that can be made by voluntary cooperation toward price and wage decisions consistent with the public interest. Some conclusions emerge clearly It is not inevitable that pressures on labor supply should begin to appear when unemployment falls below percent. It is not inevitable that wage increases should substantially exceed productivity gains and that prices should begin to rise rapidly as the economy reaches high employment It is not inevitable that price stability should be restored only through the wasteful remedy of repeated doses of economic stagnation and high unemployment But to meet the challenge the Nation must move ahead vigorously and imaginatively on many fronts. Both labor and product markets require nu- merous structural improvements and voluntary restraint must make an even greater contribution than in the past The task of reconciling price stability with high employment can not be accomplished by Government alone or by business alone or by labor alone It requires clear comprehension by all groups of the overwhelming importance of this goal And it requires an awareness of the bleakness of the alternatives : either achieving stability by sacrificing high employment or realizing high employment by acquiescing in persistent inflation. We can not and need not accept either of these alternatives Chapter The International Economy I N THE PAST TWO DECADES enormous progress has been made in building a closely knit international economy. Remarkable growth in the volume of international commerce has gone hand in hand with sustained world prosperity ; each has contributed to the other. At times deep and obvious strains in the international monetary system have imperiled this progress but these financial difficulties have been weathered without a serious setback in economic growth or world trade The world economy emerged from the Second World War in a gravely weakened state with many countries suffering severely from war damage International trade was disrupted and exchange controls and bilateral trad ' ing arrangements were the order of the day. However the recuperative strength of the European nations assisted by U.S. aid resulted in rapid economic recovery During the 's the increasingly prosperous countries of western Europe liberalized trade and capital movements substantially. Meanwhile U.S. capital exports promoted economic growth abroad and our balance-of-payments deficits contributed to a desirable expansion of world monetary reserves However by the end of the 's U.S. deficits were beginning to cause concern. A nagging question was raised : Did the international monetary system require continuous U.S. deficits and an intolerable persistent weakening of the reserve position of the United States if serious reserve inadequacies for other countries were to be avoided ? The growth of world trade and income has continued indeed has accelerated during the 's. But there have been periodic monetary disturbances associated with expected or feared realignments of exchange rates While financial officials have shown wisdom and ingenuity in modifying and strengthening the international monetary system important problems remain. Recent major financial disturbances have emphasized the need for further evolution to insure that the system can continue to support growing wrorld trade and income This chapter briefly reviews the growth of world trade and output and some of the key policy issues regarding our trade relationships with the developed and less developed countries. The review is followed by discussion of international financial problems and by analysis of several current proposals designed to strengthen the international monetary system ECONOMIC GROWTH AND WORLD TRADE In the years since the Second World War growth has come to be accepted as a normal feature of the world economy. It is easy to forget that this was not the case in earlier periods. The depression years of the 's present a particularly sharp contrast. But by any historical comparison the economic progress of the last years is unprecedented World income has more than doubled since In the fifties growth was especially rapid in the western European countries while in recent years the United States has grown more vigorously ( Table ) Japan has experienced rapid and sustained growth throughout the period With their more rapid population growth the less developed countries taken together have experienced a slower growth of per capita income than have the developed countries even though total income has grown at about the same rate in both groups of countries. Growth of per capita income has varied widely among the less developed countries in recent years ranging from high rates for Iran Korea Taiwan and Thailand to virtual stagnation or even decline for some parts of Asia and Latin America TRADE AND TRADE BARRIERS The rapid growth of recent decades has contributed much to the increase in world trade ( Table ) A continuing reduction in trade barriers has TABLE Growth of gross national product in developed and less developed countries [ Percentage change per year ] Total real GNP Per capita real GNP Region and country to to to to to to United States Europe1 EEC2 Other countries3 Japan * Less developed countries5 Developed countries Latin America Near East6 South Asia East Asia Africa o o o o O * Excludes Spain Greece and Turkey European Economic Community ( EEC ) consists of Belgium Luxembourg France Germany ( Federal Republic and West Berlin ) Italy and Netherlands Consists of Canada Australia New Zealand South Africa and Japan i Change from to Estimates based on countries for which data are available Includes Greece and Turkey Not available Note. Data exclude U.S.S.R. other East European countries Mainland China and Cuba Source : Agency for International Development TABLE Growth of world exports [ Percentage change per year ] to Region and country to World total. to Developed countries. _ Industrialized countries * Other developed countries Less developed countries.. Latin America Other Western Hemisphere.. Middle East Asia excluding Japan Africa excluding South Africa Other countries By type of export : Selected exporters of manufactures Selected oil exporters * Other less developed countries Includes United States United Kingdom industrial Europe Canada and Japan Includes other Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Includes Israel Hong Kong Korea and Taiwan * Includes Iran Libya Saudi Arabia Venezuela and Kuwait Note : Data include Yugoslavia but exclude U.S.S.R. other East European countries Mainland China and Cuba Source : International Monetary Fund also stimulated trade. As a result of six multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) levels of protection have been repeatedly lowered during the past years As the staged tariff reductions negotiated during the recent Kennedy Round are completed during the next years this downward trend will continue Even after these reductions tariffs will remain a significant barrier to trade and further efforts will be required to reduce them Nontariff Barriers As tariffs have been reduced other barriers to trade have increased in relative importance. Nontariff barriers have been adopted for a variety of reasons. For example some import quotas are surviving remnants of supposedly temporary restrictions imposed by certain countries during periods of balance-of-payments difficulties as permitted under the rules of the GATT. Other barriers result from domestic laws aimed at protecting consumers such as sanitary and health regulations. Government procurement policies discriminating in favor of domestic producers are another form of nontariff barrier and are at times a serious impediment to international competition for government contracts While protection on industrial goods has been reduced in recent years restrictions on agricultural trade including tariffs have risen. These barriers are of particular concern to the United States because they have proven to be a major hindrance to U.S. agricultural exports O The GATT rules are interpreted as permitting a country to exempt exports from indirect taxes and to impose on imports a charge equivalent to these indirect taxes. Countries such as the United States that rely heavily on income or other direct taxes may suffer a disadvantage since similar " border adjustments " are not permitted for direct taxes. This urgent problem is under intensive discussion with our trading partners Work on other nontariff barriers is going forward in the GATT. Continuing and concerted efforts are necessary both for the United States and for its trading partners. Meaningful negotiations require that the United States as well as foreign countries be prepared to make concessions The barrier maintained by the United States that is of greatest concern to our trading partners is the " American Selling Price " provision Under this practice applicable to certain benzenoid chemicals and a few other goods tariffs are based on the prices of domestic products rather than actual prices of imports During the Kennedy Round conditional agreement was reached for the United States to eliminate this provision in return for commitments by others to undertake additional reductions in tariffs on chemicals. In addition Belgium France Italy Switzerland and the United Kingdom agreed as part of the package to modify certain of their nontariff barriers. Legislation to eliminate the American Selling Price provision would permit this significant agreement to be carried out Adjustment Assistance The Trade Expansion Act of provided for adjustment assistance to those injured by tariff reductions. It recognized that because the gains from trade are widely distributed to the consuming public the Nation as a whole should share the costs of adjustment associated with trade liberalization. In practice however the criteria of the Act have proved too rigorous In no actual case has it been possible to demonstrate as required both that tariff reductions have been the major cause of an increase in imports and that the increase in imports has been the major cause of serious injury to an industry firm or group of workers. Legislative modification of these criteria is required in order to establish an effective program of adjustment assistance LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES International trade and capital transfers have made important contributions to the growth of many less developed countries during the postwar period and they will have a major role to play in the future As shown in Table less developed countries have not shared fully in the growth of world trade. Apart from a few countries which export manufactured goods or petroleum exports of the less developed countries have grown only about half as rapidly since as those of developed nations Most of the less developed countries depend heavily on export earnings from the sale of primary products. These products are subject to marked year-to-year price fluctuations and in some cases to declining price trends making them a highly unreliable source of foreign exchange. Some experts have proposed formal international commodity agreements aimed at changing market price behavior. While some commodity agreements are already in existence they have not provided a complete solution and few additional commodities appear suited to such agreements. Additional borrowing arrangements to compensate for shortfalls in export earnings similar to the facility established by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in have also been suggested. The staffs of the IMF and the World Bank have been studying the problem of volatile export receipts and are expected to report soon on the additional part these two institutions might play in arrangements to increase the stability of foreign exchange inflows to primary producers Tariff Preferences In the long run dependence of the less developed countries on primary products can be lessened through increased exports of manufactured goods The advanced countries can assist in this process by removing some of their current restrictions on imports of those manufactured and semimanufactured goods of particular interest to less developed countries. Since further general tariff reductions seem unlikely in the immediate future the granting of tariff preferences to less developed countries may represent a way of achieving a more rapid reduction of these barriers The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) unanimously endorsed the early establishment of a system of generalized nonreciprocal tariff preferences for less developed countries The United States and other developed nations are now engaged in discussions to determine whether a mutually acceptable system can be devised A generalized tariff preference system would help the less developed countries but it wrould be only a modest step toward meeting their total foreign exchange needs. The developed countries are likely to insist on excluding certain products from the preference scheme and trade in other commodities will continue to be restricted by quotas and other nontariff barriers Furthermore the initial benefits of the preference scheme would go largely to the minority of less developed countries that have already begun to export manufactured goods Foreign Aid The experience of the 's and the 's has demonstrated the value of foreign assistance in promoting economic development. Foreign capital and technical assistance from both public and private sources have been significant factors in the highly successful development efforts of such countries as Greece Israel Korea Mexico Pakistan and Taiwan While the total volume of foreign assistance has been growing during the 's it has not kept pace with the rising ability of the less developed countries to make efficient use of such funds. Foreign assistance expenditures by the United States rose sharply in fiscal but have not increased significantly since then. Unless the recent declining trend in appropriations is reversed expenditures must ultimately fall The International Development Association an affiliate of the World Bank was established in to make credits available to developing countries on liberal terms. It has been an effective channel of multilateral assistance of which the United States has been a major proponent. However its resources have been largely exhausted and replenishment is essential. It is important that the United States authorize its contribution promptly because the contributions of other countries depend on the U.S decision THE BRETTON WOODS SYSTEM The rapid growth in the world economy in the post war period has been built on a greatly improved financial base. At the Bretton Woods Conference the major industrial countries created through the IMF an international monetary system based on pegged exchange rates. The system has been strengthened by the great strides in cooperation in the IMF and in other institutions such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) This cooperation has paid handsome dividends in times of crisis. International understanding carefully nurtured during periods of calm has permitted the multilateral assessment of problems and the determination of mutually acceptable solutions. This was well illustrated in March when decisions taken with respect to the private gold market ended the immediate threat to stability and basically strengthened the system. At times of severe strain such as the British devaluation in international cooperation has contained crises and prevented chain reactions To be sure the international monetary system has had its problems. Crises have occurred all too frequently. Yet the system has consistently been able to meet the needs of the day it has evolved and adapted and it can be strengthened further to meet the remaining strains. While conserving proven arrangements governments seem increasingly ready to consider additional improvements. Proposed evolutionary changes require careful study and deliberation based on widespread official and public discussions. It is particularly important that these involve the bankers and traders who would be directly affected. The following discussion is intended to contribute to such a dialogue rather than to make specific recommendations International monetary disturbances have centered around three interrelated problems : adjustment confidence and liquidity " Adjustment " is the process of reestablishing balance-of-payments equilibrium when a country is substantially out of balance. An adjustment problem exists when the relevant forces and policies are either too weak to reestablish equilibrium within a reasonable period or involve domestic or international effects that are inordinately costly " Confidence " refers to the willingness to hold monetary assets. A problem arises when holders either become dissatisfied with the safety of some of these assets or see the possibility of profit in switching them abruptly into a different form. This problem is related to adjustment : dissatisfaction with a currency often reflects a lack of faith in the ability of the issuing country to eliminate its balance-of-payments difficulty without resort to a change in its exchange parity " Liquidity " relates to international monetary reserves which are held by countries to finance temporary balance-of-payments deficits. If world reserves are too low or too high or if their rate of growth is inadequate or excessive a liquidity problem exists. Liquidity needs are closely related to adjustment : the less rapidly and effectively the adjustment process works the higher the level of reserves needed to finance temporary balance-of-payments deficits and the less likely it is that any given level of reserves will be adequate THE LIQUIDITY PROBLEM A country incurs a balance-of-payments deficit when its payments to other countries exceed its receipts from them apart from " settlement items " required to square accounts. The immediate consequence of a deficit is that the foreign exchange market becomes unbalanced. More of the deficit country 's currency is supplied than demanded at the existing price of the currency and this will depress the price the exchange rate. Because of their commitment to a fixed exchange rate however central banks intervene to limit the fall in the rate. The floor on the exchange rate is within percent of the official parity established by the country in agreement with the IMF In order to prevent the exchange rate from dropping below this floor a country in deficit must use its foreign exchange reserves to buy the excess supply of its own currency. If the country has ample reserves it will have sufficient breathing space to restore equilibrium without resort to policies of excessive domestic restraint or direct intervention in external transactions If reserves are scanty however pressures will develop to deal immediately with the deficit even through undesirable means. If a general shortage of reserves should occur economic growth could be retarded by widespread deflationary policies and international trade and investment could be burdened by restrictions. On the other hand excessive amounts of reserves could unduly weaken the incentives of deficit countries to adjust thereby encouraging worldwide inflation TYPES OF RESERVES Existing stocks of world reserves include gold foreign exchange and IMF reserve positions Gold is the largest component of reserves but gold holdings have expanded very little for many years ; most recently they have declined. As was discussed in the Council 's Annual Report nonmonetary demand for gold seems to be absorbing a substantial and increasing share of current new production at existing prices The value of official gold reserves would be increased if the official price of gold were raised. This action is explicitly rejected for compelling reasons Although it would immediately increase world reserves it could not provide the orderly growth of reserves needed by the world economy. It would grant unearned windfall gains to private speculators to gold producers and to countries holding their reserves mainly in gold ; it would encourage speculation ; and it would divert scarce resources into the production of a metal already adequately supplied for nonmonetary uses The foreign exchange component of reserves grows only if the major reserve currency countries the United States and the United Kingdom incur balance-of-payments deficits ; and if surplus countries are willing to hold more dollars and sterling. Thus as the foreign exchange component of world reserves is expanded the liquidity position of the reserve currency countries may be undermined. It is generally recognized that the United States should not run large deficits and policies have been formulated and implemented for reaching an acceptable payments position. The United Kingdom also is determined not to run deficits and has in fact designed its economic policy to yield balance-of-payments surpluses in order to retire external debt To some extent such debt repayments will actually contract world reserves Thus world reserves can not be expected to grow substantially through expansion of official holdings of either gold or foreign exchange. Some limited expansion through normal IMF lending is to be expected. Reserve positions in the Fund are expanded however only when countries draw on the Fund beyond their " gold tranche " or automatic drawing rights. In so doing they accept obligations to repay. The natural reluctance of countries to become overcommitted to the Fund or to other countries through borrowings sharply limits the probable expansion of reserves in this form SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS In order to deal with the liquidity problem steps have been taken to create a new international reserve asset the Special Drawing Right ( SDR ) as discussed in the Council 's Annual Report. SDR 's will be allocated by the IMF to member countries. They will be a form of owned reserves usable for balance-of-payments needs without an obligation of repayment. Their use is subject only to the reconstitution provision which requires that dur- ing the initial 5-year period a country 's average holdings of SDR 's should be at least percent of its average net cumulative allocation over this period A draft outline of the proposed arrangements for issuing SDR 's was approved at the meetings of the IMF in Rio de Janiero and subsequently translated into legal form by the Executive Directors of the Fund. In March at a meeting in Stockholm of Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the major industrial countries a consensus was reached on an amendment to the IMF Articles of Agreement. The amendment was subsequently approved by an overwhelming majority of the Board of Governors of the Fund The amendment was then submitted to member countries for ratification which requires acceptance by member countries ( total membership is ) having percent of the voting power in the IMF. By January the amendment had been accepted by countries representing percent of the voting power. Seven countries have taken the further required step of depositing with the IMF instruments of participation indicating that they are prepared to carry out their obligations under the proposed amendment The United States acting with overwhelming bipartisan support in the Congress was the first country to complete both of these steps. When participation has been certified by member countries having percent of total IMF quotas the new facility will be established in the Fund Resolving the world liquidity problem requires actual creation of SDR 's a major step beyond legal establishment of the facility. The basic decisions lie ahead namely when to activate the facility and in what amounts. These decisions will require collective judgment concerning the desired growth of world reserves and the portion of that growth which should take the form of Special Drawing Rights THE NEED FOR RESERVE GROWTH The problem of estimating reserve needs has attracted much interest among economists and government officials in the last few years. The needed volume of reserves depends in part on the probable size of temporary balance-of-payments deficits which must be financed because this affects the judgment of monetary authorities as to the amounts of reserves they need to hold. According to findings by the staff of the IMF the magnitude of deficits requiring financing has tended to increase at the same rate as the volume of world transactions. This suggests that the prospective growth of world transactions might be a helpful guide to the required growth in reserves. Since trade in commodities makes up the largest portion of international transactions and is the one most reliably reported in statistics it is useful as an indicator of trends The historical relation between the growth of reserves and the growth of trade ( measured by imports ) is depicted in Chart Between and imports increased percent a year while reserves grew at only percent a year. Thus in the aggregate reserves declined quite substantially Chart World Trade and Reserves BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( ratio scale ) ~ WORLD TRADE ( ANNUAL IMPORTS ) " .I/ESTIMATES BASED ON DATA FOR FIRST QUARTERS NOTE.-TRADE DURING YEAR RESERVES AT END OF YEAR. DATA INCLUDE YUGOSLAVIA BUT EXCLUDE U.S.S.R. OTHER EAST EUROPEAN COUNTRIES MAINLAND CHINA AND CUBA SOURCE : INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND in relation to imports and probably in relation to the average size of deficits These over-all results are however heavily influenced by the large net decline in reserves of the United States the world 's largest holder. The United States was able to give up these reserves because of its excess holdings at the beginning of the period. But this loss can not continue. No other country now appears to have excess reserves sufficient to replace the United States as a willing and able net loser of reserves The relationship between growth of reserves and growth of imports is significantly altered when the United States is excluded from world totals Between and reserves of countries other than the United States grew percent a year on the average while their imports grew at percent Some have suggested that reserves in the future should grow at essentially the same rate as world transactions about percent a year to avoid any further decline in the ratio of average reserves to potential deficits. However the world economy has been able to adapt to reductions in this ratio in the past. And a moderate further decline may be appropriate both because countries should have increasing access to borrowed reserves and because possible improvements in the adjustment process may reduce the need for reserves Some guidance might be derived from the percent growth rate of reserves experienced between and by countries other than the United States. In any case a major increase from the very slow growth of the past years is needed. Whatever the desired rate of growth of reserves its achievement will depend mainly on the creation of Special Drawing Rights since other components of total reserves as noted above are unlikely to expand significantly While it is still too early to make a decision about the proper size of the initial issue of SDR 's amounts of $ billion or $ billion a year which have been used as illustrative examples of SDR creation appear to be inadequate. These amounts imply a rate of reserve growth of only about to percent. With such slow growth the SDR facility might fail to achieve its objective of avoiding a destructive competition for reserves THE CONFIDENCE PROBLEM Shifts in confidence can be reflected in two ways : through actions initiated in the private economy and through actions by governments. Private holders of liquid assets constantly adjust the composition of their holdings When they decide to shift from the financial assets of one country to those of another a process described for simplicity as shifting from one currency to another either exchange rates or official reserve holdings or both are affected. In addition shifts by private holders between currencies and gold can have an impact on monetary stability although the significance of such shifts has been substantially altered by the gold accord reached in Washington in March PRIVATE SHIFTING AMONG CURRENCIES Some shifts by private holders out of one currency into another are merely responses to differentials in short term interest rates. Other shifts among currencies may be induced by the expectation of or anxiety about a change in exchange rates and thus can be viewed as reflecting changes in confidence. Such speculative movements occur when the payments and reserve positions of some countries create significant uncertainties that exchange parities will remain fixed. Speculative capital flows can result from direct sales of the suspect currency for stronger ones or through the operation of the so-called " leads and lags " mechanism under which normal commercial disbursements denominated in foreign currency are accelerated while receipts denominated in domestic currency are delayed. ( This was an important element in the French crisis. ) A crisis of confidence can severely deplete the monetary reserves of a nation. Flows of this kind can be very large up to $ billion in a single day Crises resulting from shifts of confidence have occurred from time to time. At different times in the Canadian dollar the British pound and the French franc were under downward pressures and the German mark was subjected to upward pressures. As international businesses and financial institutions have matured additional currencies have been brought into wide international use. Thus the number of currencies potentially subject to such crises has increased It is quite appropriate that countries should borrow reserves if necessary to deal with temporary emergencies of this kind. The " swap network " has traditionally provided lines of credit among central banks for this purpose ; it was expanded and enlarged during Further improvements could be made in central bank borrowing procedures through a proposal whereby speculative funds would be immediately " recycled " returned to countries suffering losses from countries experiencing gains Even if generous lines of short term credit are available they leave countries vulnerable because crises may be long lasting. Lenders or borrowers may be reluctant to renew loans fearing overcommitment. Fortunately in recent years improvements in cooperation among the central banks and in the procedures of the IMF have reduced such fears However generous borrowing facilities may be they can not deal fully with a crisis of private confidence that arises from a major disequilibrium in the underlying balance-of-payments position of a country. In such circumstances prompt and decisive measures to achieve a basic adjustment are the key to the restoration of confidence. But the requirements for adequate adjustment are aggravated when a loss of confidence imposes a heavy drain on reserves PRIVATE DEMAND FOR GOLD Private asset holders may respond to a loss of confidence in a currency by buying gold rather than other currencies particularly when the choice of a " safe " foreign currency is not obvious. Gold speculation is rather common in many countries although not in the United States where it is illegal Private imports of gold can be an important channel for currency flight and thus become a claim on a country 's reserves. Furthermore because the price of gold in the private market is sometimes used by speculators as a barometer of confidence in currencies increases in that price can intensify currency runs While governments still retain some concern over private demands for gold they are now much less directly involved than prior to March For the preceding years countries participating actively in the " gold pool " had stabilized the price of gold in the private market in London by buying and selling near the official price of $ an ounce. In March these countries agreed to discontinue their activities Prior to the pool was a net purchaser of gold and the resulting additions of gold to monetary reserves strengthened the international monetary system. Subsequently however the pool became a substantial net seller parting with gold out of monetary stocks to keep the price from rising. Following British devaluation in late and in the early months of the volume of net gold sales became a serious drain on international monetary reserves. Moreover the market took on a highly speculative tone. Several large and irregular waves of gold purchases had destabilizing domestic monetary effects in certain countries and transmitted speculative fever to foreign exchange markets In March the active gold pool countries agreed to cease selling gold in the private market and agreed that purchases of gold from the private market were no longer necessary. They obtained the cooperation of other central banks in this decision. As a result the international monetary system has been substantially insulated from the destabilizing effects of changes in the private demand for gold and gold can no longer be drained from monetary stocks into private uses SHIFTS AMONG OFFICIAL RESERVE ASSETS Problems may arise if monetary authorities decide to shift their holdings abruptly among the various reserve assets. They may shift for political or other reasons but they are often motivated by changes in the relative degrees of confidence attaching to the future values of these assets. For example if official holders fearing a sterling devaluation were to shift into dollars the United Kingdom would be forced to give up some of its international reserves. Likewise if official holders of dollars decided to convert them into gold the United States would lose some of its reserves. Crises of confidence may feed on themselves ; for example a significant decline in U.K. reserves could further weaken the confidence of both official and private holders of sterling Shifts out of officially held sterling by sterling area countries became a serious problem following the British devaluation of November The great majority of the sterling area countries did not devalue along with the British ; thus the purchasing power of the reserves of sterling holders was reduced in terms of their own currencies as well as in dollars. This loss led to a movement toward reserve diversification which became particularly pronounced in the spring of In recognition that the burden of such reserve diversification should not be borne by the British alone industrial countries including the United States together with the Bank for International Settlements set up a new $ billion loan facility in September It was designed to provide finance to Britain to replace reserves lost as a result of the decline of sterling balances within the sterling area. The BIS will act as an intermediary and will obtain the required funds by borrowing in international markets by accepting reserve deposits from central banks of the sterling area and by calling upon standby lines of credit provided by the cooperating countries. The United Kingdom has given a dollar-value guarantee to the sterling area on eligible official sterling reserves and the sterling-area countries in return have undertaken to maintain an agreed proportion of their reserves in sterling The new facility should go far toward moderating the sterling diversification problem Some observers have pointed to the possibility of large-scale conversions of dollars into gold by central banks. The likelihood of such an abrupt shift of preferences must however be viewed in perspective. There are several reasons why countries choose to hold dollars. Dollars are useful because they can be readily employed in exchange markets and are more easily put to use in emergencies than gold. Countries recognize that they can convert dollars to gold as they see fit although they may at times refrain from gold conversions through a cooperative desire not to weaken the international monetary system by reducing total world reserves. Dollars unlike gold earn interest and the efficient American money and capital markets make investment easy. Thus there is and should continue to be a strong demand for dollars by central banks Some central banks have a preference arising mainly from tradition in favor of gold as a reserve asset. They often appear unconcerned about earning interest on reserves perhaps because their income is usually turned over to their national treasuries When dollars are acquired by countries with a preference for gold from countries with a preference for currencies as reserves conversions into gold may occur. This could happen even with no increase in total dollars held abroad and no shift in general sentiment toward gold or away from the dollar. Furthermore as world reserves grow there would be a demand for added gold if countries attempted to maintain their " traditional " ratios of gold to total reserves. However countries recognize that gold will decline as a proportion of total world reserves. And as the SDR agreement indicated they seem prepared collectively to adjust the composition of their reserve holdings Preferences that now exist among sterling dollars and gold could become more complicated as SDR 's are added thereby creating further possibilities for shifts in the composition of reserves. Certain safeguards however were provided in the plan : the power given the IMF to direct SDR 's to various holders was designed to prevent inadvertent destabilizing shifts from SDR 's into other types of reserves. Furthermore additional SDR 's could be created to offset world reserve losses arising from shifts among reserve assets PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVING RESERVE MANAGEMENT It has been suggested that agreement on mutually acceptable rules of reserve management might help to avoid destabilizing changes in reserve composition. If deficit countries used each of their reserve assets in proportion to its share in their total holdings and if surplus countries were willing to accept and hold different types of reserves in the exact proportions made available the system would be internally consistent. Before such rules could be endorsed their workings would need to be examined and agreed upon in detail A more sweeping suggested reform would be to eliminate the differences among reserve assets. Countries could combine all their reserves by depositing them in a joint account which would be drawn upon when reserves were used. Such a scheme was discussed in the September Report of the Subcommittee on International Exchange and Payments of the Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) of the Congress. In an examination of proposals of this kind many questions arise which would require careful study : What would be the role of the United States ? Would participation be voluntary or compulsory ? Would countries be permitted to withdraw from the pool ? In view of the progress already made in dealing with world liquidity and in strengthening international cooperation how urgent is such a major reform ? THE ADJUSTMENT PROBLEM The Bretton Woods system was designed to correct the weaknesses in the international monetary system that were apparent in the interwar years Faced with domestic economic collapse during the 's some countries attempted by deliberately undervaluing their currencies to stimulate exports retard imports and thus add to employment. But one country 's gain was another country 's loss. Competitive devaluations and restrictions on exchange and trade imposed a heavy toll on international commerce The postwar economy was built upon the general understanding that full employment would be the target of national economic policies and that this goal would be sought primarily through domestic monetary and fiscal policies. It was also expected that excessive price increases would normally be avoided. In the absence of both chronic deflation and chronic inflation continuous balance-of-payments problems were viewed as unlikely. The IMF was to help in the adjustment process by granting credit to allow countries time to adjust without parity changes Provisions were included to put pressure on surplus countries to take an appropriate part in the adjustment process for example the " scarce currency " clause which permits discrimination in trade against persistent surplus countries whose currencies are formally declared to be scarce. Under these conditions a system of stable exchange rates was expected to operate successfully and to stimulate international trade and capital movements while removing the temptation for governments to solve domestic problems by external means Although pegged parities were made the normal operating rule of the system provision was also made for changing parities to correct fundamental disequilibria. The meaning of " fundamental disequilibrium " was not fully clarified but the expectation at the time was that changes in parities would not be unusual. Actually parity changes for developed countries have been rare. In part this is because major countries have been reasonably successful in avoiding excesses of inflation and deflation ; but it also reflects concern about the serious economic and political consequences of changes in the parities of major currencies including the possibility of a worldwide chain reaction. Furthermore greater freedom for international capital transactions has complicated the process of changing parities CAUSES OF DISTURBANCES Despite the real accomplishments of stabilization policies the international economy has been subject to disturbances. Some have been caused by the relatively mild cyclical fluctuations that have occurred and others by differences among countries in long term trends of prices economic growth technological advance and import demand. Countries differ with respect to the maximum rate of price increase or the maximum volume of idle resources that they view as tolerable. In general a country incurring price increases greater than the average of other countries will find its exports becoming less competitive and its domestic market more accessible to imports Countries which grow particularly rapidly tend to experience stronger increases in imports ( although they may simultaneously improve the competitive position of their exports ) Or a country may experience long term deterioration in its external position if its demand for imports is more responsive to income growth than is the demand for its exports. These factors singly and in combination have led to some serious imbalances Adjustment problems may also reflect in part an insufficient growth of global reserves. When over-all reserves are growing only slowly there can be acute pressures on deficit countries to adjust. At the same time surplus countries may find that their reserves are not accumulating too rapidly ; hence they may have little incentive to correct their imbalances. A world shortage of reserves could particularly complicate the adjustment problem of the United States subjecting it to intense pressures from other countries in weak payments positions or from countries not satisfied with their reserve holdings. The United States might literally be prevented from correcting its balance-of-payments deficit because every improvement in the U.S position would cause some other countries to take protective actions to counter any weakening of their own positions There are a number of means open to a country for correcting balanceof-payments disequilibria without altering its exchange rate. These means differ in speed in effectiveness and in their side effects. They include internal measures such as fiscal and monetary policies together with supporting incomes manpower and regional policies ; and direct measures affecting international movements of goods services or capital INTERNAL ADJUSTMENTS Often the domestic policies which would contribute to balance-of-payments adjustments are also desirable for domestic reasons. Thus if a country faces a balance-of-payments deficit and rapidly rising prices it should follow tighter monetary and fiscal measures supported by incomes policy to help restrain wages and prices both to improve its trade balance and to curb inflation. Indeed one argument sometimes made in favor of a system of fixed exchange rates is that balance-of-payments deficits stiffen the resolve of governments to achieve price stability. Conversely if high levels of unemployment are accompanied by payments surpluses expansionary domestic policies are clearly indicated However a country may face a balance-of-payments deficit at a time when domestic demand is not excessive. It will then be understandably reluctant to attack its payments problem by restrictive monetary and fiscal policies. The opposite problem may arise if a payments surplus occurs when the domestic situation calls for anti-inflationary policies While the situations of surplus and deficit countries are symmetrical incentives to adjust may not be equally strong in the two cases. There is no definite limit on the accumulation of reserves so surplus countries often are under little pressure to restore equilibrium. But for deficit countries whose freedom of action is constrained by a limited supply of reserves pressures to take corrective action may become inexorable. If real progress is to be made in achieving a better balance of world payments it is crucial that surplus countries participate in the adjustment process as was indicated in the Report on the Balance of Payments Adjustment Process by Working Party No. of OECD Changes in the Policy Mix There are some opportunities to mitigate conflicts between international and domestic goals by altering the mix of monetary and fiscal policies. By influencing interest rates monetary policies have direct effects on capital flows as well as on domestic demand. If a country has a balance-of-payments deficit and a satisfactory or inadequate level of domestic demand fiscal policy may be eased and monetary policy simultaneously tightened. This combination can in principle avoid any reduction of internal demand and capture the benefits of tighter money in reducing capital outflows or attracting foreign capital. Thus it may be possible to improve the balance of payments without adding to unemployment. The reverse combination of policies may be used by countries facing the surplus-inflation dilemma While changes in the mix of monetary and fiscal policy have significant possibilities and they can be reinforced by appropriate incomes and manpower policies such adjustments can not always be relied upon as an escape from major conflicts in objectives Some of the balance-of-payments gains resulting from interest rate adjustments may be temporary. A change in interest rates may initially cause investors to make large adjustments in the composition of their existing portfolios of financial assets. Once this initial stock adjustment is completed however further gains from this source may be quite small There are limits on the willingness of countries to alter the mix of monetary and fiscal policies. A deficit country may hesitate to raise interest rates fearing that such a move would deter capital formation and thereby curtail the improvement in productivity that may be a basic solution to its balance-of-payments difficulties. Or high interest rates may be objectionable because of their uneven impact on the domestic economy. Or a growing level of foreign indebtedness may be undesirable because it will increase the burden of service payments Finally increases in domestic interest rates may lead to higher interest rates abroad. In that event the differentials between foreign and domestic rates may diminish weakening the impact on capital flows. In the absence of international coordination of monetary policies efforts by deficit countries to tighten credit may lead to a worldwide escalation of interest rates This may not only impede the immediate objectives of the deficit countries but may also dampen world economic growth. Clearly the adjustment mechanism could benefit from a continued strengthening of international cooperation in this area of policy Thus there are often important limitations on the practical scope for adjustments in the monetary-fiscal mix as a means of reconciling domestic and international objectives. One important principle stands out. In a country with a serious balance-of-payments problem the use of monetary policy for expansionary domestic purposes may be severely constrained ; and primary reliance may therefore have to be placed on fiscal policy to pursue stabilization objectives. In the United States and in many other countries this implies the need for greater speed and flexibility in the implementation of fiscal measures MEASURES DIRECTLY AFFECTING INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS In the OECD Adjustment Process report it was recognized that fiscal and monetary policies no matter how skillfully combined can not always be relied upon as the exclusive means of balance-of-payments adjustment Given the many goals of economic policy numerous instruments are needed Under some circumstances the report suggests the use of measures directly affecting international transactions Most countries do make use of specific measures affecting trade or capital movements as part of their adjustment. These policies may help to reconcile domestic and international objectives. Such measures as import duties or quotas export subsidies changes in border taxes and taxes and prohibitions on international capital movements offer opportunities for improving the payments balance while avoiding major effects on the domestic economy Some of these measures such as special tariffs and export subsidies are prohibited by the GATT but their use has at times been sanctioned implicitly or explicitly so long as they were considered temporary. Likewise exchange controls on current transactions are generally discouraged for countries accepting the full obligations of convertibility in the IMF but specific authorizations have been granted under emergency conditions Trade Measures The only trade measure explicitly condoned by the GATT for safeguarding the balance of payments is the use of temporary quantitative restrictions. Quotas on imports can be a very powerful instrument. But they can be very disruptive of normal commercial arrangements troublesome to impose and administer and difficult to abandon. Over the last few years developed countries have shown a growing preference for the use of import surcharges export subsidies or combinations of the two At times countries change their normal pattern of tax adjustments at the border in an attempt to promote balance-of-payments equilibrium. When a deficit country is taking only partial advantage of its opportunity under the GATT to make border adjustments for domestic indirect taxes it can help itself by moving to full compensation. However such action by a surplus country conflicts with the policies that should be followed for balance-of-payments adjustment. For example on January and July in conjunction with an internal tax reform the German government raised its rate of border adjustment. This tended to increase the German merchandise surplus much as a small devaluation of the mark would have done and at a time when Germany 's balance-of-payments position was very strong indeed Another example of a change in a domestic tax which permitted an increase in border adjustments was the action taken by the French government in November A rise in value-added taxes which are eligible under the GATT for border adjustments was substituted for the existing payroll tax which was not eligible. In this case the aim of the increase in border adjustments was to help restore over-all payments equilibrium Also in November the German government reduced by percentage points its border charge on most imports and its tax rebate on most exports without any corresponding domestic tax changes. This measure was taken deliberately to reduce the large German trade surplus and had effects somewhat similar to an upward valuation of the mark When countries resort to trade measures to affect their balance-of-payments positions efforts should be made to minimize distortions. General import charges imposed by themselves favor production for the domestic market thus shrinking the volume of international trade while general export grants alone unduly favor production for export. When general import charges are combined with general export grants at the same rate these two tendencies offset each other with no more distortion of merchandise trade than would result from a devaluation Even such a uniform and general combination of import charges and export grants would distort the choice between merchandise transactions and other international flows such as tourism. Furthermore serious misalloca141 tions could occur if exemptions were given individual industries or classes of products. Finally even under the best of circumstances temporary trade measures may in practice become embedded and thus should be used with great caution. Nevertheless this approach may be useful under some conditions. It should be explored further to determine whether proper safeguards can be established to ensure that equal use is made by surplus and deficit countries and that the goals of liberal commercial policy are maintained Capital Account Measures All major countries take actions at times to influence international capital flows. The techniques employed range from special incentives for domestic investment to exchange controls and capital issues committees. There is some rationale for concentrating on the capital account since fewer basic adjustments in the allocation of real resources are required by shifts in financial flows than by changes in trade. And measures to influence the capital account are generally more easily reversed in response to shifting balanceof-payments fortunes Sometimes however restraints on capital movements develop into a patchwork of controls that involve major administrative difficulties bear down unevenly and inefficiently on different types of capital flows and create a search for loopholes. The distortions can be reduced to the extent that restraints can be applied more equally among categories of capital flows and interference can be minimized within any particular category There may be opportunities to make greater use of the price system by applying variable taxes to capital flows or by auctioning permits to export capital. While the allocation of capital might be improved and administrative burdens eased by innovations in the techniques of controlling capital flows any system of major restraints is bound to be far from ideal. The possible need for temporary direct measures on the capital account must be recognized but so should the long term benefits of greater freedom in capital flows among nations THE ADJUSTMENT PROBLEM OF THE UNITED STATES The difficulties of balance-of-payments adjustment for deficit countries are evident from the recent experience of the United States. In the early 's the United States was faced with a payments deficit at a time when its economy was operating far below capacity The causes of the deficit were numerous. The United States was shouldering an extraordinarily large share of the burden of providing for the security of the Free World and of supplying aid to less developed countries. The United States possessed the only large and sophisticated capital market in which foreigners could borrow freely and the European countries had advanced to the point where they desired capital and could attract it. Moreover because of Europe 's general economic progress and the formation of the EEC and the European Free Trade Association American companies had developed an intense interest in making direct investments there. Finally the U.S. competitive position had deteriorated during the 's The Over-All Strategy In the early 's U.S. domestic needs called for expansionary policies while traditional balance-of-payments remedies would have required greater restraint on demand. To reconcile this conflict a mixed strategy was followed. It emphasized those elements in the domestic expansion which tended to improve international competitiveness together with specific measures of a temporary nature to influence the external position. The selection of balance-of-payments measures reflected several concerns : the determination to maintain as far as possible liberal policies with respect to international trade and capital flows ; the desire not to shift problems to countries in a weak balance-of-payments position ; and the need to maintain the stability of the international monetary system which was so crucially dependent on the dollar. Further difficulties in designing appropriate balance-of-payments measures arose from uncertainty over how much correction was needed from the unpredictability of the immediate quantitative impact of particular actions and from the large and uncertain " feedback " effects inherent in the large size of the United States Some policies were clearly desirable on all counts such as improving knowledge with respect to export prospects trimming unnecessary government expenditures abroad encouraging other industrial countries to give larger amounts of aid to less developed countries pressing for a more equitable sharing of military burdens and removing a tax penalty on foreigners trading in American securities Reducing the Impact of Government Activities A further group of measures to reduce the foreign exchange costs of U.S military and foreign aid required more difficult decisions. In principle savings of foreign exchange in the military area could have been pursued through three alternative strategies : ( ) reducing the level of security ( ) obtaining increased contributions of military forces from other countries or ( ) reducing offsetting or neutralizing the foreign exchange costs of a maintained level of U.S. military effort. The first alternative was ruled out. The second was pursued but with little immediate prospect of success. Thus the third became the approach emphasized in the short run. Domestic producers were given a preference over foreigners in supplying defense needs at some added cost to the Federal budget. Foreign governments were urged to purchase more of their military equipment in the United States. In recent years special U.S. Treasury bonds have been sold to countries to neutralize their balance-of-payments inflows from U.S. military expenditures Reducing the foreign exchange costs of U.S. aid presented an equally difficult choice. Either the amount of foreign aid had to be reduced or a method had to be found to ensure that more of the money provided by the United States was spent in this country. The second alternative aid-tying was chosen. This tended to reduce the effectiveness of a given dollar amount of aid but the alternative of slashing the volume of aid would have been even more costly to recipient countries Restraining Capital Outflows While gains were obtained through these measures in the early sixties the over-all payments problem was intensified by a major increase in private capital outflows. Faced with an apparently insatiable demand for capital abroad the United States had the choice of raising domestic interest rates enough to price foreigners out of our market of taxing foreign loans specifically or of using direct controls to stop capital outflows. The first alternative was inconsistent with domestic needs for economic expansion. The second alternative was chosen when the Interest Equalization Tax ( IET ) was proposed in It substantially reduced foreign portfolio investments by Americans except new security issues from Canada and investments in less developed countries which were exempted. But demand for capital shifted to American banks so the IET was extended to longer term loans of banks. Other types of bank loans and direct investment were not covered by the tax and these forms of capital outflow kept expanding In response to a large outflow of capital at the end of voluntary programs were initiated in February to cover the major remaining capital flows. The American corporations which were large direct investors were asked to help by reducing their capital expenditures abroad by relying on foreign financing for a greater share of their investments or by expanding reflows of dividends to the United States. Banks and other financial institutions were meanwhile asked to follow guidelines established by the Federal Reserve Board which suggested quantitative limits on foreign lending Most if not all of these measures have been successful in achieving the objectives for which they were designed. The basic balance-of-payments position improved through and and the liquidity deficit was sharply reduced. Further progress was interrupted in by the mounting foreign exchange costs associated with the war in Vietnam and by the reduced trade surplus resulting from overly rapid domestic expansion Because the U.S. external position deteriorated sharply late in and the stability of the international monetary system seemed in serious danger a new set of measures was proposed by the President on January This program included mandatory restrictions on foreign direct investment further tightening of the guidelines on lending by banks and other financial institutions and various other steps to reduce the deficit. The program was successful. As noted in Chapter the balance of payments has improved. In particular American direct investors have managed to finance a much greater proportion of their investments abroad by foreign borrowing and there has been a net reduction in U.S. bank credit to the rest of the world With the exception of more timely action to assure adequate domestic restraint in recent years it is hard to see even in retrospect any preferable strategies in U.S. policies to correct the deficit. The eclectic ad hoc measures that were taken involved certain costs. But they maintained the strength of the dollar and the health of the world economy. More basic improvements lie ahead pending peace and the restoration of price stability EXCHANGE RATE ADJUSTMENTS An efficient international adjustment mechanism should permit countries to choose their own domestic economic targets for growth employment and price-cost performance. Policies that restore balance at home should not lead to pressures on the international accounts in the form of either excessive accumulation or rapid depletion of reserves Suggestions have been put forward for amending the adjustment mechanism to lessen the conflict between domestic and balance-of-payments objectives. It is claimed by some that greater reliance on changes in exchange rates would work in this direction PRESENT SYSTEM Present IMF rules provide for adjustments of exchange parities as a means of correcting a fundamental disequilibrium. In practice however the process of exchange rate adjustment may involve major difficulties ; and in consequence there is often extreme reluctance to change exchange rates even when balance-of-payments difficulties are severe To illustrate the currency of a country with a large and persistent deficit will become widely recognized as a candidate for devaluation and this may touch off a crisis in private confidence as discussed above. Speculation based on the prospect of devaluation will aggravate the initial balance-of-payments difficulties and increase the outflow of reserves. To discourage such speculation governments tend to make categorical assertions that devaluation is not being considered ; once such assertions have been made it becomes a matter of national pride and political reputation to maintain the parity Furthermore an actual adjustment in an exchange rate may generate the expectation of a further change ; once an exchange parity has been adjusted a second adjustment seems less unthinkable. Fear of such a perverse reaction may cause a country to depreciate by an excessive amount in the first instance. This may lead other countries to devalue also thus reducing the potential balance-of-payments gain of the initiating country. Such a chain reaction can severely disrupt foreign exchange markets. Thus the difficulties * associated with parity adjustments have at times driven countries to commit themselves to existing parities in all but the most extreme situations PROPOSALS FOR EXCHANGE RATE FLEXIBILITY A number of suggestions ranging from minor adjustments to far-reaching changes have been made for altering the current exchange rate arrangements of the IMF The most sweeping change advocated primarily by some academic economists would be to abandon the pegged exchange system in favor of " floating rates " completely free to fluctuate in response to market forces In contrast other proposals call for a modest widening of the existing percent limit on fluctuations of rates on either side of parity. Still another type of proposal would provide for small but frequent changes in parities Each of the proposals is intended to make adjustments in exchange rates a more acceptable and effective means of correcting payments imbalances and to reduce the speculative disturbances that sometimes develop under the present system. Opinions differ widely over the probable effects of the various proposals ; intensive study would be required before serious consideration could be given to the adoption of any of them. The dramatic advances in world trade and prosperity achieved under the present system provide a strong case for conservatism in considering innovations ; at the same time the recurrence of financial strains has aroused widespread interest in possible amendments to the system In general the wider the latitude for changes in exchange rates the greater would be the amount of adjustment provided ; but also the greater would be the uncertainty of those engaged in international commerce and the possibility of a disturbance to trade and investment relationships Floating Rates While a system of floating exchange rates would ensure essentially automatic adjustment to balance-of-payments disturbances serious questions arise about its operation Advocates of flexible exchange rates are divided on whether official intervention in exchange markets should be permitted. A complete ban on official intervention would be a very radical change obviating any need for central banks to hold international reserves. Exchange rates might fluctuate quite widely causing substantial uncertainty. If on the other hand official intervention were permitted under a system of floating rates it might smooth out transitory fluctuations in exchange rates but it would open up the danger of exchange rate manipulation. For example a government might wish to drive down the price of its currency in order to strengthen the competitive position of its exports. It is difficult to devise rules which would permit desirable smoothing and yet ban manipulation In general fluctuating exchange rates would require shifts of resources among industries that export those that compete with imports and others as relative prices in world markets reflected changes in exchange rates. Moreover uncertainty about future exchange rates would concern international traders and investors. They could obtain some insurance by entering forward exchange markets buying or selling foreign currencies at definite prices for delivery at some specified future date. But such forward transactions might be quite expensive and thus add to the costs of world trade. Furthermore international investors might not be able to satisfy their needs for protection in forward exchange markets given the long time horizon of many capital transactions Advocates of floating exchange rates believe that the benefits outweigh the costs of these uncertainties. They point out that uncertainty about exchange rates is not unique to a system of floating rates. Indeed no feasible international system can guarantee against exchange rate adjustments. Moreover they emphasize that international businessmen live with many uncertainties both political and commercial. Finally it is their contention not universally accepted that under floating rates there would be an easing of pressures for exchange controls and trade barriers The adoption of floating exchange rates would constitute a drastic change in the international monetary system. If the present system were functioning very badly and if no other possibility of reform were available there might be a compelling argument for adopting this one ; but such is not the case Wider Bands Under present arrangements day-to-day market pressures can be reflected in small fluctuations of each exchange rate within a narrow band. Central banks of countries other than the United States intervene in the market by buying and selling foreign exchange to keep the dollar prices of their currencies within percent or less of established parities. The United States rounds out the system by selling and buying gold in dealings with central banks at $ an ounce. Proposals have been made by the JEC Subcommittee on International Payments and by others to introduce greater flexibility of rates by widening the permissible band of fluctuation around the par value. With a band of percent on either side of parity the exchange rate between two nondollar currencies could change by as much as percent Suggestions for a wider band like other proposals for greater flexibility in exchange rates are not directed at the official price of gold. The latter is not an exchange rate. There is no need whatsoever for it to be altered to accommodate greater flexibility of exchange rates A widening of exchange rate bands could contribute to the adjustment process. The currency of a country with an incipient deficit would fall in price thus making imports more expensive and lowering the cost of exports to buyers in world markets. Imports would be discouraged and exports stimulated strengthening the balance of payments. If the exchange rate approached the floor with its future course expected to be upward the stimulus might be particularly strong ; there would be an incentive to take advantage of the temporary low price of the country 's exports Advocates of a wider band believe that it might deter speculative runs in two ways. First the additional adjustment permitted by the wider band might make discrete changes in parities appear less likely thus reducing uncertainty. Second a wider band would increase the potential loss on a " wrong bet " against a currency. Under the present narrow band the speculator has relatively little to lose if he bets against a currency and it is not in fact devalued. With a wider band the risk of loss would be increased because a currency that was initially under pressure could experience a larger rebound in price. There is however no concrete basis for estimating the extent to which these features would deter speculation The wider the band is made the greater the potential uncertainty about the course of exchange rates but also the greater the amount of balance-ofpayments adjustment which may take place within the band. In an evaluation of a wider band these conflicting considerations would have to be weighed in determining its optimum width. A very wide band comes close to a floating exchange rate and thus shares the shortcomings of this drastic reform. A small widening of the band on the other hand might not markedly reduce the need for and the expectation of discrete changes in parity Gradual Adjustment of Parities The evolution toward greater exchange rate flexibility could involve a gradual limited adjustment of exchange parties. Two forms of the so-called " crawling peg " have been proposed one discretionary and one automatic Under the discretionary variant a country in disequilibrium would no longer make one substantial change in its parity but rather would announce a rate of increase ( or decrease ) in its parity of some specified small percentage per month until further notice. Once the desired effect had been attained the country would halt the process. This might make the transition to an equilibrium parity easier and perhaps curb speculation. Its effect on the political obstacles to changes in parities is not entirely clear ; governments might find it just as painful to announce a parity change in a series of small steps as in a single abrupt one. The discretionary crawling peg might therefore be used no more frequently than the present " adjustable peg. " The automatic form of gradual adjustment would remove parities from the direct control of individual countries. Under one variant the parity on any business day would be the average of the actual exchange rates over the preceding months ( or some other suitable period ) The actual exchange rate would be within a band around the parity prevailing on that day with official intervention permitted only at the floor or ceiling. For a period of year and a band of percent the largest possible change in the parity attained only if a currency were continuously at its floor or ceiling would be percent a year. Larger or smaller potential changes could be permitted by adopting a different period for calculating the moving average or by altering the width of the band. Again an optimum choice would depend upon the importance of certainty about future exchange rates on the one hand and on the speed of balance-of-payments adjustment to be permitted through the crawling peg on the other Unlike fully flexible rates the crawling peg would not be intended to offset all cyclical and random fluctuations in international transactions ; but unlike a widening of the band it would permit sizable changes in exchange rates over the long run. Thus it could cope with the problem of modest trends in the equilibrium values of currencies resulting from divergent national trends of prices economic growth export supply import demand or investment flows It might seem that if a currency showed fundamental weakness and was therefore expected to move downward for an extended period speculation would become a problem because of the predictability of the exchange rate movement. This kind of speculation could in principle be avoided by raising interest rates above the otherwise prevailing level by an amount equal to the anticipated rate of downward crawl of the currency The exchange gain from moving out of the currency would then be offset by the loss of interest. Such changes in interest rates might however necessitate offsetting adjustments in fiscal policy and as discussed earlier marked changes in the policy mix are sometimes difficult to achieve. Limits on tolerable interest rate changes would thus be one constraint on the speed of parity adjustment which could be permitted in such a system The various proposed modifications in the exchange rate system raise many difficult technical issues and clearly a proper evaluation of these proposals must be preceded by a great deal of careful study CONCLUSION By far the most important attribute of the postwar international economy has been steady and rapid growth. The spectacular nature of recent international monetary disturbances should not obscure the mighty contribution that the international economic system has made to world prosperity. Worldwide flows of goods and investments have been the cornerstones on which the prosperity of many nations has rested ; at the same time the growth of national economies has made possible the tremendous increases in world trade and international investment Trade is the center of the international economic system and it can not prosper in the face of highly restrictive national policies. Only a continuous chipping away at tariffs and other trade barriers can provide assurance against backsliding. Pressures for protection must be successfully resisted The fruits of unprecedented prosperity are still not being fully shared by many nations in Africa Asia the Middle East and Latin America. The future growth of these nations must be built primarily on the skills intelligence and labor of their citizens. But the developed countries must facilitate the process by providing technical assistance capital resources and access to markets The international monetary system established at Bretton Woods and developed through the years has made a major contribution to international economic growth. This system has served the world well but it has increasingly been subject to serious strains To ensure the continuing smooth operation of the monetary system work must go forward on the problems of liquidity confidence and adjustment Great progress has been made in recent years as exemplified by the agreement creating Special Drawing Rights. This achievement required careful study and long negotiations. Similar extensive efforts will be needed in the future if progress is to be maintained but the prospects for eventual success are bright Chapter Combating Poverty in a Prosperous Economy the policy of the United States [ is ] to eliminate the paradox of poverty in the midst of plenty in this Nation by opening to everyone the opportunity for education and training the opportunity to work and the opportunity to live in decency and dignity F OR OVER YEARS the United States has had an explicit national commitment to eliminate poverty in our society a commitment enunciated by the President in the State of the Union Message of and confirmed by the Congress in the above words later that year in the Fconomic Opportunity Act Americans are increasingly prosperous. Median family income in the United States ( in constant prices ) rose from $ in to $ in a gain of percent in years. Yet many families are still not able to attain minimum living standards. A preliminary estimate indicates that in about million people lived in households with incomes below the " poverty line. " While this is far fewer than in the past more than million were similarly situated in too many Americans remain poor This chapter examines the recent progress in reducing poverty the nature of the task that remains and the strategies available for eliminating poverty THE EXTENT OF POVERTY A family is " poor " if its income is insufficient to buy enough food clothing shelter and health services to meet minimum requirements. Universally acceptable standards for determining these minimum needs are impossible to formulate since the line between physical necessities and amenities is imprecise The social and psychological aspects of poverty further complicate efforts to measure poverty. As average incomes rise society amends its assessment of basic needs. Individuals who can not afford more than a small fraction of the items enjoyed by the majority are likely to feel deprived. Consequently an absolute standard that seems appropriate today will inevitably be rejected tomorrow just as we now reject poverty definitions appropriate a century ago DEFINITION OF POVERTY Even a rough measure of progress in reducing poverty requires an explicit definition although the line drawn is unavoidably arbitrary. In its Annual Report the Council used a poverty line of $ annual family income. Since the Council has employed the more refined definition of poverty developed by the Social Security Administration ( SSA ) The SSA poverty lines reflect the differing consumption requirements of families based on their size and composition the age of members and whether their residence is farm or nonfarm. The calculations center around the U.S. Department of Agriculture 's Economy Food Plan which in December added up to a per capita weekly food outlay of $ For families of three or more the SSA measure assumes all other family needs can be obtained for an amount equal to twice the family 's food requirement In the nonfarm poverty threshold for an average four-person family was $ as compared to a median income for families of that size of $ Poverty lines for different types of households are shown in Table The problems of low-income families neither begin nor end at any arbitrary poverty line. A sharp decline in poverty may be a misleading indicator TABLE Poverty and near-poverty income lines Poverty income line Household characteristic ^ Near-poverty income line Nonfarm households : member. $ $ years and over Under years members.. Head years and over Head under years members members.. members members members or more Farm households : member years and over Under years members Head years and over Head under years members members members members members or more Households are defined here as the total of families and unrelated individuals Note. Poverty and near-poverty income standards are defined by the Social Security Administration ; they take into account family size composition and place of residence. Income lines are adjusted to take account of price changes during the year Source : Department of Health Education and Welfare of progress if a large number of families are raised just above the poverty line. Accordingly the SSA has also developed a " near poor " standard averaging about one-third higher than the poverty line but still less than one-half of median income for many types of families. Near-poor income standards are shown in Table The SSA poverty definitions have some limitations. Since they are multiples of food costs the poverty lines change only when food prices change and these prices do not necessarily parallel the prices of other essentials Regional differences in living costs are not reflected in the poverty line. The income data take no account of income in kind such as health care subsidized housing and foodstuffs ( except for food grown on farms ) No adjustment is made for either net assets or fluctuating incomes and yet families with savings or temporary income interruptions have different problems than the chronically poor These problems are currently under study in an effort to refine the poverty concept. A different threshold could affect the distribution of measured poverty among various groups but would probably show much the same trend in total poverty over the long run POVERTY TRENDS With the general rise in family incomes in the postwar period the incidence of poverty the percentage of persons in poor households relative to the total population has declined sharply from to less than percent ( see Chart ) The number of persons in poverty declined about million over the past years including a drop of million since an estimated million in alone Along with the reduction in the number of poor households the " poverty gap " the difference between the actual incomes of the poor and the incomes necessary to place them above the poverty line has been reduced The poverty gap fell from $ billion in to $ billion in measured in current dollars Distribution by Community Type The incidence of poverty is highest percent in those rural areas not in metropolitan counties with the heaviest concentrations in the South and Appalachia. The incidence is also quite high percent in the smaller cities and towns outside of major metropolitan areas. In the central cities the incidence is percent and in their suburbs about percent Racial and Ethnic Distribution Most of the poor are white. In ( the latest year for which detailed data on the poor are available ) percent of all poor families and percent of all poor unrelated individuals were white. The incidence of poverty Chart Number of Poor Persons and Incidence of Poverty MILLIONS OF PERSONS PERCENT V NUMBER OF POOR PERSONS \ _ _ INCIDENCE OF POVERTY J / ( Right scale ) ^ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I -I/POOR PERSONS AS PERCENT OF TOTAL NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION N0TE._P0VERTY IS DEFINED BY THE SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION POVERTY-INCOME STANDARD SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH EDUCATION AND WELFARE OFFICE OF ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS is far higher among nonwhites : about one household in three compared with about one in seven among whites Of the million nonwhite households in poverty million are Negroes ; the remainder are mostly the original Americans Indians and Eskimos. A survey revealed that percent of the families living on Indian and Eskimo reservations had incomes under $ Only recently has the reduction of poverty among nonwhites matched the reduction among whites. Between and the number of whites in poverty declined million but during the same period the number of poor nonwhites rose by million. Between and white poverty was reduced another million or about percent while poverty among nonwhites fell by million also about percent The relative position of nonwhite families after deteriorating in the late 's has improved since ( See Appendix Table B-20. ) Only since has nonwhite median family income as a fraction of white median family income surpassed its previous peak of percent in Unemployment among nonwhite men age to has recently fallen below levels but unemployment rates for nonwhite women and nonwhite teenage males are much higher than during the early 's Most poor white families in the United States are not members of identifiable ethnic groups ; however two groups Mexican-Americans living largely in southwestern States and Puerto Ricans concentrated in New York City exhibit disproportionately high incidences of poverty. In unemployment rates among Mexican-Americans in southwestern cities ranged between percent and percent two to three times the national average Subemployment the sum of unemployment employment producing earnings too low to provide an escape from poverty and nonparticipation in the labor force by individuals who have given up hope of finding work ranged from to percent in the Mexican-American sections of southwestern cities. And while Puerto Ricans constitute only about percent of the New York City population they have been estimated to represent over one-third of the recipients of welfare and about one-third of all occupants of substandard housing STRATEGIES FOR REDUCING POVERTY A program for reducing poverty has four principal economic dimensions First sustained high employment and economic growth key objectives of economic policy for a wide variety of reasons are prime essentials Second education training medical assistance and access to well-paying jobs are needed by many of the poor to escape from chronic unemployment and low-paying dead end jobs Third three-fifths of the heads of poor households can not easily enter the labor force because of age or disability or because they are mothers with sole responsibility for the care of young children. Some workers with large families are not likely even with training and other types of employment assistance to earn an income sufficient to pull their families out of poverty Because increased employment opportunities will not eliminate poverty among these groups some form of income maintenance is required Fourth poverty is concentrated in " pockets " city " ghettos " and certain rural areas. The numbers of poor in poverty pockets can be reduced by promoting public and private investment in these communities and by providing relocation assistance to those with employment opportunities elsewhere In addition to economic policies social and psychological strategies have an important role to play. These include information about family planning for those who request it legal assistance and the encouragement of self-help organizations. Such programs lie outside the purview of this Report PROSPERITY AND THE REDUCTION OF POVERTY Virtually all the progress in reducing poverty over the past years has occurred during periods of general prosperity. In three periods of sustained economic expansion and to the present the annual decline in the number of individuals in poverty averaged two million or more a year. In contrast during recessions the number of poor people has increased. The brief recession of wiped ou,t half of the gains of the preceding 4-year expansion and several successive years of sluggish economic performance in the late 's increased the number of persons in poverty to about the level of years earlier. ( See Chart ) EFFECTS OF PROSPERITY Poor families are affected unequally by economic growth and high employment depending upon their ability to take advantage of expanded employment opportunities. Recent trends in poverty reduction for different groups are shown in Table Households with Heads of Working Age Economic expansion has caused significant reductions in poverty among households headed by a working-age man. Tightening labor markets raise wages for the poor who are employed and provide better employment opportunities for the unemployed and for those with very low-paying or part-time jobs. Furthermore when prosperity pushes unemployment rates to low levels among skilled workers business is more inclined to train poorly qualified workers for skilled jobs. From to the number of poor households headed by a working-age man with work experience fell a year ; in contrast there had been no decline from to The number of poor households headed by a working-age woman with job experience has not changed during the 's. The decline in the incidence of poverty among this group reflected a rise in the total number of households headed by working-age women Prosperity is less effective in reducing poverty among households headed by women for several reasons. Women are far less likely to be employed than men ; only about three-fifths of the women who head families have some job experience compared to about percent for male family heads Many women who head families being the adult solely responsible for young children are unable to accept full-time employment unless day care is provided for their children. Furthermore women are far less likely to escape poverty even if they do work because their employment is less steady and they earn lower wages. Nonwhite families are more than twice as likely and white families are more than three times as likely to be poor if headed by a woman than if headed by a man Elderly Households During the 's the number of poor elderly households fell slightly while the incidence of poverty among this group decreased substantially High employment has some immediate effect on poverty among the aged TABLE Number of poor households and incidence of poverty selected years Characteristic of head of household Originally published Revised Millions Number of poor households : Unrelated individualsFamilies Head years and over. Total Unrelated individuals White Male___ Female ill Nonwhite.. Male.. Female Head under years White Male.. Female Nonwhite.. Male Female Families Percent Incidence of poverty : Total households2. Unrelated individualsFamilies Head years and over. White Male.. Female Nonwhite__ Male.. Female Head under years Unrelated individuals. White Male.. Female Nonwhite.. Male.. Female Families * _ The revised estimates differ slightly from those originally published because of the use of a somewhat different estimating procedure. For an explanation of the two methods see " Current Populat.on Reports Series P-60 No. " Households are defined here as the total of families and unrelated individuals Consists only of two-person families whose head is years or over. All other families included in " head under years. " * All families other than two-person families whose head is years or over s Poor households as percent of total households in the category Note. Poverty is defined by the Social Security Administration poverty-income standard ; it takes into account family size composition and place of residence. Poverty-income lines are adjusted to take account of price changes during the period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health Education and Welfare by providing more jobs for elderly individuals wishing to continue work This opportunity is particularly important for those with retirement income below the poverty line Over the longer run prosperity permits more workers to accumulate assets and to achieve higher pension rights prior to retirement. At present an individual earning the minimum wage and working full-time in a job covered by social security is entitled to old-age benefits of approximately $ a month upon retirement only about $ a month below the poverty line Reflecting both the higher lifetime earnings of the aged and statutory improvements social security retirement benefits have increased greatly and have been the most important factor in reducing poverty among the elderly. Since legislation has increased social security retirement benefits percent across the board substantially greater than the increase in consumer prices. The minimum benefit increased percent The Disabled The ill and disabled have benefited least from recent prosperity and other efforts to alleviate poverty. Although the incidence of poverty among households whose heads are under and not working for health reasons fell from to the number actually rose. Some disabled can be retrained and these individuals can obtain jobs more readily when unemployment is low. But many who are ill or disabled can not take advantage of job opportunities The Near-Poor Table shows the number of households and the number of persons who were in the near-poor category in and The compositions of the poor and the near-poor categories differ considerably. Most striking is the difference in the proportion of nonelderly households headed by a working-age woman. These households account for percent of all nonelderly poor households ; among the near-poor they account for percent. Except for the elderly most near-poor families are headed by men who are employed but at low wages The number of near-poor showed a considerable decline between and Many who rose from poverty were added to the near-poor but at the same time an even larger number of the former near-poor moved to a higher income level PROSPECTS FOR FURTHER PROGRESS As indicated above prosperity has played a key role in reducing poverty and is essential to further progress. But sustained growth and high employment in the absence of other more direct efforts to help the poor can not maintain the recent rate of decline in poverty TABLE Number of near-poor households and incidence of near-poverty and sex of head of household and by age Incidence of near-poverty ( percent ) * Number ( millions ) Age and sex of head of household Near-poor households2 Head years and overs Head under years4 Male head Female head Unrelated individuals Families Head years and over Head under years Male head Female head._ Addendum : Near-poor persons * Near-poor households as percent of total number of households in the category ; near-poor persons as percent of total persons Households are defined here as the total of families and unrelated individuals Consists only of two-person families whose head is years or over. All other families included in " head under years. " All families other than two-person families whose head is years or over Note. Near-poverty is defined by the Social Security Administration near-poverty-income standards ; it takes into account family size composition and place of residence. Near-poverty-income lines are adjusted to take account of price changes during the period Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Health Education and Welfare If the reductions in the number of poor persons could be continued poverty would be eliminated entirely in about years. If the record of could be continued poverty would be eliminated in about ^ years Maintenance of these rapid reductions will become increasingly difficult because as poverty declines an increasing fraction of the remaining poor are members of households whose economic status is least affected by prosperity. Households headed by women with children disabled persons or elderly persons accounted for million or percent of all poor households in Much of the progress in the 's has been due to the lowering of the unemployment rate. As that rate fell further declines were increasingly effective. The hard-core unemployed the educationally disadvantaged and the victims of discrimination are the last to be hired during a return to high employment and the first to be fired during a slowdown. Upgrading the unskilled and uneducated to fill shortages in skilled labor takes time. Consequently if high employment is maintained these adjustments will continue to reduce poverty but their effects will gradually diminish. In the absence of increased direct assistance to the poor or further reductions in unemployment present annual declines in poverty must be expected to become smaller The elimination of poverty will be long in coming if the incomes of the poor grow only at the same pace as the incomes of other households. If the real income ( including transfer payments ) of each poor household were to grow at percent a year approximately the average gain for all households during normal conditions of economic growth eliminating only half of poverty would take years for poor families and years for unrelated individuals. To shorten substantially the period needed to reduce poverty the incomes of the poor must grow faster than average income some redistribution to the poor must be made from the benefits of growth INCOME DISTRIBUTION Only a relatively small redistribution of the benefits of growth is needed to speed greatly the reduction in poverty. If the approximately percent of households that are not poor and receive about percent of total income are willing to make only a small sacrifice of the estimated percent yearly growth in their real income per capita the prospects for poverty reduction can be greatly transformed. If the increase in real income for the nonpoor is lowered merely from percent to * /2 percent a year and if that differential of about $ billion annually is effectively transferred to those in poverty then family incomes for those now poor can grow about percent annually This redistribution would eliminate the " poverty gap " of $ billion in less than years. Since any program of redistribution would be likely to reach some of the near-poor and might raise some poor families substantially above the poverty line before others are affected perhaps a better projection of the time required would be to years The rapid reductions in poverty during the 's paralleled a significant rise in the share of total family income going to the lowest income groups In part this shift in distribution has been accomplished by increased employment of poor adults at higher wages The combined effect of the tax and transfer payment systems at all levels of Government also operates to redistribute income to the poor. The net gain or burden from the public sector for any group depends on the difference between all the benefits received from government expenditures and all the taxes paid. Many programs like national defense have benefits that are difficult to allocate by groups ; however the benefits of transfer payments such as social security benefits welfare payments and unemployment compensation can be allocated and compared with the tax burden The impact of Federal State and local taxes and of transfer payments on the distribution of income in is shown in Chart The tax system by itself redistributes income away from the poor. As a share of income higher taxes are paid by households in the lower income classes than by those with incomes between $ and $ This reflects the heavy tax burden on low-income families from State and local taxes primarily sales excise and property taxes. Federal taxes also contribute to this burden through the social security payroll tax The poor receive nearly as much from transfer payments as from all other Chart Taxes and Transfer Payments as Percent of Income ( Excluding Transfers ) by Income Class,1965 PERCENT _ DERAL TAXES ' TAXES AS PERCE NIT OF INCOME / STATE AND LOCAL TAXES / ///A ///A V /// ) '///At YAAA TAXES LESS TRANSFER F AYMENTS AS PERCENT OF INCOME Under & Over INCOME CLAS ( DOLLARS ) S SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS BASED ON DATA FROM A VARIETY OF SOURCES. DESCRIPTION AVAILABLE ON REQUEST sources. While these payments do not go exclusively to the poor they do have a powerful redistributive impact. The ratio of receipts to household income ( excluding transfers ) is very high in the lowest income classes. As household incomes rise the proportion of transfers to other income falls sharply When government transfer payments and taxes are combined the concentration of transfer payments in the lower income groups much more than offsets their tax burden. But since average transfer payments fall rapidly as income rises the excess of taxes over transfer payments as a fraction of income rises much more sharply from $ to $ than in higher income classes EDUCATION JOBS AND TRAINING Education and training measures can improve job opportunities for the poor and their children EDUCATION AND POVERTY Education can help prevent the children of the poor from remaining poor when they grow up. They are already better schooled than their parents. About three-fourths of poor youths between and either are attending school or are high school graduates whereas more than half of their parents had no high school education. Yet these youths still have less schooling than their more fortunate contemporaries percent of whom are in school or are high school graduates Although most poor children of all ages are now in school inferior facilities and poorly qualified teachers lower the value of the education many of them receive. Even schools equivalent to those of the prosperous would not yield equal education. Poverty imposes handicaps that children of more prosperous families do not have Children of the poor are less likely to receive good health care and good nutrition both of which affect success in school. They are also less likely to receive the verbal and intellectual stimulation in their early years that prepares them to master school work. They start school somewhat behind other youngsters and they receive less parental assistance. Since school does not meet the challenge of helping them catch up it becomes a place of defeat leading many to drop out Poor children from minority groups suffer another handicap segregation More than percent of all Negro pupils in the first grade attend elementary schools in which at least percent of the students are Negro. Not only are facilities and instruction inferior in many of these schools but studies of educational performance suggests that segregation itself has an adverse effect on school performance If poor children are to have equal opportunity to compete successfully for good jobs they need special help in the preschool years. They also need compensatory education with expenditures exceeding those made on other pupils. Finally they need financial help and other encouragement to stay in school and continue their education Major efforts have been made to upgrade education provided children of the poor in programs such as the Elementary and Secondary Education Act the Economic Opportunity Act and the Vocational Education Amendments of Head Start Title I of the Elementary Education Act and Follow Through are comprehensive programs combining health care nutrition and the involvement of the child 's family as well as education Most of these special Federal efforts have been in operation for years or less. While too little experience has been gained to allow a full evaluation enough positive results are evident to justify continuing the programs HIRING STANDARDS Poverty is perpetuated by hiring standards that arbitrarily discriminate against the disadvantaged Racial Discrimination The persistence of racial discrimination in hiring frustrates the efforts of nonwhites to realize full returns from schooling and discourages the young from remaining in school. For example a larger portion of white male dropouts to years of age secure skilled and semiskilled jobs than nonwhite males who graduate from high school and the average earnings of nonwhite high school graduates are lower than those of white dropouts Attacks are being made on discrimination in higher level occupations although most of the initial progress is in clerical jobs. The public sector has a better record than the private sector in eliminating discrimination in hiring. For example percent of the Federal and municipal white collar workers in metropolitan New York City are Negro. In contrast Negroes hold only percent of the white collar jobs in large private firms in New York City Restrictive Hiring Practices Arbitrary hiring standards and customary employment practices as well as outright racial discrimination curtail work opportunities. During World War II industry successfully adjusted standards and restructured work patterns to fit jobs to the level of workers ' skills All too often recruitment and testing procedures currently used by Government and business do not take sufficient account of innate intelligence and aptitude TRAINING AND JOB ACCESS On-the-job training is an important route to employment. Consequently the Government increased the number of on-the-job trainees financed under the Manpower Development and Training Act from in fiscal to in fiscal By the end of half the trainees had less than years of high school and percent were from families with incomes below the poverty line Through the Job Opportunities in the Business Sector ( JOBS ) program sponsored by the National Alliance of Businessmen nearly cooperating business firms have helped disadvantaged workers find employment. The premise of the program is that the best job training is a job. JOBS encourages waiving of some hiring standards and provides counseling and training to raise the productivity of the trainees. The interim goal of employers pledging to place disadvantaged persons by June has already been met far ahead of schedule. JOBS contracts have been issued to about employers who are reimbursed an average of $ per trainee for the extra costs The rapidly growing public sector has no counterpart to the JOBS program. Such a program would usefully supplement the present expansion of job opportunities in the private sector Two other major programs are designed for young workers. The Job Corps helps the most severely disadvantaged youths without job prospects As of mid-1968 the program had provided health care food and job training for enrollees since From to the Neighborhood Youth Corps provided jobs for over million youngsters from lowincome areas. While the part-time and summer work is too low skilled to provide useful job training the modest pay helps youths from low-income families stay in school IMPROVEMENTS IN INCOME MAINTENANCE The United States now has a substantial commitment to income maintenance spending about $ billion in fiscal ( Table ) Each program serves the special needs of a particular group and many are not designed specifically to help the poor. Individuals who can normally earn an adequate living are served by social insurance systems which protect against loss of income through death disability and unemployment and which provide retirement income. Individuals with inadequate earning TABLE Selected major income maintenance programs,fiscalyear Beneficiaries * Total outlays ( millions of dollars ) Program Number ( thousands ) Percent in households with income less than $ All programs3 Aid to families with dependent children Unemployment insurance : Federal-State unemployment compensation. Federal employees and ex-servicemen Railroad Disability programs : Workmen 's compensation Federal employees Veterans'compensation _ Railroad ._ Social security Ajd to the blind Aid to the permanently and totally disabled * Assistance to those years and over : Social security retirement and survivors ' benefits Old-age assistance Military retirement Civil service retirement Railroad retirement Veterans ' pensions General assistance _ Assistance-in-kind ( ) * ( ) * < ) * * Estimated income including cash benefits Data exclude State and local government retirement systems and all private retirement and charitable programs * Not available Estimate by Council of Economic Advisers Federal outlays only. See Table Source : Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) ability may be assisted by welfare veterans pensions in-kind payments ( such as food stamps or public housing ) and manpower training allowances Despite recent improvements existing income maintenance progams provide neither adequate coverage nor sufficient benefits to prevent poverty Rarely are able-bodied working-age individuals or families headed by healthy nonelderly men eligible for existing cash benefit programs yet these groups make up two-thirds of poor nonelderly households. Even among some of the groups for which programs are available coverage is much less than complete Benefits are rarely adequate to raise households above the poverty line The average Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) payment in mid-1968 was just over $ a year per family ; in five States it was less than $ a year. Average benefits in mid-1968 for a retired couple under old-age insurance were about $ below the poverty line for such families by about $ WELFARE PROGRAMS Important improvements in public assistance have been made. The courts have overturned the controversial " man in the house " rule which had denied AFDG benefits to children when a man not legally responsible for their care lived with the family. Courts have also declared invalid some State residency requirements for public assistance. States have recently been instructed to determine income need by affidavit rather than personal investigation a change to a more efficient and less demeaning method. The work incentive principle was introduced in the Social Security Amendments which call for welfare benefits for AFDC mothers to be reduced by less than the full amount of earnings. Finally the average AFDC benefit rose $ per family ( percent ) between mid-1967 and mid-1968 These improvements have led to the paradox of growing welfare rolls and costs amidst a general reduction in poverty. Not only have welfare applications increased but between and the fraction of applicants declared eligible for benefits rose dramatically. Reform of eligibility rules and increased awareness of welfare programs by the poor have probably been responsible for the substantial rise in applications The Freeze on AFDC Rolls While the welfare system generally has been improved in recent years the enactment of a sharp limitation on the number of AFDC beneficiaries now scheduled to take effect July was a major step backward. The " freeze " forbids Federal financing for any increase in a State 's ratio of deserted or illegitimate children receiving AFDC assistance to the total child population In all States the freeze places a very tight limit on the expansion of welfare rolls ; in some it will even cause a decline unless the States are willing to assume the Federal share of the costs. Eligibility for federally aided public assistance should not be determined on the basis of the place of a family in the waiting line at the welfare agency but upon the need of the family. Repeal of the AFDC freeze is the most urgently required step toward a more humane and rational welfare system Raising and Equalizing Welfare Benefits In federally assisted welfare programs AFDC old-age assistance aid to the blind and aid for the disabled benefits vary widely among States but are well below the poverty line nearly everywhere. For example the monthly AFDC benefits for a family of four range among the States from a low of $ to a high of $ but exceed the poverty threshold in only one State Establishing minimum welfare benefits wholly financed by the Federal Government could raise the lowest benefits significantly. This minimum could be modest initially and then increased until benefits are adequate in all States. Since poverty is a national problem which happens to be geographically concentrated federalization of most of the cost of welfare expenditures perhaps including even administrative costs would be desirable over the long run. Federal administration would reduce the difficulties arising from major differences in local standards of benefits eligibility and administration Improving Work Incentives in AFDC Currently if a State elects mothers receiving AFDC may earn up to $ a month without having their welfare benefits reduced. Beyond $ benefits are reduced by two-thirds of additional earnings. By July all States must adopt this work incentive formula. While these new provisions are an important advance work incentives are still too small and do not extend to other welfare categories If child-care facilities are available welfare mothers may be required to work or to accept training in order to receive benefits. At present shortages of child-care facilities and training assignments limit the impact of this provision. Nevertheless the rule raises fundamental social issues : whether children are better off in a child-care center or at home with their mothers and whether a mother should be required to work while also performing household tasks for her family These issues are not easily resolved. Nevertheless an equitable system should not penalize those who work and should provide adequate benefits to those who can not work BENEFITS IN KIND Many assistance programs provide goods and services rather than cash In-kind assistance is often designed to promote those types of consumption by the poor that also benefit other members of society. For example society may subsidize housing or health care because eliminating poor housing and ill health benefits the community as a whole. Some in-kind programs such as school lunches provide specific goods and services especially important to the young In-kind benefits often reflect the standards tastes and values of the majority and their desire to influence the consumption patterns of recipients The well-being of the poor is raised by such programs but the poor would probably consider themselves better off if they had equivalent amounts in cash and the accompanying freedom of choice Present Programs Outlays in fiscal for the major in-kind programs which directly benefit the poor are summarized in Table Health. Medicare and Medicaid account for percent of in-kind expenditures. Medicaid benefits go primarily to the poor and one-third of Medicare beneficiaries are poor. Because of high maternal and infant mortality rates among the poor expansion of comprehensive health care for mothers and babies in poor families is especially desirable Food. The next largest in-kind program is food assistance which includes food stamps school lunches and the distribution of commodities from surplus stocks. Food programs reach a significant number of the poor but as few as percent in some concentrated poverty areas. The coverage TABLE Major Federal income-in-kind programs substantially benefiting the poor fiscal year Beneficiaries1 Federal outlays ( millions of dollars ) Program Total programs Food programs.. Food stamps Child nutrition Special supplemental r Other direct distribution Housing programs. Public housing Rent supplements. Health service programsMedicare Medicaid Maternity and infant care Public Health Service medical programs : Indians seamen etc Neighborhood health centers Estimated Income including cash benefits ncludes children and mothers benefiting from more than one service of the Children 's Bureau Source : Bureau of the Budget Percent in households with income less than $ Number ( millions ) of the food stamp program will expand from to million persons by the middle of largely as a result of expansion into new areas and lower stamp charges. The child nutrition program providing free or low-cost school lunches is now being expanded Housing. Two programs to be expanded significantly under the Housing Act of are directed toward low-income groups rent supplements and public housing. By midyear families nearly all poor will be receiving rent supplements. In fiscal the number of public housing units available will increase by bringing the total to Roughly half the occupants are poor The average monthly rental in public housing is about $ more than many poor families can afford. In the North the lowest income families in public housing spend more than percent of their income on rent. In contrast occupants with incomes over $ pay about one-sixth of their income in rent. Only in the South are the majority of nonelderly public housing tenants below the poverty line Public housing could be made more accessible to the very poor in a number of ways. First higher welfare benefits would help recipients pay present rents Second rents could be lowered if the Federal Government subsidized a larger share of public housing costs. Third rents for the poorest families could be reduced if rents for all tenants were more closely tied to income SOCIAL INSURANCE SYSTEMS For the vast majority of Americans social insurance guards against a fall in income due to retirement disability survivorship or unemployment These programs prevent much of the poverty that in the past resulted from interruptions in wage income. They make remaining poverty problems more manageable Retirement The largest American income maintenance program is social security About million Americans now receive about $ billion in annual benefits from Old Age and Survivors Insurance. The goal of providing every elderly American citizen with a decent retirement income is becoming a reality. Similarly more and more widows with young children and disabled individuals are being supported above the poverty line Rising prices should not be permitted to erode the purchasing power of the retired. Social security benefits should now be increased percent across the board in line with changes in the cost of living since benefits were last raised and to allow for additional improvement. A revised method of computing benefits effective in fiscal would provide another increase Many individuals receiving low social security benefits have little if any other income. Increasing the monthly minimum benefit from $ to $ and to $ for workers with years of coverage would reduce poverty by more than half a million persons The earnings test should be liberalized. At present every dollar earned in excess of $ a year reduces benefits by cents ; earnings over $ reduce benefits dollar for dollar. Because earnings are subject to other taxes additional earnings above $ actually reduce total after-tax income. The tax-free earnings allowance should be raised to $ Fifty percent of earnings beyond $ up to $ and percent of earnings thereafter would be deducted from benefits Virtually all workers are now covered either by social security or similar retirement programs. Regular employment will provide retirement benefits above the poverty line for all but the very lowest-paid workers. Most future recipients of low social security benefits will be either individuals covered by other retirement programs or housewives with only a few years of work experience. Neither group will constitute an extensive poverty problem. The most efficient mechanism for assisting the elderly poor is either expansion of Old Age Assistance or establishment of an income-related social security minimum perhaps financed out of general revenues far above the standard minimum. Under the latter proposal social security benefits could be high enough together with other income to bring all the elderly above the poverty line Disability The number of poor households headed by the disabled has not declined since Better Disability Insurance under social security can improve this record At present to qualify for benefits workers must be disabled months and the disablement must be expected to last another months or to result in death. To remove this hardship the waiting period for benefit eligibility should be reduced from to months and eligibility should not be limited to disabilities which last more than year The burden of unusually high medical expenses could be lifted by extending Medicare to the permanently and totally disabled The other major disability income program is workmen 's compensation intended to pay medical expenses and provide income for workers ( and their survivors ) disabled through work-related accidents and diseases Workmen 's compensation is governed by State laws which require employers to obtain insurance from private companies or a State fund or to establish self insurance The present weaknesses of workmen 's compensation are inadequate benefits and the exclusion of large groups of workers In the maximum cash benefit ( including dependents ' allowances ) under workmen 's compensation was below the poverty line for a fourperson family in States ; over half the States have maximum benefits less than percent of income prior to disability. About million workers mostly domestics agricultural employees and employees of small businesses currently are not covered at all by workmen 's compensation Improvements in workmen 's compensation ought to come through State laws. To provide an incentive for such action and to protect workers in its absence Federal action may be required. Consideration should be given to legislation requiring States to extend coverage and to improve benefits. If States fail to act the law might require employers to purchase insurance providing additional coverage and higher benefits Unemployment Insurance Unemployment insurance contributes significantly to the prevention of poverty by providing income to regular members of the labor force during periods of involuntary unemployment. Yet more than a fifth of the employed labor force are excluded a large number of whom are in low-wage occupations such as domestic service and farm work The original aim of unemployment insurance was to restore at least half of wages lost. Average weekly benefits about $ in are roughly a third of weekly earnings in covered industries. Most States now pay benefits for a maximum of weeks in a single year ; over one-fifth of the recipients exhaust their benefits even in periods of high employment For a fair and modern unemployment insurance system legislation is needed to broaden protection ensure higher and more uniform benefits provide special training and eliminate abuses MAJOR REFORM Proposals for more fundamental reforms of the income maintenance system merit consideration along with the more evolutionary suggestions outlined above Major reform can be undertaken in two ways. First the categorical approach can be expanded and improved by reforming eligibility requirements raising benefit levels and in particular adding programs for poor families headed by a working man and for other groups not now covered. Alternatively present welfare programs could be replaced by a single universal Federal program supplemented by social insurance having no eligibility requirements other than low income Benefits for Poor Families Headed by Working-Age Men The largest omission from the present income maintenance system is a program to assist families headed by able-bodied working males who are not eligible for unemployment insurance or who have exhausted its benefits. Unconditional cash benefits to working-age men are often opposed on the grounds of possible adverse effects on work incentives. Whatever society 's attitude toward fathers in poverty failure to assist their children makes the children likely candidates for a new generation of poor. Further- more under the present system a father can often increase the income of his family by deserting them to make them eligible for welfare Children 's Allowances. Children 's allowances are systematic payments by the Government to families with children. The United States is the only Western industrialized nation without a children 's allowance. The program has been adopted in some nations as a vehicle for both providing income to the poor and promoting population growth Children 's allowances can take several forms. To channel aid effectively to the poor the allowances have to be related to family income. If children 's allowances are not income-related but go to all families they are an exceedingly inefficient way to help the poor An income-related children 's allowance is one method of attacking poverty among two categories of poor households those with moderate incomes and large families and those with low incomes and average-size families Guaranteed Work. A program of guaranteed work opportunity for poor employable fathers is especially attractive because it offers a workable compromise between those who favor income maintenance and those who favor expanded employment as a vehicle for ending poverty among these families Fathers suffering from long term unemployment would certainly be eligible for the program. Eventually others with very low incomes might be included Each enrollee would receive cash benefits and would be required to participate in steps including acceptance of placement services or training leading to private employment paying at least minimum wages. Those for whom private employment could not be found would be given meaningful public service jobs at minimum wages that provide opportunities for advancement The guaranteed work program could ultimately allow any man to earn the minimum wage which at present would bring families of or fewer near the poverty line. By itself this would not solve the problem of poverty for large families. Nevertheless the largest gap in the present income maintenance system would be closed in a manner consistent with the traditional American attitude toward welfare for able-bodied fathers The Negative Income Tax. The negative income tax would provide a minimum-income guarantee to all individuals. Benefits would be reduced by a fraction of income as is currently the practice for AFDC mothers and individuals receiving social security A minimum-income guarantee would end society 's attempts to distinguish between the " deserving " and ' 'undeserving " poor establishing the principle of social responsibility to aid those in need without questioning whether the fault was individual or social As a substitute for other income maintenance programs the negative income tax is bound to be expensive. If the guaranteed income is set at or near the poverty line and if the proportion of earnings by which benefits are reduced is low enough to provide adequate work incentives substantial benefits must be provided to middle-income families swelling the cost. To illustrate suppose the minimum-income guarantee for a family of four is $ about the income required to escape poverty in Suppose that every dollar earned reduces benefits ' by cents a reduction that probably approaches the maximum consistent with providing work incentives. Under this plan a family earning $ a year would have benefits reduced by one-half of $ ( or $ ) leaving the family eligible for $ All families of four with less than a $ income would receive some assistance Adoption of this particular plan now would cost about $ billion over and above present income maintenance outlays ; roughly half would go to families not now in poverty The cost can be reduced by increasing the rate at which benefits go down as income increases. But this approach would reduce work incentives. The cost could also be reduced by setting the guaranteed minimum income well below the poverty line ; however if a low-income guarantee were adopted poverty would not be eliminated. To deal with this problem the income guarantee could be supplemented by State or even Federal welfare programs for particular categories. But then attempts to distinguish between the " deserving " and " undeserving " poor would not have been eliminated Another way of dealing with the problem of different categories of the poor within the framework of the negative income tax is to establish separate minimum-income guarantees and benefit-rate reductions for various types of households. Again such modification would introduce complexities and reduce the appeal of the plan as simple and universal Nevertheless a minimum-income plan may be acceptable both in terms of cost and of the beneficiaries served. If the guaranteed minimum income is at or close to the poverty line and if the rate of benefit reduction is low enough to limit adverse incentive effects the plan would meet the tests of a good income maintenance system The Commission on Income Maintenance has been asked to study in detail the appropriate long-run direction of policy in this area. The Commission will report at the end of this year SPECIAL PROBLEMS OF POVERTY POCKETS Poverty in the United States is unevenly distributed both racially and geographically. Two particularly visible concentrations of poverty are big city ghettos and declining rural areas Many difficulties faced by residents of poverty pockets are simply virulent local outcroppings of national problems. Others are peculiar to the community in which the concentrations of poor occur. The discussion below separates the elements of poverty problems in ghettos and rural communities into those amenable to general national solutions and those that require special programs aimed at the areas in question STRATEGIES FOR ATTACKING GHETTO PROBLEMS The most visible and certainly most explosive concentration of poverty is in the ghettos of large cities. Here deteriorating physical facilities inadequate public services low income and high unemployment combine with high population density to create a dehumanizing hostile environment The ghetto contains a concentration of people whose health age family status and limited training are obstacles to full-time employment in wellpaying jobs. It has vastly inferior educational and health services. These are national problems and strategies discussed elsewhere in this chapter could produce significant rewards in the ghetto Other ghetto problems and the programs required to deal with them are unique. First unemployment is extremely high. The Department of Labor reported that in the fall of the unemployment rate in the lowincome neighborhoods of eight large cities was percent. More striking subemployment was an additional percent The second problem of ghetto areas is extensive deterioration of the physical environment housing commercial buildings even open spaces Restoration of the cities will be expensive whether publicly or privately financed but a large-scale facelifting of urban America offers the opportunity for a rational coherent attack on the problems of the ghetto Fiscal Disparities Within Metropolitan Areas Roughly an eighth of welfare benefit costs half of elementary and secondary education expenditures and virtually all police fire protection and sanitation costs are borne by local government. Central cities with their large concentrations of poor have difficulty meeting these costs. The property tax base per capita is substantially higher in the suburbs than in the central cities but suburbs collect less total tax revenue per capita and spend far less per capita on social services health care welfare police fire protection recreation and sanitation. Suburbs spend far more per capita ( and per student ) on education than does the central city. Responding to lower taxes and better educational systems a stream of middle income families flows from the central city to suburban communities. Central cities must then cut back on services or raise taxes even higher in either case increasing incentives to leave the city. The heavy burden of providing services to the poor thus threatens the viability of the central city Access to Employment The residential patterns of the poor affect their opportunities for employment. Because few lower income families can afford automobiles their mobility is severely limited. Jobs shopping health care and social contacts must all be within walking distance or accessible through inexpensive public transportation Total Employment. Most jobs are in the central cities. Even in sectors such as manufacturing wholesale and retail trade nonprofessional business services entertainment and government with relatively more jobs in lower skill occupations the ratio of employment to population is over percent higher in the cities than their suburbs. Employment in the city is also less physically dispersed than in the suburbs and public transportation is more readily available For the foreseeable future most ghetto residents will continue to have a greater chance of finding a job in the central city. Job vacancies created by normal attrition are far more numerous than those created by entirely new positions and consequently the number of job openings is greater in the city with its much larger total employment. Some big city ghettos such as Watts are isolated from the areas of greatest employment density but Harlem and Bedford-Stuyvesant are only a few minutes on the subway from the most dense center of employment in the world. Job problems in such areas are not explained by physical isolation from sites of employment Job Growth. Most of the growth in employment is occurring in the suburbs and job opportunities for low-income people will continue to grow there. Many ghetto residents already hold suburban jobs. A recent study of commuting patterns in Pittsburgh indicated that employed low-income Negroes on balance traveled away from the central city to reach their jobs while whites in the same employment class traveled toward the central city and traveled fewer miles Access for ghetto residents to the growing number of suburban jobs can be improved by both better transportation and less discrimination in suburban housing. The transportation requirements for those taking better paying suburban jobs are greatest in the first few months of employment. After that workers tend to buy their own cars or form car pools. Transportation needs of domestics and other low-paid workers are not so easily solved Suburban housing is already becoming more available to ghetto residents Between and the number of Negroes residing in the suburbs grew by half a million although Negroes continued to account for only about percent of the suburban population. Access to suburban housing should continue to improve as the fair housing provisions of the Civil Rights Act of become effective Living Costs for the Poor The central city ghetto is an expensive place to live. Ghetto residents often pay higher prices for comparable merchandise and are frequently sold inferior goods. To some extent these higher prices reflect higher selling costs resulting from smaller average purchases increased pilferage slower turnover of perishable items and higher insurance rates. Easy credit along with high-pressure salesmanship and door-to-door selling techniques also adds to the costs of ghetto retailers. A Federal Trade Commission study of Washington D.C. furniture and appliance stores revealed that prices in ghetto stores averaged $ for each of $ of wholesale cost compared to $ in the rest of the city. Even so net return on investment was considerably lower than for retailers elsewhere If ghetto residents had greater access to general market retailers they would pay significantly lower prices. This access requires improved transportation facilities in some cities and education educating general retailers that low-income families can carry moderate amounts of installment credit and educating low-income shoppers about price differentials The Role of Private Enterprise in Ghetto Development Reconstruction of the cities will require deeper involvement of private enterprise The major asset of private business is its efficiency in accomplishing specific tasks at minimum cost. The Federal Government has recognized the contribution business can make. For example local housing authorities are now permitted to turn over much of the planning site acquisition and supervision of construction of public housing to private developers. This " Turnkey " policy has reduced costs and greatly cut the time required to produce public housing Without government inducements profits are low in ghetto areas a deterrent to private investment. Despite higher prices retail business has difficulty thriving in the ghetto. Investing in new housing for low-income families particularly in big cities is usually a losing proposition. Indeed the most profitable investment is often one that demolishes the homes of lowincome families to make room for businesses and higher income families Much of the blemished reputation of early urban renewal programs came from pursuing the most profitable development of renewal areas Many business leaders are willing to sacrifice some profits in order to invest in the ghetto but they can not be expected to shoulder the major part of a financial burden that is properly the responsibility of all society Participation by the private sector is also limited by the large scale normally needed to make a ghetto project economically viable. Costs are far lower and prospects for permanent improvement far greater if redevelopment of an entire neighborhood is undertaken in a relatively short period. Only the largest corporations are likely to be able to afford efficient renewal efforts Government aid to provide profit opportunities will be needed to induce significant participation by the private sector. The Federal Government can provide such aid by direct subsidies to firms willing to build under its program specifications. Alternatively a tax credit or a deduction from taxable income could be given for a broad class of ghetto development expenditures Three considerations bear on the choice of the proper techniques for attracting private enterprise into ghetto reconstruction First the efficiency of Federal assistance is reduced if subsidies are paid for activities that would have been undertaken anyway. Tax incentives automatically apply to all investment in the subsidized category. Even in the most depressed urban areas some investments are still being made without subsidies Second a dollar of direct expenditure and a dollar of tax incentive have identical effects upon the budget requiring either a reduction in other Federal programs or an increase in taxes. One technique adds to Federal expenditures ; the other lowers Federal tax receipts Finally tax incentives are not effective for encouraging indigenous businesses. Large corporations earning profits in other operations benefit from tax incentives but firms operating only in the ghetto where profits are low receive less benefit. New firms often receive no benefits from tax incentives since fledgling enterprises typically earn low profits. Since support of new ghetto-owned businesses is a particularly promising vehicle for promoting ghetto development a more direct form of assistance for these firms is necessary. Such firms need loans and management assistance as well as the subsidies that would be provided to established businesses through tax incentives The Federal Government has moved to assist indigenous businesses Projects in Model Cities areas must where possible be constructed by labor and businesses from the " model neighborhood. " The Small Business Administration through federally guaranteed loans and technical assistance aided minority-owned businesses in fiscal It plans to raise this number to new firms in fiscal and in fiscal The Federal Government can also assist in establishing other social institutions. Community Action Agencies supported by the Office of Economic Opportunity provide a fulcrum for involving the residents of lowincome areas in the revitalization of their neighborhoods. These agencies also provide a single knowledgeable source of information on the programs available to assist the poor as well as supplying many of these services themselves STRATEGIES FOR REDUCING RURAL POVERTY Over two-fifths of America 's poor live in rural communities even though only about one-fourth of the population is rural. Rural poverty though not as visible as urban poverty is a major national concern Rural communities face two special problems. First average family incomes in these areas are often low. Rural communities have difficulty making sufficient investments in public facilities and schools. Expansion of Federal support for income maintenance education and other social services for the poor would relieve rural communities of some of the burden of caring for their relatively large dependent population The second special problem stems from the persistent outmigration of the past half century. Migration to the city occurs largely because of declines in the principal sources of rural job opportunities agriculture mining and foresty. Most migrants improved their living conditions by moving. In areas where jobs were limited and migration took place those who stayed obtained more employment at better wages than if migration had not occurred A reduced rural population creates serious problems of public finance Those who leave tend to be more employable more highly skilled better educated and younger than those who remain. Some rural communities are thus left with a skilled labor force too small to support new industries In many areas excess capacity has developed in public facilities built for larger populations than currently exist. The cost of maintaining these facilities limits the ability of local governments to finance other public services Other rural communities are growing vigorously. Manufacturing employment is increasing more rapidly in the less urbanized States than in those containing large urban centers. Furthermore from to nonfarm employment grew most rapidly in the counties with the smallest population centers Net migration out of most rural counties is continuing but at a slower pace than in the 's particularly in the rural South and Midwest. For example of the nonmetropolitan counties in Kansas only gained in population through migration in the 1950Js ; have done so since Annual net migration from nonmetropolitan counties in the South has fallen from between and to since These trends indicate that a selective rural development policy concentrating on those counties which have begun to grow in the 's can produce substantial economic progress in much of rural and smalltown America The Federal Role In Rural Communities Federal aid for education planning and public facilities overcomes barriers to future development arising from the low income of rural communities. Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act provides funds to defray part of the costs of education in areas with high concentrations of poverty. About percent of these funds go to rural areas The Federal Government has also taken an active role in promoting areawide planning in rural areas. Forty million Americans reside in seven areas served by Regional Action Planning Commissions established under the provisions of the Public Works and Economic Development Act These agencies help to plan over-all regional economic development and to coordinate Federal State and local community assistance The Department of Agriculture provides technical assistance to private and public groups in rural areas undertaking coordinated planning and de- velopment activities. Loans grants and technical aid to low-income rural areas from the major Federal Departments amounted to over $ billion in fiscal Diversification of the Rural Economy Since economic development programs are more effective if some growth has already taken place Federal rural development assistance should be oriented toward more densely settled " growth centers " such as smaller growing cities or small metropolitan areas. With a population of viable size a community can diversify its economy and cushion itself against employment fluctuations in one industry. As more firms settle in an area they interact with mutual benefit by forming a sufficient market for the growth of business services and of cheaper communications and transportation increasing the attractiveness of the community for further business development This strategy has largely been adopted by the Department of Agriculture and the Economic Development Administration in aiding depressed nonmetropolitan regions. In addition Federal agencies should give explicit consideration to the development effects of Federal installations. Military bases and scientific installations for example have a profound effect on the community in which they locate Some rural communities suited only for traditional resource-based industries will continue to decline. The Federal Government should ensure that the remaining population is not required to carry the whole burden of declines in the industries many rural communities have depended upon Adequate income maintenance support for education and federalization of other costs associated with economic and population decline are the most equitable steps that can be taken to assist these areas. Federal support for the costs of moving low-income individuals to employment opportunities elsewhere is also desirable in certain situations. Job training and job location services are also needed to help both migrants and those who remain. These last two measures are discussed in Chapter FULFILLING THE NATIONAL COMMITMENT With a " poverty gap " of slightly more than percent of GNP the United States can if it will rapidly reduce poverty. This effort will require that the incomes of the poor grow faster than average income. Otherwise conquering poverty will take a long time indeed The long-run objective should be to reduce dependency as well as poverty. To this end education and training will be required so that all Americans can qualify for a decent job. In addition programs are needed to expand employment opportunities in poverty pockets. But many of these efforts will take years to become fully effective To meet the most pressing income needs of the poor promptly expansion of income maintenance is required. Welfare and social insurance programs have brought us a long way in combating poverty among the covered groups ; further benefit increases can close the poverty gap among those covered The most difficult policy issues pertain to families headed by an ablebodied man for whom no major income support programs now exist. Most of these men now work but with insufficient earnings to take their families particularly large families out of poverty Maintaining high employment is essential to eliminating poverty among families headed by a working man. Continued prosperity will raise the incomes of some of these men above the poverty line. For the rest a desirable policy could be compounded out of job training placement income support and public employment. The poverty gap in for these families containing million persons was $ billion. The actual costs of a program to assist this group would exceed this amount. Supplementary employment services and for reasons of equity and work incentive some benefits for the near-poor would have to be provided Federalization of more of the costs of providing the poor with welfare education health care training and public facilities would spread the costs of combating poverty more equitably. Caring for the poor now places a severe financial burden on communities with concentrated poverty The choice as to how poverty will be eliminated has begun to enter into public discussion and debate. A number of good alternatives are available After appropriate and intensive deliberation the American public must find mechanisms for effectively attacking poverty mechanisms and programs that can command widespread support. The success of any program is jeopardized if assistance is handed out begrudgingly and becomes demeaning to the recipients. Beyond this the most essential requirement is a program of a scale adequate to guarantee rapid progress toward ending poverty Fulfilling the Nation 's commitment is far more important than the details of the precise tactics used REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT FROM THE CABINET COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR THE END OF VIETNAM HOSTILITIES LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL WASHINGTON D.C. December THE PRESIDENT : SIR : The Cabinet Coordinating Committee on Economic Planning for the End of Vietnam Hostilities herewith submits its report on the studies you requested in your memorandum of March Respectfully JOSEPH W BARR Secretary of the Treasury CLARK M CLIFFORD Secretary of Defense C. R SMITI Secretary of Commerce WlLLARD WlRTZ ^ Secretary of Labor IARLES J ZWIGK Director Bureau of the Budget ARTHUR M OKUN Chairman Council of Economic Advisers CONTENTS Page SUMMARY OF FINDINGS FISCAL-MONETARY POLICIES DURING DEMOBILIZATION RESOURCES AND PRIORITIES POLICIES T O ASSIST PARTICULAR COMMUNITIES AND INDIVIDUALS LOOKING FORWARD TO PEACE FISCAL-MONETARY POLICIES DURING DEMOBILIZATION DEMOBILIZATION SCENARIO ECONOMIC IMPACT FISCAL-MONETARY ADJUSTMENT RESOURCES AND PRIORITIES PROJECTIONS OF THE PRIVATE ECONOMY BASELINE FEDERAL EXPENDITURES T H E PEACE-AND-GROWTH DIVIDEND ALTERNATIVE USES OF THE DIVIDEND POLICIES T O ASSIST PARTICULAR COMMUNITIES AND INDIVIDUALS T H E MAGNITUDE OF THE READJUSTMENT READJUSTMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE FUNDING READJUSTMENT PROGRAMS ASSISTING DEFENSE-DEPENDENT AREAS ASSISTING DISPLACED INDIVIDUALS List of Tables and Charts Tables Illustrative Projections for Fiscal Year and Recent Experience Estimated Gap Between Amounts Currently Authorized and Funded Illustrative New Programs or Major Expansions of existing Federal Civilian Programs Fiscal Year ( derived from Proposals of Task Forces and Study Groups ) Estimated First Year Cost of Readjustment Programs Charts Federal Purchases for National Defense Illustrative Reduction in Defense Spending with a Vietnam Demobilization Illustrative Paths of Defense Spending With and Without a Vietnam Demobilization Report to the President FROM THE CABINET COORDINATING COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC PLANNING FOR THE END OF VIETNAM HOSTILITIES I N MARCH you asked the Secretaries of Treasury Defense Commerce and Labor ; the Director of the Bureau of the Budget ; and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers to form a committee to coordinate the economic planning for the end of hostilities in Vietnam As initial terms of reference you instructed the Committee to consider possibilities and priorities for tax adjustment prepare with the Federal Reserve Board plans for quick adjustments of monetary and financial policies determine which high priority programs can be quickly expanded determine priorities for the longer range expansion of programs to meet the needs of the American people both through new and existing programs study and evaluate the future direction of Federal financial support to our States and local governments examine ways in which the transition to peace can be smoothed for the workers companies and communities now engaged in supplying our defense needs and for the men released from our armed forces Vietnam hostilities first became a significant economic influence in the summer of at a time when the economy was remarkably well-balanced and was in the midst of the longest peacetime expansion in history. The increase in the military budget required for Vietnam ( evident in Chart ) complicated the tasks of fiscal-monetary policies. The economy was subjected to inflationary strains. Although the American economic system demonstrated the strength and adaptability necessary to carry the extra load without major disruption and without jeopardizing its fundamental health the cost of war has been a load for the economy to carry not a supporting " prop. " Prosperity has not depended on the defense buildup and will not need high military spending to support it in peacetime. On the contrary peace will provide the Nation with welcome opportunities to channel into civilian use manpower and material resources now being devoted to war Chart Federal Purchases for National Defense BILLIONS OF DOLLARS LEVEL * i i i * i PRICES-1-7 / / i t # \ # / # / # / # / # / IN CURRENT PRICES i i I I PERCENT AS PERCENT OF G N P ^ ' I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I/CURRENT PRICES DIVIDED BY IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR FOR TOTAL FEDERAL PURCHASES 2/BASED ON CURRENT PRICES NOTE : DATA RELATE TO PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I SUMMARY OF FINDINGS A self-contained summary of the findings of the Committee is presented initially under three major headings. It is followed by more detailed discussion of each major section FISCAL-MONETARY POLICIES DURING DEMOBILIZATION Sustaining prosperity during the demobilization and seizing the welcome opportunities of peacetime will depend upon the careful and forward-looking management of fiscal and monetary policies. If demobilization should produce a major and rapid decline in defense spending and if policies were not adjusted the Federal budget would have an excessively restrictive effect on the economy An illustrative pattern of demobilization was developed on the assumption that within months after cessation of hostilities a genuine peace would be secured and a full withdrawal of troops could be initiated. In such a rapid demobilization the use of real resources for defense purposes would drop by $ billion ( annual rate in prices ) below the previously planned path over a period of six quarters following the truce and ultimately by $ billion at the end of quarters. If there were no compensating fiscalmonetary policy actions the Nation could be threatened with a recession similar to that at the end of Korean hostilities The magnitude and the timing of the policy adjustment best suited to promote steady and healthy economic growth will depend on the strength of private demand at the time peace arrives and on the specific profile of the defense cutback. The best possible projections of these elements will be needed in order to guide fiscal-monetary policy A number of possible compensating measures can be foreseen now. If the current percent income tax surcharge is still in effect when hostilities end its early expiration ( or phasing out ) could provide a major offsetting element. A detailed plan to speed up expenditures on established high priority projects should be available for the President 's consideration. If further stimulus is appropriate new program initiatives could be launched The objectives of the compensating fiscal action should receive the support of monetary policy but credit conditions probably should not be pushed into a posture of aggressive ease. Meanwhile the objectives of an improved price-cost performance and balance-of-payments equilibrium should be pursued intensively RESOURCES AND PRIORITIES The choices among alternative fiscal adjustments during the demobilization period should be guided by longer run priorities. Such priorities should be weighed in advance so that the Nation will be ready to take full advantage of any opportunities to launch important new programs to strengthen high-priority existing programs or to reduce taxes As revenues expand in a growing peacetime economy the elbow room in the budget increases. But about one-half of the growth in revenues is preempted by essentially built-in commitments of existing expenditure programs to meet the needs of a growing population and an expanding economy. These commitments are reflected in the estimated " baseline " budget for both defense and nondefense expenditures in fiscal These estimates assume that the transition to peace is essentially completed by and that the current percent income tax surcharge and certain excise taxes have expired by that time According to the illustrative calculations the " peace-and-growth dividend " available for Federal programs above the baseline or for tax reduction would amount to $ billion by fiscal and would increase $ to $ billion a year thereafter. The peace-and-growth dividend must be used in order to maintain healthy economic growth and it can be used constructively Some possible uses of the dividend are set forth to illustrate the considerable pressures demands and opportunities for Federal efforts in the years ahead. Some liberalization of social insurance and other cash benefits in part to keep up with the cost of living is viewed as a significant claim on the dividend. In addition the full funding of existing civilian programs to authorized levels would cost $ billion a year Beyond that a variety of major expansions in existing programs and of new programs are highly eligible claimants. A selection of such items based largely on proposals which have been made by experts or study groups adds up to $ billion a year. And other more ambitious new proposals which are currently receiving widespread public discussion must also be recognized. Furthermore tax reduction merits consideration as an effective way to share part of the dividend broadly among Americans It is clear that the Nation can not carry out all these activities funding existing programs undertaking new program initiatives and reducing taxes in the next few years from the peace-and-growth dividend ; difficult choices based on a careful determination of priorities will be necessary. But for those objectives placed at the top of society 's priority list progress can be made in a peaceful environment of prosperity and reasonable price stability As noted above our calculations allow for expiration of temporary taxes now in effect. In view of the urgent needs of the public sector the Committee would not recommend further large-scale Federal tax reductions in the years immediately following the end of Vietnam hostilities POLICIES TO ASSIST PARTICULAR COMMUNITIES AND INDIVIDUALS The economic impact of the war has been broadly diffused among all States and most industries. Only a relatively small number of areas and industries are likely to be specially affected by the demobilization or to encounter significant transitional problems. The Committee recommends certain measures to aid people in those areas and industries including : community redevelopment assistance homeowner assistance and most importantly the strengthening of job placement and training We also recorrimend the early establishment of a coordinating group which might be called the Readjustment Operations Committee to assume responsibility for detailed planning of Federal readjustment assistance to work with State and local authorities responsible for demobilization planning and to coordinate Federal readjustment programs during demobilization The steps we propose for readjustment assistance are limited and relatively inexpensive reflecting our conviction that the maintenance of general prosperity is far and away the major part of the economic problem of the transition. In our dynamic and flexible free market economy most areas and industries should be able to make a prompt and healthy adjustment so long as the Federal Government promotes noninflationary prosperity LOOKING FORWARD TO PEACE We also wish to stress the importance of a responsible and responsive fiscal policy during the remaining period of hostilities. Only in recent months through the enactment of the program of fiscal restraint have our Nation 's finances become adequately adjusted to the defense emergency situation. Maintenance of appropriate fiscal and monetary policy is absolutely essential both to preserve prosperity and to minimize the problem of transition at the end of hostilities FISCAL-MONETARY POLICIES DURING DEMOBILIZATION Peace may " break out " in any number of ways. For example hostilities may decline gradually accompanied by reduced expenditures on armament and manpower. Alternatively there could be a lengthy armed truce which would permit no significant reduction in our forces in Southeast Asia DEMOBILIZATION SCENARIO In the calculations underlying this report defense activities in Vietnam are assumed to continue at essentially present levels until hostilities cease. It is furthermore assumed that within months after a truce there will be a genuine assurance of peace and hence the beginnings of a full withdrawal of troops from Vietnam with accompanying cutbacks in other outlays An illustrative demobilization scenario developed by the Department of Defense points to the reductions in manpower materials and outlays described below. These are the amounts by which defense activities would fall short of the path that they would have followed had hostilities continued The armed services would decline by about persons averaging a quarter starting in the third quarter following the truce and terminating after the sixth quarter Civilian personnel in the Department of Defense would be reduced by also declining smoothly between the third and sixth quarters As a result of the manpower reduction military and civilian compensation would be reduced by $ billion ( annual rate ) at pay rates by the end of the sixth quarter Other operating expenditures ( annual rate in prices ) would decline by $ billion over a slightly longer period Expenditures for procurement would be reduced by $ billion over an interval of quarters. This reduction would take longer in order to rebuild inventories held by the Department of Defense Total real defense spending ( annual rate in prices ) would thus be reduced by $ billion at the end of four quarters $ billion at the end of six quarters and $ billion at the end of quarters The time profile of the assumed reduction in real expenditures is shown in Chart Chart Illustrative Reduction in Defense Spending With a Vietnam Demobilization BILLIONS O F DOLLARS PRICES ( ANNUAL RATES ) TOTAL REDUCTION IN DEFENSE SPENDING M iiii ~ ^ PROCUREMENT ^ X ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ g " PERSONNEL COMPENSATION I } QUARTERS FOLLOWING TRUCE NOTE DATA RELATE TO FEDERAL PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR NATIONAL DEFENSE SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS BASED ON ESTIMATES OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE t This is a rapid demobilization probably the most rapid that could realistically be assumed. Demobilization may in fact turn out to be smaller or more gradual as a result of any one of at least three developments : A gradual decline in military activity prior to the truce A long period of uncertainty between the attainment of the truce and the decision for redeployment or The need to maintain significant residual forces in Vietnam even in peacetime The rapid pattern of demobilization is assumed because it represents the sharpest test of the Nation 's ability to adapt to peace not because it appears most probable. If the Nation is ready to meet the challenge of rapid demobilization the lesser challenge of a more gradual transition can surely be handled The estimated decline in defense expenditures is significantly less than the $ billion a year currently estimated as the cost of the war. Of resources currently used for Vietnam $ billion would be required in other military uses in peacetime The reduction in Vietnam outlays during the demobilization will appear as a shortfall from an otherwise increasing path of defense spending. If hostilities were to continue with undiminished intensity the total defense budget would probably continue to rise at least enough to cover increases in military pay scales and gradual advances in prices paid for defense goods A hypothetical example is presented in Chart to illustrate the relationship between the paths of defense spending with and without the demobilization. In this illustration defense purchases are assumed to be $ billion initially and to be rising at the rate of $ billion a quarter to cover price and pay increases and to provide for a very modest real growth. In the absence of peace defense purchases would reach $ billion after six quarters and $ billion after quarters. The demobilization scenario above implies that defense purchases would be pulled below this rising path by about $ billion six quarters after the cessation of hostilities and by about $ billion after quarters. The absolute decline from the initial level of $ billion would be considerably less reaching $ billion at the end of six quarters ECONOMIC IMPACT The economic impact of the demobilization ( and the required fiscalmonetary adjustment ) can be most readily appraised by supposing that the fiscal program had been appropriately designed initially under the assumption of continuing hostilities to promote a balance between aggregate demand and the economy 's supply capabilities. In this situation a major policy adjustment would be required to offset the shortfall resulting from demobilization The impact of demobilization on the balance between aggregate demand and the economy 's productive capacity has three aspects X Chart Illustrative Paths of Defense Spending With and Without a Vietnam Demobilization BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( ANNUAL RATES ) DEFENSE SPENDING UNDER HYPOTHETICAL CONTINUATION OF HOSTILITIES UNDER DEMOBILIZATION QUARTERS FOLLOWING TRUCE N0TE._DATA RELATE TO FEDERAL PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES FOR NATIONAL DEFENSE SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS BASED ON ESTIMATES OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE The reduced use of resources by the Federal Government reflected in the decline of defense spending described above The short-run downward adjustments of inventories by defense suppliers as their production is adjusted to declining orders and falls below deliveries to the Government. The economic impact would occur even before Federal expenditures declined and would remain significant for only about four quarters after the truce An increase in the Nation 's potential output resulting from the potential additional employment of released military personnel in civilian jobs where productivity is substantially greater. Some women will withdraw from the labor force when their husbands return to civilian life and some veterans will return to school before entering the civilian labor force. After allowing for these elements the cumulative net induced increase in the private labor force is estimated at about after six quarters This shift toward higher productivity would add about $ or $ billion to potential GNP. To absorb this increment action would be required to add nearly $ billion directly to total demand. The resulting additional incomes could be expected to generate the necessary additional $ to $ billion increment in demand With no policy offset whatsoever the direct shortfall of demand by the sixth quarter following the truce could amount to $ billion : $ billion for the real decline in military spending and $ billion for the direct increment in demand needed to make use of the addition to potential output Shifts in the strength of private demand might either reduce or add to this gap but they would be unlikely to change the picture dramatically. Without compensatory stabilization action the gap would be multiplied through induced further cutbacks in demand that spread through the private sector Eight quarters after the truce the total multiplied shortfall below the potential output of the economy could reach $ billion. Inaction would thus threaten a recession similar to the experience following the Korean hostilities FISCAL-MONETARY ADJUSTMENT The instruments of fiscal and monetary policy must be available for prompt and decisive use to promote noninflationary prosperity and economic growth. These instruments are clearly capable in principle of offsetting the restrictive fiscal impact of demobilization. Indeed an excessive or premature stimulative fiscal-monetary program could overdo the job and generate an inflationary boom. A major challenge will be to determine and carry out a policy adjustment of proper size and timing Determining the Magnitude The above projections merely suggest the general magnitude of the policy requirements during a rapid demobilization. The specific dimensions can only be appraised when peace comes and much more is known about the prospects for private demand the budget and the time-path of the military cutback. Nevertheless some important guides can be provided to the problems and procedures involved in determining the magnitude of the compensating actions When peace comes the President and the Congress will need advice based on detailed projections of the GNP prices unemployment and the balance of international payments. Despite the inherent limitations of projections prudent reliance on quantitative forecasts carefully weighed and interpreted is preferable to a policy of wait-and-see a resort to predetermined rules of policy adjustment or a simple extrapolation of existing economic conditions Efforts should begin now to strengthen the quality of statistical information about the economy 's performance such as those improvements recommended in the budget program for fiscal Information of this type may be critical in determining the appropriateness of policy during the demobilization For the same reasons the Department of Defense should continue intensive efforts to improve projections of military orders and outlays so as to aid economic policy during demobilization. Assessing the time-path of the military cutback will be subject to uncertainties similar to those that were encountered in appraising the initial defense buildup in Vietnam Flexibility of fiscal and monetary policy decisions will be important to the success of adjustment. Even with the best efforts gauging private demand and defense outlays will be difficult. During the demobilization prediction of private spending will be complicated by the substantial psychological impacts of peace on private decisionmakers. It is a safe judgment that Americans will be delighted by peace but it does not follow that they will therefore spend more or alternatively that they will save more. Hence a successful transition program marked by steadiness and stability in the growth employment and price performance of the Nation may require continuing adjustments in the budgetary balance and in the behavior of monetary and credit flows Fiscal-monetary policies for the transition should take into account the initial economic situation. If the economy is advancing too rapidly when peace comes the restrictive effect of demobilization should not be entirely offset. If the economy is initially sluggish the adjustment of stabilization policies should more than compensate for the impact of demobilization Types of Compensatory Action In the event of a rapid demobilization the required policy adjustment may be large. This extraordinary " dividend " would be fully available to provide for " controllable " expenditures or tax reductions unlike the normal fiscal dividend from growing tax revenues which must in part finance the built-in growth of Federal expenditures. The various types of action which might be undertaken should be considered in advance If the cessation of hostilities occurs while the income tax surcharge is still in effect its early expiration ( or phasing out ) could provide a major element in the required fiscal offset. Acceleration of the currently scheduled reductions in excise taxes on automobiles and telephone service could serve as another element in the fiscal adjustment There should be available for the President 's consideration a program of accelerated expenditures that could be initiated on short notice following the cessation of hostilities. These should be confined to highpriority public expenditures which in any event would be made in the near future. It is currently estimated that such a program could add to Federal expenditures ( at annual rates ) by as much as $ billion in months and $ billion in months following its activation Decisions on Federal expenditures as part of the program of fiscal adjustment should be made in light of the promptness with which various types of outlays will add to total demand. For example according to our staff studies some although not all Federal grant programs to States and localities involve a significant lag between the expenditure of the funds by the Federal Government and their translation into additional purchases by the recipients. Programs with long lags are not ideal for supporting demand during the transition. In contrast other Federal programs generate orders or contracts to the private sector which would increase employment and economic activity promptly even before expenditures are incurred by the Federal Government While the precise assignment of responsibilities between fiscal and monetary policies should be made in full light of the circumstances associated with peace monetary policy should be expected to play a supportive role to the fiscal program. Credit policies can undoubtedly help significantly to ensure an adequate supply of mortgage credit to meet the needs for additional housing. But placing a heavy readjustment burden on monetary policy would be inadvisable ; it probably should not shift toward extreme ease to provide a maximum economic stimulant. For one thing balanceof-payments considerations are likely to limit to some degree the easing of credit. Also the flexibility inherent in monetary policy makes it a useful instrument to hold in reserve as a means of compensating for deficiencies or excesses that might develop in the fiscal program or for unforeseen developments in private demand In general fiscal policy adjustments during the transition should advance longer range national objectives. One basic choice will concern the relative importance in the fiscal program of tax reduction and of increased Federal expenditures. This decision should not be governed by considerations of economic stabilization ; various mixes of increased spending and reduced taxes can be equally satisfactory from that standpoint. Rather the choice should depend upon the extent to which the Nation wishes to channel resources from defense uses into the other areas of the public sector. Given the allocation between tax cuts and increased civilian programs further choices will be required to set priorities among various existing programs and possible new programs. These priorities should be established in advance In the event that the Administration plans to initiate during the transition any new programs which would require major legislation such legislation might be submitted to the Congress in the near future for discussion and debate and perhaps even for enactment on a standby basis Thus these programs could be ready when needed Other Objectives In addition to the objective of steady and sustainable growth at high employment policies during the transition should be directed at the price performance of the economy and the balance of payments During the transition period efforts should be redoubled to combat the troublesome inflationary tendencies of a high-employment economy. The efforts could include various measures which have been explored recently by the Cabinet Committee on Price Stability : to strengthen manpower programs to improve the price performance of particularly troublesome sectors such as construction and medical care to increase the efficiency of the private economy generally to minimize any inflationary effects of the Federal Government 's own activities and to achieve through cooperative efforts patterns of collective bargaining and of business price determination that are consistent with over-all price stability Intensive efforts should be made to take full advantage of the opportunities that peace may bring for improvement in the U.S. balance of payments. The direct foreign exchange cost of our military presence in Southeast Asia is now about $ billion a year higher than in Reduction in this outflow could be reinforced by other measures to yield a more comprehensive solution to our lingering international payments problem RESOURCES AND PRIORITIES Many of the choices that will have to be made during transition should be guided by a longer range view. To build the best bridge to peacetime prosperity we should know in advance where we want to go when we cross that bridge. The following projections are intended to provide an indication of the resources that will become available in the next few years and to serve as an aid in making critical choices about the uses of these resources The projections are focused on fiscal They are based on the assumption that the transition will be essentially completed by that time an assumption that is reasonably consistent with the demobilization scenario if a truce occurs during calendar PROJECTIONS OF THE PRIVATE ECONOMY Underlying the post-demobilization outlook are some fairly detailed economic projections prepared by our staff. While these projections are surely not to be regarded as precise forecasts of economic conditions they provide useful rough indications on the basis of reasonable assumptions of what the economic situation might be The economic framework was based on an unemployment rate of percent and an over-all rate of price increase which gradually declines to about percent a year by These assumptions represent neither a forecast nor a judgment that these rates will necessarily be feasible or appropriate. Lower unemployment would result in a higher GNP and increased budgetary resources. Greater price stability would also be highly desirable What combination of price stability and high employment will prove feasible depends upon the success of measures to help reconcile these two objectives The time-path of real GNP was estimated using labor force employment and productivity projections supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. On the basis of the projected path of the over-all price index of GNP the estimated GNP ( in current dollars ) for fiscal is $ billion ( Table ) TABLE Illustrative projections for fiscal year and recent experience [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Item Gross national product Federal receipts.._ second half * _ _ Federal expenditures and dividend Baseline expenditures _ Defense purchases. Other expenditures Peace-and-growth dividend Federal surplus or deficit ( ) _ _ Fiscal year projected i Seasonally adjusted annual rates ; preliminary Note. Federal receipts expenditures and surplus or deficit are the concepts used in the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers This GNP estimate served as the basis for projecting anticipated Federal revenue in in line with the assumed growth of incomes. Projected revenues are augmented by scheduled increases in social security taxes and reduced by the assumed expiration of the current percent income tax surcharge and of excise taxes on telephone service and automobiles. The net result of these calculations is an estimate of Federal receipts in fiscal of $ billion Next the various components of private demand were projected allowing for the effect of tax payments on private incomes and assuming that the indicated GNP was in fact achieved. Specific allowances for the impact of the Housing Act of were incorporated into the projection of residential construction activity. Additional estimates were also made for anticipated State and local government expenditures BASELINE FEDERAL EXPENDITURES A baseline level of Federal expenditures was then projected Defense Baseline defense expenditures for fiscal are calculated on the assumption that non-Vietnam programs now funded or approved will be carried out on schedule with no stretchout or cancellation. No allowance is made for possible new defense programs. These baseline defense expenditures are consistent with the demobilization scenario outlined earlier. The estimate for defense purchases is $ billion in fiscal compared to $ billion in the second half of calendar The $ billion decline is the result of the reduction in spending associated with Vietnam ( which amounts to $ bil- lion at prices as shown in Chart ) offset in part by allowances for higher pay scales some upcreep in prices paid for defense items and program adjustments following the end of the war In constant prices the baseline estimate for fiscal is nearly percent below current real defense outlays. Compared with the pre-Vietnam average level of real baseline expenditures for fiscal year are roughly percent higher. The calculations of cost increases are necessarily imprecise because the character of defense equipment and programs changes markedly over time. After baseline defense expenditures would move up slowly mainly to keep pace with rising costs Nondefense Baseline Federal nondefense expenditures rise over time for several reasons. Some gradual increases must be expected in the prices of the things the Government buys and the pay of civilian Government employees must be raised about in pace with wages and salaries elsewhere. More veterans become eligible for pensions ; more Government employees qualify for retirement benefits ; a growing population increases the workload of many Government agencies such as the Post Office Department and the National Park Service ; and so on. Social security benefits rise even with an unchanged benefit formula as more persons become eligible for benefits and as the average past income of applicants rises. As a result baseline nondefense expenditures will rise nearly $ billion per year to reach $ billion in fiscal THE PEACE-AND-GROWTH DIVIDEND The peace-and-growth dividend may be defined as the additional total demand over and above normal private demand and baseline Federal expenditures needed to achieve the specified GNP target. Estimated total demand for goods and services including that in the baseline Federal budget adds up to $ billion for fiscal The difference of $ billion between the target GNP of $ billion and estimated total demand is the peace-and-growth dividend. It represents the additional total demand that would have to be forthcoming to achieve the GNP target For the years following the annual peace-and-growth dividend may be expected to grow $ or $ billion a year as annual Federal revenues expand by roughly $ billion and baseline expenditures absorb about half of that growth The peace-and-growth dividend can be viewed in another way. Between now and fiscal the $ billion decline in defense expenditures resulting from peace in combination with normal revenue growth provides sufficient Federal budgetary resources to cover built-in defense and nondefense commitments to permit removal of the surcharge and to allow for a further $ billion addition to total demand through expansionary policy actions 2OO The peace-and-growth dividend is thus a rough measure of the resources available for expansionary action. A dollar of this dividend may be " used up " either by a dollar of increased Federal purchases or by a dollar of additional private purchases. The latter could be induced by a reduction in taxes an increase in Federal transfer payments or an easing of monetary policy An increase in transfer payments or a reduction in taxes of one dollar will generally not increase private spending by a full dollar ; to the extent that these instruments are used the total of expansionary fiscal action can be somewhat greater than the peace-and-growth dividend The projections implicitly assume certain monetary conditions and interest rates. The appropriate Federal Reserve policy may be either more restrictive or more stimulative than assumed thus affecting fiscal policy requirements The appropriate budget deficit or surplus in any given year is determined by the fiscal action needed to support private demand in light of monetary conditions. The above calculations imply a $ billion surplus ( national income accounts basis ) in fiscal Private demand may be either weaker or stronger than assumed thereby calling for a different budgetary policy. If private demand is weaker smaller surpluses ( or possibly deficits ) will be needed and the peace-and-growth dividend in fiscal will be larger than $ billion. Conversely if private demand is stronger larger surpluses will be needed and the dividend will be smaller ALTERNATIVE USES OF THE DIVIDEND The peace-and-growth dividend must be used in some fashion if the growth and employment targets are to be achieved. And it surely can be used productively by strengthening valuable Federal programs enacting tax reductions and easing monetary policy. Indeed the problem will be to choose among many worthy alternatives There is no limit to the portion of the peace-and-growth dividend that could in principle take the form of a lighter tax burden on individuals and businesses. This use of the dividend would contribute effectively to achieving the growth and employment targets. Our national experience from to demonstrates the effectiveness of the stimulus from a markedly lightened Federal tax burden. But the use of the dividend to reduce Federal taxes must compete with compelling needs for strengthened and new public expenditure programs. The ultimate national decisions on priorities must focus on the allocation of the dividend between these two basic routes Some of the possible increases in Federal expenditures are spelled out below. Two areas of expenditure that would appear to have a significant claim are : increases in benefits needed to maintain standards under social security and related Federal programs and the full funding of existing programs which are currently operating below authorized levels Maintaining Standards Under Cash Benefit Programs The baseline expenditure projections allow for growth in social security and other transfer benefits resulting from an increased number of recipients and an increase in the lifetime earnings of recipients under the present benefit formula. But they make no allowance for statutory liberalization of benefit formulas under Old Age and Survivor 's Insurance unemployment insurance Federal retirement railroad retirement veterans benefits and public assistance programs. If in fact there were no legislative liberalization social insurance trust funds would accumulate a substantial surplus while benefits would shrink in terms of purchasing power. A legislated increase of $ billion by fiscal in these benefit formulas would ensure that benefits at least keep pace with assumed increases in the cost of living Full Funding of Existing Programs Several Federal programs particularly ones adopted recently are operating below levels authorized by the Congress. To fund these programs fully thus making appropriations match authorizations would cost about $ billion a year as distributed in Table These programs are already making important contributions to the solution of major social and environmental problems and increasing their appropriations to authorized levels would probably command high priority. Nevertheless in establishing priorities the relative value of each of these programs should be weighed against those of new or expanded programs and of tax reduction TABLE Estimated gap between amounts currently authorized and funded Billions of dollars per year Program Total full cost. Elementary and secondary education Higher education Housing and community development Water and air pollution control Crime control and prevention Area redevelopment _._ Health training and research etc __ Agricultural conservation and adjustment '.A Source : Bureau of the Budget New Efforts in Civilian Programs A variety of new efforts entirely new programs or major expansions of existing civilian programs are also eligible claimants for a share of the peace-and-growth dividend. A review of recent recommendations by task forces or study groups indicates the possible desirability of new domestic programs in the fields of education health job and manpower training social insurance welfare urban development crime prevention air and water pollution control natural resource development transportation space technology and science Table contains a list of programs that have been prominently and generally discussed recently as desirable to meet the needs of the Nation during the next several years. The table is presented for illustrative purposes only and does not indicate any program priorities. It sets forth quantitative estimates of the expenditures that might take place in each of these programs during fiscal In many instances the dollar amounts shown in the table are considerably below the recommendations of recent task forces or study groups. By many standards the list is incomplete and inadequate. Yet it totals $ billion nearly double the entire estimated peace-and-growth dividend for that year. The clear lesson emerging from this table and the reason for its inclusion in this report is that some very difficult choices will have to be made New Defense Programs Depending upon international developments affecting our national security and upon technological changes in weapon systems added expenditures on new defense programs may be needed. If these are essential to our national security they must be given a top priority claim on the peaceand-growth dividend. At the same time it is clear that the possibilities for expansion in the defense area are virtually unlimited and that utmost efficiency will continue to be needed in budgeting for defense. For illustrative purposes the staff of the Department of Defense has assembled a package of $ 6j/i billion ( annual rate ) of expenditures on new DOD programs which may come up for consideration in the next few years. The major elements in the package are expenditures of $ billion for aircraft development and modernization in connection with major new programs $ billion for the construction of defense installations and family housing projects $ billion for shipbuilding and modernization of naval forces and $ billion for advanced strategic and general purpose weapon systems Major New Initiatives The proposals listed in Table essentially expand or build upon existing programs. More elaborate proposals have also been advanced as alternatives to this piecemeal approach A comprehensive income maintenance plan such as the " negative income tax " has been widely discussed as a simple and equitable device to assist the poor. A negative income tax that succeeded in making major inroads on poverty while preserving work incentives might cost as much as $ to $ billion a year. Such a program would protect people against the ravages of poverty but it would still need to be reinforced by efforts in housing health education and job training aimed at the long-run sources and causes of poverty TABLE Illustrative new programs or major expansions of existing Federal civilian programs fiscal year { derived from proposals of task forces and study groups ) Hypothetical expenditures ( billions of dollars ) Program Total expenditures. Education Preschool Elementary and secondary. Higher. Vocational Health Kiddie-care Medicare for disabled Comprehensive health centers Hospital construction and modernization. Nutrition Community service programs Jobs and manpower Public jobs Manpower Development Training Act Employment service Social security and income support Unemployment insurance Public assistance Social security improvements Veterans Economic area and other special development programs. Entrepreneurial aid Area redevelopment Rural development Indian assistance Crime delinquency and riots Violence and riot prevention Safe streets programs Rehabilitation of offenders and delinquents L0 Prevention of delinquency and crime by special measures for delinquency-prone youthQuality of environment Air pollution prevention and control Public water supply construction programs Water pollution control and sewage treatment Solid waste disposal Natural beautification environmental protection and recreational development Natural resource development and utilization Land and forest conservation.. Water resources and related programs Mineral and energy ( excluding hydroelectric ) development Natural environmental development _ ___ ! ! Urban development _ _ ___ New cities Land acquisition and financial planning ( suburban ) Urban mass transportation Model cities _ Other urban facilities and renewal Transportation _ Airway and airport modernization _ Rapid interurban ground transit. _ Modernization of merchant marine Motor vehicle and transportation safety research and safety grants ._ Science and space exploration Post-Apollo space program _ Scientific research in oceanography communications social and behavioral sciences and natural sciences _ Foreign economic aid See Notes at end of table TABLE Illustrative new programs or major expansions of existing Federal civilian programs fiscal year ( derived from proposals of task forces and study groups ) Continued NOTES Education. The preschool program an extension of Head Start would provide full-time preschool education for about children.The elementary and secondary education funds would about double the Federal support in that area. The funds proposed for higher education would more than double current Federal support.The vocational education funds would raise Federal support about halfway toward the recommendation of the Advisory Council on Vocational Education Health. The " kiddie-care " proposal would provide health care for needy mothers and infants. Medicare offered to beneficiaries of social security disability insurance on a contributory basis would potentially reach million persons in About additional comprehensive neighborhood health care centers a year could be established for the amount shown. The added funds for health facilities would enable the Federal Government to double the rate of output of such facilities in line with estimates of national needs Nutrition. Nutritional supplements for needy pregnant women nursing mothers and small infants account for about $ million while the remainder would allow a doubling of existing food assistance programs Community service programs. This would provide for expanded daycare centers for children of needy working mothers and for expansion of coordinated services through neighborhood centers Jobs and manpower. The funds for jobs in the public sector would permit expansion of about jobs to provide public service employment for the chronically disadvantaged ; this program would reinforce expansion in education health services and urban and area redevelopment. The increase in MDTA training would support expansion of the JOBS program and would reinforce efforts to lower unemployment while improving the Nation 's price performance. It would also provide trained manpower for construction. The growth in employment service operations envisions strengthening decentralizing and computerizing manpower activities ; developing a rural manpower service ; and enlarging services to the disadvantaged Social security and income support. The unemployment insurance funds would provide for higher benefits extended benefits during recessions and aid to the unemployed through retraining and mobility assistance. The public assistance funds could permit revision of benefit standards and extended coverage or the adoption of a modest new program of income aid with objective standards. The added expenditure could fill as much as percent of the current poverty income gap. Expansion of the WIN program would provide more job and training opportunities for welfare recipients. The social security expenditure couid provide a higher minimum benefit for those dependent on social insurance benefits as the main source of income and liberalization of eligibility requirements for disability insurance as well as some general improvement in benefit levels Veterans. The higher priority recommendations made by the Veterans ' Advisory Commission in March could be instituted with these funds Economic area and other special development programs. The entrepreneurial assistance program could help minority groups so-called " black capitalism. " Area redevelopment programs would assist growth centers in less populated areas while rural redevelopment programs would concentrate on small communities providing community facility development special housing and family farm assistance Crime delinquency and riots. Federal aid to State and local governments could be provided to help prevent violence and riots and permit a higher degree of Federal readiness to cope with such emergencies. The safe streets program funds would be used to work towards the objectives of the National Crime Commission with respect to strengthening the police and courts. Rehabilitation of offenders and delinquents would be pursued by intensive retraining and other services Quality of environment. Federal funds for pollution abatement may be required to enforce standards investigate claims or abate pollution caused by government or not readily attributable to particular private individuals. Assistance in expanding the Nation 's water supply system would provide a small fraction of the $ billion annual requirement over the next years. Provision of more recreational areas near population centers would be made possible Natural resource development and utilization. Department of the Interior Corps of Engineers and Department of Agriculture programs relating to land mineral energy forest recreational and other fields have large backlogs of useful projects many already planned and authorized but held back for budgetary reasons Urban development. Metropolitan development assistance would support improved planning and coordinated advance land acquisition. Each of these programs emphasizes these requirements whether in new communities suburbs or older central cities. The allowances represent only a fractional contribution to the reconstruction and development of the cities Transportation. Such expanded investments in the improvement of the principal elements of the Nation 's transportation system would serve the objectives of economic development safety and national defense Science and space exploration. The allowances would permit the science and space agenices to fund some of the research opportunities not covered in the stringent budgets of recent years Foreign economic aid. This additional amount would help to meet growth targets in Southeast Asia and under the Alliance for Progress as well as to cover other aid requirements. Even this increase would leave our foreign assistance program below levels of a few years back Source : Bureau of the Budget An alternative major program initiative would provide guaranteed employment opportunities for persons willing and able to work but unable to find jobs. Depending on eligibility criteria and the techniques of implementation such a program might cost $ to $ billion a year Another area of mounting public concern is the financial pressure on State and local governments. As a means of reducing the relative importance of the more onerous State and local taxes the Federal Government might adopt some general scheme of revenue sharing such as a return of some personal tax revenues to the States ( or localities ) or a Federal tax credit for State income taxes. Some suggested plans would cost $ to $ billion a year. A specific but more limited proposal along these lines would be the establishment of a trust fund to finance a generalized Model Cities program Another major proposal that has much support is the establishment of an Urban Development Bank which would raise its funds in the private capital market. This institution would lend to State and local governments at reduced cost thereby relieving the pressure on the market for tax-exempt securities. It would place only a minimal burden on the Federal budget since the interest subsidies would be offset at least in part by increased Treasury receipts from reduced use of the tax exemption. But the charge against national resources and therefore against the peace-andgrowth dividend would be substantial depending upon the extent to which the Bank finances projects that would not otherwise have been undertaken There have also been proposals for replacing the present military draft with a more equitable and efficient method of obtaining the manpower needed for national defense. One such proposal which might cost $ to $ billion a year would be the adoption of a fully volunteer army. Another would be the establishment of a National Service Corps in which every young person would be expected to give at least years of service to the Nation either as a member of the Armed Forces or in a civilian assignment that would contribute to the solution of important national problems Conclusion The problems of poverty human resource development and the pressing need to improve our physical environment will impose very heavy demands on the Federal budget in the years ahead. The end of the struggle in Vietnam together with increased tax revenues resulting from economic growth will make a sizable volume of real resources available to deal with these problems. But for years and years ahead the peace-and-growth dividend is dwarfed by the magnitude of the needs. Difficult choices must be made choices between increased expenditures and tax reductions between defense spending and nondefense programs and among competing civilian programs. The above calculations allow for tax reduction from present rate levels through the expiration of the percent surcharge and certain excise taxes. These funds would permit the private sector to engage in extra private consumption or investment above the normal growth of private demand But in view of the vast and urgent needs for services that can best be supplied through the public sector we would not recommend further largescale Federal tax reductions in the years immediately following the end of Vietnam hostilities POLICIES TO ASSIST PARTICULAR COMMUNITIES AND INDIVIDUALS Demobilization will require some shifts in employment patterns from the Armed Forces to civilian jobs from defense industries to those producing civilian goods and services and from one community or area to another Shifts in the composition of activity will not be new or unusual. They are a regular feature of the highly mobile and dynamic U.S. economy. As technology and the pattern of demand evolve the free choices of businesses workers and consumers operate through markets to shift resources among industries and geographic areas. These movements are largely self-adjusting and do not usually pose major problems either to workers or communities When support is needed various Federal agencies stand ready to assist through community development activities job information and manpower training. The Office of Economic Adjustment in the Department of Defense has been dealing since with the specific economic impact associated with closings of defense installations and other major changes in military outlays The experience of these activities provides a guide for policies to assist in the adjustment problems of those communities and individuals likely to be severely affected by demobilization. Measures to assist in specific adjustments can complement fiscal-monetary policy in producing a smooth noninflationary transition THE MAGNITUDE OF THE READJUSTMENT Under the particularly rapid demobilization scenario assumed above an estimated persons would be added to the private labor force during the six quarters following the truce. In addition as many as civilian employees could be required to shift jobs as defense purchases from private businesses decline. Altogether an additional million workers may seek new civilian employment over a period of six quarters an average of about job shifts a month over and above those normally taking place. The shifts would be unevenly spaced during the period and might exceed in some months This is a significant but not enormous addition to the normal amount of job shifting. To provide perspective in the average number of layoffs per month in manufacturing alone was about and voluntary separations averaged about a month while manufacturing workers were hired at an average monthly rate of in and in While no comparable data exist for nonmanufacturing sectors layoffs and hirings for the total economy must be far larger The figures indicate the dynamism and the normal adaptations of the labor market. While specific problems of dislocation in certain areas will occur the figures do indicate that the magnitude of the demobilization problem should be manageable if fiscal-monetary policies ensure that overall demand remains strong Particular measures to facilitate the structural transitions of demobilization should include community redevelopment assistance homeowner assistance and most importantly the strengthening of job placement and job training. Efficient planning and implementation of these measures will require the establishment of a coordinating committee READJUSTMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE A Readjustment Operations Committee should be established in the near future to assume responsibility for detailed planning of Federal readjustment assistance and to work closely with State and local authorities The Committee should include the Secretaries of Defense Commerce and Labor ; the Director of the Bureau of the Budget ; the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers ; and the Director of the Office of Emergency Preparedness Prior to demobilization the Committee should be responsible for : Planning for demobilization including frequent updating of the estimated expenditures required for adjustment assistance Undertaking and supporting research on characteristics of individual communities likely to require special readjustment assistance and in particular developing a system of " early warning " Providing technical advice and information for State and local government demobilization planning authorities and Coordinating an inventory by the Departments of Defense Commerce and Labor of the skills and training of defense industry workers and armed services personnel and of the skill requirements of potential sources of employment in defense-dependent areas During the demobilization period the Readjustment Operations Committee should be responsible for : ( ) Coordinating Federal assistance programs to communities and individuals with severe readjustment problems ( ) Identifying areas experiencing or likely to experience high unemployment during demobilization through advance notification by the Department of Defense of impending contract cancellations and military base closings and through a careful monitoring of economic developments in key areas by the Departments of Labor and Commerce and ( ) De- termining in cooperation with State and local governments the appropriate size and mix of Federal assistance programs and recommending specific programs and budget allocations for dealing with the problems of severely disrupted areas FUNDING READJUSTMENT PROGRAMS The activities to assist a smooth transition will rely mainly on existing programs designed to aid communities faced with structural adjustments or to help workers gain new skills. How much these programs must be expanded will depend upon many factors which can not be estimated precisely but the approximate initial size of the programs is shown in Table TABLE Estimated first year cost of readjustment programs [ Millions of dollars ] Estimated first year cost Program High Low EDA community development assistance SBA loans HUD homeowner emergency loans _ MDTA training Employment service Relocation assistance Veterans assistance- ? Total cost 14C ? n Note. Abbreviations used in this table represent the following : EDA ( Economic Development Administration ) SBA ( Small Business Administration ) HUD ( Department of Housing and Urban Development ) and MDTA ( Manpower Development and Training Act ) Source : Bureau of the Budget Once hostilities cease or prospects for demobilization appear supplemental appropriations for readjustment purposes should be sought promptly. All expenditures from special appropriations should be coordinated by the Readjustment Operations Committee When demobilization plans are definitely known more exact program expenditures should be determined by the Readjustment Operations Committee. Initial appropriations should be at the low end of the estimated range with the understanding that additional funds may be needed. These program supplements should be reserved for uses directly related to the post-Vietnam transition. In addition funds should be requested to provide returning servicemen with veterans benefits under existing programs and to assist State unemployment insurance programs in cases of high localized unemployment Even before demobilization important permanent improvements should be made in some existing institutions to make them more effective both in the transition to peace and in the long run. The Unemployment Insurance program should be strengthened by increasing coverage raising benefits lengthening the possible duration of payments and improving the financial base of the system. And minimum standards of vesting of private pension plans should be established so that as the economy shifts to a peacetime footing workers can change jobs without losing their benefits ASSISTING DEFENSE-DEPENDENT AREAS One major measure to be coordinated by the Readjustment Operations Committee is Federal assistance for communities that will experience a major decline in employment opportunities due to the closing or curtailment of a defense plant or military base. The possible scope of this task is suggested by the growth in defense employment during the buildup for Vietnam. From to local areas experienced increases in defense employment exceeding percent of their total work force. A few of these localities are moderately large metropolitan areas but some are predominantly rural counties with no urban center exceeding population ; these rural areas may be especially vulnerable to defense cutbacks during demobilization The Federal Government can assist severely affected communities with redevelopment potential to reorient their economies through programs of the Economic Development Administration and the Small Business Administration. Initial-year funds required for these specific purposes might range from $ to $ million for the Economic Development Administration and from $ to $ million for the Small Business Administration These agencies would help defense-dependent communities modernize public facilities develop industrial sites convert defense installations to other uses and otherwise make themselves attractive to new industry ASSISTING DISPLACED INDIVIDUALS While most of the individuals who lose defense jobs or who are released from military service will be readily employable some will not possess the required skills while others will be geographically isolated from job opportunities. Federal programs should be undertaken to ease the impact of demobilization upon the most seriously affected individuals Strengthening the Federal Employment Service Demobilization will greatly enlarge demands on the resources of the Federal-State Employment Service. Prior to demobilization plans should be made for expanding the staff of the Employment Service offices : to ensure their capacity for handling veterans and laid-off defense workers to improve the flow of information about job opportunities outside the local labor market and to station staff temporarily at locations convenient to military personnel about to be discharged. The Employment Service may require $ to $ million in the first year to provide these activities 2IO Expanding Manpower Training Some individuals dislocated from defense employment will need retraining. The preliminary estimate is that $ million will be needed to prepare about servicemen for civilian employment through Project Transition and to train about enrollees in other MDTA programs. Further appropriations of up to $ million may be required for the two programs Providing Relocation Assistance A relocation assistance fund should be established to help low- and middleincome workers move out of defense-dependent communities with inadequate reemployment opportunities. The program should be administered by the Department of Labor which should develop general policy on relocation assistance including eligibility criteria in cooperation with the Readjustment Operations Committee. The program should provide full grant assistance for workers taking low-income jobs and a mix of loans and grants for those obtaining higher paying jobs Relocation assistance should be available only to individuals directly affected by cutbacks in specified defense-dependent communities. The number assisted could range between and families requiring expenditures between $ and $ million Funding Veterans Assistance Current programs available to veterans are generally adequate to cover the needs of returning servicemen ; however the accelerated separations associated with demobilization will require additional appropriations for these programs especially employment consultation services and the educational assistance program. Adequate financing of veterans programs may cost $ to $ million a year during demobilization Providing Homeowner Assistance The Federal Government should undertake to prevent a widespread loss of homes in areas suffering temporary unemployment during demobilization The Department of Housing and Urban Development should establish a program to encourage private lenders to declare moratoria on mortgage payments on homes owned and occupied by individuals dislocated by a defense cutback. When an extension of mortgage payments can not be obtained the Department of Housing and Urban Development should be authorized to lend the homeowner funds at a reasonable interest rate to cover mortgage payments. Expenditures of about $ million should be ample for this program Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December T H E PRESIDENT SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully Arthur M. Okun Chairman Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During During the year the activities of the Council of Economic Advisers were dominated by the urgent need to preserve the enormous benefits of prosperity and to head off the threats of serious inflation and international monetary instability It was clear as the year began that the delay in enacting your fiscal proposals was contributing to inflationary pressures and jeopardizing the foundations of prosperity. The Council devoted much of its energy during the first half of the year toward the enactment of the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act which you signed on June The Council 's efforts in the area of fiscal policy continued to be carried out with the closest coordination and cooperation of the Treasury Department and the Bureau of the Budget. The uncertain fiscal situation created a major problem for monetary policy and the Council engaged in frequent consultations and exchanges of information with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Much of the Council 's work to meet the challenge of price stability focused on the fundamental long-run aspect of inflationary tendencies in a high employment economy. The newly established Cabinet Committee on Price Stability and its staff studied inflationary tendencies in individual sectors of the economy and ways these could be modified by the structural improvement of freely operating markets. The Cabinet Committee also proved to be an excellent institution for intensifying coordinating and broadening the base of the Administration 's efforts to improve price performance both by structural efforts and by enlisting cooperation for voluntary restraint in price and wage decisions. Particularly in the second half of the year after an appropriate fiscal policy was implemented the Council and the other agencies of the Committee intensified these efforts both publicly and privately The progress and the strains in the international financial system during placed a high premium on studies in this area. The Council conducted analyses and evaluations of a variety of proposals which have been advanced as ways LU strengthen the system Throughout the year the Council continued to conduct studies and evaluate programs and proposals on a wide range of economic and social issues. The most important of these efforts were centered on the challenge of reducing poverty and drawing disadvantaged groups into the mainstream of economic life Another significant activity was the study of preparations for achieving a smooth economic transition to peace after hostilities cease in Vietnam. Other important efforts dealt with the analysis of domestic financial markets industrial markets housing collective bargaining agricultural policy manpower training and development and various social insurance and income maintenance programs COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP On February Merton J. Peck from Yale University joined the Council replacing Gardner Ackley who became Ambassador to Italy ; and Arthur M. Okun who had served as a Member since November was designated to succeed to the Chairmanship previously held by Mr Ackley. On July Warren L. Smith from the University of Michigan replaced James Duesenberry who returned to his duties at Harvard University Following is a list of all past Council members and their dates of service : Name Position Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark... Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns.. NeilH.Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Joseph S. Davis Raymond J. Saulnier Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich James Tobin Kermit Gordon Walter W. Heller Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein James S. Duesenberry _ Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman _ Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member _ Chairman Member.. Member Member Member Member.. Chairman.. Member Chairman Member Member _ Member Oath of office date Augusts August November May Augusts May June September March September December May April December December November May January _ January January August November May September February Separation date November January February August January December February April October January January January January July December November February August February June COUNCIL STAFF At the end of members of the Council 's professional staff were Susan R. Ackerman F. Gerard Adams Barry P. Bosworth Frederick W Deming Marten S. Estey Catherine H. Furlong Frances M. James Lawrence B. Krause James W. Kuhn David W. Lusher Thomas G. Moore Saul Nelson Roger G. Noll David J. Ott Courtenay M. Slater Luther T Wallace Charles B. Warden Jr. and G. Paul Wonnacott Each year a number of staff members who have joined the Council on a temporary basis return to their posts in private life or in Government. Those leaving the Council in were John F. Burton Jack W. Carlson Christopher K. Clague Thomas F. Dernburg Peter P. Dorner Raymond W. Goldsmith Hendrik S. Houthakker Saul H. Hymans Carey P. Modlin Joseph D. Mooney and Frank W. Schiff Continuing its practice of asking leading members of the economics profession to assist in the analysis of economic problems the Council in called on the following consultants : Henry J. Aaron James T. Bonnen William H. Branson William Capron Richard N. Cooper John T. Dunlop Otto Eckstein Stephen M. Goldfeld Kermit Gordon Walter W. Heller Allen H. Lerman Paul MacAvoy Edwin S. Mills Joseph Pechman George L. Perry Paul Samuelson Charles A. Taff James Tobin and Lloyd Ulman The Council continued its graduate student intern program which was started in Those working with the Council for various periods in were Robert E. Anderson Lucy A. Cardwell Albert J. Eckstein Morris Goldstein Stephen P. Magee Richard W. Nelson David M. Nienhaus David F. J. Piachaud Charles G. Plourde Craig E. Swan C. Daniel Vencill and William D. Watson Jr. Research assistants included Rosanna M. Coffey Katherine Champe Charles E. Kurlansky Rosemary D. Marcuss Roselee N. Roberts Joanne C. Turner and Carolyn T. Welch As in the past the Council received loyal and energetic assistance from its nonprofessional staff. Members of this staff at the end of were Teresa D. Bradburn Judson A. Byrd II Gladys R. Durkin Mary C. Fibich James W. Gatling Elizabeth F. Gray Laura B. Hoffman Christine L. Johnson Roberta R. Kirk Helen H. Knox Bessie M. Lafakis Betty Lu Lowry V. Madge McMahon Eleanor A. McStay A. Keith Miles Joyce A. Pilkerton Dorothy L. Reid Earnestine Reid Lucille F. Saverino Bettye T. Siegel Nancy F. Skidmore Barbara E. Skolnik Margaret L. Snyder and Elizabeth A. Zea In preparing its Annual Report the Council relied upon the editorial skills of Robin Elliott COUNCIL ACTIVITIES The Council of Economic Advisers was established as an agency of the Federal Government nearly years ago by the Employment Act of Under the Act the Council is charged with the responsibility of analyzing and interpreting economic developments and of recommending economic policies that will promote the goals of " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The Council 's chief responsibility is to keep the President fully informed of economic developments and emerging problems which may affect the Nation 's economy. To meet this responsibility the Council continuously reviews economic conditions undertakes special studies of particular problem areas and makes recommendations concerning Government programs and policies. The Council confers regularly with all major Government agencies having responsibilities in the economic field The Secretary of the Treasury the Director of the Bureau of the Budget and the Chairman of the Council and their respective staffs ( the " Troika " ) provide the President with a continuous joint assessment of the economic and budgetary outlook for the current and subsequent fiscal years. The heads of the " Troika " agencies and their associates together with the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System meet as the " Quadriad " with the President to discuss domestic and international monetary problems In addition to its regular and informal consultations with other Government agencies the Council and its staff in participated with other agencies in a large variety of more formal committees task forces and studies The Council and its staff represent the United States in a number of important international conferences. The Council Chairman heads the U.S delegation to the meetings of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) and members of the Council and its staff this year participated in many other international meetings under the auspices of the OECD. The Chairman also met with the Chairman and staff of the Economic Council of Canada in Ottawa and the Council was involved in activities of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe An important responsibility of the Council is to explain and clarify the Administration 's economic policies both within the Government and to the public at large. This is done through numerous speeches articles press briefings statements Congressional testimony its Annual Report and by assisting the President in the preparation of his Economic Report. The Council meets frequently and informally with many individuals and groups both from the United States and abroad including businessmen bankers labor leaders government officials university scholars and students members of the press corps and interested private citizens and more formally with a number of advisory groups including the President 's Advisory Committee on Labor-Management Policy and the Business Council 's Liaison Committee with the Council of Economic Advisers The Council prepares two documents for publication. One is the Economic Report of the President together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. Over copies of the Report were distributed to Members of the Congress Government officials the press and depository libraries or sold to the public by the Superintendent of Documents. The second is the monthly Economic Indicators. This important compilation of current economic statistics has been prepared since at the Council under the direction of Miss Frances M. James and is published by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. More than copies are furnished to Members of the Congress and depository libraries or sold to the public every month Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National income or expenditure : B-l. Gross national product or expenditure B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product B-4. Gross national product by major type of product B-5. Gross national product by major type of product in prices B-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-7. Gross national product by sector B-8. Gross national product by sector in prices B-9. Gross national product by industry in prices B-10. Personal consumption expenditures B-l Gross private domestic investment B-12. National income by type of income B-l Relation of gross national product and national income B-14. Relation of national income and personal income B-l Disposition of personal income B-l6. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices B-l Sources of personal income B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving B-19. Saving by individuals B-20. Number and money income ( in prices ) of families and unrelated individuals by color of head Population employment wages and productivity : B-21. Population by age groups : Estimates and projections B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-23. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B-24. Selected unemployment rates B-25. Unemployment by duration B-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-28. Average weekly hours of work in selected nonagricultural industries B-29. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries B-30. Average gross weekly earnings in selected nonagricultural industries B Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries B-32. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and prices B-33. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices B-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy Production and business activity : B-35. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B Industrial production indexes market groupings B-37. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate B-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and B-40. New construction activity B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing B-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-43. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-44. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Prices : B-45 B-46 B-47 B-48 B-49 Consumer Consumer Consumer Wholesale Wholesale price price price price price indexes indexes indexes indexes indexes by major groups by special groups selected commodities and services by major commodity groups by stage of processing Money supply credit and finance : B-50. Money supply B-51. Bank loans and investments B-52. Selected liquid assets held by the public B-53. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-54. Bond yields and interest rates B-55. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding B-56. Instalment credit extended and repaid B-57. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-58. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender B-59. Net public and private debt Government finance : B-60. Federal budget receipts and outlays B-61. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt B-62. Relation of the Federal Budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts B-63. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts B-64. Public debt securities by kind of obligation B-65. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-66. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt B-67. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts B-68. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts B-69. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Page Corporate profits and finance : B-70. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations B-71. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) B-72. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) by industry group B-73. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-74. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations B-75. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-76. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit B-77. Business formation and business failures Agriculture : B-78. Income from agriculture B-79. Farm production indexes B-80. Farm population employment and productivity B-81. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-82. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-83. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture International statistics : B-84. United States balance of payments B-85. United States merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-86. United States merchandise exports and imports by area B-87. United States overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years B-88. International reserves and B-89. United States reserve assets : Gold stock holdings of convertible foreign currencies and reserve position in the International Monetary Fund B-90. Price changes in international trade B-91. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current prices Symbols used : " Preliminary __ Not available ( also not applicable ) * Amount insignificant in terms of the particular unit ( e.g. less than $ million where unit is billions of dollars ) Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Total gross national product Personal sumption expenditures ^ Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment2 Net exports of goods and services Federal * Total Total National defense5 Other State and local p ] ! l Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L IIIII IV : I III IV. : I... II.. III.. IV P. i See Table B-10 for detailed components 2See Table B-ll for detailed components See Table B-6 for exports and imports separately * Net of Government sales This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Persona ! consumption expenditures Year or quarter Total gross national product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Serv- Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Residential structures Change in businessinventories i A. v Seasonally adjusted annual rates IV.. : I II III.. IV.. : I II.. III. IV p : I See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Net exports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Year or quarter Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local * l v Seasonally adjusted annual rates II Ill IV : II Ill IV v II HI IV Net of Government sales Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Gross private domestic investmentl Personal consumptior expenditures Fixed investment Total gross national Year or quarter Nonresident nrnri ucti Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures ResiProdential ducers ' strucdurable tures equipment 1Q0.0 * : : II III IV II III IV : | | III IV v See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product by sector Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Private General government I960. * II Ill IV II III IV : l III IV p Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Gross national product less compensation of general government employees. See also Tables B-7 and B-8 Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics 23I TABLE B-4-. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Year or quarter Total gross national prod- Nondurable goods Serv- Strucices tures oo | | I ! Total Final goods sales uct Durable goods Total Final sales Final Total sales = Final Total sales v Gross auto product " * 3l l | ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. ML IV. : IV. L.. II.. ML IV v : I... Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-5. Gross national product by major type of product in prices ( Billions of dollars prices ] Goods output Final sales Total Total Final goods sales Total Final sales II ) ods Nondurable goods l Total Final sales Gross Serv- Struc- auto prod>> ices tures uct * ! v Durable goods f1 Inventc chan Year or quarter Total gross national product * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I... II.. 2C8.5 IV.... III..,- IV P : I III.. IV.. : I Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups ( Billions of dollars ] Government Persons Disposable personal income Year or quarter Net receipts PerPersonal sonal Equals : consaving Total sumpor exclud- tion disexing inpendi- saving terest tures and Less : Interest paid and Total i transfer payments transfers to foreigners Expenditures Surplus or deficit Tax Less : Less : Equals : ( ) naand TransTransPurfers nonfers Equals : Total chases tional inintertax interNet of excome est goods reest rependiand and and ceipts and ceipts tures prodsubservor ac- subuct acsidies s ices cruals sidies counts ^ v ! s Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I... II.. III.. IV.. : III.. IV.. : I... II.. III.. IV p. See footnotes at end of table T A B L E B Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] International Business Year or quarter I960. v TransNet exports of goods Excess fers to and services of forGross transpriGross Excess eigners fers revate of in- by peror tained domes- vestsons Less : Equals : of net earn- tic in- ment and ExNet Imexings vestGovports ports exports ernment < ports ment * '.2 .'l * l Gross naTotal Statis- tional income tical prodor re- disuct ceipts crep- or exancy penditure * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV..- : III IV : II III IV v Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by government net interest paid by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and wage accruals less disbursements * Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing See Table B l l Net foreign investment with sign changed Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-7. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private product1 Total gross national product Year or quarter Business Total loiai Nonfarm2 Total Farm Households Rest of the world Gross government product ^ I960. P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II IIL IV : I II III IV : L III V * Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. The Post Office and public power systems are examples of government enterprises ; on the other hand State universities and public parks are part of general government activities Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ) Gross private productl Total gross national product Year or quarter Business Households Tntal Oldl Nonfarm2 Total Rest of the world Gross government products Farm 4U8 * * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV P Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. The Post Office and public power systems are e xamplesof government enterprises ; on the other hand State universities and public parks are part of general government activities Compensation of general government employees SouFCe : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-9. Gross national product by industry in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Manufacturing Year AgriTotal culture Congross fores- tract nacontry tional strucand product fishtion eries Total TransGovporta- Whole- Finance erntion insurment sale saie All comance Servand Non- muniDurand and ices govern- other i able durable cation retail real ment goods goods trade estate enterindus- indus- and prises tries tries utilities i Mining rest of world and residual ( the difference between gross national product measured as sum of final products and gross national product measured as sum of gross product by industries ) Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-10. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods c o " S. n ex XJ Is Other Total Housi Trans Other l ! l ! '5 oo c o I I Housi T3 Gasol ine an Cloth ing an -a | Total perso i ' Other quarter Furnit u r e a hoid equ Food exclu dm hoi ic bev era ; s Total ooaa Autor nobile \ Total or = ion Year Services Nondurable goods p o i Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III. IV. : II- III. IV. : L II III IV Quarterly data are estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel s Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics ( except as noted ) TABLE B-1I. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross private domestic investment Nonresidential Structures Total Residential structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonfarm Nonfarm Farm Nonfarm * '.S -L5 Seasonally adjusted annual rates II Ill IV.... : I II III.... : II III IV.... : I Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics 24O TABLE B-12. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter Total national income1 Total Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Business and professional income Income Rental inof InSupNet come Inven- farm come pleof Corpo- Inven- interproof Wages ments tory tory est perrate prieunin- valuand to valusala- wages Total corpo- ation tors sons Total profits ation before adjustrated adjustries and taxes ment enter- ment salaprises ries * * * v -A * * * * s ! o IK -L7 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : | | III IV. : L__ II.. III IV. ' IL.. Ill IV P ^ National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-13 Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items Includes change in inventories * See Table B-70 for corporate tax liability and profits after taxes Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics T A B L E B 13/ Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Gross national product Less : Capital consumption allowances Plus : Subsidies Equals : less Net current national surplus of govprodernuct ment enterprises Less : Indirect business taxes Total Federal State and local Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income * * 'j * Seasonally adjusted annual rate : II III IV : II : II Ill IV IVP Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-14. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Year or quarter National income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Plus : Wage GovContributions accruals ernment for less transfer dispayments social insurburseto perments sons ance Interest paid by government ( net ) and by consumers Equals : Dividends Business transfer payments Personal income \ l Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II. III IV. : I II. III IV. : I III Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-15. Disposition of personal income Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPerEquals : sonal Interest sonal Percontransfer sonal sump- paid by paysaving contion ments expend- sumers to foreigners itures Personal outlays Consumption expenditures Total Billions of dollars Personal saving Percent I960. 1968i ^ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I III IV : I II. IV. : I II '.8 Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-16. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Current prices prices Current prices prices ^ prices Population ( thousands ) * prices Current prices Current prices Per capita ( dollars ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I.. IIIll IV : I.. : I III IV IV p Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas. Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-17. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Wage and salary disbursements * Year or quarter Total personal ncome Propru inco CommoditypiUUUUHIg industries lotai Total Manufacturing Distrib- Service utive indus- industries tries ernment Gov- Other labor income Business and professional 35L1 v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I IL III IV. : I : I. II See footnotes at end of table Farm TABLE B-17. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Year or quarter Rental nit # i ncome UIVIof per- dends sons Personal interest income Old-age survivors disability Total and health insurance benefits State unemployment insurance benefits Veterans ' benefits Less : Personal contributions Other for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income3 * L.I L.4 L.6 L.8 L.6 * * I960. p * Seasonally adjusted annual rates IILIIII IV : II IV : Ill IV x > The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-12 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Includes change in inventories Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Year or quarter Total Gross investment Total Personal saving Gross business saving Total Federal State and local Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Statistical discrepancy ( ) _ * I960 * ( ) 'A Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IVP * Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-19. Saving by individuals l [ Billions of dollars ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter Currency and Total demand deposits Tota Securitie > nsurance Mortand SavCon- Other gage Corpopen- Non- sumer tanings debt Con- Other Govrate Corpo- sion acfarm on sumer debts dugible and re- homes rables assets7 non- credit ounts ernrate ment for- stock s serves farm bonds * eign homes bonds ? fi ? ' n ? III. IV. : II.. III. IV. : II.. III. Less Increase in debt Net investment in ? ? ? ? * r n ? * ? c * o Individuals ' saving in addition to personal holdings covers saving of unincorporated business trust funds and nonprofit institutions in the forms specified Includes miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately Includes shares in savings and loan associations and credit unions and time deposits at banks U.S. Government and State and local obligations s Includes investment company shares Private insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Noncorporate business investments s Security credit policy loans and noncorporate business debt Note. In addition to the concept of saving shown above there are other concepts of individuals ' saving with varying degrees of coverage currently in use. The personal saving estimates of the Department of Commerce are dehved as the difference between personal i ncome ( after taxes ) and personal outlays. For a reconciliation of the two series see Securities and Exchange Commission " Statistical Bulletin " August and " Survey of Current Business " July These estimates are compatible with the flow-of-funds system of accounts of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. A reconciliation of these estimates with the flow-of-funds accounts will be available in the near future Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-20. Number and money income { in prices ) of families and unrelated individuals by color of head Total Year White With incomes Total under $ number Median Num ( mil- income ber Perlions ) ( mil- cent lions ) Families : $ Total number Median ( mil- income lions ) With incomes under $ Total number Median Num ( mil- income ber Perlions ) ( mil- cent lions ) $ I U I _ I l ! $ 2,61b Nonwhite White Total Unrelated individuals : With incomes With incomes under $ Total under $ number Median NumNumPer- ( mil- income ber ber Per ( mil- cent lions ) ( mil- cent lions ) lions ) $ Nonwhite With incomes With incomes under $ Total under $ Total numnumber Median Number Median Num ( mil- income ber Per- ( mil- income ber Perlions ) ( mil- cent lions ) ( mil- cent lions ) lions ) $ J,589 $ ^ ? 7fi J.460 l | ? ? ! The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family Based on revised methodology The term " unrelated individuals " refers to persons years of age and over ( other than inmates of institutions ) who are not living with any relatives Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census 25O POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-21. Population by age groups : Estimates and projections [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Estimates : Projections : : Series C Series D } } } } j } : Series C Series D : Series C Series D_ : Series C Series D } | ! } } | } ; I 1n i fR ' } | | } | I ) i Two of four series projected by the cohort method and based on different assumptions with regard to completed fertility which moves gradually toward a level of children per women for Series C and children per women for Series D. For further explanation of method of projection and for additional data see " Population Estimates Current Population Reports Series P-25 No. " December Note. Data for Armed Forces overseas included beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Total labor force ( including armed forces ) Employment Armed forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Total Unemlabor force as ploypercent ment of non- as percent of institu- civilian tional labor popuforce lation Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over 1936_ Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Total labor force ( including armed forces ) Employment Armed forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Total labor force as percent of noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Percent : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct__ Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb_. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan.. FebMar_ Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec Note. Labor force data in Tables B-22 through B-25 are based on household interviews and relate to calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings and Monthly Report on the Labor Force. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O TABLE B Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Unemployment Employment Males Year or month Total Total years years and over Total Females Males Females years years and over Total Total years years and over Total years years and over ' " " " 18i : " ! ; ; " i,657 ; i ! ! ; " " \ ,m t i Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. ; ' ' i,052 23i ' ; July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov... Dec.. ',630 i ',603 ',532 ; : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr Apr Vlay May... June " " : 44t ; ^ i " 48',,002 ; July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. Note.-See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ' TABLE B-24. Selected unemployment rates [ Percent ] By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years By cclor By selected groups White Nonwhite Experienced wage and salary workers Married men * Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers Men years and over Women years and over Labor force time lost * Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb_ Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March Data for are for May Includes craftsmen operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October * Man-hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force man-hours Note.-See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-25. Unemployment by duration Duration of unemployment Total unemployment Year or month Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Thousands of persons years of age and over j 19fifi ! i ; Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb. Mar.. Apr May. June July Aug Sept Oct Dec Nov Mar Apr May June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Note.-See Note Table B-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment i Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) Total benefits Insured paid unem ( milploylions ments of dollars ) * Initial claims Exhaustions s Unadjusted Weekly average thousands Thousands Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Seasonally adjusted Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) * Average weekly check ( dollars ) e Percent 1941_ v M,973 * >55,581 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P55,977 * * P57,354 P57,199 * * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June. ._ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January I960 ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State programs for temporary extension of benefits from June through June expiration date of program Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment * Includes benefits paid under extended duration provisions of State laws beginning June Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year * For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Preliminary ; December is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Employment Security TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Total wage and salary workers Year or month Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods ( government Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services : 1ederal State and local L ? ? L.502 i ^ ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? q ? ? ! ? ? q q q ? f>6 ? ? ? ? / ? ? ? / / / ',736 1968P ii ? ii ? ? n See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons ) Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transporta- Wholetion sale and and pubretail lic trade utilities Government Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. AprMay. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. AprMay. June- Jury. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb. Mar_ Apr.. May. June. NOVP. Dec p. Juiy_ Aug. Sept. Oct.. Note. Data in Tables B-27 through B-33 are based on reports from empli ing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who woi ; ed during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th ot the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-22 through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers and which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings and Monthly Report on the Labor Force. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Average joeekly hours of work i n selected nonagricultural Total nonagricultural private i Year or month Total NonDurable durable goods goods v Manufacturing Contract construction Retail trade Wholesale trade industries Bituminous coal mining Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr MayJune July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Class railroads Telephone communication < * * M0. M0.8 Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted : Jan Mn addition to industries shown separately total includes other mining ; other transportation and public utilities ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places. Comparable figure excluding eating and drinking places is hours for Eleven-month average ; excludes data for July Note. Hours and earnings data in Tables B-28 through B-33 relate to production workers in manufacturing and mining to construction workers in contract construction and generally to nonsupervisory employees in other industries. See Table B for unadjusted weekly hours in manufacturing. See also Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-29. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries Total nonYear or month agricultural private ! Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods Contract construction Retail trade Wholesale trade Bituminous coal mining Class I railroads Telephone communication Agricultures 1929._ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 1965-__ p : Jan Feb... Mar..__ Apr May... June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov_.__ Dec : Jan Feb... Mar.. Apr MayJune July Aug Sept Oct..._ NOVP. $ $ L98 $ " " " i.'iif i. " ~ * For coverage see footnote Table B-28 Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis s Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places. Comparable figure excluding eating and drinking places is $ for s Eleven-month average ; excludes data for July Note See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Department of Agriculture 26l TABLE B-30. Average Year or month Total nonagricultural private * gross weekly earnings i n selected nonagricultural industries Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods $ $ $ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Retail trade Wholesale trade $ Contract construction p TIT : July Aug Sept Oct v Nov Dec v Telephone communication $ $ $ $ $ $ Bitumi- Class nous railcoal mining roads For coverage see footnote Table B-28 Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places. Comparable figure excluding eating and drinking places is $ for Note.-See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics T A B L E B-31. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries Durable goods manufacturing industries Ai manufacturing I industries Average weekly hours Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Average hourly earnings Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Year or month ExcludGross ing overtime Gross $ Gross Excluding overtime $ Gross Excluding overtime Gross Excluding overtime $ $ i.99 ' : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Nov $ Oct Ex- Adjusted Exclud- hourly cludearnings ing Gross ing ( 1957overover59 = time time ) i p Dec * _ Earnings in current prices adjusted to exclude the effects of overtime and interindustry shifts Annual average not available ; April used Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 See Table B-28 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics $ TABLE B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings2 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current prices prices i Workers with no dependents Current prices prices * Workers with three dependents Current prices prices * $ $ $ $ $ $ __ v Jan Feb Mar Apr.. May June July Aug... Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p * Earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Estimates based on 11-month average of the consumer price index Note. " Total private " consists of manufacturing ; contract construction ; retail and wholesale trade ; mining ; transportation and public utilities ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services See also Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings2 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current prices prices Worker with no dependents Current prices prices Worker with three dependents Current prices prices l $ $ $ $ $ $ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec v * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. : : : : ; : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : Nov Dec * Earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Estimates based on 11-month average of the consumer price index Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy = ) Output per man-hour Output ^ Nonfarm industries Year Total private Farm Total Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Man-hours Nonfarm industries Total private Farm Total Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Nonfarm industries Total private Farm Total Establishment basis 1962___ p Labor force basis * | v_ Output refers to gross national product in prices Hours worked by all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Man-hours estimates based primarily on labor force data Note. For information on sources methodology trends and underlying factors influencing the measures see Bureau of Labor Statistics Department of Labor Bulletin No. " Trends in Output per Man-Hour in the Private Economy " December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ] Year or month Total industrial production Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable I960. * Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec i Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System T A B L E B Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = Materials Final products Year or month Total industrial production Consumer goods * Total Total Equipment Automotive products Home goods Total including defense Business Total Durable goods Nondurable goods P Seasonally adjusted C July Aug SeDt Oct Nov Dec C Jan Feb Mar Apr May June : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec P * Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Year or month Fabricated Primary metal metals products Machinery Transportation equipment Instruments and related products Clay glass and lumber Textile Furni- apparel ture Paper and and and miscel- leather printing prodlaneous ucts Chemical petroleum and rubber products Foods beverages and tobacco v Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb... Mar Apr May... June July... Aug Sept... Oct.... Nov Dec : Jan Feb... Mar Apr.. May... June July... Aug Sept Oct Nov... Dec p Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE B-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate Utilization rate Output Capacity Period Total Advanced products output = Primary products Percent I960 10a.9 ! ) Seasonally adjusted : I II III. IV.. : I II.. III. IV.. : I II.. III. IV.. : I II.. III. IV.. : I II.. III. IV.. : I v.. II * III * IV p : l.._II III IV For description and source of data see " A Revised Index of Manufacturing Capacity " Frank de Leeuw Frank E. Hopkins and Michael D. Sherman " Federal Reserve Bulletin " November pp. See also McGraw-Hill surveys on " Business Plans for New Plants and Equipment " for data on capacity and operating rates Output as percent of capacity ; based on unrounded data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( output ) and sources in footnote ( capacity and utilization rate ) TABLE B-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment and [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Year or quarter Total i Total Durable goods Transportation Nondurable goods Mining Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and other ^ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : III IV : II III IV3 : | _ III IV ' ^ Excludes agriculture Commercial and other includes trade service finance communications and construction ' Estimates based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in late October and November The quarterly anticipations include adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in anticipatory data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures These figures do not agree precisely with plant and equipment expenditures included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. The main difference lies in the inclusion in the gross national product of investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and of certain outlays charged to current account These series are not available for years prior to and for to Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-40 New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Public construction i Total new construction Year or month Residential building ( nonfarm ) Nonresidential building and other construction Total Total Total * New housing units Total Commercial Industrial Federally owned State and locally owned * Others ; New series Mew series See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-40. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Residential building ( nonfarm ) Total Year or month new construction Public construction Nonresidential building and other construction Total Total New Total * housing units Total Commercial Industrial Federally owned Others State and locally owned Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug Sept... Oct.... Nov... Dec : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr May... June.. July... Aug Sept... Oct.... Nov * >.._ Dec Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Farm institutional public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and locally owned projects * New series in reflects differences due to the new higher level series of housing starts and farm construction expenditures and the reduced level value in place series for public utilities. See " Construction Report C30-61 ( S u p p l e m e n t ) " for a description of the differences New series differs from old in that it reflects differences in due to the introduction of new series for private nonresidential buildings and differences in due to the introduction of new series for State and locally owned public construction. See " Construction Report C30-65S " for a description of the differences Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census except as noted TABLE B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Private i Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Proposed home construction s Nonfarm Type of structure2 Nonfarm Government home programs New private housing units authorized < Total Total One family Two or more families FHA3 V A AppliRecations quests for for FHA VA comappraismitals ments ? New series _ First months : v s Monthly totals unadjusted : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public ^ Year or month Proposed Private Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm struction5 Nonfarm Type of structure Government home programs Total Total One family Two or more families FHA3 V A New private housing AppliReunits author- cations quests for for ized * FHA VA comapmitpraisments als Monthly totals unadjusted July Aug Sept.... Oct p Nov p : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June.. Dec p Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May... June July .Aug Sept.. Oct p NOVP Dec p Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly financed starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Not available prior to except for nonfarm for Units are for family housing < Data beginning cover approximately permit-issuing places. Data for are based on places and places. The addition of approximately permit-issuing places contributed an increase of percent in total permit authorizations Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction FHA program approved in June : all activity included in Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency January-December average Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) except as noted TABLE B-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month Sales i InvenRatio Sales i tories Inventories Ratio Sales i Inven- tories2 Ratio Sales i Inventories Ratio ! 195U _-,.-- I960. 1967_. ; Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb... Mar.. Apr. May-. June July.. Aug--_ Sept..Oct... Nov.. Dec. ; : Jan._-_ Feb... Mar.. Apr... May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept-- Oct... Nov * ._ Dec p.. T Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month < Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-4r3. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ] Shipmentsl Inventories Durable goods industries Year or month Total DuraNonble durable goods goods indus- industries tries Materials Work Finand in ished sup- process goods plies Total Total Nondurable goods industries Total Materials Work Finand in ished sup- process goods plies ___. Seasonally adjusted Sept__Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov " : Jan Feb Mar Apr.... May June July Aug $ Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-44. Manufacturers * new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] New orders1 Unfilled orders Durable goods industries Year or month Nondurable goods industries Total Total Machinery and equipment Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Unfilled orders-shipments ratio Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries * I Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr_ MayJune July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov_ Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov * >- Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December * Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B ^ Consumer price indexes by major groups For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ) Housing Year or month All ems Food Total Rent Apparel and upkeep Transportation Medical care 'ersonal care Reading Other and goods recreaand tion services r : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr_ May__ JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. : i January-November average Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-46. Consumer price indexes by special groups For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Commodities Year or month All items All items less food All items less shelter Services Commodities less food All commodities Food Ail Durable Nondurable Total nondurable All ; ervices Rent Ail services less rent | = January-November average Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics 28O TABLE B-47. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For city wage earners and clerical workers ( = ) Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Services less rent NonHouse- Trans- MedHouse- House Apparel durahold porta- ical bles Used hold furcomcare Other * tion less Total services cars dura- nish- Total modserv- servfood less ings bles ities ices ices and rent apparel Total i New cars : Jan___ Feb.. Mar.._ Apr__ May.. June. " " " July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. '1ncludes certain items not shown separately Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services ' January-November average Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics 28l TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Industrial commodities All commodities Year or month Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power Chemicals and allied products _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ._ July Aug_ Sept Oct Nov Dec P See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Continued [ = Industrial commodities Continued Year or month Pulp paper and allied products Furnitureand household durables Transportation equipment : Motor vehicles and equipment Rubber and rubber products Lumber and wood products : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec p Metals and metal products Machinery and equipment Index tor total transportation equipment not available Where December data not available January-November average Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Nonmetallic mineral products Miscellaneous products TABLE B-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = ) Intermediate materials supplies and componentsl Crude materials Year or month Ail commodities Materials and components for manufacturing Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Fuel Total Materials for food Total manufacturing Materials for nondurable manufacturing Materials for durable manufacturing Materials and Com- components ponents for for conmanu- strucfactur- tion ing 1965_ _ _. _ _ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct_ Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June S July Aug Sept Oct Nov Deep See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued = ] Special groups of industrial products Finished goods Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Producer finished goods Crude materials InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods exand com- cluding ponents s foods _ _ : Jan Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Deep _ Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Where December data not available January-November average Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-50. Money supply [ Averages of daily figures billions of dollars ] Money supply DeCurrency mand com- deposil component ponent Year and month : Dec : Dec : Dec ! J202.5 : : : : : U.S Government demand deposits * Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Time : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : Dec.. : Dec.. : Dec : Dec p : J a n Feb. Mar Apr. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct_ Nov_ Dec : J a n Feb.Mar._ Apr May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec p " ^ Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve System and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U S Governbank ' * h ' t e m S ' " p r o c e s s o f c o l l e c t i o n a n d Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve ! AL m ( l d o P s i t s a d i u s t e d a r e t i m e deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government * Deposits at all commercial banks Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-51. Bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting large commercial banks All commercial banks End of year or month ! Total loans and investments 1936__ 1937._ 1941._ 1956_ ' ' < : Jan Feb Mar.... Apr May.... June July.... Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept p.. Oct p... Nov p... Decs... Investments Loans U.S. Government securities Seasonally Other securities Business loans adjusted Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates used for all commercial banks ) Adjusted to exclude interbank loans beginning Loans by weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning and formerly weekly reporting member banks. See " Federal Reserve Bulletin " March * Commercial and industrial loans and prior to agricultural loans. Beginning July loans to financial institutions excluded. Prior to published data adjusted to include open market paper June data used because complete end-of-year data not available Commercial bank data are estimates for December Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-52. Selected liquid assets held by the public i [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Time deposits End of year or month | Demand deposits and currency2 Total Commercial banks3 Postal savings system Mutual savings banks I I ! ! j i | | : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. OcL. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb._ Mar. Apr. May. June July p. Aug p. Sept p. Octp.. Nov P. Savings and loan shares U.S Government savings bonds * U.S Government securities maturing within year * I j I ; ! i j I | I ! ' j ! | i ! | ! I ! Excludes holdings of the U.S. Government Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial banks and Federal Reserve banks. Adjusted wherever possible to avoid double counting Agrees in concept with the money supply Table B-50 except for deduction of demand deposits held by mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data are for last Wednesday of month Time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government ( same concept as in Table B-50 ) Data are for last Wednesday of month except that June and December call data are used where available Excludes holdings of Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial and mutual savings banks Federal Reserve banks and beginning February savings and loan associations Effective June balances accumulated for the payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from time deposits at all commercial banks and from total liquid assets Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-53. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Member bank reserves Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings All other mainly float ; Required Total i Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) : Dec : Dec : D e c : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : Dec : Dec : D e c : D e c il,822 i ; ! i ; i i ! ! ! ! ! ! j ! i i i i ! ! i : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec.. Dec Dec Dec.. Dec Dec Dec Dec p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : J a n Feb Mar Apr May. June July. Aug Sept Oct.. Nov p Dec p ! : ! i Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System i ! i ! TABLE B-54. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i month year Taxable issues issues bonds Aaa Baa Average High- rate on Prime Fedgrade shortFHA comeral term municnew mer- Reserve home bank ipal cial Bank loans bonds mortdis ( Stand- to busi- paper gage count yields ard & n e s s rate Poor 's ) selected months cities ) io ( ) ( ) S3 _ ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Juiy Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnotes at end of table o ( ) ( ) TABLE B-54. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i Taxable year month issues issues bonds * Aaa Baa Average rate on HighPrime shortgrade comterm municmerbank ipal cial loans bonds paper ( Stand- to busi4 nessard & Poor 's ) selected months cities Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Federal Reserve Bank discount rate FHA new home mortgage yields Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) Selected note and bond issues. Issues were partially tax exempt prior to and fully taxable thereafter First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissable interest rate ( % percent beginning early May ) and thru July 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages paid in years Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years s From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less c Beginning series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial institutions Beginning February series revised to incorporate changes in coverage in the sample of reporting banks and in the reporting period ( shifted to the middle month of the quarter ) Note. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service Standard & Poor 's Corporation and Federal Housing Administration TABLE B-55. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of year or month Total Noninstalment credit Repair and modernization loans i Total Jan Feb Mar Apr May June_ July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug._ Sept Oct Nov Dec Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper Personal loans Total Charge accounts Other ] Addendum : Policy loans by life insurance companies * Holdings of financial institutions only ; holdings of retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Single-payment loans and service credit Year-end figures are annual statement asset values ; month-end figures are book value of ledger assets. These loans are not included in consumer credit series * Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) T A B L E B Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Other consumer goods paper Repair and modernization loans Extended Automobile paper Total Extended Personal loans Year or month Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Repaid Repaid Extended Repaid 2,53d Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb. Mar Apr.. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept. Oct. NovDec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. ' July. Aug. Sept. Oct_ Nov. Dec * i Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-57. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional2 FHA-VA underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses Multifamily Commercial properties i to 4-family houses Total Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed to 4family houses v v v : L.. II... l IV.. : II p III p IV p. : \ v,_ II p. III p IV p. : I p__ II p_III p IV p Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B-58. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender ( Billions of dollars ] Selected financial institutions Total End of year or quarter Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Other lenders Commercial banks i Life insurance U.S comagencies panies Individuals and others IV : v II v III v IV v : v II v III p IV v : v II * III v \ \ v _ v * P .__ : II III Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not bank trust departments Includes former FNMA and new GNMA as well as FHA VA PHA Farmers ' Home Administration and in earlier years RFC HOLC and FFMC. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA and Federal land banks. Other U.S agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Sources : Board'of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from related Government and private organizations including Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Institute of Life Insurance Federal National Mortgage Association Government National Mortgage Association and Department of Commerce TABLE B-59. Net public and private debt * [ Billions of dollars ] Public Private Individual and noncorporate End of year Total Federal FedState Goveral and ern- finan- local ment cial govand agency ernagency2 ment Nonfarm Total Corporate Total Total Mortgage Commercial and financial * Farm * Consumer J 1968<> Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt. For a further explanation of the concept see " Survey of Current Business " October Net Federal Government and agency debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Figures shown here are subject to revision s This comprises the debt of Federally-sponsored agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included here beginning in ; the debt of the Feieral Home Loan Banks is included beginning in ; and the debt of the Federal National Mortgage Association Secondary Market Operations is 4included beginning with Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to6life insurance companies by policyholders Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) Treasury Department Department of Agriculture Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Land Banks and Federal National Mortgage Association GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-60. Federal budget receipts and outlays [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Administrative budget : Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Consolidated cash statement : i Unified budget : Estimate Note. Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in ; comparable data are not available for prior years Source : Bureau of the Budget TABLE B-61. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING : Expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) Expenditure account surplus or deficit ( ) Total budget : Receipts Outlays ( expenditures and net lending ) BUDGET FINANCING : Borrowing from the public Other means of financing.. Total budget financing.. Budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by the public Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes and contributions Unemployment insurance Contributions for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes.. Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts3 MEMORANDUM : Federal funds. Trust funds BUDGET OUTLAYS ( EXPENDITURES NET LENDING ) AND National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and agricultural resources NaturaI resources Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health and welfare Veterans benefits and services Interest General government Allowances T Undistributed intragovernmental transactions MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions BUDGET RECEIPTS See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-61. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Estimate Actual Description RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING : Expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) Expenditure account deficit ( ) surplus or Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending Total budget : Receipts Outlays ( expenditures and net lending ) Budget surplus or deficit ( ) BUDGET FINANCING ; Borrowing from the public Other means of financing.. Total budget financing.._ OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by the public BUDGET RECEIPTS. Individua ! income taxes ^ Corporation income taxes Employment taxes and contributions Unemployment insurance2 Contributions for other insurance and reti re m e nt Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts3 MEMORANDUM : Federal funds. Trust funds.. BUDGET OUTLAYS ( EXPENDITURES NET LENDING ) AND National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and agricultural resources Natural resources Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health and welfare Veterans benefits and services Interest General government Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions Excludes $ million of net credits for conversion of mixed-ownership enterprises to private ownership Includes Federal funds of $ million in and $ million in Includes both Federal funds and trust funds Source : Bureau of the Budget TABLE B-62. Relation of the Federal Budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Receipts and Expenditures RECEIPTS -.'l Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Employer share employee retirement. Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Total receipts budget EXPENDITURES Total outlays budget Loan account Employer share employee retirement Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment. Lending inthe expenditure account _ Dollar expenditures to finance agricultural exports Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures _ Note. See Special Analysis A " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " for description of these categories Sources : Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) TABLE B-63. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Year or quarter Fiscal year : Calendar year : v Total Expenditures Indirect Personal Cor- busipo- | ness tax rate tax and non- profits and tax nontax actax receipts cruals accruals Transfer payments Contributions for social insurance Total Purchases of goods and services To persons To foreigners ( net ) Grantsin-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts I i I Seasonally adjusted annual rates I V : I I I I I I IV v_ : l _ II.. III.. IV. : I i Estimates Note. Includes the transactions of the trust accounts and excludes certain financial transactions. Corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual basis ; expenditures are timed with the delivery ; and CCC guaranteed pricesupport crop loans are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Bureau of the Budget TABLE B-64. Public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Total public debt securities i End of year or month I960 Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ _ _ _ Marketable public issues Shortterm issues 2/8. Treasury bonds Nonmarketable public issues United States savings bonds Investment bonds * Special issues Total includes non-interest-bearing debt Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds Armed Forces leave bonds Rural Electrification Administration series bonds foreign series certificates and notes foreign currency certificates notes and bonds Treasury certificates U.S. retirement plan bonds and U.S. savings notes not shown separately. Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Bills certificates of indebtedness and notes Includes sales of U.S. savings notes beginning May * Series A bonds through September and beginning April series B convertible bonds Issued to U.S. Government accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-65.- -Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values * billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors End of year or month Total Held Held by by Govern- Federal ment Reserve accounts banks Total Mutual State savings Misceland Combanks Other Indi- laneous mercial and in- corpo- local viduals6 inves3 banks surance rations governtors ments companies ._. 1940_ ._ _. I960. $ : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May June July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb.. Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Decs.. United States savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-51 which are bas id on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers Federal oriented agencies not included in Government accounts and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund the International Development Association the Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government s Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE B-66. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within year to years to years to years Average length years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Years Months : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct.... Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May.... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) Source : Treasury Department T A B L E B Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts Expenditures State and local government Federal Government * Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts ^ * ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : III IV II Ill I V : II III See Note Table B-S3 Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics T A B L E B-68. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; calendar years ] Receipts Year or quarter Total Indirect PerbusiCorsonal porate ness tax profits tax and tax and nontax accruals nontax receipts accruals Expenditures Contributions Fedfor eral social grantsinsur- in-aid ance Total Surplus or deficit Less : PurTransCurrent <- ) chases fer surplus national of payNet income goods ments interest of ern-gov- and and to paid ment prodservperenter- uct acices sons prises counts Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I-.-II.. III. IV : : I.... II III.. IV p l.._II.. III IV.. i Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B-69. State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function ReveCorponue ration from net Federal income Governtaxes ment All other revenue Total Education Highways Public welfare AM other< Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and other unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-59 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-70. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Manufacturing Year or quarter All dustries Total _ : I.. II. III. IV. : 1930___ 1936.._ Transportation NonDurcomdurable muniable goods goods cation inand induspublic tries dus- utilities tries * All other industries Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability i DiviTotal dend payments Undistributed profits Corporate capital consumption allow-2 ances Profits plus capital consumption allowances ! Seasonally adjusted annual rates II. III IV. : I III IV p. Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes depreciation and accidental damages Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances Note. Beginning data reflect the new depreciation guidelines issued by the Treasury Department July ' and the investment tax credit provided in the Revenue Act of Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics o8 TABLE B Sales profits and stockholders1 equity all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Profits Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Profits Before taxes After taxes Stockholders ' Sales equityi ( net ) Before taxes After taxes StockSales holders ' ( net ) equity l Before taxes After taxes Stockholders ' equity I960. : I II III... IV... : I II III... IV... : I II III... * Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. Specific information about the effects of the more significant changes and revisions is contained in the following issues of the " Quarterly Financial Report " : third quarter third quarter first quarter and first quarter Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission T A B L E B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers ) by industry group Ail manufacturmg corMoporator tions Total vehi ( ex- dur- cles cept able ^ and equipnewsment papers ) Year or quarter Durable goods industries Aircraft and parts Electrical machinery equipment and supplies p. : PriMa Stone Fab- mary riclay iron for ery cated and and ( ex- metal steel motal glass prodinelec- prod- dusucts trical ) ucts tries dusines Fur -nri fjY Lumber and wood products ( except furniture ) Instruments and related products Miscellaneous manufacturmg ( including ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders equity percent2 : II III IV : II 12l5 ? Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents ._ : II III. IV : II lll..__ See footnotes at end of table R TABLE B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders' ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers ) by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Year or quarter Total nondurable i Food and kindred products Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products Leather and leather products Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent2 : I. IL III IV : I. IL III 3.G Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents : I IL.. Ill IV... : I ML-I Includes certain industries not shown separately Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. Ratios based on data in millions of dollars For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission. See also Note Table B-71 Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission T A B L E B Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Undistributed profits Corporate inventory valuation adjustment. Capital consumption allowances Sources total Internal sources External sources Stocks. Bonds Mortgages Bank loans n.e.c.. Other loans Trade debt Profits tax liability Other liabilities... Uses total Purchases of physical assets Nonresidential fixed investment Residential structures.. Change in business inventories Increase in financial assets Liquid assets Demand deposits and currency Time deposits U.S. Government securities Open-market paper Consumer credit Trade credit Other financial assets Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) * * * ^ -i ] -i The figures shown here for " internal sources " " undistributed profits " and " capital consumption allowances " differ from those shown for " cash flow net of dividends " " undistributed profits " and " capital consumption allowances " in the gross corporate product table in the national income and product accounts of the Department of Commerce for the following reasons : ( ) these figures include and the statistics in the gross corporate product table exclude branch profits remitted from foreigners net of corresponding U.S. remittances to foreigners ; and ( ) these figures exclude and the gross corporate product figures include the internal funds of corporations whose major activity is farming Includes some categories not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations ^ [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets Current liabilities Ad- End of year or quarter vances ReNet Fedand Cash U.S ceiv- Notes Notes Other workeral Other preon and and ing Gov- ables curincurInpayfrom acacernrent capiTotal hand venand U.S. counts tories rent Total ments counts come tal ment liaastax U.S in securi- Gov- receivPaysets liabili- biliable Govbanks ties ern- able ties ties ernment ment New series Ill IV : II Ill IV : II III : 4C Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations ' books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books Includes marketable securities other than U.S. Government Generally reflects definitions and classifications used in " Statistics of Income " for Note. Data relate to all United States corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations insurance companies and beginning with the new series for investment companies. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources Including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-75. State and municipal and corporate securities offered l [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Gross proceeds Proposed uses of net proceeds * New money Total Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Total Total Plant and equipment Working capital Retirement of securities Other purposes P. IIIII IV. IIIII IV. : : : I III.. IV p These data cover substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year Excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions sales of investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as offerings under employee-purchase plans Number of units multiplied by offering price * Net proceeds represents the amount received by the issuer after payment of compensation to distributors and other costs of flotation Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-76. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price index1 Year or month Totai ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) Public utilities ( stocks ) Railroads ( stocks ) Dividend yield > ( percent ) Stock market credit Price/ earnings ratio Customer credit ( excluding U.S. Government securities ) Total = Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec p. Net debit balances * Bank loans to 'others " * Bank loans to brokers and dealers0 Millions of dollars " 17.'23 ' M,277 * Annual data are averages of monthly figures and monthly data are averages of daily figures Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by the aggregate monthly market value of the stocks in the group. Annual yields are averages of monthly data Ratio of quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day in quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data * As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U.S. Government obligations are excluded through and included thereafter. Data are for end of period s Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday 'Loans'by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) for purchasing or carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday of period toUIWV. BowA O \ fcOMttWt * Ot VE f * tett \ tasww System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange * TABLE B Business formation and business failures Business failures * Year or month index of net business formation ( = ) _ 3_ New business incorporations ( number ) Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures Business failure rate Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over C Seasonally adjusted : Jan... Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June.. July Aug Sept oct. : : Nov Dec Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc 3l6 AGRICULTURE T A B L E B Income from agriculture Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Net to farm operators Realized gross Year or quarter From From From nonTotals farm farm all sources sources sources2 ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- Includreceipts penses ing net ing net from inven- invenmarkettory tory ings change change4 Billions of dollars Net income per farm including net inventory cha nge Current prices prices8 Dollars __ _.__ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : ________ II III IV : II III IV v Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to 2social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms Includes net change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at the average price for the year Income in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living Items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture O TABLE B-79. Farm production indexes [ = Livestock and products Crops Year Farm output ^ Meat ToOil Vege- Fruits Feed Hay Total grains and Food tables and Cot- bacco crops Total animals nuts ton orage rains I960. v 9i Dairy Poults prod- and ucts eggs Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules Includes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-80. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April l ) ^ Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total populations Farm employment ( thousands ) * Farm output Per man-hour Total Family Hired workers workers Per unit of total input Total Crops Livestock and products Crop production per acre4 Livestock production per breedunit Index = 1Z f2 I960. P no Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces abroad Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-22 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) T A B L E B Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = Prices received by farmers Crops Year or month All farm prodAll ucts ^ crops Food grains Feed grains and hay Total Feed grains Livestock and products Cotton Tobacco Oilbearing crops All livestock and products ^ Meat animals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs 1934_ Febl5 Mar Apr May June July Augl5 Sept Octl5 Novl5 Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug 15_ Sept Oct Nov Dec 15_ : Jan See footnotes at end of table > TABLE B-81. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and par it ratio Continued [ = ] Prices paid by farmers Year or month : Jan Febl5.. Mar Apr May June July Aug Septl5_ Octl5__ Novl5.. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octl5.. Nov Dec All items interest taxes and wage rates ( parity index ) Commodities and services Production items FamAll All items living items production items i HI Feed Motor vehicles Farm machinery Interest Wage Taxes rates * Parity ratio s Fertilizer * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes items not shown separately Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) Monthly data are seasonally adjusted s Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index on a = base. The adjusted parity ratio ( shown in parentheses in the table ) reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Includes wartime subsidy payments Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-82. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) i Year Total Exclusive of use for feed for horses and mules Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Livestock breeding units ( = ) Manhours of farm work ( billions ) Total _ harm labor Farm real estate3 MeFeed chaniFertiseed cl a lizer and power and liveand liming stock ma- materials pur- chinery chases Miscellaneous " v Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Animal units of breeding livestock excluding horses and mules ' Includes service buildings and improvements on land < Nonfarm inputs associated with farmers ' purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-83. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Financial assets Other physical assets Beginning of year MaHousechinhold Real DeTotal estate ery equip- posits Live- and and stock i motor Crops ment and curvehifurnish- rency cles ings ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prie ; tors U.S ment debt equidebt savings in coties bonds operatives _ v Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-84. United States balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Income on investments Year or quarter Total Merchan ' dise i Military sales Private Government Total Other services Merchandise1 Military expenditures _ Other services Balance on goods and services Remittances and pensions ; Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV.. : I II III : IV.... : I II III * __ See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-84. United States balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter U.S Government grants and capital net U.S. private capital net Direct investment Other longterm Shortterm Balance Foreign capital net Errors and Offiunrecial corded l reserve transactions qu'dity3 transbasis actions basis * Changes in selected liabilities ( decrease ( ) ) To foreign official holders Liquid Nonliquid Changes in gold convertible currencies and To IMF other gold foreign tranche holders position ( increase ( ) ) j-1,347 -l,206L Seasonally adjusted annual rates Quarterly totals unadjusted ! r " ! | -2,748'- : I II. III. IV ' : I. II.. ML IV. : I II... jj * Adjusted from customs data for differences in timing and coverage Includes certain special Government transactions s Equals changes in liquid liabilities to foreign official holders other foreign holders and changes in official reserve assets < consisting of gold convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF * Equals changes in liquid and nonliquid liabilities to foreign official holders and changes in official reserve assets consisting of gold convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF * Includes short-term official and banking liabilities foreign holdings of U.S. Government bonds and notes and certain nonliquid liabilities to foreign official holders * Central banks governments and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the United States * Private holders ; includes banks and international and regional organizations excludes IMF Not reported separately Includes change in Treasury liabilities to certain foreign military agencies ; excluding these changes data ( $ millions ) are ( ) ( ) ( ) Average for the first quarters on a seasonally adjusted annual rates basis Note. Data exclude military grant-aid and U.S. subscriptions to International Monetary Fund Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE B United States merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise exports * Total including reexports Merchandise imports Domestic exports General imports s Year or quarter Seasonally Unad- Total adjusted justed Total * Food Crude Food Crude bever- mate- Manbever- mateufacages rials Seaages rials tured and to- and and to- and sonally Unadbacco fuels s goods adjusted bacco fuels s justed Gross merchandise trade surplus seaManufac- sonally adtured goods e justed ^ ; ; E s * II III IV ? II III IV II III IV8 Beginning data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in Totals exclude Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments Exports excluding military grant-aid less general imports ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted 8Totals based on data for October November and estimates for December Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census. Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Export values are f.a.s. port of export and include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments. I m p o r t values are defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excluding the U.S. import duty and transportation costs such as ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE B-86. United States merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Area January-November Exports ( including reexports and special category shipments ) : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western HemisphereWestern Europe i Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa General imports : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hemisphere. Western Europe1 Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries2 Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Consists of certain low-valued shipments and some uranium imports not identified by country Note. Developed countries include Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and the Republic of South Africa. Developing countries include rest of the world except Communist areas in Eastern Europe and Asia and unidentified countries Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE B-87. United States overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] Type of program and fiscal period Total Near East and South Asia East Asia Other and nonregional Latin America Vietnam Africa Europe Total economic loans and grants ( net obligations and loan authorizations ) : average Loans Grants * * * Loans Grants _ Economic loans and grants to less developed countries by program : Net obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average. Agency for International Development : Net obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Export-Import Bank long-term loans : Loan authorizations : average.. ---Repayments and interest : average Food for Freedom : Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average Contributions and Subscriptions to International Lending Organizations : Obligations : average Peace Corps and other : Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average * Some data are preliminary Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. On this basis " less developed " countries include all countries receiving U.S. loans or grants except the following which are considered " developed " : Japan Australia New Zealand Republic of South Africa Canada and all of Europe except Malta Spain and Yugoslavia Includes capital subscriptions and contributions to the Inter-American Development Bank the International Development Association and the Asian Development Bank Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) Source : Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE B-88. International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country September December All countries Developed a r e a s United Kingdom Other Western Europe Austria Belgium. France.. Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Finland Norway and Sweden ) Spain Switzerland.. Othera United States- ( & Canada- Japan.. Australia New Zealand and South Africa Less developed areas * Latin America Middle E a s t Other Asia Other A f r i c a ( <290 ; i Not available separately In addition to other Western European countries includes unpublished gold reserves of Greece and an estimate of gold to be distributed by the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold Includes unpublished gold holdings not allocable by area < Estimate Note. Includes gold holdings reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange of all countries except U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Communist China and Cuba ( after ) Beginning when most of the major currencies of the world became convertible data exclude known holdings of inconvertible currencies balances under payments agreements and the bilateral claims arising from liquidation of the European Payments Union Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-89. United States reserve assets : Gold stock holdings of convertible foreign currencies and reserve position in the International Monetary Fund [ Millions of dollars ] Gold stock i End of year or month Total reserve assets Total * Treasury Convertible foreign currencies3 Reserve position in International Monetary Fund4 _ s ; : Jan.. Feb Mar Apr _ May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan... Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund with the right of repurchase which amounted to $ million on December Beginning September also includes gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas. Amount outstanding was $ million on December The United States has a corresponding gold liability to 2the IMF Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System In accordance with Fund policies the United States has the right to draw foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund virtually automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could draw additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a U.S quota increase which became effective on February In figures published by the Fund from June through January this gold subscription was included in the U.S. gold stock and excluded from the reserve position Mote. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Treasury Department and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-90. Price changes in international trade = ] Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade i United States Exports Terms of trade Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade Latin America Exports Terms of trade Southern and Eastern Asia < Exports Terms of traded World export price indexes Foodstuffs Coffee tea and cocoaCereals Other agricultural commodities * Fats oils and oilseeds. Textile fibers Wool Rubber Minerals Metal ores. Manufactured goods : Total Nonferrous base metals 8_ Primary commodities : Total Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Includes foreign trade of Alaska Hawaii and Puerto Rico Data are for second quarter * Excludes Japan Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes e Includes nonfood fish and forest products Note. Data exclude trade of Communist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Commerce ) TABLE B-91. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries = = ] United States Period Canada Japan France Germany Netherlands Italy United Kingdom 1963-_ : II. _ III IV : L II ._ Ill IV : II III IV : II Ill IV ! _ Averages for January-November for the United States ; January-September for the Netherlands ; and January-October for all other countries October-November average for the United States and October data for ail other countries Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O