ECONOMIC TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS FEBRUARY 197O Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington T>.C Price $ CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT T H E USES OF OUR NATIONAL OUTPUT T H E PRESENT INFLATION T H E OUTLOOK FOR STRENGTHENING THE WORLD ECONOMY SEVEN BASIC PRINCIPLES ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND POLICY IN CHAPTER STABILIZATION POLICY FOR AND BEYOND CHAPTER USES OF THE NATIONAL OUTPUT CHAPTER GOVERNMENT AND THE MARKET CHAPTER FREEDOM AND STABILITY IN THE WORLD ECONOMY. APPENDIX A. UNEMPLOYMENT AND THE ECONOMY APPENDIX B. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX C. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page Ill ECONOMIC REPORT OP THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : For many years the American people have been seeking through their Government the road to full employment with stable prices In the first half of the 's we did have price stability but unemployment averaged 5l/2 percent of the civilian labor force In the second half of that decade we did have relatively full employment but with sharply rising prices After years of sustained unemployment followed by years of sustained inflation some have concluded that the price of finding work for the unemployed must be the hardship of inflation for all I do not agree It is true that we have just passed through a decade when the economy spent most of the time far off the course of reasonably full employment and price stability. But if we apply the hard lessons learned from the sixties to the decade ahead and add a new realism to the management of our economic policies I believe we can attain the goal of plentiful jobs earning dollars of stable purchasing power Those lessons sire plain : We have learned that Government itself is often the cause of wide swings in the economy We have learned that there is a human element in economic affairs habit confidence fear and that the economy can not be managed mechanistically and will not suspend its laws to accommodate political wishes We have learned that 1-year planning leads to almost as much confusion as no planning at all and that there is a need to increase public awareness of long-range trends and the consequences for future years of decisions taken now My Economic Report reflects these lessons. The current actions we are taking are designed to help the American economy regain its balance ; the plans we are making are designed to build on that balance as our free economy grows and responds to the needs of its citizens " Stability of economic policy/ ' Theodore Roosevelt pointed out " must always be the prime economic need of this country. This stability should not be fossilization. " Stability is a means to an end. The end we seek is steady growth predictable Government action in maintaining a sound economic climate and constant involvement of the people in setting their own priorities Accordingly this Economic Report " opens up the books " as never before We are making available the facts and figures that will enable the people to make more intelligent judgments about the future. If we are to improve the quality of life in this Nation we must first improve the quality of debate about our national priorities. In this Report and in the Budget Message long-range projections are made that will enable the people to discuss their choices more effectively in the light of what is possible In the read world of economics there is a place for dreams dreams that are realizable if we make the hard choices necessary to make them come true THE USES OF OUR NATIONAL OUTPUT We have placed the Nation 's larger decisions in the context of a picture of the total resources available and the competing claims upon them. A summary of this analysis is contained in Chapter of the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers ; I hope it will be studied carefully and its precedent carried forward in future years That analysis is neutral about which options and claims should be chosen. The purpose of the analysis is to help everyone observe the discipline of keeping claims and plans within the limits of our capacity and to make sure that excessive claims do not prevent us from achieving our most important goals Even in our own highly productive and growing economy resources are limited. There will be competition between private and government uses for our national income competition among programs within government budgets and competition among borrowers for the limited national savings Our problem in short will be to choose wisely what to do with our output and incomes. Large as they are the claims upon them what people expect of them are even larger. If we add the expenditures that consumers will want to make with larger incomes ; the investment that businesses must make to assure rising productivity ; the housing construction needed to meet the current shortage and the demands of a growing pop- illation with rising incomes ; the likely expenditures of State and local governments ; the costs of present Federal programs plus the proposals already recommended by this Administration we find that the total would nearly exhaust the national output until And that total would not include tens of billions of dollars of new programs that are commonly urged upon the Government We shall have to think carefully about how to choose the claims upon the national output that will be met since we can not meet them all. This choice is not made exclusively or even mainly by the Federal Government It is mostly made by the individuals who produce the output earn the income and decide how it should be spent. Nevertheless a Federal Government with a budget of $ billion has a great influence on how the national output is used. This influence is not confined to the output the Federal Government uses itself. The taxes the Federal Government collects the grants it makes to State and local governments its borrowing or repayment of debt influence the purchases of private citizens and of State and local governments Personal freedom will be increased when there is more economy in government and less government in the economy. Economic domination like any other government domination is dangerous to a free society no matter how benevolent its aims. Freedom depends on our recognizing the line between domination and influence between control and guidance The quality of life in America depends on how wisely we use the great influence that Government has We know that existing programs of Government and probable demands of the private sector could use up all the output we can produce for several years to come. This does not mean that we can not do anything new. It does mean that we have to choose. If we decide to do something new or something more in one direction we will have to give up something elsewhere. There is no unclaimed pool of real resources from which we shall be able to satisfy new demands without sacrificing or modifying some existing claims If we fail to tailor our demands consciously to resources available the likely consequences would be both misdirection of resources and inflation. We have seen this in the past years. Beginning in mid-1965 the Government imposed on the economy a large increase in nondefense spending and the demands of the Vietnam War effort. It did not however face up soon enough to the need to cut back other demands by raising taxes or by following an adequately restrictive monetary policy Of course failing to take these steps did not relieve us of the necessity of cutting back. It only meant that the cutback was imposed unfairly by inflation rather than in a more deliberate and equitable way THE PRESENT INFLATION The inflation unleashed after mid-1965 had gathered powerful momentum by the time this Administration took office a year ago. The expectaton of more inflation was widespread as was skepticism of the determination of Government to control it. Businesses anticipating rising prices and costs were eager to invest as early as possible and were willing to incur high interest charges that they would pay later in presumably cheaper dollars. Workers demanded large wage increases to catch up with past increases in the cost of living and to keep up with expected future increases. Prices were being boosted to catch up with past cost increases and to keep up with the future Inflation was in full tide The inflationary tide could not quickly be turned. At least it could not be turned quickly without a serious recession. Such a recession would itself have brought hardship to millions of people. Moreover it would have been another episode in the history of stop-go economic policy when the need was to introduce an era of steadiness in policy that could yield stability in the economy Our purpose has been to slow down the rapid expansion of demand firmly and persistently but not to choke off demand so abruptly as to injure the economy. The greater price stability that all desired could not given a concern about unemployment come quickly. This transition would take place in several steps each of which would require time and only at the end would increases in the price level slow down was a year of progress in the fight against inflation. For the first time since the price spiral began there was a sustained period of combined fiscal and monetary restraint. During the rise of Federal expenditures was slowed to an increase of $ billion compared with an annual average of $ billion in the preceding years. Instead of the rising budget deficits of earlier years there was a surplus in Instead of the money supply expanding by percent as in it grew at a 4.4-percent annual rate in the first half of and at a 0.7percent rate in the second half The growth of total spending public and private which was the driving force of the inflation slowed markedly from percent during to percent during and an annual rate of percent in the fourth quarter of This decline in the growth of spending was inevitably accompanied by what in October I called " slowing pains. " Gains in real production slowed down. Industrial production declined. Profits drifted lower as margins were squeezed. All of these slowing pains were increased and the inflation prolonged by the failure of productivity to rise for the first time in many years And in the latter part of the year there were the first faint signs of gain on the price front. Instead of continuing to accelerate the rate of inflation itself began to level out THE OUTLOOK FOR As we enter continuation of a low rate of growth of sales production and employment for several months seems probable. Thereafter the performance of the economy will depend on both the continued resolve of the Government and the difficult-to-predict behavior of the private sector Government policy must now avoid three possible dangers. One is that after a brief lull the demand for output would begin to rise too rapidly and rekindle the inflationary process as happened in This possibility can not be ignored. The tax bill passed in December reduced revenues for the next fiscal year by close to $ billion compared to my original proposals requiring the Administration to reduce spending plans further in order to retain a surplus. Pressures for increased spending threaten to shift the budget from the surplus position to a deficit by the latter part of calendar unless the responsible fiscal course urged by the Administration is accepted by the Congress A second danger we must consider is that the moderate and necessary slowdown may become more severe. The highly restrictive stance of monetary policy is one reason for considering this possibility. Moreover there is a question whether the rate of real output can long remain essentially flat without more adverse consequences than we have so far experienced. Until now the unemployment rate has remained low partly because employers have retained workers despite growing signs of sluggishness in sales. However they may be unwilling to do this for long with profits shrinking A third danger is that although the economy remains on the path of slow rise and avoids either serious recession or revived inflation this is achieved with such tight credit conditions as to paralyze the housing industry preventing needed additions to the supply of homes and apartments. A Federal budget deficit which would require the Treasury to become again a net borrower in the capital markets taking funds that would otherwise go to other users might bring this about. This is one reason why I continue to stress the importance of a strong budget position Our objective is to avoid these dangers as we achieve stability. A necessary condition for doing this is to keep the Federal budget in balance in the comingfiscalyear A prudent fiscal policy avoiding the risks of returning to budget deficits and a prudent monetary policy avoiding the risks of overly long and overly severe restraint offer the best promise of relieving strains and distortions in financial markets bringing interest rates down and encouraging a sustainable and orderly forward movement of the economy After some months of slow expansion of sales output and employment which seems likely a moderately quicker pace later in the year would be consistent with continued progress in reducing the rate of inflation The goal of policy should therefore be moderately more rapid economic expansion in the latter part of than we have recently been experiencing or expect for several months ahead. Keeping the Federal budget in balance as I have recommended and a moderate degree of monetary restraint will help achieve this result. This combination of policies would also permit residential construction to revive and begin a rise toward the path of housebuilding required by our growing number of families needing homes and apartments As far as can now be foreseen this pattern of developments through the year could be achieved with a gross national product for of about $ billion. This would be 5/2 percent above that for A slowdown in the rate of increase of consumer prices is a reasonable expectation in this economic outlook An unfortunate cost of having allowed the inflation to run for so long is that it courts the risk of some rise in unemployment. The policy of firm and persistent disinflation on which we have embarked however holds out the best hope of keeping that risk low This risk emphasizes the importance of promptly enacting the legislation this Administration has recommended for manpower training unemployment compensation and welfare systems : The proposed Manpower Training Act would not only bring about better planning and management of training programs ; it would also trigger an automatic increase in appropriations for these programs if the national unemployment rate reaches percent for consecutive months The unemployment compensation legislation would increase coverage encourage States to improve benefits and provide for Federal financing of extended benefits if unemployment of insured workers exceeds percent for consecutive months The proposed Family Assistance Program would provide income support for poor families with children whether headed by a male or a female while providing strong incentives and assistance for those who can do so to find and accept employment Because our expanding and dynamic economy must have strong and innovative financial institutions if our national savings are to be utilized effectively I shall appoint a commission to study our financial structure and make recommendations to me for needed changes In we are feeling the postponed pinch of the late sixties. If responsible policies had been followed then the problems of would be much easier. But we can not undo the errors of the past. We have no choice now but to correct them and to avoid repeating them STRENGTHENING THE WORLD ECONOMY The achievement of greater balance and stability in our own economy is also important for international finance and trade. The dollar is not only our currency ; it provides the principal vehicle for world trade and payments. We are the world 's largest exporter and importer and instability in the United States whether it involves inflation or recession has unsettling effects on the world economy. Inflationary pressures arising in the United States have added to inflationary problems in other countries in recent years. The long inflation has also weakened our trading position. However with the restraining of excessive demand in the deterioration in our trade balance has been arrested I am particularly gratified to note improvements in the international monetary scene during the past year with the introduction of Special Drawing Rights and with the realignment of several important currencies. In cooperation with other countries we are actively investigating other ways to make the international monetary system more stable and orderly and to give more attention to international coordination and synchronization in the management of domestic economic policies Although a high and rising level of international trade can add to the prosperity of the United States and other countries imports from time to time may cause domestic dislocations. Since the gains from international trade are enjoyed by the country as a whole it is appropriate that the costs of trade-associated dislocations be spread more evenly. The trade bill presented to the Congress in November contains practical adjustment assistance and escape-clause provisions that would soften the impact of import competition in cases where it harms our own workingmen It also includes the repeal of the American selling price method of tariff evaluation a step which is important in reducing the nontariff barriers to U.S. exports Trade is vital to the progress of the less developed countries of the world. With other industrialized nations the United States is exploring ways of enabling less developed nations to participate more in the growing volume of international trade SEVEN BASIC PRINCIPLES Since this is my first Economic Report it is in order for me to set out the basic principles that will continue to guide the management of economic policy in my Administration : First the integrity and purchasing power of the dollar must be assured To re-create confidence in a secure future we must achieve that reasonable stability of the price level which has been so severely eroded since mid-1965. The unfairness of a steeply rising cost of living must not again be inflicted on this Nation Second our economic policy must continue to emphasize a high utilization of the Nation 's productive resources. We must maintain a vigorous and expanding economy to provide jobs for our growing labor force Third we must achieve a steadier and more evenhanded management of our economic policies. Business and labor can not plan and consumers and homebuyers can not effectively manage their affairs when Government alternates between keeping first the accelerator and then the brake pedal to the floor Fourth Government must say what it means and mean what it says Economic credibility is the basis for confidence and confidence in turn is the basis for an ongoing prosperity Fifth we must preserve and sustain the free market economy in order to raise the standard of living of every American. The most basic improvement in our national life during the last three decades has come through the doubling of real purchasing power that our free competitive economy has delivered to the average American family. No Government programs during that period begin to approach this doubling of real income per family as a source of our improving economic well-being Government now has both the ability and the duty to sustain a general climate for stability and growth but it must do so in the firm conviction that only a free economy provides maximum scope for the knowledge innovativeness and creative powers of each individual Sixth we must involve the American people in setting goals and priorities by providing accurate credible data on the long-range choices open to them making possible much better informed public discussion about using the resources we will have in meeting the needs of the future. The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers is a long first step in that direction Finally the free economy of the future will rest squarely on the foundation of genuinely equal opportunity for all. Some because of race or national origin find themselves situated far back of the starting line in our economy. Others by the happenstance of health accidental injury education or economic background are unable to participate fully in our economic life ; still others become casualties of obsolete skills. We are deeply committed to make a reality of the promise of an equal opportunity in life so that the fruits of our economic progress and abundance will become available to all. The national conscience demands it human dignity requires it and our free and open economic system can not be fully effective without it February II THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS O LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report February in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully PAUL W MCCRACKEN Chairman S ^ ^ a ^ JUu ^ HENDRIK S. HOUTHAKKER HERBERT STEIN CONTENTS Page CHAPTER ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE AND POLICY IN The Goals of Stabilization Policy The Strategy of Policy in Direct Influence on Wages and Prices The Expected Chain From Policy to Results The Record in Fiscal Developments Monetary Restraint The Flow of Credit The Demand for Output Shares in the National Income The Labor Market Price Movements CHAPTER STABILIZATION POLICY FOR AND BEYOND Policy and Outlook for The Policy Objectives for Policy for Outlook for GNP and its Components Unemployment and Manpower Policy for Manpower Training Act Employment Security Amendments Family Assistance Plan Other Manpower Programs The Transition to Full Employment Growth The Stabilization Problem in the Longer Run Stabilizing the Growth of GNP Improving Our Economic Data Living With Instability The Continuing Problems of Inflation and Unemployment CHAPTER USES OF THE NATIONAL OUTPUT Introduction The Decisionmaking Process The Level of Decisionmaking Budgetary Balance as Discipline Toward Improving Federal Decisions Future National Output and the Claims Upon It Potential and Projected GNP Claims on the National Output Balancing Claims and Resources Conclusions Appendix : Basis for Estimates of Output and Claims CHAPTER GOVERNMENT AND THE MARKET Role of the Government Costs of Government Intervention Improving the Efficiency of Markets Promotion of Competition Adequate Information for Consumers Protection of the Environment Regulation Government and the Financial System Government Regulation of Agriculture Regulation of Noncompetitive Markets Government Participation in the Market Postal Service Uranium Enrichment Facilities The Government and Housing CHAPTER FREEDOM AND STABILITY IN THE WORLD ECONOMY. The Expansion of Trade Nontariff Barriers The Trade Bill of The Developing Countries in the World Economy The U.S. Trade Balance International Capital Mobility and the Balance of Payments. The Problem of International Equilibrium International Adjustment The Dollar and International Equilibrium Page Ill APPENDIXES : A. Unemployment and the Economy B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During C. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Funds Raised in Credit Markets Nonfinancial Sectors Changes in Deposits and Selected Nondeposit Sources of Bank Funds Sources and Uses of Funds Nonfarm Nonfinancial Corporate Business Changes in Gross National Product and Components Changes in Personal Income Taxes and Saving Changes in Civilian Employment and Distribution of Change Selected Unemployment Rates and Tables Increases in Average Gross Hourly Earnings of Private Nonagricultural Production or Nonsupervisory Workers Since Wage and Benefit Decisions Changes in Implicit Price Deflators for GNP by Sector Changes in Current Dollar Costs and Profits Per Unit of Real Output of Nonfinancial Corporations Since Changes in Wholesale and Consumer Prices Gross National Product and Projections for Projections of Federal Expenditures National Income Accounts Basis U.S. Balance of Payments International Investment Position of the United States and Charts Changes in the Money Supply and Federal Expenditures.... Changes in GNP Real GNP and GNP Deflator Changes in Federal Surplus ( National Income Accounts Basis ) Interest Rates Unemployment Rate Changes in Compensation Productivity Labor Costs and Prices ( Private Nonfarm Sector ) Price Changes Gross National Product Actual and Potential Net Family Formation Housing Starts Mortgage Yields and Dividend Rate of Federal Savings and Loan Associations Per Capita Personal Income of Farm and Nonfarm Population. U.S. Balance of International Payments Page CHAPTER Economic Performance and Policy in THE GOALS OF STABILIZATION POLICY T ^ H E AMERICAN ECONOMY began with production incomes * and prices increasing rapidly from the momentum of earlier inflationary fiscal and monetary policies. As the year moved along however the economy began to respond to the constraints of policies which had been changed to combat inflation. The huge budget deficit had been closed with the aid of a tax increase in mid-1968 and the new Administration further tightened fiscal policy in by a sharp pruning of projected Federal outlays. Monetary policy also shifted its direction becoming increasingly restrictive during the year This was not the ordinary problem of an economy that had veered momentarily toward excessive rates of expansion. It was the problem of an economy already in its fourth year of severe inflationary pressure. The momentum generated by years of inflation was evident in widespread pressures for wage and price increases and in continuing expectations of more inflation. This momentum could not be stopped dead in its tracks without serious consequences. The policies of fiscal and monetary restraint followed in have reduced it while at the same time they have laid the ground for a return to price stability and sound economic growth Continuation of fiscal and monetary restraint should bring a deceleration of inflation during and This will be an important step toward price stability but it will not mean that the goal has been reached. History contains other instances in which inflation was slowed down or stopped only to break out again as policies shifted too sharply toward expansion The Nation 's goal should be more than just a year or two of declining rates of inflation. This time we should try to reach and maintain price stability The longer run goal of continuing price stability would not be served by a sharp or prolonged rise of unemployment. Such a development would be an evil in itself. In addition by forcing a sharp shift toward expansionary policies it would intensify the already difficult task of maintaining the restraint necessary for a lasting victory over inflation But inflations have seldom ended without a temporary rise in unemployment. While we must direct our efforts to altering the historical pattern we can not ignore the possibility that joblessness will rise in the period imme- diately ahead. But we can not avoid this problem by allowing the current inflation to continue for that would harden the expectations of inflation and make subsequent policies to curb it more difficult and harsh. The best hope of curbing inflation and restricting the rise in unemployment to a relatively small and temporary increase rests with a policy of firm and persistent restraint on the expansion in the demand for goods services and labor Such a policy should ultimately produce high employment with much less inflation than we have recently experienced. During the transition we may find both unemployment and inflation to be higher than would have been desirable if the inflation had not been allowed to persist so long. This is the price we must pay for having long pursued inflationary policies. Once inflation has been set in motion there is no way of correcting it without some costs. The aim of policy is to keep the costs as low as possible Over the longer run further progress in reducing unemployment and getting as close to a stable price level as possible is dependent upon holding aggregate demand to moderate and sustainable rates of growth. It will require other measures as well. Public policies can help improve the efficiency of labor markets by providing information opportunities for training and assistance in relocation. Persistent effort in these and other ways to make the economy more flexible and adaptable will contribute to lower unemployment rates and to a more stable price level THE STRATEGY OF POLICY IN The current inflation was generated by the mounting budget deficits and rapid monetary expansion that began in with the escalation of the Vietnam War and the massive increases in Federal spending for domestic programs. These developments stimulated demand for output and labor at a pace which could not be met by growth in the labor force and other productive resources. The resulting pressures caused prices to rise rapidly Any plan for arresting the inflation called fundamentally for arresting the forces which were causing it. In addition it was clear that slowing down the inflation after it had gathered momentum would be more difficult than taking the steps necessary to avoid the inflation initially Steps to end rising budget deficits and to slow down monetary expansion had been taken in The Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of June had helped to shift the budget from a deficit of $ billion in the fiscal year ended June to a surplus estimated in January at $ billion for the fiscal year Near the end of the Federal Reserve had turned to a policy of more restrained monetary expansion Each of these moves however was only a beginning. Once they had finally been taken it was important that they remain in force long enough to do the job. Yet the shift in the budget position to surplus had been achieved with the help of a temporary tax surcharge which was scheduled to expire on June With continuing strong pressure for increased expenditures in fiscal year the danger of sliding back into a budget deficit could not be ignored. Nor could it necessarily be assumed that the new and more restrained monetary policy would continue as long as needed. In monetary tightness had contributed to a dampening of the economy and of the inflation but the economic slowdown led in turn to a shift back to highly expansive policies in and to a resurgence of inflation. It was commonly thought that this pattern might be repeated At the beginning of as earlier there were disagreements among economists about the relative roles of rising budget deficits and rapid monetary expansion in causing the inflation of On one view the rising deficits were the driving force and they would have been enough to cause substantially the inflation that was experienced even if there had been much less monetary expansion. On the other view the rapid monetary expansion was the primary factor ; with it there would have been substantial inflation even with a stable budget policy and without it there would have been little inflation even with rising deficits. These different views led to different emphases in policy prescriptions for Following the one theory the critical matter was at least to stabilize the budget in its current position of moderate surplus. According to the other theory a reduction of the rate of monetary growth was the decisive way to slow down the inflation The Government could not prudently let the control of inflation depend on the choice of one of these strategies to the neglect of the other. Many uncertainties exist about the relative power of fiscal and monetary actions taken separately. There is much less doubt about the power of fiscal and monetary actions taken together. A reliable policy had to turn away from both the rising deficits and the rapid monetary expansion DIRECT INFLUENCE ON WAGES AND PRICES The Administration 's plan of policy for did not include an attempt to revive wage-price guideposts such as those existing in The results of our own experience and numerous trials of such policies in other countries over the preceding years did not justify confidence that such efforts would help solve the inflation problem in In their usual form these policies enunciate general standards of noninflationary price and wage behavior coupled with appeals to labor and business for compliance. The degree to which representatives of labor and business have participated with government in defining standards and seeking compliance has varied from country to country. The sanctions invoked in support of the standards are usually informal and have varied in their severity and nature Experience with such policies in other countries has been remarkably consistent. In some cases success in holding down wage settlements or price increases has been achieved in particular industries. There is usually a period in which these programs may have some overall deterrent efTect though evidence here is less certain. After an interval however there is a point at which accumulating pressures make the programs ineffective American experience conformed to this pattern. In January the Council of Economic Advisers promulgated a set of guideposts intended to describe the course of wages and prices that would be consistent with general price stability and certain other objectives. The main element in the statement of these guideposts was that hourly wages should rise in line with the average long-term gain in output per man-hour. Prices should ordinarily be stable ; but in a particular industry they could rise if productivity rose less than the average and they should fall if productivity rose more than the average. A number of exceptions were specified and indeed these were necessary to meet requirements of equity and efficiency As originally put forth the guideposts were to serve a general educational function of encouraging voluntary patterns of behavior that would be noninflationary. There was no suggestion that the Government would apply them in particular cases or try to enforce them. But it was natural to question whether actions in particular cases conformed to the guideposts and the Government felt it necessary to comment on the justification for these actions Once this threshold had been crossed the Government also became involved in attempting to insure compliance in particular cases where it was considered necessary. Usually the attempt consisted of discussions with the persons involved. Sometimes there were public exchanges of charges and countercharges. In some cases the Government relied upon its power as purchaser regulator and law-enforcer to encourage compliance With the upsurge of inflation and inflationary pressure after mid-1965 the difficulty of reconciling the guideposts with market forces became more intense. Labor and business were being asked to act as if prices were not rising when in fact they were- As it became evident that steps necessary to keep prices from rising were not being taken it also became more obviously unrealistic and inequitable to make these requests in specific cases. By the fall of the policy was widely recognized to be unworkable and it was allowed to fade away. In subsequent years there were only episodic actions with specific companies regarding prices Whether the policy changed the overall behavior of the price level before it ran into intense inflation is uncertain. These were years of relative price stability. But they were also years of considerable slack in the economy relatively high unemployment and stable or declining farm prices. That is they were years in which market conditions favored price stability. Econometric studies attempting to isolate a further contribution that guideposts might have made to price stability have produced uncertain results. The findings of some studies are consistent with the view that the guideposts may have had some effect in reducing the increase of the price level ; other studies do not support this conclusion Whatever the uncertainties about this earlier period the guidepost policy clearly did not work once the economy ran into strong and serious pressures of inflationary demand. By that time the question was not whether guideposts would have a measurable influence on the rate of inflation. It was whether they had any credibility and viability at all. The evidence is that they did not. The conspicuous cases in which guidepost policy could exercise some influence were too few and were overrun by the general tide of inflation in the economy as a whole The Administration in recognized that the speed of the disinflationary process would depend in part upon how quickly business and labor became convinced that the economic climate was changing. If business and labor continued to expect demand and prices to rise rapidly and if they pushed up wages and prices in anticipation disinflation would come slowly and more painfully. This meant that the public 's understanding of the determination to check inflation of the policies being pursued and of the progress being made would be important to success. There would be room and need for efforts to inform the public. But first there would have to be evidence that the new policies were actually working In the exercise of its ordinary functions the Government has a considerable influence on conditions of demand and supply and consequently on prices in particular markets. It would be important for the Government to make sure that its influence did not unnecessarily contribute to inflation in those markets and beyond that to try to correct malfunctions in particular markets which might aggravate the consequences of the general inflation THE EXPECTED CHAIN FROM POLICY TO RESULTS As the process was viewed at the beginning of the fiscal and monetary restraint that was the core of anti-inflation policy would slow the rate of inflation through a series of steps which can ,be summarized as follows : A Slowdown in the Growth of Total Spending The growth in aggregate spending for goods and services as measured by gross national product which was percent from to would be reduced. The Federal Government 's own purchases would not rise so fast nor would its payments to State and local governments and to individuals payments which these sectors ordinarily use to make their own purchases. By avoiding the tax reduction scheduled for midyear the Government would refrain from boosting private after-tax income and consequently from stimulating private spending Monetary restraint and the resulting scarcity and high cost of credit would slow down spending in various ways. Expenditures financed by borrowing for new houses for State and local construction projects for business investment and for consumers ' durables would be most directly affected. In addition money balances would decline in relation to rising incomes and transactions and the market value of other assets would be depressed because of higher interest rates. This would dampen the inclination of businesses and consumers to spend. These effects of monetary restraint on spending would not be immediate or follow a precise formula based on the amount of the restraint but they would come if the restraint continued A Decline in the Rate of Growth of Production The slowdown in the growth of purchases would mean a slowdown in the growth of sales ; businesses can not sell what others do not buy. Some businesses might respond to a decline in the growth of sales by allowing inventories to accumulate rather than by cutting their planned output but this could only be a temporary reaction. Others might respond to a slowdown in the growth of sales by cutting prices in an attempt to keep volume up. But this was not likely to be the first response in Having already experienced several years of rapidly rising demand costs and prices businesses would expect more of the same and for the most part they would keep their own prices up and rising The most general and important response of business to a slowdown of sales would be a slowdown in the rate at which production was increasing Initially this would involve a decline in the rate of growth and possibly some temporary decline in production itself. An absolute decline in output however would not be a necessary aspect of the disinflationary process. In a growing economy the labor force is increasing new productive equipment is being added new technology is being introduced and the basic trend of labor productivity is rising ; this means that the potential output of the economy also grows. Therefore even though output is still rising absolutely a slowdown in the rate of growth of output reduces actual production relative to its potential and is an anti-inflationary force. This is a part of the process that eventually builds up those back pressures which are essential to the development of a new stability in the level of costs and prices A Decline in Profits Per Unit A deceleration in the rate of growth in real output would adversely affect productivity in the short run. The movement of fixed costs per unit of output would thus be less favorable for a time. After a sustained period of expansion and labor shortages employers would tend to maintain work forces and payrolls would tend to be fixed. The deterioration in productivity and increased costs per unit of output would reduce profits per unit. While even higher prices might consequently seem necessary and while in many cases they might be posted market conditions would make it difficult for such prices to hold and the major effect would be heavier pressure on businesses to begin actions to reduce costs. The need to improve productivity and thereby pare unit labor costs would make labor " hoarding " more costly Employment at overtime would diminish and layoffs would become more common A Slowdown in Wage Increases As profits per unit weakened employers would become more resistant to granting wage increases. At the same time a softening labor market would lessen workers ' insistence on large wage increases as a condition for employment since they could not be so sure of finding another job quickly if they left a current one or rejected a new offer. Moreover if business profits were less favorable a major rationale for heavy wage demands would be removed As a consequence the average rate of wage increase would ultimately begin to diminish. However in view of the momentum of past increases in wages and the cost of living this could not be expected to happen quickly. Nor could it be expected to happen evenly in all sectors A Slowdown in Price Increases While as already indicated the unfavorable development in profits would create some incentive to mark up prices more sluggish market conditions would encourage businesses to pursue temperate pricing policies especially as this influence began to be reinforced by a slowdown in the rise of wage rates and unit labor costs. The reductions in wage and price increases would tend to reinforce each other. The longer price increases moderated the weaker would become the expectation of further inflation. In turn business and labor would be increasingly inclined to respond to the waning inflation by making appropriate price and wage adjustments in preference to accepting a lower volume of production and less employment. With this change the economy would be on the road to regaining full employment without setting off another round of inflation At the beginning of no one knew how much of this process might occur during the year. As this Council indicated in its testimony before the Joint Economic Committee in February the growth of demand would be slowed only a little in the first half of the year because demand was strong at the outset and the turn to monetary restraint just before the year opened would not have had much time to work. A more marked slowdown of demand was likely for the second half. At first almost all of the slack in demand would probably be taken up by a slowdown of production Price and cost trends at the beginning of the year were too strong to be deflected by the moderate deceleration expected in the first half. But it could be expected that after midyear the slower growth of real output and of employment would create sufficient excess in the supply of products and labor to begin to have visible effects on price and wage increases. By the end of the year the rate of inflation would be lower than at the beginning The effects to that point might not be great. Still the economy would have crossed the threshold from a state of accelerating inflation to one of decelerating inflation and we could count on making further progress THE RECORD IN Fiscal and monetary policies in followed the general course that seemed desirable at the beginning of the year. In general the economy responded to those policies by moving through some of the stages just outlined more slowly than was expected at the beginning of but in a manner that confirmed the initial view of the necessary stages in the process The policy and economic developments of the year are summarized in the next few pages after which the main elements in the story are told in greater detail The contribution of fiscal policy to disinflation was a slowdown in the growth of Federal spending and the maintenance of a moderate budget surplus. During calendar Federal expenditures ( as measured in the national income accounts ) increased by about $ billion as compared with about $ billion a year in the preceding years ; and the budget surplus amounted to almost $ billion for the year as compared with a deficit of $ billion in Monetary policy reduced the rate of growth of the money supply ( demand deposits and currency ) from percent in to percent in The reduction occurred in successive steps that brought the rate of growth close to zero in the fourth quarter ( Chart ) Chart Changes in the Money Supply and Federal Expenditures PERCENTAGE CHANGE ANNUAL RATEJ/ MONEY SUPPLY ( Currency and Demand Deposits ) til iI 1I1 CHANGE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATEi/ FEDERAL EXPENDITURES ( National Income Accounts Basis ) VA \ Y7i [ -I/BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED QUARTERLY AVERAGES OF DAILY FIGURES i/sEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Chart Changes in GNP Real GNP and GNP Deflator PERCENTAGE CHANGE ( ANNUAL RATE ) NOTE : BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE As the year progressed it became more and more likely that these developments which led to accelerating inflation were transitory. Profits reported by corporations declined after the middle of the year. Also the slower growth of total output including an actual decline of industrial production began to be translated into slower growth of employment and reduction of working hours. This combination of conditions marked a necessary step toward a subsequent decline in the rate of inflation FISCAL DEVELOPMENTS The operating objective of fiscal policy in initially and throughout the year was to keep a budget surplus at least as large as had been achieved by the Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of in the neighborhood of $ billion to $ billion. The first step in the process of fiscal control was a review of the budget for fiscal that the outgoing Administration had submitted. A program-by-program examination indicated that $ billion could be cut from the totals. Of this amount $ billion would come from reducing defense outlays $ billion from deferring increases in Social Security benefits and $ billion from cuts in a wide range of other Federal programs. As a result the Administration announced in April its intention to hold fiscal expenditures to $ billion During the necessary costs of certain " uncontrollable " items such as interest on the debt Medicare public assistance civil service retirement and veterans benefits increased beyond the earlier estimates. At several points Congressional action also increased expenditures. In order to hold to the $ billion total for fiscal year the Administration therefore announced further cuts in mid-September amounting to $ billion of which $ billion was in the defense program Adherence to the $ billion ceiling required not only making these gross reductions of $ billion in existing programs but also firmly resisting proposals originating in Congress that would have required spending many billions of dollars for new programs or program expansions. By the beginning of it was clear that the ceiling could not be maintained for the entire fiscal year. For calendar year however the tight restraint on expenditures allowed fiscal policy to contribute to the fight against inflation The initial review of the budget also revealed that in order to avoid an abrupt shift from surplus to deficit it would be necessary to extend the 10percent income tax surcharge scheduled to expire on June and to defer the scheduled reduction of the excise taxes on automobiles and telephone services. Accordingly in March the President recommended their retention with the 10-percent surcharge to continue until June Subsequent consideration of the longer-range issues led the Administration to conclude that the 7-percent tax credit enacted in to stimulate business investment should be repealed. The national priorities of the 's did not require or justify this special incentive Once the decision was made to ask for repeal of the investment credit the repeal had to be effective immediately in order to minimize disruptions from heavy advance order placements. Thus although the repeal served a longrun objective there would be some revenue increase in the short run and therefore a gradual phasing out of the tax surcharge was possible Consequently on April when the Administration asked for repeal of the investment credit it also recommended that the surcharge rate be reduced to percent on January and then allowed to expire on June The extension of the surcharge was the subject of prolonged debate in Congress. Extension for the last months of was not signed into law until August and extension for the first months of at the 5-percent rate did not become law until December Continued uncertainty about tax prospects which raised doubts about how determined the fight against inflation was going to be contributed to the persistence of an inflationary psychology during the year As already indicated the growth in Federal expenditures slowed down substantially in The Federal pay raise that went into effect on July accounted for about one-third of the year 's increase. Federal purchases of goods and services including the pay raise increased by approximately $ billion from the end of to the end of All other Federal expenditures combined however Social Security and other transfers grants to States and localities net interest paid and subsidies continued their upward trend though at a somewhat more moderate pace. Among these net interest paid rose because of sharply higher interest rates On the revenue side the increase in Social Security tax rates on January from to percent added about $ billion to collections in During the year other tax rates were stable except that the elimination of Chart Changes in Federal Surplus National Income Accounts Basis CHANGE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE the investment tax credit effective April increased total tax liabilities for calendar by $ billion ; only the corporation share of this $ billion is counted as Federal receipts within calendar in the national income accounts. Only a small part of eligible investment made in lost the advantage of the tax credit because of the rather long leadtime between order placement and expenditures. Total Federal receipts ( as measured in the national income accounts ) rose by more than $ billion from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of The reported figures distort the pattern of receipts and consequently of the budget surplus during the year because the insufficient withholding of personal income tax payments in increased final settlements in the first half of A correction for the bunching of these payments would show that the surplus stayed within a fairly narrow range during the year ( Year-to-year changes in the surplus are shown in Chart ) MONETARY RESTRAINT Last February Chairman Martin described the goal of Federal Reserve policy as being " to disinflate without deflating. " It was difficult to tell then or later in the year however what rate of growth in the money supply would in fact achieve this general goal. Certainly it was necessary that the money supply grow more slowly than the 7.2-percent increase of In the circumstances of with interest rates high and rising and with strong and spreading expectations of inflation businesses and families would be likely to hold declining money balances in relation to their income. Therefore to bring about even a moderate slowdown in demand for goods and services might require a very low rate of monetary growth lower than would be consistent with prosperity in a more stable economy. Past experience however threw little light on the requirements of this transitional period and policy had to be tentative and watchful During the first half of the growth of the money supply fell to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent. ( Before revisions in the data were made in late summer the first half growth had appeared to be lower. ) For the second half the policy became even more restrictive and growth in the money supply was only percent at an annual rate ( Chart ) For the year as a whole time and savings deposits at commercial banks declined by percent as market interest rates rose well above the ceiling rates that banks could pay on these deposits and thus diverted funds to market securities The Federal Reserve restricted monetary growth primarily by reducing the expansion of its monetary liabilities. Although currency outside banks expanded during by percent almost as much as the percent expansion in total reserves of commercial banks ( adjusted for changes in reserve requirements ) were practically constant for whereas they had increased percent for Other restrictive steps were also taken in April. The discount rate on loans to member banks secured by U.S obligations or other eligible paper was raised from / to percent and reserve requirements on demand deposits at all member banks were raised one-half of a percentage point THE FLOW OF CREDIT One way in which the monetary restraint was transmitted to the economy was through its effect on the supply of credit. Banks were less able to expand credit through increases in the money supply. Also as the year went on the combination of continued slow growth of money and rising transactions and income lessened the inclination of individuals and businesses to reduce TABLE Funds raised in credit markets nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Borrowing sector III II U.S. Government net of cash balance Other sectors Total funds raised Change in U.S. Government cash balance outside Federal Reserve Net funds raised State and local governmentsBusiness Households Home mortgages Foreign II III IV Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System their money balances further in order to acquire other financial assets Whereas earlier the restraint on bank lending could be made up by more borrowing from other lenders who started the year with ample liquidity this solution became more difficult as the year progressed. The tightening of credit supplies affected borrowing on the open market as well as through financial intermediaries. As a result by the third quarter of total funds raised in credit markets net of changes in Treasury cash at commercial banks were nearly percent less seasonally adjusted than in the fourth quarter of ( Table ) Most of this decline came in the third quarter A dramatic turnabout was made of course by the Federal Government On a seasonally adjusted net basis it changed from a heavy borrower in the first half of to a moderate borrower through the first quarter of then to a substantial lender in the second quarter ; in the third quarter it borrowed only a small amount on a net basis. As a result even though the net funds raised by all sectors declined in the second quarter of the net funds raised by borrowers other than the Federal Government actually increased. In the third quarter however when the Federal Government was not active in the market on a net basis borrowing of all other sectors declined and consequently total net funds obtained fell sharply This restraint in the amount of credit being supplied occurred in the face of an unusually strong private demand for credit. In addition to the strong demand which ordinarily accompanies a high level of economic activity the expectation of more inflation acted as a further stimulus to borrowing. The fact that inflation had been accelerating since intensified expectations of future price increases. Individuals and businesses seeing an opportunity to invest in real assets that would be expected to increase in money value with inflation were eager to borrow in the expectation of repaying with dollars of reduced purchasing power. They were willing to pay high interest rates because they believed that inflation would substantially reduce the real cost of those rates. On a loan made at the beginning of a year at an 8-percent interest rate and repaid at the end of a year in which prices have risen by percent the return on the loan in real purchasing power is of course about percent In these circumstances interest rates would have risen even if the money supply had continued to rise rapidly as happened in But the curtailment of monetary expansion in and the curtailment of the supply of credit that accompanied it temporarily raised interest rates even more Until the slowdown of monetary expansion could reduce economic expansion and lessen the expectation of inflation an extraordinary demand for credit would collide with a more restricted supply and interest rates would soar In fact interest rates did soar in ( Chart ) By the end of most interest rates had climbed around percentage points above their level One must consult records for the Civil War and earlier to find comparable interest rates. And the steepness of the advance on long-term as well as short-term securities may well have been unprecedented The high interest rates of substantially altered financial flows in large part because legal ceilings put some borrowers at a disadvantage and shunted funds to unrestricted parts of the market. Ceilings on deposit interest rates were particularly important. The maximum interest rates that banks could pay on time and savings accounts and on certificates of deposit had not been changed since April while market interest rates increased sharply. As a result commercial banks could not compete and large certificates of deposit outstanding fell from $ billion at the end of to $ billion at the end of June and to $ billion at year-end ( The ceiling rates were adjusted upward in January ) The two other financial institutions subject to deposit-rate ceilings mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations also felt the competition for funds. They experienced heavy withdrawals and their net growth declined substantially. Time and savings deposits which the public held with Chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER ANNUM SHORT-TERM PRIME COMMERCIAL PAPER FEDERAL RESERVE DISCOUNT RATE 3-MONTH TREASURY BILLS ( New Issues ) I I I ,',,, I I lll | l l l l l | I LONG-TERM FHA NEW HOME MORTGAGES CORPORATE Aaa BONDS ( New Issues ) HIGH-GRADE MUNICIPAL BONDS ( New Issues ) U.S. GOVERNMENT BONDS ,I ^ | | n | SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND STANDARD & POOR 'S CORPORATION all deposit-type financial institutions grew by $ billion in but declined by $ billion at an annual rate during the third quarter of Life insurance companies also faced heavy demands for automatic policy loans since the standard 5-percent rate on such loans became a bargain as other interest rates rose TABLE Changes in deposits and selected nondeposit sources of bank funds [ Billions of dollars ] Change from preceding period Selected source of bank funds not seasonally adjusted Commercial bank time and savings deposits Negotiable certificates of deposit _ Other time and savings deposits _ ) IV _ III Selected nondeposit sources of bank funds Euro-dollar borrowing3 Direct foreign borrowing4 Commercial paper LoanRPV II \ ) Not available Change during first half of s Bank liabilities to foreign branches * Euro-dollars borrowed directly or through brokers and dealers and liabilities to banks ' own branches in U.S. territories and possessions Paper issued by a bank holding company affiliate or subsidiary Loans or participations in pools of loans sold under repurchase agreements to other than banks and other than affiliates or subsidiaries Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Commercial banks were able to offset deposit withdrawals at first by tapping other sources of funds. They borrowed more heavily in the Eurodollar market negotiated repurchase agreements of their loans with corporations and expanded commercial paper issued by subsidiaries and affiliates In total as shown in Table banks raised about $ billion by these devices during the first half of Later in the year the Federal Reserve took steps to make the use of these sources more expensive to banks. Most repurchase agreements had to be treated like deposits after August and were thus subjected to reserve requirements and interest-rate ceilings. In effect this prohibited their further use. Euro-dollar borrowings above May levels were also subjected to reserve requirements beginning in September. Banks did not raise additional funds from these sources after midyear. Commercial paper sales continued to grow however and provided $ billion more in the second half ( Recent proposals not yet effective would bring these sales under either reserve requirements or interest rate ceilings or both. ) To meet heavy demands for loans commercial banks also sold U.S. and municipal securities depressing the bond market and they traded actively in the Federal funds market. With time deposits declining and nondeposit sources of funds quite costly large commercial banks made the terms of their lend- ing more restrictive and the expansion of business loans slowed significantly after midyear The funds withdrawn from or not placed in banks or other financial institutions were not lost to the supply of credit. Funds returned by way of the open market. This can be seen in the shift in the composition of assets acquired by households and nonfinancial businesses. Households accumulated only $ billion in money and savings deposits at a seasonally adjusted annual rate during the third quarter of far below usual amounts and diverted their savings increasingly into market instruments because of the much higher yields. They invested at an annual rate of $ billion in all credit market instruments in the third quarter of well above any quarterly rate in recent years. Most of this was accounted for by the purchase of $ billion of U.S. Government and agency securities. Nonfinancial corporations withdrew funds from time deposits at an annual rate of $ billion in the third quarter of and purchased $ billion ( annual rate ) of commercial paper TABLE Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Source or use of funds Internal funds Credit market instruments III IV Sources total II II III Stocks Bonds and mortgages Bank loans ___ Other loans Trade debt and tax liability Other liabilities _ Uses total Acquisition of financial assets : Liquid assets Consumer and trade credit Other assets _ _ Capital expendituresDiscrepancy ( sources less uses ) __ ___ _ Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Businesses which could borrow on the open market were able to meet their credit needs despite this shift in fund flows from financial intermediaries to credit market instruments. Although the third quarter of saw a decline in the funds raised by businesses in credit markets compared with the second quarter the total of funds raised represented an annual rate higher than during most of Businesses expanded capital expenditures steadily during the first quarters of despite little increase in the generation of funds internally and a decline in their borrowing from banks ( Table ) They made up the difference in large part by selling liquid assets. In the third quarter nonfinancial corporations sold liquid assets at an annual rate of $ billion whereas these corporations are typically net purchasers of liquid assets often by substantial amounts For the housing sector the job of tapping the open market to find the funds no longer available through private financial intermediaries fell upon federally sponsored agencies chiefly the Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Banks. These agencies stepped up their support of the mortgage market substantially. Their annual rate of support for residential and farm mortgages furnished either directly by purchases of mortgages or indirectly through loans to savings and loan associations increased from $ billion in all of to a $ billion annual rate in the third quarter of This represented percent of the total supply of noncommercial mortgages as compared with percent in Despite this increased assistance the growth of total mortgage credit declined in the fourth quarter The support of mortgages by federally sponsored agencies was financed by issuing securities which competed with other financial assets and to some extent depleted private sources supplying the mortgage market. Total issues of sponsored Federal credit agencies made mainly for mortgages rose from $ billion in to a $ billion annual rate in the third quarter of The largest and earliest decline in net funds raised outside of the Federal Government was experienced by State and local governments. By the third quarter their acquisition of credit was one-fourth below the rate. Many States and localities were prevented from borrowing in by legal ceilings on the interest rates they could pay. Also during parts of the year the market was disturbed by uncertainty about possible changes in the tax status of State and local securities in addition to heavy selling of these securities by commercial banks THE DEMAND FOR OUTPUT The policies of fiscal and monetary restraint and the associated credit stringency described earlier affected the behavior of the economy by slowing down the total demand for output Total expenditure for goods and services ( gross national product or GNP ) rose $ billion from to when it reached $ billion This was an increase of percent as compared with the percent rise from to ( Table ) A major factor in the slower growth of spending was the slower increase of Federal purchases mainly for defense. In fact GNP other than Federal purchases rose as much in as in the preceding year. The most marked shift within the non-Federal total was the much larger increase in business fixed investment and the much smaller increase in residential construction than had occurred in the preceding year. These movements were at least partly related. The large absorption of funds to finance business TABLE Changes in gross national product and components [ Billions of dollars ] Change from preceding period Component 1969,< easonally adjusted annual rates Gross national product II III IV i State and local government purchases Fixed investment Personal consumption expenditures Net exports of goods and services._ Federal Government purchases Non-Federal purchases Nonresidential Residential structures. Change in business inventories Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce investment together with tightening monetary conditions meant that less funds were available to finance residential construction. Monetary restraint also had some effect on State and local government purchases which nonetheless continued to rise at a much higher rate than GNP The main categories of GNP other than Federal purchases and net exports are reviewed below. Exports and imports are discussed in Chapter Fixed Investment by Business Business demand for plant and equipment was strong throughout and offered stubborn resistance to restraint even though the rate of expansion moderated within the year. The 12-percent increase in investment over that of was the eighth annual advance in a row marking the longest sustained increase since before World War I. However businessmen spent less than they had anticipated in the February CommerceSEC annual survey of investment plans The rise in investment during was an extension of a recovery that started haltingly in late and early but gathered momentum from the upsurge in sales and profits in the first half of The surtax on corporations resulting from the passage of the tax increase in mid-1968 did not seem to have much impact on the developing investment expansion perhaps in part because the tax rise was small and was expected to be temporary. During the second half of the financing of these programs was facilitated when the monetary authorities shifted to an easier policy and the Federal deficit declined sharply making additional funds available for the private sector. At the end of businessmen projected for the first half of one of the largest half-year increases ever recorded in the CommerceSEC survey Several influences that should have inhibited business investment emerged in although at best they served only to slow down the increase in the second half. They included the shift to monetary restraint and the rapid rise in interest costs ; the tapering in the expansion of demand and output and the emergence of excess plant capacity in a number of industries ; the decline in book profits after the second quarter ; and the proposed repeal of the investment tax credit announced on April although this move could not have greatly affected spending until late in the year because of the sizable backlog of equipment orders that existed in mid-April. In any event speculation that the termination of the investment tax credit might be in the Administration 's proposals led to an upsurge in order placements immediately prior to April as businessmen acted to take advantage of the credit while it was still allowed Although their spending fell somewhat short of expectations in the first half of the year businessmen forged ahead with their investment programs as progressed. New appropriations by manufacturers and new projects started by manufacturers and public utilities rose through the third quarter And at the end of businessmen reporting in the Commerce-SEC survey were once again projecting a substantial increase in expenditures in the coming year The industrial composition of investment provides a clue to the strength of business investment. Over the past few years the demand for capital goods by electric and gas utilities and telephone companies has been exceptionally strong. In contrast to other groups investment in these industries has increased steadily and substantially each year. Several successive years of sharply rising demand have strained facilities and the service failures that have appeared in particular areas have accentuated the need for additional capacity. High interest rates have not seriously deterred these industries from investment because they must meet demands for service and because the regulatory authorities permit such cost increases to be reflected in higher rates. Actual spending by these firms rose sharply in and their planned spending is a major source of strength in the near-term investment outlook Housing Housing in showed the effects of disrupted capital markets and high interest rates. Private nonfarm housing starts at about million units for the year as a whole were unchanged from but they declined irregularly from an early peak. Expenditures for the full year were ^ percent greater than in but the increase was due almost entirely to higher prices. During the year private housing outlays declined percent ( annual rate ) from the first to the fourth quarter and this decline was a major reason for the dampening in the rise of aggregate demand Homebuilding never did recover fully from the effects of the credit stringency of The housing upturn in came to a temporary halt in the first half of because of rising interest rates. Since housing starts from to fell considerably below the number needed to satisfy the requirements created by new households and the replacement of obsolete units a substantial backlog in demand built up. Vacancy rates continued to be low prices for new and existing homes recorded sharp increases and rents rose at an accelerated rate In the second half of the somewhat easier credit market conditions that followed enactment of the surtax led to a pronounced pickup in private nonfarm starts. From a seasonally adjusted annual rate of million units in the second quarter of they rose to million in the first quarter of However this upsurge in starts was also short lived. The slower monetary growth near the beginning of was followed by a further rise in what were already high interest rates. Some lending institutions shifted from mortgages to more lucrative investments and most experienced much less favorable savings flows. The further sharp tightening by the monetary authorities after mid-1969 hampered housing. As was indicated earlier the thrift institutions which are important in mortgage financing were handicapped in their attempt to compete for savings. These institutions experienced large outflows of savings because depositors sought the higher yields available on market securities. After starts had fallen to a million unit rate in the second quarter they declined to million units in the third and million in the fourth Partly in an effort to support homebuilding the Administration took several steps to alter supply and demand conditions in ways that would curb inflationary trends in construction ( including the homebuilding industry ) Early in the year lumber and plywood prices rose sharply as a result of tight supply conditions and the expectation of further tightness. The Government curtailed its own purchases and initiated measures to increase the supply of timber from the national forests. These actions played a part in the sharp retreat of lumber and plywood prices from their speculative peaks Increases in construction wage rates were very pronounced in with collective bargaining agreements commonly calling for rises in excess of percent per year for or years. These increases and the consequent advances in costs made it even more difficult to sustain an already weak residential construction industry. Moreover building such large wage increases into costs for future years raised the danger that the entire construction industry would be left stranded by excessive costs when inflation abated. There was also concern that the exceptional wage increases in this industry would set an example that might be followed in other industries On September the President announced a program to attack the inflationary aspects of construction wage settlements The Federal Government would cut new contracts for direct Federal construction by percent with the cut to continue until conditions eased in the economy or in the construction industry. If that limitation were to remain in effect through fiscal it would reduce contract awards by $ billion State and local governments were requested to cut their new construction contracts voluntarily. If not enough voluntary restraint was forthcoming the Administration would consider a reduction in Federal grants for construction Private business was requested to cooperate in restricting nonresidential construction The Departments of Labor and of Health Education and Welfare were directed to apply more of their manpower training programs to increasing the number of skilled construction workers A Cabinet Committee on Construction headed by the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers was established to develop long- and shortrange programs for analyzing problems in the construction industry On September the President established a tripartite Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission to consider solutions to a number of labor-management and manpower problems in the industry including productivity seasonally settlement of disputes and the training of labor Consumer Income and Spending Personal income rose $ billion or percent from to ( Table ) There were large increases in payrolls and incomes from property and still larger percentage rises in transfer payments ( such as payments for Social Security Medicare and veterans benefits ) Personal taxes rose last year by $ billion or percent an even greater increase than from to when the surtax went into effect. Last year TABLE Changes in personal income taxes and saving Change from preceding period ( billions of dollars ) Period Personal income Personal tax and nontax payments Disposable personal income Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving l Saving rate for period ( percent ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Second half : First half Second half : First half.. Second half2 Disposable personal income less personal outlays ( personal consumption expenditures interest paid by consumers and personal transfer payments to foreigners ) I Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce was the first full year of the surtax ; for this reason surtax liabilites were higher rising from 7/ to percent. In addition tax payments were unusually high because of the underwithholding of taxes in Because of the substantial increase in taxes personal disposable ( after-tax ) income rose only percent the smallest percentage advance in years Consumer spending rose more rapidly than disposable income from to The pattern of consumer expenditures within the year was particularly interesting for the light it threw on the impact of the surtax. When the surtax was imposed in mid-1968 it was recognized that some of its effects might be offset if consumers decided to reduce their rate of saving For reasons that are still not entirely clear the rate of saving had been rather high for almost years before the tax increase was enacted Furthermore there was always the possibility that consumers might be slow in adjusting their expenditures to an anticipated change in disposable income especially if they regarded the surtax as temporary. As it turned out consumers did reduce their rate of saving but to an extent that was much greater than anticipated The imposition of the tax had little immediate impact on consumer spending. In the third quarter of spending rose sharply and the saving rate fell ; not until the fourth quarter did spending show signs of slowing down. At the start of many analysts counted on the slowdown in consumer spending that had finally emerged in the fourth quarter of to continue in the first half of particularly since consumers had heavy tax payments to make on their liabilities and since Social Security taxes were increased at the start of the year. In fact however consumer spending rose sharply in both the first and second quarters despite the slow expansion in disposable income. The personal saving rate fell to exceptionally low levels. Helping to explain the high rate of spending relative to disposable income in and was the rapid monetary expansion and the substantial accumulation of liquid assets that preceded these years The liquidity of households increased at very rapid rates throughout and The process of attempting to adjust these liquid asset holdings to normal levels may have contributed to the heavy consumer spending in and the first half of as it did in the case of business investment During the second half of increasing concern over the economic outlook which showed up in a number of surveys of consumer sentiment was reflected in a more subdued pace of consumer spending and a rise in the saving rate. Spending for durable goods edged down bringing to a halt a rise that had started in the summer of Auto purchases showed considerable weakness late in the year as a result of which auto producers made substantial cuts in production State and Local Purchases State and local government purchases with a 12-percent increase showed the largest percentage advance of any of the major demand components in The somewhat slower rise as compared with the increases from to was the result of credit tightness. Several State and local jurisdictions either found it impossible to sell securities because of statutory ceilings on interest rates or decided to postpone new bond issues because of high rates Hardest hit was construction which accounts for about one-fourth of State and local government purchases and which rose very little after annual increases of about percent in the preceding years. The Administration 's request to State and local governments in September to curb construction came too late in the year to influence outlays significantly Inventory Investment Investment in business inventories totaled $ billion last year about as much as the year before. Businessmen tended to be cautious in their inventory policies possibly because of the high cost of borrowed money and uncertainties over the sales outlook. Accumulation was moderate in the first half but during the third quarter there was some evidence that unwanted stocks were piling up. However the actual rate of accumulation apparently fell in the final quarter as steps were taken to adjust production A good part of the swing in inventory accumulation centered in the automobile industry SHARES IN THE NATIONAL INCOME The value of the Nation 's production can also be measured by the national income which is obtained by adding up all of the incomes earned in current production wages and salaries corporate profits proprietors ' incomes net interest and rental incomes of persons. Since incomes are the factor costs of production an analysis of them is particularly instructive in a time of inflation. It provides a useful backdrop for the discussion of the labor market profits and prices that follows The rise in employee compensation approximately percent matched the large increase from to The combination of higher employment and substantial increases in rates of pay resulted in the largest percentage increase in private payrolls since Government payrolls grew less rapidly than in the preceding year mainly because the growth in employment slowed. The slowdown in military payrolls was especially pronounced because for the first time since the size of the Armed Forces showed no increase. The rise in Federal civilian employment was deliberately held down as a measure of restraint. Growth in State and local government employment remained substantial but its rate of increase fell for the third year in a row In the national income accounts measure of corporate profits ( that is adjusted to exclude inventory profits ) was slightly above the total However according to preliminary data profits declined in each quarter of continuing a movement that started in late Book profits ( including inventory profits ) made a better showing in than the national O income version ; the rise from came to $ billion bringing the total to more than $ billion. After-tax profits rose $ billion to a new peak the repeal of the investment tax credit adding $ % billion to tax liabilities Corporations increased dividends more than after-tax profits rose so that undistributed profits edged down Both farm and nonfarm proprietors experienced increased incomes in Large increases in farm prices helped raise the total net income of farm proprietors by $ billion. Last year 's income of about $ billion was the same as the total which in turn was the highest since Cash receipts from marketings of livestock and livestock products were bolstered by a 12-percent price rise that reflected a continued increase in consumer demand for meat coupled with only moderate increases in market supplies and in imports which are limited by voluntary restraints. In the case of crops however another record harvest combined with big carryovers of grains and soybeans resulted in a 3-percent decline in prices. Direct Government payments totaled about $ % billion last year up $ 5/3 billion from They accounted as in for percent of the cash receipts from farm marketings Inflation had an important effect on farm expenses as well as on receipts last year. Prices were higher for all major inputs except fertilizers. Sharp increases were recorded for farm wage rates which were up percent from Because the number of hired farmworkers dropped however total cash wages showed an increase of percent over the figure THE LABOR MARKET The pressures of excess demand that the economy has experienced most of the time since have been nowhere more evident than in the labor market. The tight market that prevailed during most of showed up in many different ways. For the year as a whole the unemployment rate was the lowest since In response to the heavy demand for workers there was an abnormally large increase in the civilian labor force ; the number of persons employed rose by million to a record million. The workweek remained long. Wage rates continued their rapid advance and the rise in productivity came to a halt. Within the year labor demand was less intense in the second half than in the first Employment The increase of million persons in the civilian labor force was not only some greater than the average rise of the preceding years but it was the largest since after the demobilization of the Armed Forces With their unemployment rates extremely low and labor force participation rates already high adult men accounted for a significantly smaller proportion of the increase in total employment than in the preceding years. Adult women and teenagers apparently attracted by the ease of finding jobs ac- counted for about three-fourths of the employment rise a much larger proportion than in and when employment increases were not so great ( Table ) A large proportion of the jobs that women and young persons found last year were part-time jobs which have been growing in importance over the past several years TABLE Changes in civilian employment and distribution of change Change from preceding year Year Total employment Both sexes years Females years and over Males years and over Thousands of persons Percentage distribution of change Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor The long-term downward trend in agricultural employment which had slowed markedly in and accelerated in All of the major industry divisions in the nonagricultural sector recorded employment increases but most of the gains were outside manufacturing increases in construction and retail trade being especially noteworthy. The rise in manufacturing employment was moderate far below the advances in and when the buildup for the Vietnam War was underway Unemployment The average number of persons out of work in was almost the same as in and the unemployment rate edged down from percent to percent of the labor force. Most groups experienced decreased rates. The shortage of adult male workers who account for nearly percent of total employment and constitute the mainstay of the labor force was especially evident last year. Their unemployment rate fell from to percent the lowest for any year in the postwar period. Last year 's percent rate for teenagers was the lowest since and the percent rate for Negroes and other nonwhite races combined showed a decline. Decreases occurred in the relatively unskilled occupations but they were also significant among craftsmen and foremen ( Table ) TABLE Selected unemployment rates and [ Percent ] Group of workers All workers Sex and age : Both sexes years... Men years and over Women years and overRace : White Negro and other races Selected groups : White collar workers Blue collar workers. _ Craftsmen and foremen Operatives Nonfarm laborers Private wage and salary workers in nonagricultural industries. Construction.. Manufacturing Source : Department of Labor Although the demand for labor was strong through the year it showed some easing as the year .progressed notably after midyear. In nonfarm establishments employment increases which had averaged per quarter in the first half fell to per quarter in the second half. The length of the workweek in private nonfarm industries fell noticeably in the final quarter after remaining high and remarkably steady through September. The unemployment rate rose from percent in the first quarter to percent in the second and edged up further in the second half showing little change on average from the third to the fourth quarter ( Chart ) Productivity Changes Output per man-hour for all employees in the private nonfarm sector recorded no change from to This was the poorest performance for productivity growth since the mid-1950 's. The absence of comprehensive and detailed data makes it difficult to specify the reasons for this poor showing. The explanation probably involves two factors which differed in importance from industry to industry and time to time. One is that the slower rate of increase of demand and output itself limited the gains of productivity. Employers not only retained staff technical and other " overhead " workers as they usually do ; they also expanded their work forces despite the slower sales rise in order to be prepared for a future higher level of demand. The consequence of combining this with slow growth of current output was a poor performance of output per man-hour. The other explanation is that productivity was limited by the shortage of labor as evidenced by the low unemployment rates especially for experienced workers Employers were forced to turn to marginal workers such as teenagers and housewives most of whom have relatively little work experience and a lower Chart Unemployment Rate PERCENT * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I II I I II I I II I I I I I I II I I II UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR than average rate of productivity. Probably also as a result of labor shortage absenteeism and turnover were both unusually high which depressed productivity. Finally under the conditions that prevailed in delays in the delivery of materials and equipment were common especially in the capital goods sector and production schedules were hard to maintain at least through the summer Wage Changes Since the demand for labor in recent years has been strong in relation to supply at existing wage rates labor has been in a position to win large gains in hourly compensation. During this period the rapid rise in living costs and expectations of further increases in the cost of living have added to labor 's wage demands. Employers have bid up wages because of their own expectations that higher costs could readily be passed on in the form of higher prices Increases in average hourly earnings excluding fringe benefits were again very large in ( Table ) In construction and mining where the demand for labor was extremely strong hourly earnings showed their sharpest gains since In manufacturing where the increase in labor demand was more moderate the rise in earnings fell a little short of the increases in TABLE Increases in average gross hourly earnings of private nonagricultural production or nonsupervisory workers since Percentage change per year Industry Total private to to to to to to Mining Contract construction Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods. Wholesale and retail trade. Wholesale trade Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate * Preliminary Includes transportation and public utilities and services not shown separately in this table Note. Data relate to production workers in mining and manufacturing to construction workers in contract construetion and generally to nonsupervisory workers in all other industries Source : Department of Labor TABLE Wage and benefit decisions Median annual rate of increase in decisions reached in Measure Major collective bargaining situations : Wage and benefit changes ( packages ) : Equal timings.. Time weighted ( actual timing ) ^ Negotiated first-year wage-rate increases : All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing < Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Negotiated wage-rate increases averaged over life of contract : All industries ( ) Wage increases in manufacturing : All establishments _ Union establishments Nonunion establishments- Preliminary Except for packages data are for contracts affecting workers or more. Package cost estimates are limited to settlements affecting workers or more ( in ) The package cost of a few settlements affecting relatively few workers has not been determined Based on estimated increases in hourly costs at end of contract period and assumes equal spacing of wage and benefit changes over life of contract * Takes account of actual effective dates of wage and benefit changes * Not available Based on settlements affecting workers or more Data not available for year ; data apply to first months of Note. Possible increases in wages resulting from cost-of-living escalator adjustments ( except those guaranteed in the contracts ) were omitted Source : Department of Labor Although was not a year of collective bargaining agreements on an extensive or major scale the increase in wage rates and benefits won by unions was considerably above their gains in Pay raises were not only much larger in nonmanuf acturing industries than in manufacturing as was true in but the acceleration in comparison with that in the preceding year was also much greater in nonmanuf acturing ( Table ) As in earlier years " front-end loading " was common last year. This is the practice of concentrating a pay raise in the first year of a contract covering more than year. It reflects attempts by unions to make up quickly for the erosion of prior wage gains because of rising living costs The combination of higher hourly compensation and no rise in productivity resulted in a 7-percent rise in labor costs per unit of output the sharpest annual advance for employees in the private nonfarm sector since It was far above the preceding year 's rise of percent because of the pronounced difference in productivity performance ( Chart ) The rise in unit labor costs continued throughout the year PRICE MOVEMENTS As a result of last year 's pressures in the economy all major price indicators the comprehensive GNP price deflator the consumer price index ( CPI ) and the wholesale price index ( WPI ) rose more rapidly than in any year since Changes in GNP deflators by sector are shown in Table while changes in the CPI and WPI are shown in Table The rise in the GNP deflator was intensified by the sharp advance in farm prices and by continued large increases in pay scales for Government workers and members of the Armed Forces. Although the price rise for the private nonfarm business sector ( which produces about five-sixths of the GNP ) was smaller than for the GNP as a whole it represented a significant stepup over the preceding year 's change TABLE Changes in implicit price deflators for GNP by sector Percentage change Producing sector to Business _ Nonfarm Farm Households and institutions General government Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce S Private Gross national product to to to ? Chart Changes in Compensation Productivity Labor Costs and Prices Private Nonfarm Sector PERCENTAGE CHANGE PER YEAR I960 TO TO TO TO i mmmm TO HH COMPENSATION PER MAN-HOUR OUTPUT PER MAN-HOUR UNIT LABOR COST NOTE.-DATA RELATE TO ALL EMPLOYEES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE PRICES Some insight into price movements in the nonfarm business sector is provided by Table which shows for nonflnancial corporations the composition of price change in terms of changes in its components costs and profits per unit of output. These data link the various income flows such as wages and profits with real output. Costs and profits per unit of output are derived by dividing each cost aggregate and aggregate profits measured in current dollars by real output measured in prices throughout the period. The sum of the costs and profits per unit equals price per unit which is the deflator for nonflnancial corporations. ( As indicated in the table for example the price of a unit of output thus measured rose cents from to ) Labor cost is the single most important component of price ; in the period from through its relative importance varied from 621/2 to percent of price. All other costs combined depreciation indirect business taxes and net interest accounted for about to percent of price while profits ( including the inventory valuation adjustment ) accounted for the remainder Last year as in and increased labor costs per unit of output were almost equal to the rise in prices. Depreciation indirect business taxes and net interest also added small amounts>to the price rise. However businessmen were only partly successful in translating unit cost increases into higher prices and consequently profits per unit of output edged lower. This differed from the experience from to a period of very rapid increase in demand when the price advance was accompanied by larger unit profit margins TABLE Changes in current dollar costs and profits per unit of real output of nonfinancial corporations since [ Dollars per unit of real output ] Item Total priceLabor costs. Other costs Profits average to to to to Preliminary Capital consumption allowances indirect business taxes plus transfer payments less subsidies and net interest Before tax and including inventory valuation adjustment Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Although the price rise was substantial throughout the character of the rise appeared to be undergoing a transition some time late in the year Unit costs continued to increase rapidly. With real output growing more slowly aggregate overhead costs became increasingly burdensome. But demand pressures which had been the dominant element in the price rise earlier in the year diminished making it more difficult for business fully to recoup cost increases through higher prices. However the further narrowing of unit profit margins did not prevent prices from rising sharply at the end of the year Wholesale and Retail Prices Large increases in wholesale prices of farm products and foods and widespread advances in industrial prices brought about a 4.0-percent rise in wholesale prices from to considerably more than the 2.5-percent rise from to ( Chart ) All of the main parts of the industrial component increased and for most the rises were greater than they had been from to Increases were considerably above average for metals and metal products amounting to almost percent as a result of large increases in steel and nonferrous metals prices. Prices of lumber and wood products recorded a rise of percent from to after a 13-percent advance from to TABLE Changes in wholesale and consumer prices J966 Percentage change ( annual rate ) over preceding period Commodity or item group II III Unadjusted Wholesale prices : All commodities Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Consumer prices : All items Food Nonfood commodities Services Seasonally adjusted Consumer prices : All items Food.. Nonfood commodities _ Services. _ Source : Department of Labor Industrial prices rose at a very rapid rate early in the year showed a declining rate of increase in the second and third quarters and then accelerated again in the final quarter when prices advanced at an annual rate of percent. This movement through the year was distorted to some extent by the behavior of lumber and wood products prices which rose very rapidly through March and thereafter declined percent falling back almost to the level of the preceding year. That decline followed from a weakening in demand as a result of the downturn in housing starts and from special efforts undertaken by the Administration to improve supplies. The exclusion of the lumber and wood products component from the industrial average would reduce the first quarter increase and raise the second and third On this basis the increases in the first three quarters would be about the same while the fourth quarter would represent a peak for the year Chart Price Changes PERCENTAGE CHANGE WHOLESALE PRICE INDEX TOTAL WHOLESALE PRICE INDEX INDUSTRIALS m m V77A SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The consumer price index rose percent in following a advance of percent and increases of just under percent in and All of the broad components registered sizable advances the largest percent being in services. However the acceleration in relation to the record was attributable almost wholly to food ( percent in as compared with percent in ) and housing ( percent in as compared with percent in ) Consumer prices rose rapidly throughout the year. The increase was largest from the first to the second quarter when it came to an annual rate of almost percent. However the rise subsided a little in the third and fourth quarters # # # By the end of the first signs that the inflationary tide was no longer rising had begun to appear. They had been slow in coming. Strong expectations of inflation an abundant supply of liquidity when the year opened and poor productivity performance all contributed to the delay in the response to anti-inflationary policy. But there was enough response to indicate that if the policy was continued the desired results would be achieved. The steadfastness of policy would be tested in CHAPTER Stabilization Policy for and Beyond POLICY AND OUTLOOK FOR E YEAR OPENS with total demand slowed down substantially * and real output approximately stable but with prices still rising rapidly The objectives of policy for are to reduce the rise of prices and to revive the growth of output. These objectives are difficult to reconcile. Measures that would most quickly revive the growth of real output would almost certainly accelerate the rise of prices. Measures that would assure the most rapid stabilization of the price level would almost certainly force a sharp contraction of production and employment. But there is a path of moderate expansion of demand which will yield both a decline of the rate of inflation and a resumption of growth of output. The task of economic policy in is to achieve that path The path of the economy in the early part of is already largely determined. Policy actions taken in the first few months of the year will probably not have much immediate effect. However the course of the economy later in the year will depend heavily on policy actions still to be taken The policy problem for is to take actions in the first half of the year which will place the economy on the sustainable path of moderately rising output and significantly declining inflation in the second half. This desirable path will also be the probable path if the policy needed is correctly identified and carried through THE POLICY OBJECTIVES FOR Although the course of the economy in the early part of is already largely determined this is not to say that it is already known. In fact even for the next few months there are considerable uncertainties. A continued slow rise of money gross national product ( GNP ) at about the annual rate of the fourth quarter of seems likely. The very small monetary expansion of the second half of may portend an even slower rise of GNP If this were about to occur in the months immediately ahead however clearer evidence might already have been expected in developments such as new orders for durable goods which reflect the intermediate processes between changes in the money supply and changes in GNP With continued slow increase of GNP in the early months of the growth of real output would remain close to zero and there should be some decline in the rate of inflation. The sharp rise of wholesale prices at the end of however holds out the possibility that the rise of over-all prices ( as measured by the GNP deflator ) in early may differ little from that in late However if the slowing of final demand leads to an increased rate of inventory accumulation early in the year subsequent reductions in production schedules might mean losses in output and some softening of prices as inventories were being worked back down Despite these uncertainties of degree it does seem likely that by mid-1970 the economy after three quarters of very little increase of real output would be producing significantly below its potential. Such a GNP gap places a downward pressure on the rate of inflation. Businesses find themselves selling in markets less receptive to price increases. This forces greater resistance to cost increases including wage increases. These pressures against inflation will continue if demand remains below potential output even though demand begins to rise more rapidly Thus in the second half of a moderately more rapid rise of money demand bringing about an increase of real output would be consistent with a further reduction of the rate of inflation. The demand for output would be short of the potential so that a moderately larger increase in demand would call forth mainly an increase in real output not in the price level On the other hand if demand continues to rise so slowly that real output does not rise this could be expected to result in rising unemployment. It is well to remember however that the unemployment rate does not move in any fixed precise relationship to other measures of business activity. We were reminded of that again in There was a considerable slowdown of real output gains and in the fourth quarter a cessation but this did not cause a significant rise in the unemployment rate. Still this slippage between real output and employment can not be expected to go on indefinitely. The prospect of a rise in unemployment increases the importance of bringing about a rise in real output when that is consistent with continued progress in reducing inflation The exact timing and degree of expansion that would be consistent with a significant reduction in inflation in are uncertain. However it seems a reasonable estimate that the slow increases of GNP foreseeable in the first half plus the moderately larger but still noninflationary increases desirable in the second half would add up to a GNP for the year between $ and $ billion a range which for convenience may be described by the figure of $ billion. This would be an increase of about 5J/2 percent over as compared with the increase of percent from to Part of this smaller GNP rise would be reflected in a smaller increase of real output. Part of it would be reflected in less inflation. Whereas the GNP price deflator went up percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of and was still rising at a 4.7-percent annual rate at the end of it is reasonable to expect these figures to be substantially lower in It is not necessary at this point in history to emphasize the fallibility of such estimates of a desirable pattern of the GNP and of the consequences of that pattern for the behavior of prices. However precision in such estimates is not required for the success of policy. The estimates indicate the desirable general direction of policy. The basic point is that if the rate of growth of GNP is slowed the rate of inflation will in time also decline although the timing and magnitude of the effect is inevitably somewhat uncertain. The growth of GNP has already been slowed to a rate which although temporarily necessary is lower than needs to be sustained for long in order to achieve significant disinflation. Therefore we can tolerate a moderate rise in the rates of increase of GNP and of real output without reviving inflation and should have such a rise in order to avoid mounting unemployment POLICY FOR There is substantial room for judgment about the combination of policies that would get the economy on the desired path. There are two dangers to be avoided. One is that after the slowdown of activity which is now in progress total demand will rise too soon and too sharply touching off another round of inflation as in Some have expressed concern about the expansiveness of fiscal policy with the two-step elimination of the income tax surcharge the institution of the low-income allowance and the increase of the personal exemption in the income tax and the large rise in Social Security benefits. This some fear could add up to excessive stimulus ; the tight expenditure control recommended in the budget for fiscal year submitted by the Administration is intended to prevent that Others are concerned that the highly restrictive stance of monetary policy after mid-1969 and the slow growth of real output experienced in late and expected to continue into early will make the slowdown too severe The combination of tight credit conditions slow sales growth and declining profits could bring unexpected weakness in business investment ( including inventories ) at the same time that Federal purchases are falling and credit tightness is restraining construction and purchases by State and local governments It would not be prudent to count on these two possibilities an expansive swing in the budget position and cumulating severity of monetary restraint to offset each other although it is possible that they might. Not enough is known about the relative influences of the fiscal and monetary factors to preclude the possibility that one or the other might be heavily dominant resulting in either excessive expansion or excessive contraction. The safer course would be a more moderate posture for both fiscal and monetary policies There are other important reasons for not relying on a combination of an expansive fiscal policy with a budget deficit and an extremely restrictive monetary policy. Even if this combination should result in the desired moderate disinflation it would do so only with high interest rates and scarcity of funds that would limit the rate of residential construction to a level inadequate for the needs of the growing population. Moreover excessive pressures in U.S. money and capital markets are reflected in international financial markets tending to lead toward a disturbing escalation of interest rates in those markets Fiscal policy in should therefore aim at continuing a modest surplus in the unified budget. Combined with moderate monetary restraint this might be expected to yield the GNP path indicated above as desirable without overly severe pressures in credit markets. This does not mean a return to the rates of monetary expansion of and The appropriate rate of expansion is between that of and the severe restraint of the latter part of But just what this rate should be is particularly difficult to tell because of uncertainty about the adjustment of the economy to the lower demand for money resulting from high interest rates inflationary expectations and the development of new money substitutes. In these circumstances policy must be cautious and tentative and feel its way along OUTLOOK FOR GNP AND ITS COMPONENTS The fiscal and monetary policy described is intended to bring a moderate revival along a sustainable path after slow expansion of the GNP in the first half of the year. This target has been indicated above by a path which would yield a total GNP of about $ billion for The behavior of the components of GNP that might be expected to accompany this policy and realization of the GNP total is subject to a number of uncertainties but the following is a reasonable expectation for the major sectors of the economy that is consistent with this picture for the whole Business Fixed Investment. Private investment surveys suggest a to 10percent increase in plant and equipment spending in and the Commerce Department-SEC survey suggests a 9-percent increase from to the second quarter of with a further small increase in the second half of Since a large fraction of the anticipated increase in plant and equipment spending is in nonmanufacturing industries such as public utilities which have somewhat independent investment demands a strong further gain for investment in seems likely. On the other hand there are constraints on a further substantial expansion of capital outlays. Credit is expensive and for some firms difficult to obtain. The liquidity of many companies has been reduced sharply. And profits are going to be under adverse pressures. These suggest tha.t investment demand in other sectors might be sluggish. Thus with the economy slowing realized investment spending may come in somewhat less than anticipated. On balance an increase of about percent on the low side of the anticipations surveys seems to be a reasonable expectation for 6o Inventories. Although auto inventories were a bit high at the end of inventories in general did not seem out of line with their relationship to sales in recent years. Businesses seem for the most part to be successful in pursuing a cautious inventory policy. Thus only a slight decline in inventory investment is expected in Both inventories and business fixed investment present a major uncertainty on the down side of the forecast. A major downturn in sales expectations could bring a large downward revision in both kinds of business investment But no such swing seems to be in the making now. Such factors as the need to reduce costs with modern equipment the expectations of the business community concerning the price level and for many companies the still thin margin of spare capacity are all acting to keep capital expenditures strong Residential Construction. Housebuilding is the sector most exposed to increasing tightness in the capital markets and it has also been hard hit by distortion in the flow of funds in response to interest rate ceilings. The rate of housing starts ( private nonfarm ) fell from an average million ( seasonally adjusted ) in the first quarter of to million in the last quarter as credit conditions tightened Housing starts are expected to remain low in the first half of If as expected conditions become easier in the money and capital markets housing starts should respond favorably in the second half of the year. Nevertheless in housing will be below the longer-run demand indicated by present and prospective rates of new family formation and real income and normal replacement needs Despite housing costs rising residential construction expenditures are expected to fall to about $ billion in from $ billion in State and Local Government. The strong upward trend of State and local government purchases of goods and services is expected to continue in rising about $ to $ billion over those in Much depends on credit conditions. The increase is expected to be less in the first half of reflecting credit conditions in As capital market conditions gradually ease during the first half of outlays may accelerate in the second half Federal Purchases. The tight expenditure control projected in the budget for fiscal is reflected in the estimates of Federal purchases of goods and services in Total Federal purchases which came to $ billion in are expected to fall by about $ 4/ billion in This declining Federal Government demand for output is a major factor in the projected reduction of the rate in inflation. All of the decrease in Federal purchases is projected to come in the defense area which is expected to reduce its purchases from $ billion in to about $ billion in Nondefense Federal purchases are expected to remain about at the level of $ billion O 6i Consumption. Consumer spending in is another major source of uncertainty. Surveys indicate that consumer sentiment has been falling sharply since the first quarter of and experience suggests that these changes in consumer attitudes are associated with slower buying. Indeed automobile sales began to show some weakness toward the end of and into this year. On the other hand reduction of the income tax surcharge to percent on January and to zero on July in addition to an increase in Social Security benefits of about $ billion ( annual rate ) in April with an additional $ billion one-time payment for benefits retroactive to January should tend to stimulate consumer spending On balance it is expected that consumer expenditures will rise by about $ billion from to With some of the addition to disposable income from the surcharge elimination going into saving the saving rate is expected to rise from percent in to about ^ percent in Net Exports. Net exports of goods and services are expected to rise from about $ billion in to about $ billion in While the slowdown expected in the growth of U.S. demand should reduce the growth of merchandise imports the combined effect of less buoyant demand conditions in some markets abroad and the lagged impact of rising prices in the United States on our exports and imports may limit the improvement in Summary. The general trends in the composition of the GNP described above are consistent with a GNP for of about $ billion or more realistically between $ and $ billion. While specific figures in billions of dollars have been put down for each major component of GNP it would of course be possible to achieve the total with a different mixture. If this total is achieved the year should see progress toward establishing the basis for sustained gains against inflation and for more sustainable rates of expansion. Policy will have to be open for reconsideration if the economy seems to be on a markedly different path or if the path is not leading to the desired results UNEMPLOYMENT AND MANPOWER POLICY FOR With little growth of real output likely in the first half of and with the restraint that will have to be maintained in the second half some increase in the rate of unemployment is possible. This depends in large part on the change in output per worker and in the proportion of the population that seeks employment variables that are particularly difficult to predict. Much of the increase would be the result of a small lengthening in the average interval of unemployment experienced by people between jobs or newly entering the labor force. ( For a discussion of the character and significance of unemployment see Appendix A. ) The reduction in Department of Defense procurement reflected in the budget and in the projections of defense purchases will directly cause a decline in defense production and employment. This has been taken into account in the earlier discussion of monetary and fiscal policy and of the possibility of changes in overall unemployment. The Federal Government in action coordinated by the President 's office will assist the workers and communities directly affected to make the smoothest possible transition to other activities. This action will include in addition to the programs discussed in the next few paragraphs planning assistance loans and grants for severely affected communities and in some cases transfer of federally owned facilities to nondefense use The risk of a rise in unemployment even if small and temporary adds to the urgency of steps to spread its burden more equitably and to minimize its adverse effects on those who become temporarily unemployed. The Administration 's programs in manpower training and welfare reform while primarily aimed at longer-run structural improvement will also help to cushion the impact of a temporary increase in unemployment MANPOWER TRAINING ACT The Administration has proposed many improvements in manpower training efforts in the Manpower Training Act of which coordinates separate manpower programs and creates a comprehensive manpower services system. The bill would decentralize the administration of manpower programs to State and local governments because they can more accurately identify specific local problems and priorities. The decentralization would take place in three steps as States and municipalities demonstrate interest and establish administrative capability in the manpower area. The bill would unify the administration of manpower services providing for the establishment of State and area single prime sponsors who will be responsible for planning and providing services. It would provide flexible funding for manpower programs so that they may be better utilized in the community to meet local needs In addition it would facilitate the use of manpower programs as an economic stabilizer by authorizing a 10-percent increase in the manpower appropriation when the national unemployment rate reaches percent ( seasonally adjusted ) for consecutive months EMPLOYMENT SECURITY AMENDMENTS The Administration has also proposed legislation to strengthen our unemployment insurance system. The legislation would extend unemployment insurance to million workers not now covered and automatically extend the duration of benefits in periods of high unemployment. Eligible workers would receive benefits for up to an additional weeks beyond the present limit ( usually weeks ) if insured unemployment were to go as high as percent ( seasonally adjusted ) for consecutive months. The legislation would also require States to permit workers to continue to receive unemployment insurance benefits while enrolled in job training programs. These changes will make the unemployment insurance system more effective than ever before in maintaining the purchasing power of the unemployed FAMILY ASSISTANCE PLAN The proposed Family Assistance Plan ( FAP ) ties in closely with the manpower training programs. It greatly reduces the danger that poor people who had not been covered by unemployment compensation would be seriously injured by an increase in unemployment or that workers with large families would find themselves in difficult straits in periods of temporary unemployment. The Plan would supplement the incomes of the poor whose wages are too low to meet the needs of their families and of those who have difficulty working or probably ought not to be working such as women with low incomes who head families with young children The Plan in conjunction with the Administration 's food stamp program would have its greatest impact on the working poor while maintaining the incentive to work. A family of four with no income would receive $ plus about $ in food stamps for a potential income of $ An incentive is provided for recipients to obtain jobs by permitting a family of four to receive some FAP payment until its income reaches $ Able-bodied men who are not employed and mothers of families with no such man at home and no children under must register at the State employment office for training or employment as a condition of receiving their benefit ( although payments to their dependents are in any event automatic ) Day care would be provided for children whose mothers are at work or in training The Family Assistance Plan would eliminate the existing system of welfareconditioned-on-dependency. By providing aid to families headed by working men and by providing incentives to work it would presumably contribute to family stability in low income groups. The FAP payment ( with food stamps ) at any income level would be well above the present welfare payment at that income level in many States thereby reducing State-to-State differences in benefit levels. The Federal Government would finance the Plan relieving the States of some of the burden of high welfare costs. Payments would be made on the basis of declaration of income. There will be a presumptive need test but it would be simple and straightforward and the citizen 's word would have approximately the same weight as it does in selfreporting for personal income tax deductions. With this method the social worker no longer has to judge eligibility for benefits and supervise the use of the family income OTHER MANPOWER PROGRAMS The Computerized Job Bank is a promising innovation in job placement It currently is operating in seven U.S. cities and by next June the target is to have such facilities established in a total of cities. The Job Bank plan produces a daily up-to-date computerized list of available jobs to help place the unemployed. In addition the establishment of a national system of job vacancy statistics presently under development will provide current information on the numbers and locations of jobs available in different industries and occupations Changes have been made in the Job Corps to improve its operation and to integrate it better with other manpower programs as well as with local labor markets. Fifty-nine centers were closed and new inner-city and near-city training centers will be established in order to shift the emphasis from conservation work to training and job placement The Administration has emphasized well conceived and carefully planned manpower training programs. Pilot projects to test manpower programs are an important means to accomplish this objective. A pilot project presently is being conducted in several States to test various methods of using computers to match specific jobs to the needs interest and ability of a particular applicant. All of these programs will help to ease the slowing pains of the disinflationary policy that must be followed in while improving labor mobility and skills to provide the base for a noninflationary expansion back to full employment beginning in late THE TRANSITION TO FULL EMPLOYMENT GROWTH At the end of total output should be rising and the price level should be rising significantly less rapidly than at the beginning of the year. Nevertheless total output will be below its potential and the rate of inflation while declining will probably still be too high. The transition to an economy growing along the path of potential output at full employment with reasonable price stability will not have been completed The problem then will be to raise the rate of increase of real output while continuing to reduce the rate of inflation. This will be essentially a continuation of the problem. There will however be two differences Whereas in it is necessary that real output should rise by less than its potential at some point it will be necessary that output should rise somewhat more rapidly than potential for an interval. This would be the only way for actual output starting below potential to regain the potential This temporary period of regaining potential output will have to be negotiated cautiously to avoid reviving inflation. The possibility of doing this should be strengthened by another development. As persistence of policy brings the actual inflation rate down the expected rate of inflation will also fall and this will influence both buyers and sellers of goods and services ( including labor ) Workers will accept smaller increases in money wages if expected price increases are smaller. Interest rates will be lower because lenders will no longer want as much compensation for the expected fall in the value of money and borrowers will be less ready to give such compensation. In other words the inflationary momentum that resisted antiinflationary policy strongly in its early phases will subside With the economy starting from a position below potential and inflationary expectations reduced an increase of demand sufficient to restore output to its potential rate need not revive inflation if it does not occur too rapidly Just how fast it will be safe to proceed can be much better judged after the behavior of the economy in is tested It is impossible to state a target for reduction of unemployment and the rate of inflation in the years just ahead. As both are reduced the costs and benefits of further reduction must be weighed. It would be foolish to predict now where the margin of improvement in unemployment and inflation lies But after we will have a clear guide for the direction of policy : lower inflation and lower unemployment THE STABILIZATION PROBLEM IN THE LONGER RUN The main lesson of stabilization policy in was the importance of avoiding in the future the kind of inflationary situation and pervasive inflation-mindedness that had built up by the end of Starting from that situation a major change in the behavior of the economy and in expectations was required a change that would run against the current of strong ongoing forces. No one could tell how fast that change could be successfully accomplished or the degree of monetary and fiscal restraint required to accomplish it The objective of stabilization policy in will be to move us toward a position where the main goal can be continuity. That position will have been reached when inflation has been brought down to a significantly slower rate and real output is growing at about its potential rate. At that point growth of the GNP in current dollars at a steady and moderate rate such as percent per year would serve to support steady growth of output at its potential rate with a far better performance of the price level than has been experienced in recent years The problem then will be threefold : To stablize the rate of growth of money GNP as far as feasible at a pace that will permit the economy to produce at its potential ; To adapt the economy so that it lives better with whatever remaining instability may develop ; and To press on with measures to reduce both inflation and unemployment further STABILIZING THE GROWTH OF GNP To stabilize the growth of GNP will require avoiding destabilizing moves in fiscal and monetary policies and instead using these policies to offset or at least constrain destabilizing forces arising in the private economy. One difficulty is that the attempt to use fiscal and monetary policies to counter fluctuations arising in the private economy may itself be destabilizing if moves are not made in the right amounts and at the right times Stabilization by Fiscal Policy Fiscal policy should avoid large destabilizing swings occurring at random or contrary to the clear requirements of the economy. The big upsurge of Federal spending ( nondefense as well as defense spending ) after mid-1965 which was unmatched by any general tax increase for years is a major example of such a destabilizing movement The likelihood of achieving economic stability would not be greatly affected by the size of the surplus or deficit within a reasonable range if that size were itself stable or changing only slowly and if the effects on liquidity resulting from secular increases or decreases in the Federal debt were offset by monetary policy. Therefore it should be possible to decide on the desired full-employment surplus or deficit on grounds other than stability and without sacrificing stability if the target itself is kept reasonably stable. If the budget position changes sharply in the short run in the absence of marked shifts in private demand the adaptation of the private economy and the compensatory force of monetary policy may not come into play quickly enough to prevent large swings in overall economic activity. This is a major lesson for the 's The considerations which should govern the decision about the average size of the surplus or deficit are discussed in Chapter Except as a result of a national emergency there is probably no reason for this decision to change in a way that would radically alter from year to year the size of the surplus or deficit that would be the objective under conditions of high employment If the surplus or deficit position of the budget that would be yielded by a steadily growing full-employment GNP were kept stable the actual figure would of course automatically respond to changes in the pace of the economy. If the economy were to grow unusually slowly in any year receipts would rise slowly also and the surplus would be below normal ( or the deficit would be enlarged further ) These variations in the size of the surplus or deficit would tend to stabilize the growth rate of the GNP. The question is in what circumstances and how to go beyond this and vary expenditure programs and tax rates to offset fluctuations in the private economy. There is now abundant experience with the obstacles to effective and flexible use of tax changes for this purpose. Moreover recent experience and analysis suggest that the stabilizing power of temporary income tax changes may not be as great as had been hoped and it might become less if they were used frequently because people would tend to adjust their behavior to what they regard as the normal rate of taxation. Nevertheless there will be situations in which tax rates must be changed in order to maintain the desired longrun deficit or surplus position and there may also be circumstances in which the effort should be made to use a temporary tax change to offset destabilizing shifts in private demand The possibility of varying the rate of increase of Federal spending in the interest of stability is somewhat greater though still limited. Although tax and expenditure decisions are both politically sensitive the fact that the President has some discretion to adjust the timing of expenditures within the limits of legislation avoids some of the complications that beset tax changes Moreover the effect of expenditure changes on economic activity can probably be more reliably foreseen than the effect of temporary tax changes It is true that the part of the total expenditures that is open to deliberate variation is small because of legal and implied commitments. Nevertheless some variations can in fact be made as they were in and it would be unwise to rule out the attempt to do more of this when the economic necessity is clear. Furthermore it is possible to broaden the " automatic stabilizers " in Federal expenditure as the Administration has proposed in the Manpower Training Act and Employment Security Amendments mentioned earlier The possibility of using debt management as an instrument of stabilization policy has been severely inhibited by the * -percent interest rate ceiling on Government bonds. This ceiling has forced the Federal Government to sell only short or intermediate securities since Raising or eliminating the ceiling to realistic levels or eliminating it would provide the Federal Government with a desirable degree of latitude in conducting its financing operations Stabilization by Monetary Policy Monetary policy can be devoted somewhat more singlemindedly to maintaining stability than can fiscal policy. Nevertheless there are a number of difficulties in its use. Apparently the effects of changes in monetary policy are felt in the economy with widely varying and often long lags. Therefore if policy that is intended to have a restrictive effect is continued until the effect is visible the lagged consequences of what has been done may show up in excessive contraction. The attempt to counter this by a sharp reversal in policy to an expansive posture may after a while generate inflationary rates of expansion. In the present state of knowledge there is no ideal solution for this problem. Prudence therefore suggests the desirability of not allowing monetary policy to stray widely from the steady posture that is likely on the average to be consistent with long-term economic growth even though forecasts at particular times may seem to call for a sharp variation in one direction or another The suggestion that monetary policy might well be steady or at least steadier than it has been raises the question of the terms in which this stability is to be measured. There is abundant evidence that the steadiness of monetary policy can not be measured by the steadiness of interest rates. Interest rates will tend to rise when business is booming and inflation is present or expected ; they will tend to decline in the opposite circumstances. Better results might be obtained by concentrating more on the steadiness of the main monetary aggregates such as the supply of money of money plus time deposits and of total bank credit. This still leaves questions of policy to be resolved when these aggregates are tending to move in different directions or at different rates of change as they often do. There is no substitute for trying to understand in particular cases what the significance of the divergences is and what they indicate about the underlying behavior of the supply of liquidity IMPROVING OUR ECONOMIC DATA Since the Federal Government has the responsibility for keeping the economy on a noninflationary growth path with high employment it must have at its disposal the tools for accurately measuring on a timely basis the performance of the economy at the national level. The Government now publishes a broad array of economic statistics that serve this purpose These statistics particularly those relating to economic activity in the short run have grown over the years in volume and quality and have served the Nation well. But our demands for economic data of high quality keep outrunning the supply. The Federal Government is not alone in requiring better statistics since to an increasing extent businesses have been making use of economic data for planning their own operations. Indeed never before have so many businesses watched so closely the economic indicators that appear each month or quarter More accurate measurement of economic performance would improve the management of policy in a number of ways. It would tell us more certainly where we have been. Elementary as this may sound it is of crucial importance. Too often this is a fundamental problem for the policymaker. The economy or some important part of it may be on a somewhat different course from that indicated by the data. Or economic series that purport to measure the same thing or almost the same thing may move in contradictory directions. Sometimes a series that moves in one direction one month moves in the opposite direction when revised the following month. The first requirement for making judgments about where the economy is going or what policies are needed is an accurate picture of where we have been Accurate data are also needed in order to help analyze the past and find relationships that have some degree of stability. Accomplishing this aim is obviously only partly a question of statistics ; the economy is of course more than a mechanism. For example swings in sentiment and attitudes in our affluent economy have a powerful effect on the inclinations of consumers and businesses to spend. Consumer behavior has been especially difficult to predict in recent years and may be more complex than had been thought previously. Business decisionmaking is equally complex. Yet economic analysis is a continuing search for patterns of regularity that can be helpful in forming judgments about the economy. And the first requirement for this search is reliable basic data. The Administration has proposed substantial improvements in many of the key economic statistics including for example those relating to retail sales construction the service industries international prices and job vacancies Having data on a timely basis is also important for the policymaker. This is particularly important if there is reason to think that the economy may be shifting its course. This Nation probably has more timely statistics than any other economy but clearly much improvement is in order here. Early in the President directed the Director of the Bureau of the Budget to take action that would secure prompter issuance of monthly and quarterly statistical series by Federal agencies. The Bureau of the Budget issued a set of guidelines governing release of major economic indicators and the statistical agencies have already achieved a considerable speedup. Further progress depends heavily on obtaining prompter reporting from the business community LIVING WITH INSTABILITY If the American people assign sufficient priority to doing so they should be able to enjoy a higher degree of economic stability than in the past. Still some instability will remain and this emphasizes the importance of improving the operation of the economy so that the remaining instability will cause less pain and inefficiency. The most obvious and probably most important step in this direction is improvement of the unemployment compensation system. Proposals of the Administration to accomplish this have been discussed earlier in this chapter. Improvement of labor markets through better provision for retraining and movement of workers would also help to prevent the concentration of unemployment on a small group of workers who are substantially injured by it On the inflation side also some useful steps can be taken. The distortions introduced into the economy by the presence of interest rate ceilings of various kinds on savings deposits and shares on guaranteed and insured mortgages on loans generally under State usury laws have become evident in this inflationary period. When market interest rates rise certain uses of credit are shrunk disproportionately because of these ceilings. The need to free the economy of these rigidities is discussed in Chapter The construction industry has experienced much greater fluctuations in conjunction with general economic instability than most other industries This has been painful to the workers and contractors in the industry and harmful to the growth of its productivity. Steps to reduce this extreme instability are also discussed in Chapter THE CONTINUING PROBLEMS OF INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT The present anti-inflation effort should reduce the rate of inflation substantially and demote inflation from its position as the Nation 's most important economic problem. Still the problem of getting the inflation rate down further while at the same time maintaining high employment will probably remain. This will require persistent efforts to reduce the inflation that occurs when demand is growing sufficiently to keep employment high. One of the most hopeful lines of attack will be to improve the adaptation of the labor force in skills and location to the pattern of demand for labor. This will shorten the interval of job-search for persons losing or leaving old jobs or entering the labor force in given conditions of the labor market. It will permit an increasingly high rate of employment to be attained without so strong a pressure of demand as to cause inflation. Manpower programs to move in this direction by better training programs application of computer technology to job placement and general overhaul of the Nation 's job exchange system have already been discussed. Evaluation of experience with them should permit further development of improved methods. Measures to improve the competitiveness of product markets to assure that business policies will freely and flexibly adapt to changes in market demand will also contribute to reducing the average rate of inflation that accompanies high employment. Some of these measures are considered in Chapter There is no inherent reason why a high employment economy must be an inflationary economy even a mildly inflationary economy. After the series of inflationary episodes since World War II the transition to a stable condition of high employment without inflation will come slowly. But with persistent attention and effort it is attainable CHAPTER Uses of the National Output INTRODUCTION B Y ANY USUAL MEASURE AMERICA ENTERS THE 's a wealthy nation which is growing wealthier at a rapid rate. Per capita national income in was about $ and had increased in real terms about percent since It is expected to increase percent more by Despite this or perhaps because of it Americans are becoming acutely aware that being rich and growing richer does not solve all of our problems The realization that we expect more than the economy can produce productive as it is points the way to the real problem which is to make sure that the output is used efficiently to meet our most important needs. There is a growing sense that the limited national output is not being used in this way The focusing of increased attention on how the national output is divided comes after a generation in which it had seemed that the country could make a quantum jump in available output that would dramatically improve the quality of life. In fact for a time this was true. During the 's when the Nation was producing far below its economic capacity we expected that our needs could be satisfied by the return of production to reasonably full employment. During World War II when the economy actually operated at capacity private citizens could foresee a large increase in the output available to them after the war Later in the 's and early 's many people were impressed with the possible contribution that a " small " increase in the annual rate of economic growth from or percent to or percent would make to providing the output available for every kind of purpose. " Faster growth " became the source from which all new claims on the national output would be met. But in time this was seen to be largely an illusion. The basic fullemployment growth path of an economy is not readily raised by any of the policy instruments that we now know about. The country could count on sustained growth to increase its capacity for doing many things. It could not count on being able to boost the growth rate at will to support every new claim Although the necessity to confine total uses of output to a growing but limited productive capacity is becoming more recognized in principle it tends to be ignored in practice. This is obvious in Federal Government policy involving claims on resources. Even when the economy is operating at fairly full employment it is possible to increase Government expenditures to reduce taxes and to finance Government borrowing by monetary expansion. This may seem to provide an escape from the limitation on resources and the necessity for hard choices that all individuals and State and local governments face. But in fact it does not. All it does is let inflation choose which demands are satisfied and which are not. A mature people can find a better way to make these choices. The basic problem is to make better decisions about the uses of the national output. This chapter discusses the role of the Federal Government in this process The attention given here to the Federal Government 's role in allocating the national output may seem excessive for a nation committed to a freemarket decentralized economic system. The idea that the Federal Government must make hard decisions to allocate the limited resources within its own budget is commonplace. The idea that it does or should influence the allocation of the output of the entire economy is not. However the Federal Government does have an important influence on decisions about the use of resources in the private as well as the Government sector. Perhaps that influence should not be as big or as detailed as it is. Nevertheless a large influence exists and much of it is inevitable or desirable or both. This influence should be recognized its effects appraised and decisions consciously made to achieve the effects that are preferred In the Federal Government purchased and used mainly for defense percent of the gross national product. The remainder except for a small amount of net exports was used for personal consumption for private investment and for State and local government purposes. The Federal Government was a major influence in the division of the remainder among these three categories and within them. While it purchased only about percent of the national output for its own use it collected about percent of the national output in taxes and social insurance contributions. It returned the difference to State and local governments in grants to households in transfer and interest payments and since there was a budget surplus to private capital markets for investment through repayment of Government debt. Grants to State and local governments to finance purchases ( as opposed to transfer payments ) were about percent of their purchases Federally financed transfer and interest payments to persons were equal to about percent of consumer expenditures. The funds supplied by the Federal surplus to capital markets and available for private investment were percent of gross private domestic investment. The relative amounts of these flows and the taxes used to raise the revenues substantially affected the division of the available output among these three broad categories Federal decisions also influence the division of the output within these categories. The Federal Government not only provides the States and localities with billions of dollars in grants but it provides these grants through hundreds of separate programs for specific purposes. The taxes it collects from households and the transfers it pays to them come from and go to particular classes of persons and thus affect the distribution of income and the composition of consumer spending. Taxes levied on specific items such as automobiles or alcoholic beverages also affect what is consumed Facilities and services provided by the Federal Government stimulate private consumption or investment expenditures that are complementary with them or curtail private expenditures that are competitive with them For example Federal expenditures on highways encourage private expenditures for automobiles and trucks THE DEGISIONMAKING PROCESS The Federal Government has a large and pervasive influence on the allocation of the national output. Its decisions in this role fundamentally affect the national welfare. There can be no single scientifically determined " best " allocation of the national output. Differences of interest value and opinion among people are inevitable and they are not of a character that can be resolved objectively. They must however be reconciled and it is the function of the political democratic process to do this Given the distribution of interests and the location of powers to make decisions there is still much that needs to be done to reach better decisions to make sure that as far as possible the consequences of decisions are known and are taken into account as they are made. Decisionmakers need to know the longrun as well as the immediate results of what they do and the indirect as well as the direct results. They need to see the options that are open to them and there must be an opportunity for differing viewpoints to confront each other. The effort to improve decisionmaking has a long history in which the establishment of the modern budget the consolidation of the Appropriations Committees in Congress the development of the Executive Office of the President and the creation of the Council of Economic Advisers were milestones THE LEVEL OF DEGISIONMAKING One basic requirement for good choices about the use of the national output is of course that they should be made at the right level and by the right people. The mere size of the Federal Government will influence the division of decisionmaking between it and the non-Federal private State and local parts of the community. There is a strong case for holding down that size in order not to load responsibilities on the Federal Government beyond its capacity to discharge them as well as for other reasons. The character of the Federal activities is probably as important as their volume in determining the location of decisionmaking. For example Federal tax policy inescapably influences the total amount of consumption expenditures by private households but some kinds of taxes go further and influence the composition of consumption. Similarly the Federal Government probably can not avoid influencing the total rate of private investment but different Federal policies can involve more or less Federal influence over the character of the investment The problem of the appropriate level of decisionmaking has become critically important in the relations between the Federal Government and the States and localities. The amount of Federal financial assistance to the lower levels of government has grown markedly in the postwar period This growth has raised the question whether the Federal Government should be a neutral supplier of funds or should attempt to determine how States and localities use these funds and their own. Undoubtedly there is room for some Federal intervention in the decisionmaking process. However grants for highly specified purposes have reached a degree of detail which is neither necessary nor efficient The Administration has proposed to alter the Federal-State-local relationship by instituting a system of revenue sharing through which the Federal Government would supply funds without dictating their use. In addition the Administration has asked for authority to consolidate some of the innumerable specific grant programs when they relate to similar functions. In these ways it is hoped to improve the overall decisionmaking process BUDGETARY BALANCE AS DISCIPLINE Balancing the Federal budget has long been a symbol and instrument of discipline in Government decisionmaking. The requirement that if some expenditures are raised others must be cut or taxes must be increased has forced Government officials to count the costs of expenditures. In recent years the Nation has become more sophisticated about budget deficits and surpluses. It has learned that the size of the surplus or deficit will and should vary with economic conditions. It is now learning that the longrun average size of the surplus or deficit should be determined by the amount of savings it is desired to make available for private business and housing investment in total. But this does not reduce the relevance or value of the budget-balancing discipline Once the appropriate longrun average size of the surplus or deficit has been determined that goal should not be changed except upon reconsideration of the longrun objectives. Shortrun fluctuations in private demand will sometimes require offsetting temporary changes in tax rates or Federal expenditures. And the size of any specific year 's surplus or deficit will inevitably depart from the target level as a result of economic fluctuations even with tax rates unchanged and expenditures at longrun levels. But achieving the desired average budget position over a period of years means that on the average expenditures can grow only as fast as full-employment revenues Beyond that expenditure increases in one area must be matched by expenditure cuts in another or by increased taxes. In principle every decision on Government expenditures should reopen the question of the desirable size of the surplus or deficit. In fact Government can not operate that way. The objectives served by the surplus or deficit although important are remote and indirect. These objectives will suffer if they are implicitly reevaluated every time an expenditure decision is made. In their day-to-day decisions about spending Government officials need to be confronted with costs that are obviously and directly within their purview and responsibility. This means that they must at least count costs that appear in the form of tax and expenditure requirements to meet a given surplus or deficit target The budgetary discipline in the Federal Government can only be selfdiscipline. If the old symbolism of the balanced budget is losing its force a new understanding of its value must replace it TOWARD IMPROVING FEDERAL DECISIONS Although a budgetary rule that requires the balancing of additional expenditures against additional revenues has an essential role in Federal decisionmaking it is by itself far from a sufficient guide to the discharge of the Federal Government 's fiscal responsibility. This rule tends to focus attention on the shortrun aspects of what are also longrun commitments It forces the counting of costs but it does not provide realistic information on what the costs are. It concentrates on choices among uses of the relatively small part of the national output that is within the budget without adequately revealing the effects that the choices will have on the larger part that is outside the budget This Administration has taken several important steps to improve decisions about the allocation of resources. The President established in July the National Goals Research Staff to identify alternative goals important to Americans and to study long-range social trends of significance for national policy. The Cabinet level Urban Affairs and Rural Affairs Councils and the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy are interagency groups the President has formed to coordinate the development of policy. The Defense Program Review Committee on which the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget serve helps to assure that the broad picture of total national resources and claims enters into the process of decisionmaking for defense As a further step toward improving the organization of the Executive Branch for making its major policy decisions including those which importantly affect the allocation of the national output the President established the President 's Council on Executive Organization the Ash Council In a new effort was inaugurated throughout the Government in the planning-programing-budgeting system to evaluate more objectively the costs and benefits of existing and proposed programs. Building on this beginning the Administration is now focusing economic analysis primarily upon major policy issues. By examining especially carefully the most important programs scarce analytical resources are economized ; thus analysis can penetrate further into the decisionmaking process. Potential savings from improved decisions can be large Analysis of the possible implications of proposed decisions before they are taken is although speculative obviously necessary. Equally necessary and somewhat less speculative is evaluation of the results of decisions after they have been taken. Persistent efforts to evaluate existing programs are necessary if the Nation is going to be able to do the new things it wants to do One of the steps in this direction was the President 's instruction to the Office of Economic Opportunity to establish a research and evaluation office capable of independent appraisal of Federal social programs affecting the disadvantaged. Evaluation of the results of Government programs remains one of the most urgent needs of Government as it seeks to make effective decisions about the use of resources Besides assessing the full costs and benefits of Federal programs agencies must take into account the time pattern in which benefits and costs of programs occur. The Government like private firms and individuals must recognize that benefits are worth more if they occur today rather than tomorrow. Accordingly agencies have been directed to apply a discount factor to all programs which have costs or benefits that occur or more years in the future. Studies have been undertaken to determine the appropriate factors to use in this kind of calculation. In addition explicit account is being taken of risks involved in public projects The Administration is seeking to formulate the larger choices it faces in the allocation of national output in the light of the competing options Among the most important steps in this direction have been the interrelated studies conducted through the National Security Council and the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy. These studies examined alternative defense strategies with their associated costs and alternative nondefense Federal programs. Various defense strategies were translated with rough accuracy into a large number of possible forces and budgets. Similarly alternative nondefense Federal programs were developed. The studies revealed the probable effects of different combinations of defense and nondefense programs on private consumption housing other investment and State and local expenditures given the limit set by potential national output These studies in the Cabinet Committee have also explored trade-offs among various nondefense programs within resources that will be available from continued economic growth and assumed reductions in defense expenditures. All of these studies have served as background for consideration of long-range revenue and expenditure decisions O FUTURE NATIONAL OUTPUT AND THE CLAIMS UPON IT The last few pages have discussed mainly the budgetary rules and decisionmaking procedures that might improve Federal Government decisions These decisions affect the use of the entire national output as was pointed out in this chapter 's introduction. The substance of the priorities problem is to allocate the future national output among alternative uses in a rational way that reflects decisions about national priorities. This tailoring of Federal decisions concerning allocation to a view of national priorities requires An estimate of what the future national output can be A view of the claims upon the national output the things we would like to do with it that are eligible for serious consideration A view of the policy measures that would be necessary to bring about satisfaction of some claims rather than others A decision about the claims to be satisfied and the policies to carry out the decision Step in this process must of course ultimately reflect Government decisionmaking at the highest level. This section undertakes a tentative approach to the first three steps. No one can now confidently draw comprehensive and detailed conclusions on these first three steps. But even the rough and preliminary estimates presented here reveal much about the priorities problem confronting the Nation and establish the need for further efforts to analyze it Projections of available future output and the potential claims on it can move discussion of the priorities problem from vague and sometimes easily ignored knowledge to the concrete realization of just how limited the available output will be. First a projection will be made of available output GNP in real terms for the years Then visible claims on this output by consumers governments and business will be projected Adding up these claims and comparing the total to available GNP will indicate the magnitude of the priorities problem. The projections will also provide a framework for discussing various policy alternatives that would meet various sets of claims on the output The principal objective of this section therefore is to estimate the claims against GNP and to show how different patterns of allocation of the GNP can be achieved. Since it is assumed throughout that the projected real GNP is in fact achieved the only problem discussed here is how the GNP is to be allocated. The projected GNP can be achieved by any one of a number of different combinations or " mixes " of fiscal and monetary policy which will differ in the allocation of the total GNP that results from them. In these terms this section is concerned with which mix will give a desired allocation of the total GNP. In the short run this is probably an exaggeration of the choices available ; the number of mixes consistent with economic stability may be more limited. But for the long run which is the appropriate context of this analysis the assumption of a given GNP achievable with any of a large variety of policy mixes and resource allocations is reasonable Since the problem here is allocation of a projected real GNP as it moves along its growth path the projections are made in constant prices This does not imply any forecast about the price level ; rather the assumption keeps the focus on the allocation problem POTENTIAL AND PROJECTED GNP The output the economy would be capable of producing when operating at an unemployment rate of about percent called here potential output is estimated to rise by about percent per year in real terms This results from projected growth of the labor force at % percent per year a decline in annual average hours of work per person of onequarter of percent per year and an increase of output per man-hour in the total economy of percent per year. Projected available output is assumed to be below potential from until as a result of policies to slow inflation but to equal potential output thereafter The resulting illustrative projections of available GNP at prices are shown at the top of Table CLAIMS ON THE NATIONAL OUTPUT To list uses of the national output which though desirable would exceed potential output is. not difficult. But that is not the purpose here The purpose is to present the claims that already exist. The largest part of the claims is found in the usual consumption behavior of households given the incomes they would be earning and the taxes they would be paying and in the investment behavior of businesses given the total output and demand projected. Other claims exist in the form of ongoing Government programs goals stated in legislation and proposals made by the Administration TABLE Gross national product and projections for [ Billions of dollars prices ; calendar years ] Projections Claim actual Gross national product available Claims on available GNP Federal Government purchases State and local government purchases Personal consumption expenditures Gross private investment Business fixed investmentResidential structures Other investment Excess of claims Note. Projections are based on projected Federal expenditures ( see Table ) and their influence on various components of GNP Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers Large claims not recognized in these estimates exist and new ones will emerge. However it is sufficient here to show that the existing visible and strongly supported claims already exhaust the national output for some years ahead. This is not to say that no other claims will be satisfied or that claims included in these calculations should have preference over claims not recognized here. The basic point is that if other claims are to be satisfied some of those recognized here will have to be sacrificed The projection of claims on the national output shown here corresponds to a projection of Federal spending. Federal spending affects not only the Federal Government 's own purchases of goods and services but also the purchases of State and local governments through Federal grants to them and the purchases of consumers through Government transfer payments The method of estimating the claims is described briefly here and in more detail in the Appendix to this chapter The estimate of Federal spending includes a baseline projection of the costs of the Federal Government 's program in prices and the costs of new programs already proposed by the Administration. The baseline adjusts the program for changes related to population workload and pay increases in dollars. The new initiatives shown separately in Table project the dollar costs of proposed new programs such as the Family Assistance Program and Revenue Sharing and proposed expansion of existing programs State and local spending is the estimated consequence of projected growth of GNP ( in prices ) and population to plus the grants included in the Federal expenditure projections of Table Personal consumption is the expenditure that would result from the amount of income that households would have available if the projected GNP at prices were produced present tax laws remained in force ( with the income tax surcharge expiring June ) and governments made the transfer payments included in the government expenditure projections TABLE Projections of Federal expenditures national income accounts basis [ Billions of dollars prices ; calendar years ] Priority category Federal expenditures Baseline Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments to persons i__ Grants-in-aid Other New initiatives Purchases of goods and services Transfer payments to persons i__ Grants-in-aid Other Excludes transfer payments to foreigners which are included under " Other. " Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Bureau of the Budget 8o It is assumed that personal saving is percent of personal disposable income Residential construction expenditures are the amounts consistent with reaching the goal specified in the Housing and Urban Development Act of along the path of housing construction shown in the Second Annual Report on National Housing Goals Business fixed investment in real terms is estimated to decline as a fraction of privately produced real GNP from percent which it has averaged since to percent by This would continue the downward trend of the ratio of capital stock to real output experienced since World War II The two other components of real GNP inventory investment and net exports are both projected to rise slowly with their total growing from $ billion in to $ billion in ( in prices ) BALANCING CLAIMS AND RESOURCES The results of these calculations are summarized at the bottom of Table in the figures on the excess of claims over resources. The projected claims which assume no addition to present Federal nondefense programs beyond those already proposed by the Administration would approximately absorb all available resources through and leave room for significant additions only by The basic lesson of the estimates is that the country is already at a point where despite prospective rapid growth of output a decision to satisfy an existing claim on a larger scale or to satisfy a new claim will require giving up something on which people are already counting These estimates are based on a number of assumptions which may turn out to be wide of the mark. Even a generous allowance for errors in the assumptions however is unlikely to change the fundamental picture. And some of the assumptions may themselves be optimistic. If potential output grew by only percent rather than percent the excess of claims would increase but only slightly because consumption expenditures and business investment which amount to about percent of total claims would also be smaller. On the other hand the excess of available output over claims would be a little larger about $ billion more in ( in prices ) if personal savings were percent of disposable income instead of the percent assumed here. This is possible but it is no more likely than that the personal savings rate should turn out to be percent which would increase claims on available output. Other departures from the assumptions are possible certainly there will be some but none seems sufficiently large or probable to change the conclusion. Moreover there is little reason to expect that these departures will all be in the same direction Inability to meet all the visible claims would not deny that the country is rich and growing richer. The most comprehensive index of the economic 8i condition of the population real per capita personal consumption would rise about ^ percent per year under the Table projections compared to 2J/2 percent per year in the period to The conclusion is simply that choices must be made In fact of course choices will be made. The total of satisfied claims can not exceed the available output. Policies whether of omission or commission will determine which claims get satisfied and which do not. The following discussion of ways in which claims and resources can be brought into balance is not intended to support any particular claims or any particular ways of meeting them. It is only intended to illustrate the options that are permitted and not permitted by the arithmetic of the economic system If the projections of output prove reasonably accurate and Federal expenditures run at the projected level or higher with taxes unchanged trimming of claims on output would fall mainly on investment. Private saving together with the Federal surplus would be inadequate to finance all the private investment claims shown here through Interest rates would rise and while this might stimulate saving the main effect would be to make funds scarce and expensive and keep some investment demands from being met. Since housing is more sensitive to the supply of funds than other investment the shortfall would probably be relatively larger in housing. If however the shortfall occurred in capital outlays of businesses productivity would tend to be adversely affected and the economy 's rate of growth would lag Government policy could bring about a different pattern of resource allocation. If it were desired to do so the combined investment claims shown here could be satisfied by either of two approaches or some combination of them. One would be to hold Federal expenditures down below the level projected here through and not too much higher thereafter. Federal purchases of goods and services would be lower and State and local purchases and consumers ' purchases would also be lower as a result of smaller grants and transfer payments. With purchases in these categories lower more of the national output would be available for investment. As a corollary to this there would be a larger budget surplus which would make more funds available to finance private investment. To obtain the same level of investment with higher Federal expenditures the second alternative would be to raise taxes to restrict private consumption thus releasing resources for investment and sustaining the budget surplus needed to finance investment. These methods of generating a surplus to finance a desired total of private investment would not in themselves assure any particular division of the total between business investment and housing What has been said about the combination of taxes and expenditure programs that would be required to permit satisfaction of the private investment claims implies a certain relationship between the Federal surplus and private investment. The surplus must be large enough when added to pri- vate saving to finance the private investment. The higher the private investment desired the larger in general will be the budget surplus required. This is the main longrun implication of a budget surplus The additional surplus that would be required to support an additional amount of private investment say $ billion would probably be larger than $ billion if the additional surplus is created by raising taxes to reduce consumer spending. This is because the higher taxes will probably reduce private saving somewhat and the surplus must be large enough to cover the additional investment desired plus the loss of private saving. Thus on the assumption used in this section that personal saving is percent of personal income after tax additional personal taxes and a further surplus of $ billion would be required to increase the total of private saving and the surplus by $ billion These are propositions about the national income accounts budget which unlike the unified budget does not include as an outlay the net lending of the Federal Government. To the extent that net lending of the Federal Government to finance private investment is already included in the unified budget as outlays the surplus that would be required in the unified budget would be smaller. The required surplus would be the excess ( if any ) of desired private investment over private saving plus Government net lending. That would not however affect the amount of taxes that would be required to bring about a given amount of private investment. It would only mean that part of the taxes would be used to finance the Government lending rather than the repayment of Federal debt which would permit private lenders to supply more funds to private investment CONCLUSIONS The estimates of this section are of course hypothetical calculations based on inevitably somewhat arbitrary assumptions. The costs of programs now on the books may turn out to be different from projections used here. Moreover programs now in being can be modified or eliminated if people decide that costs are excessive or that other things are more important The capability of the economy to grow may be different from what has been assumed. Nevertheless for all of their necessarily hypothetical character these estimates do highlight three important points that have major implications for fiscal policy. First existing claims upon the growing available national output already exhaust the probable output and real national income that the economy can generate for several years to come The satisfaction of a new claim therefore necessarily will require the rejection of another claim which now exists. Second the Federal Government 's fiscal policies will directly affect which claims on our national income are satisfied not only the direct Federal claims but also State local and private claims. Federal actions that increase State local or private expenditures even if those actions are not reflected in the Federal budget generate claims against the national output. Therefore the Federal Government should be concerned that its extrabudgetary as well as its budgetary actions do not generate excessive claims or do not cause more important uses of the national output to be displaced by less important ones. Third the level of private investment in business plant and equipment and particularly in housing is necessarily directly affected by decisions that determine the character of the budget and the target for a longrun average surplus or deficit. The budget and the budget surplus should not be regarded merely as conventional symbols of sound finance ; they have a profoundly important functional role in achieving national goals APPENDIX Basis for Estimates of Output and Claims POTENTIAL AND PROJECTED GNP The available total output by years from to is estimated in two stages one yielding potential output and the second yielding projected available output Potential output is considered to be the output the economy would produce when operating at a percent unemployment rate. This is slightly above the rate in the last half of when actual output was considered to be close to the potential. The annual growth of real potential output is determined by the growth of the labor force estimated at % percent per year the decline in annual average hours of work per person estimated at one-quarter of percent per year and the growth of output per man-hour. In the private sector of the economy output per man-hour is estimated to grow by about percent per year less than in the early 's when resource utilization rose but more than in when the economy operated under excessive demand pressure. Allowance for the fact that productivity growth in the Government sector which produces about percent of national output is zero by definition ( because Government output is measured by labor input ) reduces the overall productivity growth rate to about percent per year. Combined with the estimates of labor input this yields about a percent rate of growth of potential real GNP Projected available real output lies below potential output from to because some gap between actual and potential output is necessary to slow down inflation. A gradual closing of the gap is projected to permit the potential to be regained without reviving inflation. Potential and projected real GNP in dollars are shown in Chart Projected available GNP in dollars is shown at the top of Table Chart Gross National Product Actual and Potential BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ( ratio scale ) * GNP IN PRICES POTENTIAL-1/ i i i i i i I i i i i i i i i i i i i i i1 i i i I i i i1 i i i i i iI i i i i i i i i i h i i i i i I i ii SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J / T R E N D L I N E OF PERCENT FROM MIDDLE OF TO IV PERCENT FROM IV TO IV PERCENT FROM IV TO IV PERCENT FROM IV TO IV PERCENT FROM IV TO IV AND PERCENT FROM IV TO IV SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS CLAIMS ON THE NATIONAL OUTPUT Federal Expenditure Projections Federal expenditure projections are presented before those for the private and State and local government sectors because the level and nature of Federal expenditures affect the other expenditure components. The amount of Federal transfer payments to individuals affects consumer expenditure and the level of grants affects State and local purchases. Because of these effects it is convenient to have an initial projection of Federal spending preparatory to making projections of expenditures in the rest of the economy Baseline Expenditures. The cost of the Federal program adjusted for increases in workload and pay increases at prices gives the projection of baseline expenditures in Table broken down into purchases of goods and services transfer payments grants and other expenditures The major increases in the baseline are projected for transfer payments which rise by $ billion ( in prices ) from to and grants to State and local governments which rise by $ billion in that period. Much of the increase in transfers will be due to increased coverage and population growth as more people receive checks for social security disability insurance and so forth. But part will also be due to higher real benefits. Much of the increase in grants will come in essentially open-ended programs such as Medicaid in which the Federal Government must provide matching funds if the States choose to provide funds for the program New Initiatives. The costs at prices of new programs proposed by the Administration in the Fiscal Budget are added to the baseline expenditures to give the projections of Federal expenditures used here. These in turn are broken down into purchases transfer payments grants and other expenditures The costs of Federal programs at prices are projected to rise from $ billion in to $ billion in Two aspects of these expenditure projections are especially noteworthy. First the projections include expansions of transfer and grant programs and a reduction of purchases. Expanded Federal programs would focus upon providing money to people in transfers and to States in grants rather than upon purchasing output directly Second projected Federal expenditures build up rapidly through and rise less rapidly thereafter. If this path were in fact to materialize the claims-resources position would be tighter in the early 's and a bit easier in the middle 's. But this flattening out of the expenditure path may instead reflect simply the difficulty of seeing more than or years ahead. As these years arrive further proposals for new programs or extensions of existing programs can be expected to come forward. Thus it should probably be assumed that the position will be just as tight in the middle 197O 's as in the next year or so State and Local Government Purchases State and local government purchases of goods and services at prices are projected to grow with real GNP population and projected levels of Federal grants-in-aid from to Projected growth of these items yields the estimates of State and local purchases shown in Table In dollars State and local purchases are projected to increase from $ billion in to $ billion in or at an average annual rate of percent. Of the $ billion increase in State and local purchases from to $ billion is projected to be due to population increases. This leaves a projected increase of $ billion over and above the cost of providing State and local services at the present per capita level. This $ billion represents an increase of percent per year in the real per capita quantity of the services provided by State and local purchases compared to the to average increase of percent Personal Consumption Expenditures Consumer spending is a fairly stable fraction of personal income after taxes aside from shortrun variations. Personal income other than transfer payments is assumed to be percent of GNP. Adding to this transfers by Federal State and local governments gives total personal income. Projected Federal State and local personal taxes are subtracted to arrive at disposable personal income which is allocated between consumption expenditures personal interest and transfer payments and personal saving The projections assume a saving rate of percent and percent for personal interest and transfers leaving percent for consumer spending The projections of consumer expenditures in prices based on the projected Federal expenditures are shown in Table Two important assumptions in the consumer spending projections should be noted. First the percent saving rate is near the middle of the percent range experienced since Second the projections in the table assume present tax law Private Investment Demand The remaining four elements of private demand are estimated independently of the Federal expenditure projections. These are business fixed investment residential construction inventory investment and net exports Business Fixed Investment. Since cumulative net business investment equals capital stock the projection of investment should yield an accumulated capital stock consistent with the projected GNP path and a reasonable capital-output ratio Since real business fixed investment has averaged percent of real private output. It is estimated that if this fraction gradually falls to l l / percent by the ratio of capital stock to real output would continue the slow downward trend experienced since World War II. The projections of business fixed investment in dollars are shown in Table Residential Construction. A key area of the projections is residential construction. Twice in the last half decade homebuilding has been severely squeezed by the competition of the Federal deficit and high business investment for the supply of private saving. Moreover as Chart shows there will be a substantial increase in the rate of family formation in the next years. Both because of the backlog of need created by the housing declines in and and because of the increased demand for housing generated by family formation the number of housing starts is likely to rise considerably in the early 's In the Housing and Urban Development Act of Congress stated a goal of million new housing units to be constructed from fiscal year to fiscal year The Second Annual Report on National Housing Goals to be submitted by the President this month projects a path of housing construction including both conventional and mobile homes to which will meet the goal and is considered feasible. The conventional Chart Net Family Formation INCREASE MILLIONS OF FAMILIES NET INCREASE IN NUMBER OF FAMILIES WITH HEAD YEARS OF AGE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS housing starts portion of this path on which the residential construction projection is based is shown in Chart This path of starts gives the residential construction projection in dollars shown in Table The projection assumes residential construction expenditures per start ( in dollars ) of $ the average from to This cost figure will turn out to be high if the costreducing potential of Operation Breakthrough the industrial housing program of the Department of Housing and Urban Development is fulfilled The two small remaining components of GNP inventory investment and net exports are both projected to grow roughly in line with GNP from to Inventory investment along trend is expected to be roughly a constant fraction of GNP perhaps percent. This would maintain an approximately constant ratio of stocks to final sales. Net exports are projected to expand from the low as the U.S. trade position improves Total Expenditure Projections The second line of Table * " Claims on available GNP,35 which adds up the expenditure projections assuming projected Federal expenditures shows total visible claims oil potential GNP Chart Housing Starts MILLIONS OF UNITS * -PROJECTIONS- T O T A L PRIVATE AND PUBLIC. DATA EXCLUDE MOBILE HOME SHIPMENTS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT To avoid confusion it should be noted here that the " Claims on available GNP " of Table is not the equilibrium GNP in dollars that would result if the " exogenous " investment and government expenditures were realized. This is because consumer spending is projected on the basis of present tax law transfer payments in the Federal spending projections and available GNP. Thus the difference between available GNP and " Claims on available GNP " is the reduction in exogenous expenditure needed to bring the demand for output down to the level of available GNP CHAPTER Government and the Market HIT SHALL BE THE DUTY AND FUNCTION OF THE COUN1 CIL to appraise the various programs and activities of the Federal Government [ and ] to develop and recommend to the President national economic policies to foster and promote free competitive enterprise. " With these words in Section the Employment Act of makes clear the responsibilities of Government for the vast range of policies and programs that are concerned with strengthening the vitality and efficiency of our market economy. This chapter therefore focuses on the essential role of the Government in maintaining a competitive free market economy and in supplementing the market where necessary to achieve efficiency and progress This role of the Government is especially important today when many people have become disenchanted with the effects of the Government 's participation in economic life. We rely upon the Government to do more than ever before but we grow less and less confident that its ways of discharging the responsibilities placed upon it are the most effective. On occasion the Government 's action has run counter to its responsibility restricting rather than promoting competition and failing to observe the principles of the market economy in the management of its own affairs In the main we depend for the satisfaction of our economic goals on the voluntary activity of individuals. Traditionally this Nation has accepted the premise that the individual should be as free as possible to decide for himself what goods and services will be best for him and where and how he will exercise his own talents and energies in the common productive efforts. By and large the resultant system serves us well. It has made possible a large and growing measure of personal liberty wider job opportunities and rising levels of living. Because each of us has considerable freedom in applying his knowledge and talents our system is more flexible innovative and progressive than if it were guided in detail by Government edicts ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT An economic system can not however operate in a vacuum. Besides controlling general monetary and fiscal policies Government must establish the necessary framework for economic activity if our free and open economy is to keep its responsive and effective character The need for rules of the game concerning contracts property rights fraud and fair methods of competition is obvious. In the course of time additional rules have become necessary as our economy and our society have become increasingly complex. It is necessary to prohibit the sale of harmful foods and drugs and to proscribe child labor unsanitary working conditions and discrimination in employment. But just as new rules have become necessary old rules can become obsolete and hamper our efforts to realize the capability of the economy Since we depend on the private sector to produce the overwhelming proportion of our goods and services the Government must insure that competition is vigorous and that markets are efficient. Vigorous competition is the main protection of consumer interests ; in most areas of the economy it helps create efficient markets that respond quickly to the desires of consumers and in which costs of production and distribution are kept low. A well working financial system and well-informed consumers are also necessary for efficient markets ; the Government can and does play a vital role in these areas In a relatively few instances competition alone may not be sufficient to protect consumers ' interest or it may not be a possibility. Economies of largescale production may be so great as to leave room for only a few firms too few for competition to be effective. Where property rights are poorly defined competition may lead to the waste of valuable resources or to degradation of the environment. As a result in these areas elaborate regulations concerning prices outputs and standards of service have been prescribed In a few sectors of the economy agriculture is one example the ability of buyers and sellers to respond promptly to shifts in demand or supply may be so limited that prices fluctuate more widely than is good for either consumers or producers. In such situations Government intervention in the markets may be desirable The Government also has a role as a participant in market activity. Some enterprises essential to the national well-being or the national defense have been confined to governmental operation. Traditionally the Post Office has been a Government operation even though it exists chiefly to provide a service for which a price is charged and attempts to cover its costs with its receipts. In other cases such as the Tennessee Valley Authority the commercial activity has been mainly incidental to the principal objective of the project which was in that case unified resource development in a region especially hard hit during the Great Depression Whatever reason the Government has for engaging in market activity it should follow certain.rules to insure that the operation is efficient and its effects are equitable. Certain operations are of course deliberately subsidized to serve essential public objectives ; in such cases it is always good practice to identify the subsidy explicitly in the budget. Except in these cases however prices should reflect costs if resources are not to be wasted and users unintentionally subsidized at the expense of others. Rules are also needed to guide the managers of Government enterprises so that they take all costs into account not simply those in their budgets The Government is involved therefore in economic activity for many different reasons. It must establish the " rules of the game " for private participants ; it must facilitate competition and improve the efficiency of markets ; it must impose detailed regulations where the market does not offer sufficient safeguards to consumers ' interests because of inevitable monopolistic conditions ; and it must establish rules for its own participation in market activity COSTS OF GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION Generally this Nation has preferred to limit the rules and regulations it imposes on individuals and on market operations in order to encourage private initiative ; and it leaves the burden of proof on any who assert a need for more governmental involvement. A business in the private sector operating under normal competition has a direct test of how well the business is doing its job profits. All companies that are inefficient or put out products not desired by the public must face the consequences. A Government agency a Government operation or even Government rules need not submit to such a direct test. Inefficient operations can limp along for years without being called to account. Some regulatory rules that persist protect obsolete or inefficient production. Import quotas agricultural marketing agreements and outdated regulations can encourage or preserve high-cost badly located or obsolete facilities with little interference and no direct test of their net value. Indeed a major problem in Government 's participation in our economic life is that we have developed no systematic procedure for eliminating obsolete rules activities and programs. In principle and generally in practice the competitive marketplace has an answer and this is one of its crucial advantages. In a competitive market if a private company uses productive resources inefficiently market pressures force it to relinquish them. This is one of the reasons why we should rely as much as possible on the discipline of the market place to protect the public interest Government involvement is not always the best answer even when private activities are producing undesirable side effects or markets are not completely efficient. Government regulations are themselves not costless Certain provisions in building codes for instance were originally intended to protect consumers by specifying the materials that can be used. Now that some of the prohibited materials have been improved these regulations can result in needlessly higher costs of construction The sections below discuss the role of the Government in providing the framework for efficient markets the role of the Government when regulation is necessary and the rules under which the Government should participate in the market IMPROVING THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS Government has a major role in promoting the efficiency of markets Where markets are efficient prices and output respond swiftly to shifts in consumer demand. Efficient markets result in reasonable uniformity in the prices charged by sellers or offered by buyers. Markets that work well also have low transaction costs ; that is buyers and sellers can conduct transactions swiftly and cheaply For efficient markets it is necessary to have clearly defined and appropriately specified property rights enforceable contracts competition informed consumers and a well working monetary system. Where no one owns scarce resources such as fish in the ocean oil under the ground or radio frequencies Government regulations are necessary to prevent wasteful exploitation. Some of the problems that result from such common property resources are treated below in the discussion of regulation A similar problem on which attention is now focusing is the inadequate demarcation of public and private property rights in the atmosphere and in bodies of water. At present most private citizens have little or no legal recourse against others who cause pollution. Since private property rights are rarely established for air or water the Government must find alternative ways of protecting the environment. These are discussed later in this chapter PROMOTION OF COMPETITION A major role of the Government in providing for efficient markets is to promote competition. The nature and extent of competition have been continually changing as our economy has grown. Some changes have made markets more competitive others have made them less so. The most notable change has been the increase in size of markets because of advances in transportation and communications the growth of the population and its concentration in metropolitan areas. Most firms now compete over a much wider area and for a much larger sales volume. Consumers find that many more sellers are seeking their favor. This growth in size of the market leads toward larger ( but not necessarily fewer ) firms that are better able to take advantage of a large market As educational levels have risen buyers have also become better informed and more sophisticated. On the other hand products have become more complex and more difficult to evaluate. Incomes of most consumers have risen and these increases have made them better able to choose different combinations of products. In every market segment new products and services are competing vigorously for the consumer 's dollar The vigor of competition often depends on the number and size of rival companies offering similar products or services. Although no data exist for the economy as a whole data on manufacturing do not support claims that competition in general is diminishing. Concentration within manufacturing industries has changed little since World War II and may have O declined since The average share of the market for the largest four firms among the same manufacturing industries was between and percent in both and On average rough estimates indicate that the concentrated portion of manufacturing has probably not increased and may even have decreased since the turn of the century Partly as a result of merger and partly as a result of internal growth however there has been a steady increase in the proportion of total manufacturing assets controlled by the largest firms in manufacturing. In percent of the total assets of all manufacturing firms belonged to the largest corporations ; in the comparable figure was percent Thus in manufacturing the concentration of ownership of assets by corporations has increased dramatically while concentration in the share of markets has not gone up. These conflicting trends apparently result from an increase in conglomerate activity Antitrust Competition is not always self-sustaining. Collusion on prices output or market share can usually increase profits. Mergers between major competitors will eliminate their rivalry and may reduce competition. Consequently the antitrust laws have long been accepted as necessary to market efficiency. This Administration has continued vigorous enforcement. During cases were brought of which involved alleged violations of Section of the Sherman Act ( conspiring to restrain trade ) There have been five conglomerate merger cases some of which involve vertical relationships between buyers and sellers in some product lines. There were cases involving mergers between firms in the same line of business The Justice Department is actively pursuing a course designed to apply the antitrust laws to the changing and expanding economy. For example in both the legislative and judicial branches a broader concept of interstate commerce has been recognized. In consequence the Justice Department is considering whether the antitrust laws apply to transactions including those in the service industries heretofore regarded as intrastate. Indeed the Department has recently brought suit to enjoin a county association of real estate brokers from conspiring to fix minimum commission rates Remedies and Sanctions. Enforcement in itself may not be enough however if the remedies or sanctions are inadequate. Generally the remedies now available to the Department of Justice in civil cases are felt to be adequate But some have criticized the Expediting Act governing appeals in Government civil antitrust cases because it provides no right of appeal from the grant or denial of a preliminary injunction. This shortcoming in the law would be corrected under an Administration bill to revise this Act Inflation and the growth in size of companies have lessened the force of maximum fines for criminal violations of the antitrust laws. Because a corporation can be fined no more than $ for each criminal violation regardless of the seriousness of the crime or its cost to the economy the cor- porate fine is often ineffectual. Accordingly the major deterrent to price fixing and other criminal antitrust action has been the threat of treble damage suits and the possibility of jail sentences for company executives. The Administration has accordingly requested Congress to raise the maximum fines for corporations to $ Mergers. A horizontal merger between major firms in an industry can be at least as effective in eliminating price competition as any agreement between the firms. Mergers even between competitors are not per se violations of the law however and they may even favor healthy competition The ready marketability of a firm may encourage others to become entrepreneurs and establish new enterprises. Mergers may also be an efficient way of replacing incompetent managements. They may lead to greater economies of scale in production and marketing. And they may make it easier to transfer resources to the industries or enterprises that can most effectively employ them. In addition access to capital markets may be facilitated Nonetheless the law prohibits mergers whose effect " may be substantially to lessen competition or to tend to create a monopoly. " An accomplished effect deleterious to competition need not be proved ; it is sufficient if there is a reasonable likelihood that such an effect will follow Problems may arise when a merger involves two firms in the same line of business that until then had not competed in the same market. A recent case of this kind involved the merger between Standard Oil of Ohio ( Sohio ) and a subsidiary of the British Petroleum Company Ltd. ( BP ) operating in the States along the Atlantic seaboard. The Justice Department has established guidelines for such market extension mergers : A proceeding will be brought when a company that is one of a few most likely entrants into a concentrated market joins in a merger with a leading firm in that market. In this case because BP was a likely entrant and Sohio had by far the largest market share in Ohio the Department of Justice brought suit. A consent decree has been entered requiring that some of Sohio 's stations be divested ( sold or exchanged ) to other firms so that they will supply additional competition. Sohio-BP will now not only operate in the Ohio market but extend its operations elsewhere. The general effect on competition in the gasoline retailing market should be beneficial Conglomerate mergers are growing in importance. Over two-thirds of the mergers between and were between competitors ( horizontal ) percent represented market extensions percent were between a buyer and the seller ( vertical ) and only percent were between unrelated firms ( conglomerate ) In the period the proportion of horizontal mergers fell to percent the drop being at least partly due to antitrust action while conglomerate mergers rose to percent of all combinations. These mergers are more difficult to evaluate. They do not increase the market share of either part of the joint firm. Their effect may be to stimulate competition but because of its very size diversity and financial strength the combination may operate to lessen competition Conglomerate firms can use the profits in one market to subsidize price wars or promotional expenditures in other markets and so eventually reduce competition. Conglomerates may also be in a position to require suppliers to purchase some goods from other divisions of the conglomerate This practice of reciprocity may exclude competitors from a part of the market The Department of Justice has announced that it intends generally to adhere to its guidelines but that it probably will oppose any merger among the top manufacturing firms or firms of comparable size in other industries or any merger by one of the top manufacturing firms with any leading producer in any concentrated industry. This program is based upon recent decisions of the Supreme Court condemning mergers that eliminate significant potential competition entrench leading firms in concentrated markets substantially increase the power of large firms to engage in reciprocity or further a trend of mergers that would lessen competition The staff of the Federal Trade Commission has recently issued a report on conglomerate mergers. The Commission is planning to continue its study and to coordinate it with a projected Administration study of economic concentration including conglomerate mergers Resale Price Maintenance The Miller-Tydings Act and the McGuire Act under which resale price maintenance arrangements established under State law are exempted from the Sherman Act reflect a major exception to the antitrust laws and to the policy of promoting competition. The State laws in question permit a manufacturer to contract with a retailer not to sell his product or products for less than a specified amount. In a State with a " nonsigner " clause in its statute no retailer is permitted to undercut this price. While the " nonsigner " clause has been found to violate State constitutions in States States with over half the population still have effective resale price maintenance statutes A major objective of permitting resale price maintenance is to protect and encourage small business by eliminating price competition between retailers of the same branded product. Resale price maintenance reflects the dilemma of whether to protect competitors or competition. Generally under resale price maintenance manufacturers establish generous margins for retailers as an inducement to promote their product. But other manufacturers can quickly counter with similar margins and they do. Retailers often profit temporarily from these higher gross margins but competition usually eliminates the gain by encouraging additional outlets to carry the product with the result that sales per store decline. For example a Justice Department study found that for eight lines of retailing in States with strong provisions for resale price maintenance the sales per store in metropolitan areas were to percent less than in States without any such law. Thus manufacturers receive at best only a temporary edge from resale price maintenance. Retailers ' gains are also eroded over time but consumers normally will continue to pay higher prices ADEQUATE INFORMATION FOR CONSUMERS For retail markets to be efficient in providing buyers with the goods wanted consumers must have adequate information. Ill-informed consumers can be defrauded or they can be misled even when there is no intent to defraud in the legal sense. Unless he has a technical background and enough time to evaluate a product fully the most careful buyer often finds it difficult to decide what he should purchase. He can perhaps reduce his risk by keeping strictly to well-known brands and reputable retailers but this may cost him the chance to profit by satisfactory low-cost alternatives. Moreover on a wide scale this practice could entrench existing manufacturers and create new barriers against entry into the market Often the most effective way to help buyers become well informed is to require proper labeling. The Truth in Lending Act and the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act are intended to help the consumer make " value comparisons. " In certain instances however labeling is impractical and the Government may need to prescribe standards for certain products. Moreover with automobiles and some other products an unsafe feature poses a danger not only to the owner but also to others. The Government has therefore established Federal safety standards for new vehicles and many States require periodic safety inspections. Since January 1st a prospective new car buyer must be told the stopping distance acceleration and the tire reserve load of a vehicle Considerations of safety may require the Government to ban the sale of certain products altogether rather than rely on the consumer 's ability to protect himself even when provided with adequate information. For example where complex products like drugs are involved the necessary information may be unintelligible to the layman and it is simplest and safest to prohibit their sale unless they are prescribed by physicians Increasing public concern about standards for the safety and quality of products has led to proposals that the Government widen its influence in the marketplace. Particularly where products represent a potential hazard there is obviously a strong case for having the Government set and enforce standards for producers. Nevertheless we need to evaluate carefully the advantages and disadvantages to the consumer when considering such proposals Despite their beneficial intent their adoption could in some cases have the undesirable effect of lessening competition among producers and thus breaching one of the consumer 's most effective defenses. The consumer 's interest may not be served if so much reliability is required that it adds heavily to the cost. Another possible disadvantage in these restrictions is their effect on the development of new products. Producers may be uncertain about how well potential new products or services can meet published standards requiring reliable performance and freedom from other defects. Such uncertainty together with the threat of costly damage suits confiscation of goods or time-consuming delays in satisfying a multitude of Federal requirements may inhibit the development of new products and the entry of new firms into the market to compete with established companies. We must also consider whether safety is better served by educating consumers in the proper use of a product rather than making the product completely safe against even remote contingencies The Consumer and the Market To defend the public from misinformation offered by sellers the Administration has proposed a Consumer Protection Act. This act would specify and prohibit many unfair and deceptive practices such as " bait and switch " advertising ( where the victim is attracted by a low-cost line and then switched to a more expensive product ) passing off used goods as new and misrepresenting price reductions. Responsibility for enforcing these prohibitions would lie in a new Consumer Protection Division to be established in the Department of Justice. The Federal Trade Commission would also have powers to enforce these prohibitions. As soon as a violation was determined in a proceeding by either agency consumers could bring suits individually or on behalf of a group of consumers for damages in the Federal courts. This procedure would give consumers effective relief in proven cases of deception or fraud ; at the same time it would protect firms against nuisance suits Because information provided by the private market must be reliable a Consumer Product Testing Bill has been recommended to Congress. Under the provisions of this bill the Office of Consumer Affairs to be established in the Executive Office of the President would review the adequacy of current methods now used to test consumer products. One purpose of the bill is to upgrade the tests used by private laboratories when necessary. If test standards were lacking or deficient the Government could ask industry to establish proper ones. If industry were unable to establish acceptable standards by itself the Government could then identify the standards it believes should be followed. Firms meeting approved standards would be entitled to say so in their product promotion activities The Consumer and the Government In the past the interests of labor capital and management have been well considered in Government deliberations. Consumers are less organized however and they have not always been adequately represented. To help remedy this defect the Administration has proposed as noted above an Office of Consumer Affairs and a Consumer Protection Division in the Department of Justice The Office of Consumer Affairs would have broad powers to coordinate and improve present programs relating to consumers. It would see that the interests of consumers receive consideration at appropriate levels of the Federal Government. Among other powers it could conduct research hold conferences on consumer problems and develop a program for the release and publication on a generic basis of product information derived from the Federal Government 's purchasing expertise. This office may also publish a Consumer Register which would translate the legal terminology of the Federal Register into layman 's language so that interested consumers would be properly informed of Federal regulatory proposals and rules The Consumer Protection Division would have broad powers of advocacy and enforcement. It would be authorized to intervene in any proceedings by Federal agencies which affect consumer interests as the Antitrust Division now does in proceedings which affect competition. It would thus offer a counterweight in formal hearings to the briefs filed on behalf of producers PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT The existing rules of the game governing the economic system were not primarily designed to deal with our common responsibility for the environment in which we live. As public concern for the environment increases the demand for appropriate rules and for Government action if these rules fail becomes more pressing. The environment is threatened when the wastes originating in a factory home or automobile find their way to the outside world or when outsiders are bothered by noise odors or unsightliness. The following discussion will be confined to pollution caused by wastes though some of the remarks also apply to other forms The problems created by wastes can be handled by five general approaches They can be left to nature ; the public sector can dispose of wastes at general expense ; standards can be imposed to prevent or reduce pollution ; the costs of reducing pollution can be shared by the Government and the polluter ; or incentives to control pollution can be developed by levying special charges on emissions. Each of these approaches which can be used in combination has its advantages and disadvantages As long as pollution is insignificant it is possible to ignore wastes and their consequences. This traditional approach depends primarily on the ability of the environment to clean itself or to absorb wastes without unduly harmful effects. But the quantity of wastes has now become so great that pollution is affecting peoples ' lives noticeably. Air pollution for example is not only unpleasant but has a measurable impact on death and morbidity rates. Water pollution has prevented millions from utilizing rivers lakes and ocean fronts for recreational activity and has interfered with farming and commercial fishing. In addition water pollution and the residues of fertilizers and pesticides are held responsible for undesirable changes in the ecology Consequently the Government has found it necessary to develop programs to deal with pollution. Water pollution has normally been handled by treating wastes before releasing them to the environment. The public costs of treatment have traditionally been borne most heavily by local authorities although recently the Federal and State shares have increased. Most treatment of industrial wastes is performed by industrial firms through their own treatment plants but some firms release their effluents untreated or rely on municipal systems. In the latter case it is important to charge for treatment ; if the direct costs of dealing with pollution are charged to the general taxpayer rather than to the polluter there is no incentive to reduce pollution The backbone of pollution abatement programs for both water and air pollution utilizes the resrulatorv approach. Under the Air Quality Act of air quality standards for stationary sources of emissions are being established for control regions throughout the Nation. Subject to the approval of the Department of Health Education and Welfare standards are established by the States and an implementation program is drawn up. A special regulatory scheme enacted to cover motor vehicles requires that new cars can be sold in the United States onlv if emissions complv with standards specified by HEW. Under the Water Quality Act of water quality standards are being set for all parts of interstate and coastal waters under a similar Federal-State partnership. For example each section of a river is designated for a particular use such as water supply swimming fish production etc. and the standards are set to achieve that quality. All States have developed water quality standards and enforcement procedures which have been approved at least in part by the Secretary of the Interior. The cost of complying with these standards normally falls on the polluter and in some cases on municipalities aided by Federal and State grants A related and supplemental method of pollution abatement would be to provide some form of cost sharing payment for individuals or firms to reduce the pollution they cause. Such payments might conceivably take the form of tax concessions on the costs of pollution abatement methods. A stronger incentive is provided by taxes on effluents or treatment fees which can lead firms to change their processes or install new equipment to reduce their effluents. The cost of pollution would then be charged to those who cause it and as a result they may decide to reduce or eliminate their discharge of wastes In some water pollution cases however economies of scale may make it more economical for a public agency to deal with the wastes than it would be for the individual polluters. Who should provide abatement equipment and how depends both on the cost of treatment and on the costs to the environment of the pollution. In some cases regulation combined with tax incentives may be most efficient and equitable. In other cases effluent charges may be appropriate REGULATION Regulation has been imposed for two purposes : to make the market perform more satisfactorily and as a substitute for competition. In the financial area it is particularly important that markets work well not only for stabilization purposes but also to insure that product and labor markets are efficient ioo GOVERNMENT AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM Throughout our history the Government has been involved in regulation of the financial markets. Such regulation serves three broad purposes : ( ) It provides for an appropriate money supply and efficient operation of the payments system ; ( ) it protects the public from loss due to financial failures as well as from misrepresentation and fraud ; and ( ) it encourages and subsidizes the allocation of credit to particular sectors. Achievement of the first two objectives increases the efficiency of markets. The third is aimed at using regulation to accomplish other policy objectives A well-functioning payments system is vital to the economy as the banking panics of and earlier periods forcefully remind us. The Constitution authorizes Congress " to coin Money [ and ] regulate the Value thereof " an authority that has been broadly construed. The United States has established a variety of regulations and agencies for controlling the creation of money and the operation of commercial banks and other depository institutions. For example the Federal Government issues currency charters banks imposes reserve requirements oversees foreign exchange operations insures deposits prohibits interest on checking accounts and sets ceilings on the rates to be paid on time and savings deposits The stock market crash of and some financial malpractices that subseouently came to light created doubts about relying solely on the general laws of contract in financial markets. Since Congress has aided the investing public by enacting laws curbing unethical financial practices and by making pertinent information more accessible. The Securities and Exchange Commission was established to formulate and enforce requirements relating to operations of securities exchanges and the disclosure of information about publicly issued and traded stock ( later extended to bonds ) To protect public shareholders Federal legislation also restricts and requires publication of the trading of stock by corporate " insiders. " The Investment Advisers Act of and the Truth in Lending Act are examples of laws designed to improve the information upon which the public bases financial decisions Problems of Financial Regulation While the ultimate objectives of Federal involvement in the financial sector are clear the problems and costs do not always receive sufficient attention. The direct costs to the Government and the public of imposing restrictions on financial institutions may not seem large but an important cost easily overlooked because it is difficult to quantify stems from the inflexibility of regulations once they are issued. Regulations devised for an earlier economic environment can stifle innovations and new developments in today 's market. Examples are the restrictions on branch banking imposed by many States which Federal law makes applicable also to national banks ; the geographical and portfolio restrictions on savings and loan associations which are particularly onerous when their potential market IOI has been shifting to new areas ; and restrictions on commercial banks that hamper them in meeting emerging demands for new services Sometimes regulations created to protect the public against malpractices are extended and used to restrict new entry into a market. Regulations also often prescribe or support minimum or maximum prices. The Investment Company Act of in effect establishes a resale price maintenance law for mutual funds that prevents retail dealers of mutual funds from charging lower commissions. Minimum brokerage fees set by major stock exchanges are currently under review. Many financial regulations distort credit flows by imposing interest-rate ceilings on mortgages and deposits The problem is to make certain that " fairness " in setting rates does not put an umbrella over inefficiency and that " soundness " in financial institutions does not become a pretext for impeding competition and innovation Deposit-Rate Ceilings as a Case History. An example of the problems created by the inflexibility of regulation can be found in recent developments arising from interest-rate ceilings on time and savings deposits at commercial banks and other financial institutions. Authorized by the Banking Acts of and these ceilings were intended to prevent banks from paying more interest on deposits than " sound " banking would warrant. The fear was that banks might otherwise make high-rate but risky loans ( to cover excessive interest rates on their deposits ) and would thus become vulnerable to default whenever business activity weakened. There was also concern that in a system composed of thousands of banks competition for funds on a rate basis might draw funds away from many individual institutions and seriously weaken them. In reality the ceilings made very little difference until the mid-1950 's because interest rates on all assets remained very low and the deposit rates actuallv paid remained below the ceilings In later years these ceilings on deposit rates at commercial banks have come to serve quite different purposes than those originally contemplated In particular thev are viewed as a device to ensure a larger flow of funds into home building because they help protect savings and loan associations a mainstay of home financing. These associations specializing in mortgages have attracted deposits by paving a slightly higher return than commercial banks which are prevented by the ceilings from offering competitive rates Because of the slow turnover of the long-term mortgage holdings of savings and loan associations however these institutions were not in a position as interest rates rose rapidly in the past several years to increase the rates paid to depositors sufficiently to prevent large withdrawals. Chart illustrates how the yield on new mortgages which reflects what homebuyers are willing to pay climbed in recent years above the average return on association portfolios a figure which after allowing for costs represents what these institutions could afford to pay to attract deposits and still show a positive net income. Because of these competitive pressures rate ceilings were extended in to cover savings and loan associations Chart Mortgage Yields and Dividend Rate of Federal Savings and Loan Associations PERCENT PER ANNUM MORTGAGE YIELDS : y FHA NEW HOME MORTGAGES \ _ zf " S & L PORTFOLIO AVERAGEJ/ \ ^ ^ gfltumnnun * * * * * * * * S& L DIVIDEND R A T E i / I I J / T O T A L INTEREST RECEIVED AS PERCENT OF AVERAGE MORTGAGE LOANS HELD / T O T A L DIVIDENDS PAID AS PERCENT OF AVERAGE SAVINGS CAPITAL SOURCES : FEDERAL HOUSING ADMINISTRATION AND FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD During a consequence of rate ceilings has been a net reduction in the inflow of savings to depository institutions as a group. Many of their depositors have withdrawn funds in order to invest directly in market securities which have recently paid much higher interest rates. Rate ceilings have also discriminated against small savers who can not so easily switch to securities and must be content with lower rates Since mid-1969 deposits of savings and loan associations have practically stopped growing despite the lack of competition from commercial banks and the consequence has been a decline in mortgage financing. The savings and loan associations must now depend heavily on loans from the Federal Home Loan Bank System. Indeed only a massive dose of support by federally sponsored agencies has been able to prevent an even larger decline in mortgage financing and housing starts Direct regulation of interest rate ceilings on deposits together with portfolio restrictions has contributed to these problems because it has encouraged some developments and delayed others in such a way that an important part of the financial system is now ill-adapted to a world of changing interest rates. These ceilings have not provided a satisfactory answer to the financial needs of housing while they have prevented the free and efficient movement of funds through financial markets. Mortgage financing and the role of interest ceilings need reexamination. Savings and loan associations need greater flexibility to adapt to market developments and new sources of funds for the mortgage market need to be devised. Given the consequences of four decades of deposit-rate ceilings they can not be suddenly removed without serious financial disruptions. Some basic reforms in financial regulations are however needed Presidential Commission on Financial Structure and Regulation Our expanding and increasingly complex economy must have financial institutions reflecting the vitality that comes from vigorous innovation and competition. Financial services required by tomorrow 's economy will differ in as yet undefinable ways from those appropriate today. The demands on our flow of national savings as indicated in Chapter will be heavy in the years ahead and our financial institutions and financial structure must have the flexibility that will permit a sensitive response to changing demands. Thus the time has come for a thorough examination of needed changes in our financial institutions and our regulatory structure. This study will be carried out by a commission to be appointed by the President early this year GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF AGRICULTURE Agriculture is another important sector of the economy where regulation has been used in an attempt to make market performance more satisfactory Many of the problems of agriculture are the result of a steady increase in agricultural output per farmer which has made farmers a continually dwindling minority and of insufficient mobility which has kept their average income below that of most other occupational groups. As early as the number of farmers had dropped below the number of persons in other occupations. This trend has continued and the proportion of the population gainfully employed in agriculture at the present time is only percent. This is the usual transition in an advancing economy. Fewer and fewer people are required to produce the food and fiber for the rest of the population ; or stated another way as the real income of consumers rises an increasing proportion of income becomes available for other things than the basic necessities of life. Currently about percent of consumer income is spent on food Thus we get the familiar adjustment problem in the agricultural sector Stimulated by the yield from public and private programs to develop and facilitate adoption of technological innovations output grows more rapidly than consumer demand. Since the demand for farm products is relatively inelastic increased supplies generally lead to markedly lower farm prices As a result farm incomes are depressed and farmworkers and proprietors move to other occupations. But because there are impediments to this movement per capita personal farm income does not catch up with the level in other sectors At the depth of the depression per capita personal income of farm people was less than one-third that of the nonfarm population. In the middle fifties it was about percent. Currently the per capita personal income of farm people is about percent of that of the rest of the population but the narrowing of the income gap is due in large part to increasing Government payments to farmers steady gains by farmers in adding to their income from nonfarm sources and substantial declines in farm population ( Chart ) Chart Per Capita Personal Income of Farm and Nonfarm Population DOLLARS INCOME OF NONFARM POPULATION INCOME OF FARM POPULATION : FROM FARM SOURCES INCLUDING GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS FROM A L L SOURCES FROM FARM SOURCES EXCLUDING GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Government Intervention in Agricultural Markets The depression of the 's led the Federal Government to intervene directly to support falling prices in agricultural markets with the objective of stabilizing farm income. Since that time commodity programs that were originally adopted largely as emergency measures have varied only in emphasis from one decade to another. They have generally involved direct payments to farmers production controls on output price supports and storage and marketing activities. All these programs have entailed substantial budgetary costs. Direct payments alone were about $ billion in accounting for about percent of realized net farm income Because most commodity programs have been related to output their main benefits go to the larger commercial farms ; for example in the top percent of the farms ( those with sales of $ or more ) received nearly one-fifth of the Government payments and accounted for about onethird of the realized net farm income As another indirect form of regulation Federal and State marketing orders and agreements are in effect for many perishable commodities such as milk fresh fruit and fresh vegetables. Milk marketing orders illustrate one method of market control. For each milk marketing order minimum prices are established for the milk sold by dairy farmers. Using criteria provided by statute the Secretary of Agriculture sets these prices ; prices may be different for the same milk depending on its final use. Drinking or Class I milk carries a higher price than manufacturing or Glass II milk. The average or " blend " price is paid to all farmers In an attempt to reinforce price discrimination between the two classes of milk the Food and Agriculture Act of provided for so-called Class I Base Plans in Federal milk markets. These plans which are instituted at the request of dairy farmers can be used to restrict production to the level of Class I requirements in an individual market. Under this plan each producer receives a high price on his " base " ( his share in the Class I market ) rather than a " blend " price on all production. Milk produced in excess of the established base is then priced at the lower Class II level thus discouraging the production of milk for manufacturing. When access to the Class I market with its higher prices is sharply restricted title to a base may be very advantageous. The value of these bases subsequently becomes capitalized into production costs for new producers who purchase them. And consumers of Class I milk must continue to pay substantially higher prices A Market-Oriented Agriculture Policy Farm policies on field crops should give greater emphasis to market forces and thus reduce direct governmental participation in the marketplace Specifically three goals should be sought. First prices should become more flexible so that they approximate equilibrium between supply and demand when averaged over a period of years. With this flexibility farmers should be able to hold and even expand both domestic and foreign markets. Price supports should not interfere with normal commercial transactions but should serve only as a price floor to prevent excessive fluctuations and to provide a basis for credit Second production should not be controlled by limiting individual crop acreages ; rather it should be guided by market prices. Because the Government can not immediately withdraw the influence on production that it has exercised during its four decades of direct intervention a gradual approach is needed by which greater freedom will be gained through restrictions on total land use only. Such a program would restore considerable freedom of choice to participating farmers permitting each one to produce as much of any crop as he thinks will be most profitable up to the limits of his authorized cropland. Eventually we may be able to discard even this control measure Third direct income payments properly applied offer a more efficient way to support farm income than high price supports. The potential benefits of high prices are largely dissipated because they make additional purchases of inputs profitable. Direct income payments will be necessary for some time to compensate for inequities and to smooth the adjustment process. Reasonable limits on payments to individuals however would help prevent the undue enrichment of large operators at public expense REGULATION OF NONGOMPETITIVE MARKETS In a few markets competition does not flourish. In fact in some instances one large firm can supply an entire market at lower cost than several smaller firms. When this is true there tends to be a natural monopoly The American answer to these problems has generally been to substitute regulation by Government agencies for reliance on the market. Nationalization and Government operation have only been experimented with in a number of instances. This preference for regulation instead of nationalization has given rise to a variety of Federal and State agencies that set up and enforce restrictions on many economic activities. There are agencies covering transportation communications electric power pipelines and petroleum to cite most of the important ones The American experience with regulation despite notable achievements has had its disappointing aspects. Regulation has too often resulted in protection of the status quo. Entry is often blocked prices are kept from falling and the industry becomes inflexible and insensitive to new techniques and opportunities for progress. Competition can sometimes develop outside the jurisdiction of a regulatory agency and make inroads on the regulated companies threatening their profitability or even survival. In such cases pressure is usually exerted to extend the regulatory umbrella to guard against this outside competition so that the problems of regulation multiply and detract from the original purpose of preventing overpricing and unwanted side effects The fundamental problem lies in the complex and conflicting objectives that sometimes characterize economic regulation itself. Agencies are supposed to protect the present and future interests of consumers employees investors and the Government. No one can begin to see the full consequences of current decisions on all these groups. As quasi-judicial bodies the regulatory commissions tend to give much weight to precedent. As a result change of any kind becomes hard to justify and even harder to allow when some affected group can claim immediate harm whereas the potential beneficiaries are widely diffused and usually not represented. Yet innovation and adaptation are the dynamics of economic progress There is no clear safeguard against these dangers but more reliance on economic incentives and market mechanisms in regulated industries would be a step forward. The record in transportation and communications and other examples in this chapter point to that lesson. Industries have been more progressive when the agencies have endeavored to confine regulation to a necessary minimum and have otherwise fostered competition. When regulation has stifled competition performance has deteriorated. The clearest lesson of all however is that regulation should be narrowed or halted when it has outlived its original purpose Transportation The Interstate Commerce Commission 's efforts to eliminate price cutting among truckers railroads and bargelines is a classic example of the attempts to curb competition through regulation. The original justification for regulation that railroads were monopolistic has lost much of its validity since there is now considerable competition from other modes of transportation although the shippers of some bulk commodities are still heavily dependent on rail transportation. Yet the ICC must continue to operate under the mandate of past transportation acts. Greater reliance on the market would be beneficial to transportation but in view of long established practices this would have to be approached gradually. Except for predatory pricing to drive competitors from a market which is prohibited under antitrust law many transportation rates could safely be allowed to find their own level through competition. A policy of permitting and encouraging competition of all kinds would if general economic experience is any guide make the industry more efficient as well as benefit the public ICC regulations also have the effect of restricting entry into markets particularly in the trucking industry where economies of scale are limited and costs of entry low. Lack of free entry protects the profits of existing carriers but it hardly benefits the public. Here the regulatory process is arrayed against new entrants. Those who could suffer from competition make themselves known and actively plead their cause. Those who might enter if restrictions were relaxed are less clearly identifiable and they have less interest in advocating the case for free entry The origin of regulation was somewhat different in the air transportation industry. The Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) was given a mandate to foster competition consistent with orderly growth and the convenience and needs of the public. Public safety was to be an important dimension of convenience. As a result the air transportation industry blends competition with a high degree of safety and convenience. Regulation has inevitably reduced price competition however and has tended to reduce new entry in air transportation. With the exception of two carriers serving Alaska no new trunkline carriers have been certified since the CAB was established The CAB has however encouraged limited competition by certifying competing carriers on some routes and this limited competition has resulted in increased service to the public Communications Common-carrier communications service such as the telephone service is a natural monopoly. In many parts of the world the practice has been to nationalize this industry. Here we have chosen to provide detailed regulation of privately owned service. The results have been generally satisfactory in terms of convenience to customers. Regulation should be carried out in such a manner that it does not prevent or limit competition in sectors that are not natural monopolies. Recently after a series of Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) and court decisions new carriers of private wire and microwave systems have been permitted with beneficial effects on rates and services Long-distance communications may be entering a new and more competitive era with the development of satellite communications systems Economies of scale in the operation of satellites do not appear to be sufficient to bar competitive operations. Hence the Administration has recommended to the FCC that multiple domestic satellite systems be authorized and that restrictions on entry be applied only where they are necessary to prevent undue interference. It is the Administration 's hope that increased competition will eventually make it possible to let market forces assume more of the role of detailed regulation Radio Spectrum Property rights in radio frequencies do not exist nor are markets allowed to determine the allocation of frequencies. The FCC currently allocates spectrum among the competing users and thus creates quasi-rights. Unfortunately it is difficult for any regulatory body to determine the most beneficial uses of a scarce resource. While the FCC attempts to make sound allocative judgments it is faced with continual requests for spectrum for many different uses. Without a market test it has no way of being sure that its allocative decisions are appropriate o The absence of property rights to the radio frequencies also helps create congestion in the spectrum. No single user feels impelled to develop methods that will require less spectrum. Nor does he have an incentive to share his spectrum with others who may make more efficient use of the frequency Here too the market should probably have a stronger influence on the allocative process. As an illustration it might be possible to experiment with a mechanism reflecting the economic value of the entire spectrum. Such an experiment might involve a system of fees varying with the estimated value of particular frequencies and subject to repeated adjustments GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION IN THE MARKET The Government participates in the market primarily as a buyer of goods and services. It also participates as a seller or provider of goods and services Some of these are collective goods such as national defense that can only be provided by the Government. Others such as education can and are furnished by the private sector as well. A full treatment of the Government 's participation in the marketplace is beyond the scope of this Report but certain aspects are worth emphasizing When the Government is the only supplier the public is not always adequately serviced. The Government makes many items available free or below cost so that it becomes a monopoly supplier. Sometimes the Government has established a legal monopoly and prohibited competition. Unless there is a compelling reason to justify a Government monopoly it should not be established ; rather competition should be encouraged wherever possible In some instances goods or services are supplied below cost when the Government could accomplish the same aim yet encourage competition by supplying buyers with funds earmarked for the purchase of the desired item in the market. The food stamp program is an example of this approach In general the recipients will derive less benefit from such earmarked funds than from unrestricted grants in the same amount. The Administration 's Family Assistance Program therefore envisages replacing food stamps by cash grants as rapidly as possible In the Government 's role as a supplier of goods and services its charges should clearly reflect the incremental costs of its operations including capital charges except where subsidization is a conscious objective. When charges are brio such costs a wasteful use of resources may result since consumers are encouraged to use more of the product or service than they would if charges reflected costs more accurately. Subsidization is of course appropriate wherever such greater use is the explicit objective ( and in this case there should be an explicit accounting for the subsidy ) Costs of Government enterprises are especially difficult to measure. In principle the appropriate measure of cost to the Government is what the resources it consumes could have earned in the private sector. As the previous chapter pointed out when any resources are used by the Government no it lessens by that much the resources available to the private sector. One alternative to Government use of resources would be to make more funds available for private investment. As a first approximation the appropriate cost of a Government investment would be the expected earnings pretax on a similar private investment and not the cost to the Government of borrowing funds If a Government enterprise is operated in a market framework the discipline of the marketplace is likely to improve the results. When an enterprise faces active competition it can not afford to offer poor service. If it must raise capital in the private sector it will naturally take account of the full cost to the economy of such investment. And when it operates without Government aid it must cover its costs Thus a practical way to improve the workings of Government enterprises unless subsidizing is a major objective is to move the operation as close to the private sector as possible. This Administration has initiated two important moves in this direction. It has recommended the establishment of a Government-owned postal corporation which would ultimately have to cover nearly all its costs. It has also recommended that the Atomic Energy Commission 's uranium enriching plants be sold to private industry at an appropriate time and that in the interim the operation of the plants resemble private operation as nearly as is practical POSTAL SERVICE The Post Office is essentially a commercial operation run as a Government agency but modern management practices are difficult to introduce Personnel costs which account for about percent of Post Office costs are fixed by Congress. Net fixed assets per postal employee were only $ in while they were $ per employee in merchandising $ in manufacturing and $ in transportation. Partly as a consequence of these conditions postal productivity has been increasing since at a rate of about percent per year compared with percent for the private sector of the economy According to the Kappel Commission 's review of the Post Office working conditions in many post offices leave much to be desired. More than percent of the regular postal employees finish their careers at the same level at which they started. Patronage and residence requirements for postmasters ' appointments have held down career opportunities. Efforts to improve productivity are often frustrated. The system has been " run by the book " a 2,000-page Postal Manual intended to cover all contingencies Most postal rates are currently set by Congress. Under the current accounting system it is impossible to ascertain the incremental cost of any service For this reason little basis exists for confirming or denying the popular belief that first-class mail more than pays for itself while other mail is delivered at a loss in The Kappel Commission pointed to the political nature of Post Office appointments as one of the most serious problems in the postal system The President has asked that Congress no longer require Senate confirmation of appointments to postmasterships at first- second- and third-class offices. He has also requested legislation to bar political tests in the selection appointment and promotion of Department employees. Departing from a former practice the President does not seek local political endorsement of prospective postmasters. All these steps are designed to strengthen the merit system and permit candidates to be chosen for their competence rather than their political activity An even more fundamental departure is the Administration 's proposal for reform of the postal service through the creation of a Government-owned self-supporting corporation to operate the postal system under a directive that costs must be covered with revenues after a transitional period except for public service costs for which appropriations would be made. The corporation would have the power to borrow fimds for capital investment to negotiate wage rates with postal unions and subject to veto by Congress to set postal rates. The Government-owned postal corporation would be allowed great flexibility in operating the postal system especially in its personnel and capital expenditure programs The postal reform proposal would obligate the board of directors of the postal corporation to report to Congress within years concerning modernization of the postal monopoly laws which effectively prohibit a private firm from delivering first-class mail. A careful review of these laws might show that additional competition could prove beneficial to the using public URANIUM ENRICHMENT FACILITIES In the current state of technology the most efficient method of providing nuclear power is the use of light water reactors which operate on enriched uranium. Three plants owned by the Atomic Energy Commission and operated under contract by private enterprise supply this uranium. Constructed at a cost of $ billion these plants are located in Oak Ridge Tenn. Paducah Ky. and Portsmouth Ohio Originally the plants were built for the nuclear weapons program. Military needs for enriched uranium are expected to be small in future years much below the capacity of these plants but the growth of the nuclear power industry is expected to lead to capacity operations by the late 19705s In the chain of operations involving this form of energy from mining uranium to generating nuclear power the enriching plants are the last link to remain exclusively in Government hands. Since demand for enriched uranium is likely to come almost entirely from the commercial sector the President has indicated that these plants should also be sold to private industry when conditions for disposal are advantageous Conditions for such sale are not advantageous at present. The plants are currently being operated at only about percent of their existing capacity Moreover because of existing long-term contracts for power supplies the plants will produce considerably more enriched uranium than can be sold at present though it may be needed to meet future demands So long as the Government keeps the plants it should encourage their efficient use in order to strengthen competition in the power field. The President has asked the AEC to establish a Directorate to run these plants in a manner that approaches more closely commercial enterprises implying1 that they should earn commercial rates of return on the investment. The Directorate will use commercial accounting procedures and prepare annual financial statements equivalent to those of private corporations An important feature of this change is that nuclear generating plants will not enjoy a subsidy giving them an advantage in their competition with fossil fuels as sources of electric power. The proposed Directorate 's operations modeled after commercial operations should provide a record of earnings that will facilitate subsequent sale to private industry and help to assure that the Government receives a fair price for the plants when they are sold THE GOVERNMENT AND HOUSING All levels of government have been involved to an exceptionally high degree in the housing industry in its financing its technology its labor supply and labor relations and even in its supply of some basic materials In addition housing is the only major private industry for whose output a fairly specific goal has been stated by legislation. The Housing Act of declared a goal of " a decent home for every American family " and the Act of said that this goal could be met by constructing or rehabilitating million houses in the next decade of which million would be for lowand moderate-income families The enactment of this goal was not based on a calculation of the costs of achieving it and a decision to pay those costs whatever they might be. Until the costs and possible methods of achieving this goal are assessed more accurately it can not be regarded as a firm basis for planning. Moreover any goal set now would certainly have to be regarded as open to review and revision as time passes. Nevertheless the kind of concern expressed by the million housing goal together with the prospect that rising family formation will greatly increase the demand for houses in the next decade calls for a reexamination of the Federal role with respect to housing A distinction should be made between policy about housing for lowincome people and housing for the rest of the population. An intention to subsidize housing for low-income people is clear. This may be explained on the same grounds as other contributions from the more affluent to the poor although there are questions about whether in the long run subsidizing housing is an efficient way to make this transfer " Federal policy toward the nonsubsidized part of housing is probably best understood as an effort to improve the operation of private markets. This is clearest with respect to finance. The cost of capital to finance housing has been affected by the real or apparent riskiness and illiquidity of mortgage instruments. Policies to reduce these costs without subsidies from the Federal Government include FHA insurance the provision of insurance and a reserve lending source for savings and loan associations and the establishment of the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) to create a secondary market for mortgages. Further action along this line may be useful especially to reduce the great instability of the residential construction industry which in turn would contribute much to increasing productivity in the industry It is probably inevitable that housing construction should be particularly sensitive to variations in interest rates given the heavy weight of interest charges in housing costs and the fact that much of the demand for housing can be postponed at least for a time. However this sensitivity has been greatly increased by a number of institutional arrangements of which interest rate ceilings have been among the most important. In the past legal ceilings on the interest rates payable on FHA and VA mortgages have caused the supply of funds available through those programs to dry up whenever market interest rates rose much above the ceilings. The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development is authorized to vary the ceiling rate and this flexibility can somewhat ease that particular problem. Usury ceilings in some States prevent the flow of funds into mortgages when market rates are high. In the supply of mortgage money in States with low usury ceilings appeared to be more limited than in other States. Stability in construction would be improved if these usury ceilings were eliminated. The fact is that these ceilings instead of protecting people from having to pay exorbitant rates often prevent their obtaining mortgage credit at all The housing industry is also less able to compete for funds when interest rates are rising because by custom it has depended heavily on specialized financial intermediaries as noted elsewhere. The possibility of raising funds in the face of high interest rates might be improved if housing had recourse to more varied sources. Several steps have recently been taken to remedy this lack. The Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Bank Board ( FHLBB ) have greatly expanded their borrowing on their own securities in the open capital market in order to supply funds to mortgage markets directly or through savings and loan associations. In regulations were promulgated for the issue of mortgage-backed securities of various kinds guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) This action was intended to authorize a mortgage investment instrument that would be marketable and attractive to a wide range of investors not now interested in mortgages directly. Establishment of a facility providing a secondary market for conven- tional mortgages somewhat along the lines that FNMA now provides for FHA-VA mortgages is currently being considered The housing industry is unable to raise sufficient funds during a period of rising interest rates and inflation because of the nearly universal use of a longterm credit instrument with a fixed interest rate and amortization schedule When future interest rates and rates of inflation are uncertain both lenders and borrowers may be better satisfied with an instrument that provides some hedge against these uncertainties. One possibility would be a mortgage in which the interest rate varied with some prevailing market rate adjustment to be made by lengthening or shortening the repayment schedule. Lending institutions may need greater flexibility to work out terms of mortgages that are accepable both to them and to their customers The Government 's efforts to improve the flow of finance into housing has only recently begun to be matched by efforts to increase the supply and improve the utilization of real resources notably labor. But the imperfections on this side of the industry have probably been as great as on the financial side. Entry into the construction workforce has been limited by prevailing practices. The large turnover of firms the seasonality of the work and the traditionally long apprenticeships contribute to the difficulty in securing an adequate supply of skilled workers. The fragmented structure of the industry and the instability of its operations have impeded the research and development that might lead to greater efficiency and lower cost In order to improve the utilization of construction manpower the President issued an Executive Order on September establishing a Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission. The Commission was established to assist in the settlement of labor disputes through voluntary procedures and to seek solutions to a wide range of manpower problems including training and development of construction manpower instability and seasonality of employment and productivity and mobility of the construction labor force Significant expansion of training programs will be necessary to meet the large projected demand for skilled construction workers. Expansion of vocational education programs emphasizing construction skills can play an important supplementary role in increasing the supply of craftsmen with skills appropriate for entering construction work or for further training to attain full journeyman status. Federal officials will work with State and local authorities to encourage programs in construction skill training and some Federal funds will be used to obtain direct expansion of these programs. Cooperative programs between the schools unions and contractors in which credit toward apprenticeship requirements is granted for vocational education programs is also a promising new direction which HEW is currently emphasizing The Administration has also made a major effort to expand participation of minority workers in training and employment in construction work especially on Federal and federally assisted construction projects. The " widespread shortage of skilled construction workers in the industry is indicated by the ability of unions to obtain very large wage settlements To open a greater flow of minority workers into the industry in order to help relieve these skill shortages is a major objective of the Philadelphia Plan. The Plan requires contractors bidding on Federal construction projects to make good faith efforts through affirmative action to meet established hiring goals for minority employment. The Department of Housing and Urban Development has also been working to develop local coalitions that will help increase opportunities for members of minority groups to join craft unions and apprenticeship and other training programs Through its " Operation Breakthrough " program the Department of Housing and Urban Development has solicited proposals for experimental projects to demonstrate the use of new production techniques including improved building management and financial arrangements as a basis for significant improvements in productivity and efficiency. Simultaneously the Department has solicited prototype site proposals from State and local governments willing to cooperate in eliminating building code and zoning constraints and in combining markets for volume production. The goal is to develop techniques to meet opportunities for mass marketing through the use of volume production methods and the capital resources of large companies. The Department of Housing and Urban Development has received proposals for the use of new systems in residential construction projects. About of these will be underwritten in part by the Department An essential part of the " Breakthrough " program is to change zoning and building regulations that presently impede building of low- and moderate-cost residential units in and around many major cities. While some States are now enacting statutes capable of overruling local ordinances the remaining political and social obstacles are great. There is also need for a breakthrough to reduce the administrative delays and unnecessary redtape that are characteristic of many Federal housing programs and of many local housing authorities The Department has also taken the lead in the negotiation of a pilot labor-management agreement which will reduce obstacles hampering the introduction of new techniques. This nationwide agreement permits the factory production of modular homes provides for locally negotiated wages and fringe benefits uniform for three building trades allows for the crossing of craft jurisdictions and incorporates effective dispute settlement machinery. In addition provision is also made for training and employment opportunities for minority group members. It is felt by many observers that the agreement will provide a viable model to others similarly engaged in construction of housing units in an industrial context Improving the financing arrangements for housing removing obstacles to the supply of labor increasing investment in the training of construction labor where the payoffs justify the costs and improving technology should all raise the rate of housing construction in the years ahead. Whether they will suffice to achieve a predetermined goal for the number of houses to be built in the decade remains to be seen. Much will depend upon concurrent developments in the economy including the strength of business demands for capital the degree to which the Federal Government is adding to or subtracting from the supply of capital by its surplus or deficit and the success of the home building industry itself in offering innovative products at a reasonable cost CHAPTER Freedom and Stability in the World Economy I NTERNATIONAL SPECIALIZATION AND EXCHANGE have made an important contribution to rising standards of living in the United States and abroad. By offering its own products in payment a nation can acquire imports with less sacrifice of domestic resources than would be required to produce the same goods at home. Imports are the fruits of international trade and exports are what must be given up to obtain them The ability of a country to import depends primarily on how much of its production it can sell abroad. And this depends in turn on its domestic production costs compared to those abroad its access to foreign markets and the exchange rates which translate the exporters ' selling prices into the importers ' currencies Of these determinants domestic production costs are the result in part of general monetary and fiscal policy discussed in Chapter and in part of market performance discussed in Chapter Access to foreign markets is one of the subjects taken up in the first part of the present chapter and exchange rates are considered in the last part. This chapter also deals with international capital movements and the Euro-dollar market and with other recent developments in international finance THE EXPANSION OF TRADE The case for free markets in international trade is much the same as it is in the domestic economy. Artificial barriers to trade such as tariff 's and quotas usually act to reduce or eliminate exchange that would have benefited the trading parties. Similarly by insulating domestic producers from foreign competition trade restrictions reduce the incentives to increase innovation efficiency and specialization dynamic forces that have made a major contribution to the economic growth of industrial nations. Restrictions on trade also limit the extent to which imports can compete with domestic products and thus weaken an important restraint on domestic price increases In a dynamic world economy changing conditions require continuous adjustments. These may inflict hardship on some and evoke resistance. But American industry is used to adapting to changing competitive pressures from both at home and abroad and American labor has always been mobile both among regions and among industries. Most of the necessary adjustments can be taken in stride but some may prove more difficult. By providing temporary adjustment assistance the Government can help those who must adapt to changing patterns of world trade and improve the capability of our market economy to take full advantage of the benefits of international trade and investment NONTARIFF BARRIERS The rapid growth of international trade in the past decade attests to the progress made in reducing trade barriers. In total world trade approached a quarter of a trillion dollars an increase of about percent over that for During the decade of the 's the international trade of industrial nations increased at an average rate of almost percent per year As incomes rise and wants become more diverse it is to be expected that opportunities for trade among these nations will grow rapidly and this clearly has been happening. Progress towards freer trade however has been uneven. A serious problem is that the lowering of tariff walls has not been accompanied by similar progress in the lowering of nontariff barriers which have increased in relative importance and in some cases absolutely as tariffs have declined. Recognizing the importance of attacking nontariff barriers in a systematic and coordinated manner the countries adhering to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) assigned high priority to this problem in the work program planned to follow the Kennedy Round. On industrial products an analysis of existing nontariff barriers was completed during and it was agreed to begin early in to formulate means of dealing with various types of these restrictions. A similar project has been initiated in relation to agricultural trade Nontariff barriers range from formal and explicit quotas to unpublicized administrative procedures that have the effect of impeding or excluding imports. One clear-cut example is quota restrictions that are imposed during periods of an unfavorable balance of payments but often continue after the difficulties have disappeared. ( The GATT allows the use of quantitative restrictions to correct deficits in the balance of payments under certain circumstances provided that such restrictions are progressively relaxed as the balance of payments improves. ) More commonly however nontariff import barriers have been imposed for a variety of other reasons. In some cases their explicit purpose is to protect domestic industry. In other cases legitimate domestic measures may have a protective side effect ; health and sanitary regulations primarily designed to protect the consumer for example may also make it more difficult for foreign competitors to gain access to the domestic market Government procurement policies are frequently designed to provide protection for domestic industries. Domestic procurement may be explicitly required or a price preference may be allowed on bids by domestic concerns In a number of countries the responsible administrative agencies are given wide latitude in accepting or rejecting bids by foreign producers. As a result American corporations may run into a combination of high barriers and frustrating uncertainties about how the barriers are administered On the U.S. side preferences are also granted to domestic suppliers but these are generally explicit and easily understood. Thus regulations issued under the Buy American Act grant a 6-percent preference plus another percent if the materials are produced by a small business or in an area with substantial labor surplus. A 50-percent preference in overseas procurement is applied for balance-of-payments reasons by the Department of Defense and most other Government agencies. The case for the 50-percent preference involves weighing balance-of-payments gains against budgetary costs Restrictions abroad on trade in agricultural products are arousing particular concern in the United States because we have a comparative advantage in many of these products. The farm programs of most developed countries include special measures to support the prices farmers receive and to give them protection beyond that provided by customs duties. Measures taken pursuant to the Common Agricultural Policy of the European Economic Community have an especially distorting effect on world agricultural trade because they insulate domestic producers from foreign competition in order to keep internal farm prices far above world prices. The surpluses in some commodities resulting from these high prices are sold abroad with the aid of large export subsidies. While the United States also supports the prices of most basic crops these prices ( with a few exceptions ) do not greatly exceed the world market level. We also maintain import quotas notably on sugar and dairy products and have arranged for exporting countries to limit exports of beef to the United States THE TRADE BILL OF The trade bill submitted by the President to Congress in November continues the movement toward freer world trade and it also explicitly recognizes the importance of insuring that U.S. producers have fair access to foreign markets. Specifically the bill would restore Presidential power to make limited tariff reductions. It envisions the elimination of the American selling price ( ASP ) system ( in which certain import duties are based on the domestic selling price of competing American products rather than on the normal basis of actual export price ) It would broaden the present authority to act against countries that treat U.S. products unfairly and would provide new authority to act against those countries that grant export subsidies which result in unfair competition against U.S. exports in third markets. At the same time it would significantly improve the procedure by which business and workers injured by imports can receive Government assistance The tariff authority requested in the bill would make it possible for the President to approve occasional minor adjustments in tariffs that may be required to compensate foreign countries for example if the United States applies an escape clause or if a statutory change is made in tariff classification. It is not designed to be used for major tariff negotiations The American selling price system of customs valuation which applies to a few American products ( primarily benzenoid chemicals ) has taken on symbolic importance for our trading partners. In conjunction with the Kennedy Round of tariff reductions an agreement was reached providing that if the United States removed ASP others would make specified further reductions in foreign tariffs on chemicals as well as reductions in several important nontariff barriers such as European road taxes which discriminate against larger automobiles. Legislation to eliminate ASP would achieve these already negotiated trade benefits and would also be an important positive step toward multilateral reduction of nontariff barriers a liberalization which would benefit the United States both as an exporter and as an importer Although the relaxation of tariffs and other barriers in international trade promises clear benefits to the national economy as a whole it must be recognized that the effects on some industries and individuals may be adverse at least in the short run. Because the gains from trade are widely distributed to the consuming public the costs of major resulting adjustments should be borne in part by the economy as a whole not just by those who must suffer the direct effect of liberalization. For the economy as a whole increased imports need not create unemployment. This was demonstrated for instance during the inflationary expansion of when unemployment fell from to percent in spite of the record increase of percent in imports Nevertheless specific imports may cause disruption in directly competing industries. The Trade Expansion Act of provided for assistance to help those injured by tariff reductions adjust to the change but in practice the criteria for assistance have been excessively stringent. The new bill would relax these criteria and make aid more readily available to those who require it In his trade message of November the President stated that provisions concerning both the escape clause and adjustment assistance in the act were too tightly drawn and too technical to insure prompt and effective relief for those actually injured by imports. The President therefore recommended that the escape clause be made more flexible by providing a simple and clear statement of what should constitute injury under the law : Relief should be available whenever increased imports are the primary cause of actual or potential serious injury Under the present law the injury must be related to a prior tariff reduction. In many cases the tariff rates originally set in the Tariff Act of have been reduced in a series of trade agreements from to and it has become increasingly difficult to determine whether past tariff reductions are the cause of increased imports. Since the same problem arises in investigations of adjustment assistance the President recommended a similar change in the criteria applicable to petitions for adjustment assistance filed by firms or groups of workers. The President observed that improving the provisions for relief from import injury should lessen the pressure for legislation to restrict imports and should thus aid in the continuing U.S. attack on trade restrictions of other countries which currently impede the access of U.S. exports to foreign markets THE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN THE WORLD ECONOMY Greater access to markets is especially important to the developing countries. Although aid from abroad is vital to most of their plans for achieving greater prosperity the most important condition for success is their ability to make better use of their own resources both internally and externally. An effective strategy must be designed to further their participation in foreign trade and attract private investment from abroad The Flow of Resources For more than two decades the United States has provided large amounts of financial aid to the less developed countries ( LDC 's ) In recent years other industrialized countries have also begun to provide substantial amounts. In industrial countries contributed $ billion in official development assistance ( which excludes private investment and loans on commercial terms ) Although the flow of resources from the United States rose steadily up to the mid-1960 's it has leveled off in recent years. Private investment on the other hand has grown rapidly during the last years. In U.S. private investment in less developed countries increased to $ billion more than double the rate. Total private investment in the LDC 's by developed countries as a whole rose to $ billion in also more than doubling the figure. To encourage a continuation of this trend the President signed the Foreign Assistance Act of providing for the establishment of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation which would sell insurance and guarantees to U.S. private investors. The President has also endorsed the multilateral institutions the World Bank and its affiliates and the regional banks as channels through which development assistance can be provided on an equitable basis The Efficiency of Aid Greater reliance on the market mechanism can contribute significantly to economic growth in the LDC 's as well as in developed countries. It is especially appropriate that the United States whose strong economy owes so much to the freedom of our market system set an example by showing a willingness to let market forces operate. When this Administration came to office foreign aid was subject to " additionally " and " tying " conditions which hampered its effectiveness. Tying requires that aid funds be used only to purchase U.S. goods and services ; additionality further requires that aid funds not otherwise restricted be spent on U.S. products or services that do not substitute for commercial exports from the United States In June the Administration acted to end additionality requirements for aid. Later the tying requirement in aid to Latin American nations was relaxed ; they may now spend aid funds anywhere in Latin America as well as in the United States. The speed with which the United States can make further improvements in the efficiency of its aid is governed to a major extent by its balance of payments and by the aid policies of other countries Tariff Preferences In the long run the LDC 's must look to a continued and vigorous expansion of export earnings as an important part of their economic progress. Aid can help them overcome their initial handicaps but by itself it can not constitute a lasting solution. Greater internal efforts are also required From to export earnings of the developed nations grew at a rate of percent per year. Although rates for different countries differ widely export earnings of LDC 's as a whole rose at the rate of only percent. At present primary products account for almost percent of the exports of LDC 's and the rate at which exports of these products are growing is substantially below the rate of growth of world trade generally. Because of the limited potential for future expansion of trade in traditional exports the ability of the LDC 's to develop new exports especially of manufactured products will be increasingly important. This development is inhibited by tariffs and quotas imposed by developed countries and by internal economic difficulties within the LDC 's To assist in meeting the goals of the LDC 's the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) recommended that the more prosperous nations offer preferential tariff rates on the exports of the LDC 's. The Organization for Economic Cooperation x and Development ( OECD ) has appointed a working group consisting of representatives of the OECD members plus Australia and New Zealand to formulate a plan for a system of generalized tariff preferences. The United States has submitted a proposal to this body. Some of the key provisions are : ( ) All duties on manufactured and semimanufactured products imported from less developed countries except textiles footwear and petroleum and petroleum products would be eliminated. A selected list of agricultural and fishery products that would also benefit from the preferences is provided ( ) There would be no quantitative limits on the additional imports eligible for preferential treatment. Injury to domestic producers would be handled by standard escape clauses and adjustment assistance ( ) The preferences would be temporary scheduled to last no more than years and should not obstruct further general tariff reductions ( ) All major developed countries would adopt a common plan ( ) The United States would not grant preferences to any country that received an exclusive trade preference from any developed country for a product covered by the plan nor would we grant preferences to LDC 's that gave exclusive trade preferences to any developed country ( reverse preferences ) Other participants in the OECD working group have also submitted proposals some of which vary in important respects from the U.S. approach The European Community 's proposal for example calls for limits on the quantities of imports granted preferential treatment In November the OECD transmitted to the UNCTAD a report setting forth the positions taken by the prospective preference-granting countries. The United States will be engaged during the coming months in discussions in OECD and UNCTAD with the other developed countries and with the potential LDC beneficiaries with a view to reaching agreement on a mutually satisfactory arrangement Tariff preferences for the LDC 's will mark a significant departure from the most-favored-nation principle on which the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has been built. This principle which requires nondiscriminatory treatment of all imports regardless of origin lies at the heart of free international trade and departures should be avoided except for compelling reasons When one country gives another preferential access to its markets an increase in trade between the two countries will normally result. This may represent new international trade or it may come from substituting the exports of one country for those of others. In the first case there will normally be an increase in efficiency. In the second case where trade is diverted from the lower cost third countries the result will generally be lower economic efficiency. Countries negotiating trade matters find it least painful to give one another the markets that were previously the province of third parties. The general GATT proscription of preferential arrangements was aimed to counteract the natural bias toward trade diversion when countries exchange selective preferences The departure from the most-favored-nation principle is justified by two considerations. The development of manufacturing industries is essential to the progress of the LDC 's and these industries will be stimulated by preferences. Second a liberal system of general preferences replacing specialized regional preferences will create additional world trade and may reduce existing distortions in trade patterns THE U.S. TRADE BALANCE The U.S. economy and developments in our own external payments have a profound influence on the stability and growth of the world trading and financial system. Our exports now account for percent of total world trade and the dollar has achieved high standing as an international currency. Growing economies abroad have provided expanding markets for our output. In turn the level of our material welfare has been raised by an increasingly diverse array of products from abroad During the 's U.S. exports grew rapidly at an average annual rate of over percent. Imports grew even more rapidly however with the result that the trade surplus in merchandise shrank from a peak of $ billion in to less than $ billion during The growth of U.S. exports has been fostered by high technology exemplified in such manufactured items as computers jet aircraft and control instruments. Even the rapidly growing international demand for these products however has not been sufficient to prevent a decline in the U.S. share of total world exports. One reason is that growth in the traditional U.S export markets has been below the average. And even within these markets U.S. competitive shares of manufactured exports have declined During recent years export prices of some of our major competitors such as Germany Italy and Japan have performed better than those of the United States. It is not surprising therefore that from through U.S. bilateral trade balances with these three countries declined by more than $ billion. In the same interval the overall trade balances of these three countries improved by roughly $ billion The U.S. trade balance with Canada has also shown a large decline in recent years but the reason appears to lie in special conditions affecting U.S.-Canadian trade. Canada 's trade balance with other countries deteriorated slightly during the 's There have been other important changes in the composition of U.S trade during the decade. From through U.S. agricultural exports increased rapidly but they have been at a standstill since The sharp rise in U.S. imports of finished manufactured goods other than foods from $ billion in to almost $ billion in was also significant The share of these products in total U.S. imports increased from to over percent in the period from through The increase was particularly strong in imports of consumer goods especially luxury products A part of the recent surge in U.S. imports can be attributed to inflation in the domestic economy. During the years of relatively stable prices between and the value of merchandise imports as a percentage of GNP varied little hovering around percent but by it had increased to almost percent. In it edged slightly higher but remained just under percent Because of the prolonged dock strike in the first quarter of it is difficult to interpret the currently available trade figures for last year. There are signs of improvement in the merchandise trade balance after midyear and the deterioration of the trade balance typical of the past several years appears at least to have been arrested. As inflation is slowed in the United States the trade balance should improve. It is not likely however that regaining internal stability will be enough by itself to restore promptly the large surplus in the trade balance of the early and middle 's. For one thing the excessive domestic demand emerging toward the end of has become incorporated into higher costs and prices and these tend to be inflexible downwards. Thus the inflation of recent years will continue to have an adverse effect on our competitive position in the world economy. At the same time our technological superiority in many fields has been narrowed by the notable advances of countries like Japan and Germany O INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MOBILITY AND THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS While the gradual narrowing of our trade balance has dominated the general trend of the U.S. balance of payments short-term fluctuations have become increasingly dominated by capital movements. Capital flows are treated differently in the two most widely publicized measures of the balance of payments : the official settlements balance and the liquidity balance Because short-term capital movements have been large these two measures have recently yielded very different results. During the first half of the United States registered a record surplus measured on the official settlements basis while the same period showed a record deficit in terms of the liquidity definition. For the full year preliminary estimates indicate an official settlements surplus significantly larger than the $ billion surplus of The liquidity balance was in surplus during the fourth quarter although the deficit for the year was far larger in than in any previous year ( Chart ) Two Measures of the Balance of Payments The differences in the coverage and concept provided by these two measures must be kept in mind. The official settlements balance measures the change in our holdings of international reserve assets less the change in liquid and certain nonliquid claims on the United States by foreign official institutions such as central banks or finance ministries. The liquidity balance measures the change in our holdings of international reserve assets less the change in liquid liabilities to all foreigners whether official or private Thus sales to foreign official institutions of securities that exceed year in original maturity ( and are hence technically nonliquid ) in replacement of short-term instruments do not affect the results according to the official settlements basis but they do improve the liquidity measure. For for example Table shows that such special financial transactions shifted what would have been a liquidity deficit of $ billion to a liquidity surplus of $ billion. As these instruments are paid off with liquid claims on the United States they correspondingly augment the liquidity deficit leaving the official settlements basis unchanged. In the second and third quarters of for example the reversal of previous special transactions added approximately $ billion to the liquidity deficit Perhaps an even more fundamental difference between the two measures concerns the treatment of flows of foreign private short-term funds into the United States. To the extent that private foreigners obtain or withhold dollars from their central banks these flows reduce the official settlements measure of the deficit ( or increase the surplus ) Under the liquidity definition however a net increase in liquid liabilities to foreigners ( whether official or private ) indicates an enlarged deficit. Thus if private foreigners TABLE U.S. balance of payments [ Billions of dollars ] Type of transaction Merchandise trade balance Exports Imports Balance on investment income. U.S. investments abroad Foreign investments in the United States _ Balance on other services Exports2 Imports BALANCE ON GOODS AND SERVICES2 Unilateral transfers net ; transfers to foreigners ( ) BALANCE ON CURRENT ACCOUNT average first quarters i Errors and omissions BALANCEON LIQUIDITY BASIS. Balance on direct private investments. U.S direct investments abroad... _ Foreign direct investments in the United States BALANCE ON CURRENT AND DIRECT INVESTMENT ACCOUNTS Transactions in U.S. private nondirect assets net Transactions in U.S. Government assets excluding oficia reserve assets net Transactions in foreign nondirect nonliquid assets net Less : Certain nonliquid liabilities to foreign official agencies Plus : Foreign private liquid capital t net BALANCE ON OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS Addendum : Special financial transactions. BALANCEON LIQUIDITY BASIS EXCLUDING SPECIAL FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS... < * ) * Average of the first quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rates Excludes transfers under military grants Excludes military grants of goods and services * Not available Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce gain more short-term claims on the United States than are lost by official foreign holders of dollars the difference adds to our liquidity deficit. During the large short-term capital flow into the United States caused by the Euro-dollar borrowings of U.S. commercial banks has made the difference in treatment unusually important The Euro-Dollar Market and Short-Term Capital Movements Euro-dollar deposits are liabilities of banks outside the United States ( including foreign branches of U.S. banks ) which are denominated in dollars rather.than local currency. London is the center of the Euro-dollar market in which such funds are placed and borrowed. Large amounts of U.S. dollars are also on deposit in continental Europe Canada and Japan. The Eurodollar market consists almost entirely of short-term funds with few deposit maturities exceeding days. ( There is a counterpart long-term market for Euro-bonds including substantial amounts of securities of U.S. corporations offered in Europe but denominated in dollars. ) While exact measurement of the size of the Euro-dollar market is not possible estimates published by the Bank for International Settlements indicate that the market may have been roughly three times as large in as it was in growing from $ billion to $ billion with further growth during One can gain some idea of the increasing importance of this market as a source of foreign borrowing for U.S. banks by looking at the liabilities of U.S. banks to their foreign branches. These grew from approximately $ billion in to more than $ billion by the summer of after which they remained relatively constant. The branches themselves had Eurodollar liabilities amounting to $ billion on September Eurodollar deposits are also held in foreign-owned banks abroad The Euro-dollar market has become a major link among national shortterm money markets. Its growth owes much to the impetus generated by various restrictions on competitive practices in national money markets. The part that domestic banking regulations play in stimulating the growth of the Euro-dollar market is well illustrated by the effects of the Federal Reserve 's Regulation Q fixing the maximum interest rates which member banks can pay on most types of time deposits. During short-term interest rates moved well above the Regulation Q ceiling impeding the access of American banks to domestic money markets. In their search for funds U.S banks turned to Euro-dollar borrowing through their foreign branches. This demand helped push Euro-dollar interest rates upward to more than percent in June and they stayed close to that level for the remainder of ( Chart4,page36 ) These high interest rates attracted funds from Europe 's domestic money and capital markets. Participation in the Euro-dollar market required U.S dollars and the major part of these dollars ultimately came from European central banks with the result that European countries did not gain official reserves on the scale they might otherwise have done or even lost part of these reserves. Thus such flows from European domestic money and capital markets into Euro-dollars contributed to the U.S. official settlements surplus As private European funds were attracted to the Euro-dollar markets interest rates in European money markets rose. In response to the pull exerted by the Euro-dollar market several European countries have taken actions Chart U.S. Balance of International Payments BILLIONS OF DOLLARS _ EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES ~ EXPORTS \ * IMPORTS " AVERAGE iyOD 1969-1/ BALANCE ON CURRENT ACCOUNT AND DIRECT PRIVATE INVESTMENT BALANCE ON OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS / _ _ ^ ~ _ BALANCE ON LIQUIDITY BASIS AVERAGE 1QA Iyo i i J/ J/BALANCES ON LIQUIDITY BASIS AND ON OFFICIAL RESERVE TRANSACTIONS BASIS ARE ESTIMATES FOR FULL YEAR. ALL OTHER DATA ARE FOR FIRST QUARTERS AT SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE to restrict the outflow of funds from their domestic money and capital markets The surge in Euro-dollar interest rates together with the Regulation Q ceiling on domestic deposit rates also provided a strong incentive for U.S depositors to place funds in the Euro-dollar market rather than directly with U.S. banks. As a result a circular flow of U.S. funds developed in which dollars moved from the United States to the Euro-dollar market and back again through the foreign branches of U.S. banks. This flow involved both an increase in U.S. residents ' claims on foreign institutions ( which largely went unrecorded and therefore showed up as " errors and omissions " in the balance of payments ) and an increase in liquid liabilities to foreign branches of U.S. banks. The result of the circular flow was an increase in the liquidity deficit On both counts then Euro-dollars contributed to a divergence between the official settlements and liquidity balances. When dollars were drawn out of foreign official reserves they influenced the official settlements balance without affecting the liquidity balance. When dollars originating in the United States were routed through the Euro-dollar market they increased the liquidity deficit without affecting the official settlements balance Long-Term Capital Movements and Investment Income Long-term capital movements have also strongly influenced the U.S balance of payments in recent years. In response to the limits imposed by the Direct Investment Program on net direct investment abroad with U.S. funds and to the high cost and reduced availability of domestic funds U.S. corporations have been increasing their efforts to raise long-term funds abroad. At the same time a substantial number of foreign investors have broadened their portfolios to include American common stocks. During the first three quarters of foreign purchases of U.S. corporate securities are estimated to have been $ billion or $ billion more than net sales of foreign stocks and bonds to U.S. investors over the same period. Direct U.S. investment abroad also continued to be large during the first three quarters of The heavy U.S. borrowing abroad in recent years brought to a halt the rapid growth of the U.S. net international investment position. Between the end of and the end of net assets remained virtually unchanged at $ billion. The composition and growth of the U.S. international investment position are given in Table Earnings on U.S. investments abroad have continued to contribute to the U.S. balance of payments. During our rate of return on direct investments abroad reversed its previous decline and rose almost a full percentage point above the percent of During the first three quarters of income from direct and other private U.S. investment abroad is estimated to have reached an annual rate of almost $ billion up about $ billion from On the other hand interest payments on foreign investments in the United States have increased even more rapidly reflecting heavy U.S short-term borrowing from abroad during the first half of High interest rates also increased the cost of refinancing previous borrowings. In the third quarter interest payments by U.S. commercial banks on their liabilities to foreign branches were running at an annual rate of approximately $ billion rising from less than a quarter of a billion dollars in late For the first three quarters of income on private foreign investments in the United States is estimated at roughly $ billion $ billion more than the total for the whole of TABLE International investment position of the United States and [ Millions of dollars ; end of year ] Total Western Europe Type of investment Net international investment position of the United States U.S. assets and investments abroad 2_ Private investments Long-term Direct Other Short-term assets and claims U.S. Government nonliquid credits and claims Monetary reserve assets Foreign assets and investments in the United States Long-term Direct Corporate stocks Other Nonliquid short-term assets and U.S. Government obligations Liquid assets Private liabilities reported by banks.. Other Latin Canada American Republics Preliminary. Total includes other foreign countries and international organizations and unallocated not shown separately in this table Includes U.S. gold stock Source : Department of Commerce THE PROBLEM OF INTERNATIONAL EQUILIBRIUM The rapid growth of international trade and capital flows has brought into sharper focus two essential requirements for an adequate world monetary system. In the first place there must be sufficient official liquidity to finance temporary imbalances. Second the terms of exchange between national currencies should be sufficiently stable to foster confidence in international dealings but not so rigid that they preclude the adjustments that may be needed from time to time as trading patterns and terms of trade undergo inevitable change. The urgency of progress in both these directions has been underlined in recent years by the increasing frequency of international financial disturbances. The ad hoc solutions for these have often been to impose various restraints that now threaten to obstruct further advances in the efficiency of the international economy The past year has seen important improvements especially in the direction of greater liquidity. Years of discussion and negotiations culminated in final agreement to create Special Drawing Rights a new international reserve asset. Now for the first time in history there is an international arrangement for systematically creating reserves. Also the official parities of two important currencies were adjusted during France reduced the exchange value of the French franc in August. Following repeated inflows of speculative capital most notably the flood of between $ billion and $ billion in May and over $ billion in September the Germans allowed the mark to float upward at the end of September and a new higher parity was chosen in October. These two parity adjustments together with the devaluation of the British pound in November have resulted in a pattern of exchange rates that is more closely in line with international competitive positions. A lessening of strains and instability in the international financial situation has followed and the effects are apparent in the exchange markets. Most notable perhaps has been the narrowing of the discounts and premiums on forward exchange which had become abnormally large before these adjustments in parities were made The agreement to create Special Drawing Rights provides a fundamental and lasting method for dealing with the liquidity question but the changes in exchange rates during the past year do not assure an equally permanent solution to the adjustment problem. Some of the major maladjustments have been relieved for the time being but basic forces that could produce new disequilibria continue to operate. Nations attach different degrees of importance to different objectives for economic policy. Changes in technology and demands have varying effects among countries. We should use the period of reduced tensions which recent currency realignments and advances in providing for needed liquidity have granted us to consider how the international financial system might be made more capable of adjusting to possible future shifts in the world economy International Liquidity : Special Drawing Rights Consideration of how the international economic system might become better able to cope with changes in the relative positions of individual economies must begin with the landmark decision to establish Special Drawing Rights ( SDR 's ) As trade and investment grow countries tend to need higher reserves. If the reserves coming into the system are insufficient general success in meeting goals for national reserves becomes impossible and the outcome is destructive competition for reserves. Domestic and international policies are warped by a preoccupation with the balance of payments Reductions in barriers to trade and investment become ever more difficult ; indeed international barriers may be increased as a result of the desire to protect national reserves To avoid these undesirable consequences international studies were started in focusing on the possibilities of creating a new reserve asset. The establishment of Special Drawing Rights resulted from these studies and from protracted negotiations later on involving the Group of Ten and the International Monetary Fund. SDR 's are created by the IMF and allocated among the member countries in proportion to their Fund quotas. Because they are counted as an increase in reserves of the member countries incentives to compete for reserves should be correspondingly lessened The preliminary steps to create the SDR 's were discussed in the Council 's Annual Reports for and During the past year two final steps were taken in preparation for activation in January The amendment to the Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund creating Special Drawing Rights was ratified during August by the recmired member countries having percent of the voting power of the IMF. The next step resolved the important question of the appropriate amounts of SDR 's. The deficient growth of international reserves made it desirable that initial allocations of Special Drawing Rights should be substantial. The decision by the International Monetary Fund to create $ billion in Special Drawing Rights between and should permit an adequate but not excessive growth of official reserves In using SDR 's countries are expected to fulfill the " requirement of need. " SDR 's are to be transferred to meet balance-of-payments needs and cover reserve losses but not solely to change the composition of reserves. A country may use SDR 's to purchase balances of its own currency from another participant if the other participant agrees. Another set of provisions enables the Fund to guide SDR transactions from using countries to countries designated as eligible recipients on the basis of a number of criteria including their balance-of-pavments and reserve position. No country is bound to accept additional SDR 's if its holdings already amount to three times its cumulative allocations During the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund also agreed to recommend an increase in quotas in the Fund by a total of $ billion or percent. While an increase in IMF quotas does not in itself result in an increase in " owned " international reserves it does create a larger pool of international credit which acts as a partial substitute for reserves ( When countries can borrow to finance temporary balance-of-payments deficits they are under less pressure to acquire and hold reserves. ) As part of the general increase in quotas the U.S. quota will if Congress approves rise from $ million to $ million an increase of percent. Special arrangements were made in order that the proportion of the quotas held by less developed countries should not fall as much as they would with a mechanical application of the usual criteria based on trade and GNP. These countries ' share of the total quotas will decrease only from percent to percent and in absolute terms they will rise from $ million to $ million INTERNATIONAL ADJUSTMENT Creating the Special Drawing Rights and increasing the IMF quotas will give nations more time to redress their balance-of-payments disequilibria in an orderly fashion but the question of the most effective way to correct imbalances is still open. In principle they can be corrected by three basic measures applied singly or in combination. First domestic policy can be altered. Countries with a surplus can adopt more expansive policies and thereby increase their imports and reduce their exports. Countries with defi- cits can restrict domestic demand thereby reducing their imports and increasing their exports. Second governments can take direct action by adopting certain selective measures. To correct deficits countries can increase tariff rates or institute import quotas or controls on capital movements and tourist expenditures. In countries where a surplus exists governments can reduce tariffs remove other obstructions to imports or encourage the outflow of capital. Third exchange rates can be altered ( although as a practical matter the United States can not adjust its exchange rate ) Countries may aim to correct deficits by adjusting the exchange rate of their currencies downward a move that will discourage imports and encourage exports. Surplus countries can appreciate the exchange rate of their currencies thereby encouraging imports and discouraging exports. The measures a country selects and its quickness in applying them will depend on its willingness and ability to finance deficits out of reserves and borrowings or to permit surpluses to build up reserves Each of the three general methods for redressing balance-of-payments disequilibria has its advantages and disadvantages. How much international synchronization of domestic policies is desirable depends partly on whether policies to achieve internal stabilization will also restore a balance-of-payments equilibrium. It has been argued for instance that maintaining fixed exchange rates encourages countries to keep inflationary pressures under control thus reinforcing " discipline. " There is no automatic assurance however that the internal adjustment required to correct a country 's balance of payments will also contribute to domestic stability. A balance-of-payments surplus might coincide with a domestic boom in which case the restrictive policies needed by the domestic economy would further enlarge the surplus in the country 's external payments. Another country might face the reverse of that situation with underemployment at home and a deficit in its external payments. In such instances there will be strong pressure to adopt direct action affecting international transactions and in some cases to alter the exchange rate Direct Actions International adjustment may be attempted through direct actions aimed at any of the components of the balance of payments but the nature and limitations of such controls must be fully recognized. Although at times they may relieve an urgent situation their function is essentially palliative. Once established moreover it often proves difficult either to deactivate them or to integrate them effectively into longer range solutions At the time the International Monetary Fund was established capital transactions were believed to be a possible source of international disequilibrium and capital controls were therefore considered preferable to current account controls as a means of correcting the balance of payments. Capital controls however also have their costs. The case for free international investment is similar to that for free international trade. Broader and freer markets for both capital and goods contribute to economic efficiency the growth of the world economy and a more rapid improvement of living standards generally. Capital controls create serious administrative difficulties and are likely to inspire a search for loopholes in their provisions Once set up they have a tendency to enmesh the economy in an everwidening circle of restrictions rather than to develop conditions that would obviate the need for curbs. Furthermore they are inconsistent with a liberal approach to economic policy and are irksome to business In his message of April the President affirmed the Administration 's intention to move away from controls on capital movements. The program to restrict direct investment abroad was relaxed ; the minimum amount of investment that is the leeway before restraints are applicable was raised from $ to $ million. This measure reduced the number of firms required to furnish quarterly reports under the program from to Furthermore an optional earnings quota was established which allows companies to reinvest up to percent of their foreign earnings. The Federal Reserve guidelines for banks were revised to give them more flexibility in financing U.S. exports and to resolve some equity problems. For further changes were made in the Federal Reserve program to encourage the financing of exports. The former minimum of $ million under the Foreign Direct Investment Program was raised to $ million so long as investment over $ million is used in the less developed countries On the trade side temporary quantitative restrictions on imports are sanctioned under the GATT as a method for protecting the balance of payments. Since quantitative restrictions are particularly likely to disrupt trade however there has been some tendency to use import surcharges or a combination of import surcharges and export subsidies in their place. In theory the imposition of a uniform import surcharge combined with an equivalent export subsidy is close to a change in the exchange rate in its effects on the trade balance and therefore almost as neutral as an exchange rate adjustment with respect to the allocation of resources. In one important respect however these measures are not equivalent to an adjustment in the exchange rate. The latter applies to all international transactions including tourist expenditures and other invisibles as well as capital items. In contrast the combination of import surcharges and export grants applies only to merchandise trade. Furthermore almost inevitably there are pressures to exclude certain items from the surcharge-grant system with the consequence that specified industries enjoy a degree of protection not granted to others It is appropriate for countries having a surplus to reduce their restrictions on imports and on capital flows and a number of countries have taken such steps. ( Countries may also undertake unilateral reductions in import barriers or a speedup of reductions already agreed upon to reduce domestic inflationary pressures as Austria and Canada did during and as Switzerland plans to do in early ) Although direct restrictions on imports or capital flows to correct deficits will normally have the undesirable side effect of inhibiting mutually advantageous international exchange direct action to deal with a country 's surplus by reducing barriers to trade or capital flows will have favorable side effects and will also lessen the likelihood of restrictive measures by deficit nations. Where possible therefore direct actions should take the form of a relaxation of controls and restraints by countries with a surplus rather than the introduction or tightening of such measures by deficit countries Exchange Rate Adjustments Proper management of domestic economic policy as indicated above will not always be sufficient to avoid balance-of-payments difficulties. Other factors besides improper demand management may create imbalances Where the economic policies required for external equilibrium differ greatly from those that promote price stability and high employment at home the Bretton Woods system provides for discrete adjustments in exchange parities In practice however countries have been reluctant to make such adjustments promptly and their delays have often generated speculative movements of funds and use of restrictionist measures. The frequency of international financial crises in recent years has focused attention on the possibility of adjusting exchange rates in a calmer and more orderly manner At the Annual Meeting of the Governors of the International Monetary Fund in September the Managing Director announced that the Fund will continue its study and appraisal of proposals for " limited flexibility " in exchange rates. The Secretary of the Treasury made it clear that the United States will actively participate in and contribute to this study. Although the results of such studies can not be foreseen it is possible to point out some of the technical and policy problems that will need clarification Within the general framework of the Bretton Woods system there is scope for greater flexibility of exchange rates than has been evident in practice. It has been suggested that parity adjustments could be made more frequently and hence in smaller amounts. Some official interest has also focused on proposals to widen the band within which exchange rates would be permitted to fluctuate around parities and to provide mechanisms like the so-called crawling peg or sliding parity that would make movements in parity more gradual than they have been in the past Wider Bands Interest in proposals for wider bands has concentrated on the possible effects of a modest widening perhaps changing the present maximum range of percent on each side of parity to permit a range of percent. In itself this would do little to improve the adjustment mechanism. What it might do is to help insulate domestic money markets from movements of interest-sensitive short-term funds and reduce the largely one-sided speculative options that occur under the present system. However a modest widening of the band can have no substantial effect in reducing troublesome flows of short-term money unless abrupt changes in parities are considered unlikely If people commonly believe that the equilibrium exchange rate falls well outside the band the broader band in itself can do little to discourage movements of short-term funds For a number of reasons widening of the present bands can not wholly guard against international imbalances sufficiently severe to throw established parities into question. As already pointed out countries do not attach equal weight to the different objectives of economic policy. Some nations are more tolerant of inflation or of increases in unemployment than others Governments also differ in their ability to influence the trend of costs and prices effectively. And even if general price trends were identical in all countries balance could be disturbed by changes in demand and supply patterns for internationally traded goods or differing trends in government purchases and receipts. This situation has encouraged some to ask whether stability of the international monetary system would be improved if smaller and more frequent changes in parity were made in the hope of avoiding large discrete jumps Smoothly Moving Parities A number of proposals have been made for smooth and gradual adjustments in parity of up to or percent per year. While these proposals for " crawling pegs " differ in technical detail they present in common a number of the fundamental questions that figure in debates on this subject. One important issue turns on the degree of national discretion to be encouraged or permitted in altering exchange rates. Another question is whether smoothly moving parities would tie interest rates more closely to international developments and thus reduce the independence of domestic monetary policies. It is also feared that parity movements would weaken the external discipline on domestic policies. And there has been concern about whether these movements might complicate the conditions under which international business transactions take place The Degree of Discretion. The various proposals for slowly moving parities range from a completely permissive discretionary authority to a completely automatic mandatory system. A purely discretionary system might be no more successful than present arrangements in preventing fundamental imbalances that require abrupt changes in parity. Experience suggests that left to their own discretion individual countries might postpone parity changes until political or financial developments made them imperative. On the other hand a fully automatic system might be unacceptable to nations that regard control over their exchange rate as an established prerogative of national sovereignty A possible compromise may lie between complete discretion and binding rules. One solution might be to develop presumptive rules that with a degree of multilateral surveillance would guide countries in making appropriate adjustments in parities The objective criteria most frequently recommended for incorporation into such presumptive rules are based on the behavior of spot and forward exchange rates and on the changes in reserve levels defined in various ways for example to include or not include short-term funds held by commercial banks. Typical proposals have urged that desirable parity changes be indicated by a moving average of past spot rates or by reserve movements. An advantage of including some measure of reserve movements in the criteria is that rules on direct official intervention in the spot or forward market might then be unnecessary. ( If exchange rates were the only criterion such rules might be deemed necessary since exchange rates can be influenced by official intervention. ) Much technical work remains to be done however before satisfactory criteria for parity changes can be established A number of other questions about the most desirable form of a moving parity system also require further study. For instance how general would participation in the system need to be ? As an initial step should one or a few countries be encouraged to experiment with greater flexibility ? Would slowly moving parities work best if they were accompanied by a widening of the band around parity ? What special problems might arise for regional economic groupings ? In addition to these technical points questions have been asked about the fundamental value of any form of slowly moving parities or widening of the band in improving the operation of the international monetary system. A full discussion of all of these issues would go beyond the scope of this chapter but five of the most commonly raised questions about the desirability of greater exchange rate flexibility will be considered briefly. These ask what effects a greater flexibility in exchange rates would have on monetary independence ; whether internal discipline would suffer ; what provision would be made for forward cover on exchange transactions ; whether small but frequent exchange rate adjustments would actually be effective ; and what the implications of greater exchaijige-rate flexibility would be for the U.S. dollar Monetary Independence. One criticism of smoothly moving parities has been that they would bind monetary policy too closely to international conditions. If for example it was generally believed that a country 's parity would move downward at the maximum permitted annual rate say percent for an extended time and that its spot rate would move down accordingly there would be an incentive for capital to move out of the country unless domestic interest rates were 2-percent higher than foreign rates This criticism assumes that movements in the spot rate are predictable Under certain conditions they might be. If sliding parities were used in an attempt to overcome an already existing and sizable disequilibrium the direction of future movements in the exchange rate would be clear. This however is a purpose for which sliding parities are not particularly well suited. Alternatively movement of the spot rate might be predictable if the equilibrium rate were gradually rising or falling over time. If a downward crawl in the exchange rate resulted from a more rapid rate of inflation in one country than in others that country 's domestic capital markets would tend to reflect these inflationary pressures and the higher interest rates could exist for domestic reasons. The need to have higher interest rates because of the crawling peg might not therefore represent a restraint on domestic policy. Similarly in countries with less inflation there would be a tendency for interest rates to be lower whether there was a crawling peg or not Different rates of inflation are not of course the only forces that would cause a crawling peg to move. If the par value of a country 's currency were too high for other reasons a predictable one-way downward crawl might raise complications with international capital flows impelling the monetary authorities to keep interest rates above the level that they consider desirable for domestic reasons perhaps over fairly long periods. In any event the important comparison lies between the policy restraint that might result from the crawl and the policy restraint that now occurs when an exchange rate is generally considered out of line and when capital flows may consequently be stimulated by the expectation of a large discrete adjustment in the exchange rate. Because such adjustments offer the prospect of immediate sizable gains the expectation that they will occur has often been an important motive behind short-term capital flows Furthermore the initial capital flows in response to expected movements in the exchange rate will greatly overstate the magnitude of continuing flows. Once financial positions adjust to these changed incentives capital movements would probably become much smaller and the cessation of the crawl in due course would eliminate the incentives. Finally the reversible nature of most liquid capital movements means that problems arising from short-term capital flows under a sliding parity could to some extent be dealt with by official financing instead of adjustments in interest rates Domestic Discipline. Another concern about slowly moving parities centers on whether they would reduce the disciplinary effects that reserve losses may have on nations needing to deal with domestic inflation. Since upward movements in the par value would have no such effects it has been suggested that greater flexibility be allowed only in moving exchange rates upward. Indeed an upward movement of the exchange rate would reduce inflationary pressures and facilitate the maintenance of domestic price stability in countries having a surplus. For countries with deficits the validity of the discipline argument is difficult to assess in general terms. The response of countries to reserve losses varies considerably. Most countries have been reluctant to devalue. Some have adopted more restrained domestic policies as well as imposing restrictions on international transactions. The problems that might be caused by permitting a downward crawl therefore do not lend themselves to easy generalization The Provision of Forward Cover. A third question has to do with the operation of the forward market when there is greater flexibility in exchange rates. A change in the international financial system that whatever its merits aroused even more uncertainty about exchange rates might have an adverse effect on trade and investment. On the other hand to the extent that greater flexibility in the exchange rate promoted better adjustment and that speculative expectations became more stabilized demands by international traders to cover their exchange risk in the forward market might actually fluctuate less than they do at present. Moreover as the chances of an abrupt and large adjustment in the exchange rate are reduced the consequences of being caught without forward cover become correspondingly less serious The Effectiveness of Small Changes in Parity. Another question is whether small but frequent changes in parity would be an effective means of promoting adjustments since the evidence suggests that it takes time for trade to respond fully to a change in exchange rates ; that is elasticities in international trade are generally higher in the long run than in the short run This lag is of course more relevant in situations where small changes in the exchange rate are used to correct already existing imbalances than where such changes are used to prevent a disequilibrium from developing. That being so small but frequent adjustments of parity would probably be more useful in maintaining approximate equilibrium than in restoring a balance after a substantial disequilibrium has been allowed to develop The U.S. Position. Because of the central role of the U.S. dollar in the international monetary system the United States can not move its own parity with respect to other currencies. This implies that the United States would be particularly concerned with the direction in which other countries were moving their parities. A bias in one direction or the other could lead to an overvaluation or undervaluation of the dollar. Historically devaluations of currencies with respect to the dollar have been more frequent and on average larger than revaluations. While to some extent this may reflect greater price stability in the United States than in many foreign countries the danger of systematic overvaluation as a result of greater flexibility should be guarded against. This could be done by appropriate specification of the presumptive rules mentioned earlier THE DOLLAR AND INTERNATIONAL EQUILIBRIUM The United States has the world 's largest economy and its exports and imports are larger than those of any other nation. These facts alone would make economic developments and policy here a matter of great concern to the world economy. A further point however is that the dollar has become the principal international currency. Much of the world 's trade is denominated in dollars and throughout the world dollars are widely held as reserves and as working balances to accommodate trade and investment Because the dollar plays a central role in the international monetary system the United States is more constrained in its adjustment policies than other countries. Since the United States does not have primary control over any market exchange rate other nations in effect determine the exchange value of the dollar. It is generally recognized that exchange rates are a matter of international concern and the United States is consulted through the IMF and other organizations regarding the appropriateness of exchange rate adjustments. Yet the United States clearly exercises only indirect influence over the exchange value of its currency in contrast to the more direct control exercised by other countries The central position of the dollar in the international system was not the result of any conscious decision or strategy on the part of the U.S. Government. It was the natural consequence of the size strength and stability of the U.S. economy traits which were especially evident during the early years after the Second World War. This central role provides benefits for the United States but it also entails problems and responsibilities For some years now concern over the state of the U.S. balance of payments has been evident. The discussions of a dollar shortage in the 's have given way to discussions of the U.S. payments deficits. Nevertheless in this same interval the predominant change in the exchange parities of other currencies has been downward ( not upward ) in relation to the dollar. There have been only three upward changes in the past decade the revaluations of the German mark by percent in and percent in and the revaluation of the Dutch guilder by percent in In part perhaps in large part- ^ this paradox can be attributed to the fact that international liquidity needed to grow and a large part of this growth has been through official accumulation of dollars. To be sure not every payments imbalance is an indication of a low overall level of liquidity But when many countries simultaneously begin to feel that their balance-ofpayments positions are too weak it is evident that there is a general shortage of liquidity. It was precisely to eliminate this shortage and the resultant danger of a destructive competition for reserves that the Special Drawing Rights were instituted. The introduction of SDR 's should moderate the general tendency to consider that official reserves are too low It is also important to the United States and to the international community that the international adjustment mechanism be strengthened. Failure to achieve this could have serious consequences. New strains on the world monetary system could develop unless our payments position assures foreign monetary authorities and private traders that the dollar will remain strong. The present situation in which we maintain an official settlements surplus only because of large-scale foreign borrowing by U.S. corporations and banks at high interest rates creates a feeling of some uneasiness here and abroad and observers generally regard the present structure of the U.S. international accounts as abnormal and temporary Whatever the United States does is felt in other countries. We therefore have every reason to consider the effects that our economic policies will have on them. Continuing prosperity and economic stability abroad depends in part on stable growth in the United States. Because of our size other countries feel the influence of inflationary or deflationary pressures originat141 O ing in this country. If U.S. inflation were to continue at its recent levels some countries might face the painful necessity of choosing between the inflationary consequences of a large export surplus or an upward adjustment of their exchange rates. For international as well as domestic reasons it is most important that the United States restore internal balance and achieve sustainable noninflationary growth. This responsibility along with reasonably free access to U.S. markets constitutes our predominant obligation toward international economic well-being Appendix A UNEMPLOYMENT AND THE ECONOMY CONTENTS UNEMPLOYMENT AND THE ECONOMY UNEMPLOYMENT STATISTICS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION Page UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR MOBILITY T H E DURATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT UNEMPLOYMENT AMONG DIFFERENT GROUPS List of Tables and Charts Tables A l Unemployed Persons by Reason for Unemployment A-2. Unemployment by Age Sex and Race A Selected Measures of Unemployment A-4. Distribution of Activities of Persons Years of Age A-5. Distribution of Activities of Persons Years of Age by Sex and Race Chart A l Unemployment Rate and Duration Unemployment and the Economy The unemployment rate occupies a prominent place in the array of economic statistics that indicate the overall state of the economy. This central position is to a large extent attributable to the fact that it serves as a broad but direct index of the extent to which the mandate of the Federal Government embodied in the Employment Act of is being fulfilled Much of the attention the unemployment rate receives however is a result of its role as an indicator of economic waste and public welfare As a Nation we are highly and properly sensitive to the problem of the person seeking employment and unable to find a job. We need to know as much as possible about the numbers and characteristics of the unemployed and the reasons they are not working so that the most effective remedies can be devised. In the management of economic policy it is essential to see this complex picture clearly in order to formulate a judgment about the relative emphasis to be placed on general measures to enlarge employment opportunities and on other special-purpose programs to deal with more specific manpower problems. This appendix examines information bearing on the character and composition of unemployment in our recent experience UNEMPLOYMENT STATISTICS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION Unemployment is usually accompanied by an interruption or decline in the income flow that often represents the principal source of livelihood for a family or individual. Unemployment can therefore cause substantial hardship particularly if it occurs for the family breadwinner and if it persists for a considerable period of time. The implications of unemployment and loss of income for economic well-being and morale provide ample justification for public concern about unemployment and for government policies to reduce its incidence and to cushion its impact when it occurs While these social implications of unemployment are widely recognized and appropriately given great emphasis some other facets of unemployment in the economy and the interpretation of the unemployment rate have received much less recognition and discussion The unemployment rate is sometimes viewed as an indicator of wasted resources in the economy. In its simplest formulation this view often rests on the notion that labor services lost through involuntary unemployment are irretrievably lost and that the loss serves no economic purpose. It can legitimately be argued that the loss in labor services is not restricted to the period of idleness if unemployment is accompanied by loss of income that results in a decline in the health and well-being of workers. In addition loss of proficiency in skills and loss of motivation and morale accompanying idleness may further increase the waste of human resources that involuntary unemployment entails. Nevertheless this view of unemployment as an important source of waste is applicable to only a part of actual unemployment and that portion declines as lower unemployment rates are achieved The level of the unemployment rate and the numbers of unemployed persons in various subcategories are often taken to indicate the narrow segment on which the incidence of slack in the economy falls the unemployed The cost to society of unemployment is then viewed as the earnings loss implied for those experiencing unemployment. Viewed in the context of aggregate economic policy the cost of economic conditions or policies that result in increased unemployment thus appears to be concentrated on those in the fraction of the labor force reported as unemployed. While these costs are borne disproportionately by some groups the portion of the work force experiencing unemployment over a period of time is much larger than the unemployment rate suggests. Moreover involuntary part-time employment other forms of underemployment and nonparticipation in the labor force as a result of poor prospects for obtaining employment are not reflected in the unemployment rate. Some unemployment is a byproduct of labor market adjustments such as entry into the labor force seasonal variation in manpower requirements and changes in the composition of demand. Although its origins may be inherent in the operation of a free labor market even under conditions of high demand such unemployment may cause serious problems for some workers Recent unemployment rates have been low compared to our historical experience since World War II. The interim goal of a 4-percent average annual unemployment rate set out in the early sixties has been surpassed for years ( ) and in this period the unemployment rate was at its lowest level since the Korean conflict in the early fifties. The primary policy emphasis has now shifted from one of reducing slack in the economy and further decreasing unemployment to one of monetary and fiscal restraint to contain the forces of inflation. Thus an examination of the character and composition of unemployment in our recent experience will indicate the dimensions of the labor market adjustment process under high employment conditions UNEMPLOYMENT AND LABOR MOBILITY The American economy has been characterized by growth and technological change. This has been accompanied by a shifting pattern of output and resource use. A highly mobile labor force has facilitated the adjustment processes necessary to accommodate rapid and continued change New employment opportunities constantly open up providing more productive and higher paying jobs than in other sectors of the economy. Increasing productivity and rising wages have resulted from this continuing reallocation of labor to more productive employment as well as from improvement in workers ' skill levels and an increasing supply of more productive capital inputs Many workers are able to change jobs without an intervening period of unemployment and many of those leaving school or reentering the labor force have jobs lined up in advance. But obtaining new employment often involves time and effort in search of the most suitable and productive opportunities consistent with workers ' skills and preferences. Time spent in search of the most suitable employment in a generally active labor market can be regarded as a constructive activity on the part of some workers. In those cases it should not be regarded as a waste of resources just as time spent in schooling skill training or other activities to upgrade earning power are not regarded as economic waste. There is a cost to the worker and to the economy of such " frictional " unemployment but improvements in job status earnings working conditions and job satisfaction are offsetting benefits Ways should be sought to reduce this cost without losing the attendant benefits. For example information plays a crucial role in the process of satisfactorily matching workers with jobs. Providing job information may be a worthwhile social investment decreasing the time and effort workers must typically spend in search of suitable employment and improving labor utilization. The Department of Labor has long played a leading role in gathering and disseminating job market information and tr ^ is Administration is accelerating the development and introduction of systems such as the Job Bank and experiments in computerized matching of workers with jobs Many job changes with accompanying periods of unemployment are a result of voluntary turnover workers leaving their previous employment in search of more favorable alternatives. In percent of the unemployed voluntarily left their last job ( Table A l ) In addition many of those unemployed were entering or reentering the labor force percent in These workers who entered or reentered the labor force are actively using this time in an effort to find suitable jobs. Unemployment for workers in these categories often is not strictly involuntary. For many of them it can be described more properly as time voluntarily devoted to obtaining productive employment improved job status or more suitable and perhaps higher paid employment TABLE A Unemployed persons by reason for unemployment Number ( thousands ) Reason Percentage distribution Lost last job Left last job Reentered labor force Never worked before Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Total unemployment The rapid pace of technological change contributing to rising living standards leads to changes in the pattern of labor use that often require some involuntary job changes. In addition the seasonal nature of some work secondary effects of work stoppages and temporary adjustments in production and inventories result in involuntary loss of employment. In percent of those unemployed left their last job involuntarily. Most were unemployed for only a short time. One out of two were unemployed less than weeks as compared to slightly over weeks for those who became unemployed for reasons other than job loss The nature of the job search required to obtain suitable employment for those workers experiencing unemployment is indicated by the amount of time the typical unemployed worker spends in search of employment. In the median duration of unemployment was less than weeks ( Chart A l ) The search period required for the typical unemployed worker to obtain employment varies with the level of the unemployment rate. Since it has been less than weeks. Thus the predominant share of those unemployed spend a relatively short time in search of suitable jobs. Some workers experiencing frequent short periods of unemployment are nevertheless seriously affected by unemployment that is typically of short duration Chart A-l Unemployment Rate and Duration PERCENT WEEKS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED UNEMPLOYMENT R A T E ! / ( Left scale ) MEDIAN DURATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT ( Right scale ) I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ^ UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS I5O Many workers of course enter or leave the labor force without suffering any unemployment. In for example over million persons worked at some time during the year. ( Data for are not yet available. ) Slightly over million of those who worked were unemployed at some time during the year. Hence over million persons worked in and experienced no unemployment even though the average number employed was less than million. Viewed in a slightly different manner over million persons worked less than weeks in But less than million ( percent ) of these part-year workers experienced some unemployment. The rest of those who worked less than a full year entered or voluntarily left the labor force during the year. In addition many workers who worked a full year changed jobs without experiencing any intervening unemployment. In manufacturing alone a sector accounting for over percent of average employment in Bureau of Labor Statistics data indicate that almost million job changes and new hires occurred a number almost equal to the total number of persons experiencing unemployment throughout the entire economy in that year. These data illustrate the amount of flux in the labor force. They also indicate that changing jobs and obtaining employment typically require far less search time than is indicated by the median duration of unemployment since those statistics refer only to workers experiencing unemployment THE DURATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT An increase in the unemployment rate obviously results in additional persons experiencing unemployment. It is less generally recognized that part of the increase in the unemployment rate is attributable to a lengthening in the time that workers must typically spend in search of suitable employment. More people are unemployed because of layoffs and an inability to find other employment immediately. Others who enter the labor force or who left previous employment are more likely than before to go through a period of job search instead of finding suitable employment immediately. Since the increase in the period of time typically required to find work is reflected in the reported unemployment rate the number of additional people experiencing unemployment over a period of time is proportionately less than the increase in the number reported as unemployed at any given time An increase of percentage point in the unemployment rate would on the basis of past experience be expected to result in an increase of about weeks in the median time required for those becoming unemployed to obtain jobs. Thus from the point of view of both the larger number of workers experiencing unemployment and the longer average duration of unemployment higher unemployment rates increase the costs that must be incurred to find suitable jobs by those entering the labor force or changing employment Workers most seriously affected by unemployment and increases in the unemployment rate are the long-term unemployed. In for example over workers experienced more than months of unemployment during the year more than half of them having more than one interval of unemployment. Yet the number unemployed more than months at any given time averaged about Thus even this group of long-term unemployed is subject to substantial turnover For the long-term unemployed searching for suitable employment is extremely costly and the consequences for family income when the principal earner is unemployed for a long period are likely to be severe. Many of these workers undoubtedly have handicaps impairing their ability to get and hold jobs. Manpower training programs to improve their employability or special programs to give them access to job opportunities are required Fortunately their numbers are relatively small. There were reported as unemployed for months or more in monthly statistics ; of these were married males with wives present. Although they represent a small group in a labor force of over million the costs unemployment imposes on them justify strong manpower policies to improve their employment prospects and further reduce the number in this group UNEMPLOYMENT AMONG DIFFERENT GROUPS Unemployment rates differ markedly among classes of workers and population groups. They are particularly high for teenagers and relatively high for women and for Negro and other races ( Tables A-2 and A-3 ) TABLE A Unemployment by age sex and race Age sex and race Number ( thousands ) Total unemployment Teenagers years of age. _ Males White Negro and other races Females White Negro and other races Percentage distribution Rate ( percent ) i Males White Negro and other races. Females Negro and other races. Adults years of age and over. Negro and other races. Females White Negro and other races. Adults years of age- White Males White... i Number of unemployed in each group as percent of labor force in that group Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE A-3. Selected measures of unemployment Number ( thousands ) Measure Total unemployment Rate ( percent ) Race : White Negro and other races Selected type of worker : Blue collar White collar Sex : Male Female Marital status : Male : Married Other __ _ Female : Married Other Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Teenagers and Young People Almost percent of the unemployed in were persons although this age group comprised only percent of the labor force. The unemployment rate for persons years of age was percent in while that for persons years of age and over was percent. Since the overall unemployment rate was percent the high rates for persons years of age contributed percentage points to the overall rate But the high unemployment rates of young workers give a misleading impression of the incidence of unemployment among teenagers as a group as well as of their welfare implications The pattern of activities of persons in the age class differs markedly from that for older persons. The primary activity of nearly half ( percent in ) of the persons in the civilian population age years old is schooling. Although their unemployment rate was percent only percent of all the persons in this age class were both unemployed and not attending school Examining only annual averages obscures the large seasonal variation in the labor force and employment that occurs in this age class. During the school year ( October 1968-May ) percent were attending school ( Table A-4 ) The percentage in school dropped to percent in the summer months ( July and August ) and the unemployment rate of the year age group increased from to percent. The percent of those in this age class who were unemployed and not in school increased from to percent. The number in the labor force however increased by more than one-third. This short-term increase for the summer months occurs for a period averaging about months or less * T A B L E A Distribution of activities of persons years of age annual Activity average Percentage distribution of civilian noninstitutional population years of age total School year October 1968May Summer months July and August Employed Unemployed. Not in labor force Employed Unemployed. Not in labor force Major activity going to school : In civilian labor force : Major activity other : In civilian labor force : Unemployment rate persons years of age ( percent ) : In school Not in school Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics During the school year percent of those in the year age class were in school and unemployed. During most of the school year over percent of those unemployed and in school were interested in only parttime work. In the summer months about percent were looking for part-time work. Even in the large short-term bulge in the labor force occurring in the summer months only percent of the population in this age class was unemployed not in school and looking for full-time work Unemployment rates particularly in the summer months and for Negro and other nonwhite races are comparatively high for persons in the year age class ( Table A-5 ) This is in part a result of the large seasonal change in the labor force that occurs in the summer months. For this age class entry and reentry into the labor force are also much more prevalent than for older workers. This is a period in which a large share of the transition between schooling and attachment to the work force is accomplished Persons in this age class are particularly vulnerable to unemployment because many are seeking their first job. Moreover many of the early school-leavers enter the labor force without skills or qualifications that are easily recognizable by employers. Many are inexperienced at searching for work and often change jobs frequently to explore different types of employment. The large share of those in this age class that are usually searching for employment their inexperience in job search and the relative lack of information both on the part of employers and job seekers are all factors contributing to the high unemployment rates they experience. Lack of family and other commitments also often makes their attachment to work and to any given job more casual than that for older workers X years of age by sex and race TABLE A-5. Distribution of activities of persons Percent of noninstitutional population years of age Unemployment rate ( percent ) persons years of age Period sex and race In school Unemployed In school Not in school In school Not in school School year October 1968-May : Males : White. Negro and other races Females : White Negro and other races Summer months July and August : Males : White Negro and other races Females : White... Negro and other races Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics The earning capability of many workers in this age class is low relative to that for older more experienced workers. A large fraction is also interested in only part-time work and part-time jobs typically pay lower wages than full-time long-term job commitments. Higher minimum wage levels and expanding coverage requirements may therefore be significant factors influencing recent high unemployment rates for persons in this age class The welfare and income implications of unemployment among young persons are somewhat less serious than for other groups such as adult married men. Many of these young persons are part of larger family units. The contribution of working teenagers to average family income in was about percent. More than three-quarters of those who worked earned less than $ Moreover many unemployed teenagers are from families that are relatively well-to-do. Over percent of unemployed teenagers were in families with annual incomes of more than $ ; about the same fraction were in families with incomes of less than $ Women Unemployment rates for women are also relatively high. In the unemployment rate for females was percent compared to percent for males. Nearly half of unemployed women were married with husbands present. In a large fraction of these families the husband was undoubtedly employed and employment for the wife would represent a secondary source of income. Among the unemployed females not married or whose husbands are not present many are young persons with the special reasons for high unemployment already discussed. Since there were unemployed female teenagers in they account for a J large fraction of the unemployed females who were not married or whose husbands were not present Negro and Other Races Unemployment rates for Negroes and other minority races are roughly double those for whites a pattern that has prevailed since the late fifties The higher unemployment rate for Negro and other races reflects in part their different labor force composition. Standardizing for age and sex differences in the labor force decreases the unemployment rates for Negro and other races from to percent but the adjusted rate is still almost double that for whites ( percent ) Standardizing for years of schooling industry occupation and the like would further decrease the relative unemployment rate of Negro and other races. But the need for adjustments of this sort simply reflects an historical pattern of discrimination and disadvantage that more recent policies to improve employment qualifications and opportunities have only begun to ameliorate An additional jobs for unemployed Negroes and members of other races in would have made their unemployment rate equal to that of whites. This is about percent of the annual increase in average employment in each of the last years. Focusing on the additional jobs required for members of Negro and other races to bring their unemployment rate down to the level for whites however gives a misleading impression of the nature of the problem. The problem is not that additional members of Negro and other races are totally unable to obtain employment. In for example persons of Negro and other races were reported as unemployed for months or more in a typical month. The fraction of those unemployed who were unemployed for months or more was slightly higher for Negro and other races than for whites compared to percent Bringing the unemployment rate for Negro and other races down to the level prevailing for whites requires long-term policies designed to improve the distribution of education skill levels occupational and industrial affiliation and job opportunities Appendix B REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS, Washington D.C. December T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully PAUL W. MCCRACKEN Chairman HENDRIK S. HOUTHAKKER HERBERT STEIN Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During In for the third time in its history the Council of Economic Advisers was entirely reconstituted as the result of a change of Administration Paul W. McCracken took office as Chairman of the Council on February replacing Arthur M. Okun who became a Senior Research Fellow at the Brookings Institution Washington D.C. Mr. McCracken who had previously served as a Council Member for years during and is on leave of absence from the University of Michigan where he is Edmund Ezra Day University Professor of Business Administration Herbert Stein and Hendrik S. Houthakker also became Members on February They succeeded Merton J. Peck of Yale University and Warren L. Smith of the University of Michigan. Mr. Houthakker is on leave of absence from Harvard University where he is Professor of Economics. Mr. Stein is on leave from his post as Senior Research Fellow at the Brookings Institution Below is a list of all past Council Members and their dates of service : Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyssrling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H.Jacoby Walter W.Stewart Raymond J.Saulnier. Josephs. Davis Paul W. McCracken. Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich James Tobin Kermit Gordon Walter W. Heller... Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis.. Otto Eckstein... Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L Smith Position Oath of office date Separation date Chairman Vice Chairman. __ Acting Chairman Chairman Membar Vice Chairman.. Member Member Chairman Member Member Member _._ Chairman Member Member Member Member Member. Member Chairman Member Chairman Member _ Member Member Chairman Member Member Member August August November May August May June September8,1952.. March September December t-f l&sJ'J-. UCWCIIIUVI April December May December November May January January January August November May September November Feburary February Februarys _ July November January February August January December February April January October January January January July December November February August February January June January January ; ECONOMIC POLICYMAKING AND THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The Employment Act of describes explicitly the objectives of economic policy as " creating and maintaining in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The foremost duty of the Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) is to give the President advice based on economic analysis which will assist him in assuring that this responsibility of the Federal Government is met A variety of analytical techniques is used ranging from economic models incorporating complex equation systems to the careful judgment and appraisal that must finally temper the answers from formal systems. Statistical analyses of many aspects of economic conditions and stabilization policies are a continuing part of Council work. Final output of this analysis is reflected in personal consultations with the President and in memoranda from the Chairman of the Council to the President and others in the Administration Although the Employment Act of specifically directs the Council " to appraise the various programs and activities of the Federal Government " this function of the Agency is less familiar to the general public because it is largely internal. The Council works with other agencies to assist the Administration in formulating proposals for new programs and policies and in reappraising existing ones. It also recommends positions on bills proposed in Congress. Since January the Council has made formal recommendations on bills that have been either in the early stages of consideration by the Administration or the Congress or have come to the President 's desk to be signed or vetoed. The Council brings to its appraisal the analytical methods of economics and it seeks to take the viewpoint of the public at large or the economy as a whole During the Council participated in formulating a number of new Administration programs including programs for manpower training transportation social security unemployment compensation welfare and agriculture. In each case following background analysis by the staff the Council 's position was defined in memoranda to the President. The CEA also played a role in drafting some proposed legislation Analysis by the Council and its staff also helped reexamine a number of existing Federal Government programs policies and procedures. Among these was the CEA 's participation in inter agency efforts directed at such matters as interest rate ceilings on bank deposits minority business enter- prise international monetary reform and trade policy meat and oil imports wheat exports and a wide range of other programs and policies Much attention was devoted to the pressing problems in the construction and housing sectors of the economy during The Council played an active role in interagency groups dealing with lumber prices housing prospects in the seventies and the cutback in new contracts for direct Federal construction. The Council also participated in the Cabinet Committee on Construction appointed by the President and the Chairman of the Cjouncil was directed by the President to serve as Chairman of this Committee The Chairman of the Council also chaired a committee to study policies for handling the Government 's uranium enrichment plants The CEA assists the President in the preparation of his Economic Report and also prepares its own Annual Report POLICY COORDINATION The Council and its staff are in daily contact with other Government officials. There is especially close coordination among the Treasury the Budget Bureau and the CEA. At least weekly the Secretary of the Treasury the Director of the Bureau of the Budget and the Chairman of the Council meet. Known as trie " Troika " this coordinating group has two other " tiers. " The second tier consists of one of the other two Council Members the Assistant Director of the Budget for Economic Policy and the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy. A third tier consisting of senior staff economists from the three agencies meets frequently to appraise the economic situation and its policy implications. Outlook memoranda are prepared and cleared through the second tier of the Troika for use by the principals. The Troika meets with the President frequently. From time to time the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System participates in these meetings also The new Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy established by Executive Order of the President on January serves as a major forum for broader policy discussion and coordination. Members include the President the Vice President the Secretaries of the Treasury Agriculture Commerce Labor and Housing and Urban Development the Counselors to the President ( Mr. Burns and Mr. Moynihan ) the Director of the Bureau of the Budget the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers ( who coordinates the work of the Committee ) This Cabinet Committee considers the broad spectrum of economic program and policy issues. During the President appointed subcommittees to study such problems as post-Vietnam planning agricultural trade economic aspects of antitrust laws legal ceilings on interest rates Federal lending policies and procedures establishment of a commission to review Federal statistics and the availability and prices of softwood lumber and plywood The Cabinet Committee on Construction was established by the President on September in response to the growing problems in this industry. Its purpose is to study the impact of Federal activities on the industry and to appraise the Nation 's needs for construction and housing and to devise ways to meet these needs. Formerly under the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy the interagency Task Force on Requirements for the Housing Program became a part of this Cabinet Committee. Members of the Cabinet Committee on Construction are the Secretaries of Commerce Labor Housing and Urban Development and Transportation the Postmaster General the Administrator of the General Services Administration and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers The Council participates in a variety of other activities of interagency concern. Reflecting this wider role the Chairman of the Council serves as a member of the Rural Affairs Council the Urban Affairs Council and the National Defense Review Committee ; he meets with the National Security Council and the Environmental Quality Council when agenda items make this relevant. The other two Council Members as well as senior staff economists also participate in the task forces and study groups designated by these councils. The Chairman of the Council regularly attends Cabinet meetings There is a particularly close association between the Council and the Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) of the Congress a Committee which was also created by the Employment Act of " to make a continuing study of matters relating to the Economic Report3 ' and generally for the purposes of furthering the objectives of the Act. Each year soon after the President has submitted his Economic Report to Congress the Council testifies before the JEC which itself is required by the Act to file a report to the Senate and House by March of each year presenting its findings on the recommendations and content of the Economic Report. Testimony may also be presented to the JEC at other times throughout the year. During the Council testified four times before the JEC. On February the Council testified on the economic thinking of the new Administration. On April the Chairman testified before the Subcommittee on Economic Statistics of the JEC in support of the decennial census. On June the Chairman testified before the JEC 's Subcommittee on Economy in Government on defense spending and national priorities in the years ahead. And on October the Council reviewed economic conditions and the outlook with the Subcommittee on Fiscal Policy of the JEC Although Council testimony in the past has largely been limited to the Joint Economic Commitee three exceptions arose in On March the Chairman testified before the Senate Committee on Banking and Cur- rency with regard to interest rates and monetary policy. On May the Chairman appeared with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget before the Committee on Ways and Means of the House on behalf of the Administration recommendations for extending the income tax surcharge. And on September the Council testified before the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives on a bill that sought to formalize the apparatus of wage-price guideposts At the international level the Council Members and staff are active participants in meetings of the Economic Policy Commitee ( EPC ) of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) The Chairman of the Council heads the U.S. delegation to the EPC. This Committee is part of the international machinery by which nations strive for better mutual understanding and coordination of their domestic economic policies. A Member and senior staff economists also participated in the subcommittees of the EPC on balance of payments and international financial problems ( Working Party I I I ) and Council staff have been active in OECD studies of the short-term outlook ( Working Group on Short-Term Economic Prospects ) of long-term economic growth ( Working Party I I ) and of manpower policies pursued in the member countries ( Manpower and Social Affairs Committee ) In Council personnel attended seven of these international meetings PUBLICATIONS The Council 's Annual Report remains a major communication between the Council and citizens generally. About copies of the January Economic Report have been distributed. The Council also prepares Economic Indicators a monthly publication of the Joint Economic Committee. The current circulation of Economic Indicators is approximately PUBLIC CONTACTS The Council arranged periodic meetings during the year with groups of leading academic business and labor union economists in order to keep informed about their views on the major economic questions of the day There is a constant stream of visitors to the Council from outside of Government among them business and labor leaders students educators foreign visitors the press and interested citizens generally. Informal interviews and discussions are also held on a wide range of economic policy problems and issues. Finally to explain economic conditions and policies during the year Council Members made a number of public speeches and granted interviews to newspapers and magazines ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN Under authority of the Employment Act as amended by Reorganization Plan No. in the Chairman of the Council bears full responsibility for employing the Agency 's staff and he is officially charged with reporting the Council 's views to the President OTHER COUNCIL MEMBERS The day-to-day direction of the professional staff is the general responsibility of the other two Council Members. While the Council has no departments there is an informal division of responsibilities by subject area. Mr Houthakker 's responsibilities include economic analyses by the Council 's staff in such areas as the balance of payments and international financial matters trade policy foreign aid and economic development agriculture transportation industrial organization and antitrust labor relations longterm economic growth consumer affairs natural resources technology and environmental problems Mr. Stein 's responsibilities include forecasting and analyses of economic conditions fiscal policy and taxation monetary policy and financial institutions housing and urban affairs welfare and social security problems education manpower and human resources national defense matters and post-Vietnam planning generally In addition to these responsibilities Mr. Houthakker and Mr. Stein represent the Council in a wide variety of official capacities including meetings of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy and the Cabinet Committee on Construction. One of these two Members is always designated as Acting Chairman when the Chairman is absent from Washington PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the Council 's senior professional staff included economists and one statistician. Assisting the Chairman in carrying out his numerous official responsibilities is the Special Assistant to the Chairman Albert H. Cox Jr. Mr. Cox also handles press relations for the Council acts as staff secretary for the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy and performs professional duties including work in his primary fields of specialty ( financial markets and monetary conditions ) Senior Staff Economists William H. Branson Murray F. Foss and Frank C. Ripley work primarily on analyses and forecasting of economic conditions. Mr. Branson who along with Mr. Foss represents the CEA in the third tier of the Troika ( discussed earlier ) also did extensive work during the year on the Administration 's proposed welfare program and on the review of economic aspects of the defense program. Mr. Ripley 's primary responsibility has been in the development and refinement of the Troika forecasting models the analysis of price-making forces and other econometric studies Senior Staff Economist Phillip D. Cagan and Staff Economist Robert Rene de Cotret cover monetary policy and financial institutions and the influence of developments in this area on economic activity. Senior Staff Economist Charles E. McLure Jr. has been concerned with matters of fiscal policy and public finance including tax policy problems of measuring the Federal budget cost-benefit analyses of expenditure programs social security and economic and budgetary aspects of Federal credit programs The fields of human resource development and labor market analysis are assigned to Marvin H. Kosters and Michael H. Moskow both Senior Staff Economists. Mr. Kosters and Mr. Moskow are primarily concerned with labor market conditions manpower programs and problems industrial relations labor union developments and wage trends and prospects Housing and construction problems and the problems of small business and minority business enterprise are the primary focus of Sidney L. Jones Senior Staff Economist. Mr. Jones also serves as the staff secretary for the Cabinet Committee on Construction. Staff Economist Irene Lurie works in the field of welfare and income maintenance and on other economic aspects of poverty problems Three Senior Staff Economists specialize in economic analysis of particular programs and activities of the Federal Government. During Thomas G. Moore participated in a wide variety of interagency studies including those concerned with the uranium enrichment facilities of the Atomic Energy Commission urban mass transit the supersonic transport pollution problems domestic satellite communications antitrust policy airports and airways economics of marine resources electric power reliability and international aviation policy. Studies relating to oil import quotas tariff preferences for less developed countries and foreign aid were among those to which Senior Staff Economist Edward J. Mitchell contributed. Senior Staff Economist Harold O. Carter is concerned with the economics of agriculture and the many aspects of agricultural and rural development programs and policies Saul Nelson has been the Senior Staff Economist concerned with price and commodity developments and during the year he participated in various interagency studies in these fields. In October Mr. Nelson was given a leave of absence to work on a project for the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Analysis of international economic problems is carried forward by G Paul Wonnacott and Thomas D. Willett Senior Staff Economists. Mr Wonnacott has been concerned with such areas as balance of payments and international financial developments foreign trade policy and problems concerning the interrelationships of domestic economies. In addition to participating in the coverage of these areas Mr. Willett has been engaged in the study of longer range aspects of international financial policy Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician is in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Miss James has major responsibility for managing the Council 's economic and statistical information system. She also supervises the preparation of Economic Indicators for publication the preparation of tables and charts for a wide variety of meetings throughout the year and for the Economic Report and the fact-checking of memoranda speeches and testimony Assisting the senior professional staff are four Junior Economists Leslie J. Barr Paul N. Courant Robert A. Kelly and Rosemary D. Marcuss Barry M. Levenson and Timothy B. Sivia are research assistants. Assisting Miss James in the Statistical Office are Teresa D. Bradburn Catherine H Furlong Christine L. Johnson and V. Madge McMahon From time to time leading members of the economics profession have acted as consultants to the Council in various capacities. At the end of the list of active consultants included Edward F. Denison ( Brookings Institution ) Marten S. Estey ( University of Pennsylvania ) Ray C. Fair ( Princeton University ) Milton Friedman ( University of Chicago ) Gottfried Haberler ( Harvard University ) Arnold Harberger ( University of Chicago ) David J. Ott ( Clark University ) George Stigler ( University of Chicago ) and Lloyd Ulman ( University of California ) In the Council continued its student intern program. Under this program the Council employs a limited number of outstanding students in economics both graduate and undergraduate for various periods of time particularly in the summer. Employed under this program in were Henry E. Cole W. Donald Dresser H. Diana Hicks Neil J. McMullen Paul B. Manchester Richard C. Marston Mary E. Procter Daniel L Rubenfeld and Earl M. Unger. Mr. Dresser Mr. McMullen and Miss Procter also returned as consultants during preparation of this Annual Report SUPPORTING STAFF The Council 's Administrative Officer James H. Ayres has responsibility for office management including general supervision of the secretaries and messengers duplicating and the Agency 's budget. Mr. Ayres who reports to the Special Assistant to the Chairman is assisted by Nancy F. Skidmore Elizabeth A. Zea and Bettye T. Siegel The secretarial staff includes Daisy S. Babione Mayme Burnett Mary C Fibich Elizabeth F. Gray Laura B. Hoffman Bessie M. Lafakis Patricia A. Lee Betty Lu Lowry Eleanor A. McStay Joyce A. Pilkerton Dorothy L Reid Earnestine Reid and Linda A. Reilly. Margaret L. Snyder serves primarily as the Agency 's contact for general public information. James W Gatling Judson A. Byrd and A. Keith Miles operate the duplicating and messenger department In preparing its Annual Report the Council relied upon the editorial skills of Rosannah C. Steinhoff DEPARTURES Charles B. Warden Jr. who had served as Special Assistant to the Chairman for more than years resigned to accept a position with Data Resources Inc. Lexington Mass The Council 's professional staff is drawn primarily from universities largely on a 1-year basis. Many therefore who had served the Council during were not on the staff at the end of the year. Senior Staff Economists who resigned during the year were Leonall C. Andersen F. Gerard Adams Barry P. Bosworth Frederick W. Deming Marten S. Estey Lawrence B Krause James W. Kuhn Roger G. Noll David J. Ott Jack Rosen Courtenay M. Slater Thomas T. Stout and Luther T. Wallace. Junior economists who served the Council in but were not members of the staff at the end of the year were Susan R. Ackerman and Roselee N. Roberts. Research assistants Elaine R. Goldstein and Joanne C. Turner also served for a part of the year. Secretarial resignations included Frances V. Broderick Anne G. Donnelly Gladys R. Durkin Roberta R. Kirk Helen H. Knox Karen J. MacFarland Lucille F. Saverino and Joy T. Sindelar The Council of Economic Advisers suffered a great loss with the passing of David W. Lusher June Mr. Lusher widely known in this country and abroad as a student of economic developments and policy joined the staff of the Council in March Appendix C STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National income or expenditure : C-l. Gross national product or expenditure C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices G-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product C-4. Gross national product by major type of product C-5. Gross national product by major type of product in prices C-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups G-7. Gross national product by sector G-8. Gross national product by sector in prices G-9. Gross national product by industry in prices G-10. Personal consumption expenditures C-l Gross private domestic investment C-12. National income by type of income C-l Relation of gross national product and national income C-14. Relation of national income and personal income C-15. Disposition of personal income C-l6. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices C-l Sources of personal income C-18. Sources and uses of gross saving C-19. Saving by individuals C-20. Number and money income ( in prices ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Population employment wages and productivity : C-21. Population by age groups : Estimates and projections C-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force C-23. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age C-24. Selected unemployment rates C-25. Unemployment by duration C-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data C-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments C-28. Average weekly hours of work in selected nonagricultural industries C-29. Average gross hourly earnings in selected industries C-30. Average gross weekly earnings in selected nonagricultural industries C-31. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries C-32. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and prices C-33. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices C-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy O Production and business activity : C-35. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions C-36. Industrial production indexes market groupings C-37. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures C-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate C-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment G-40. New construction activity ^ C-41. New housing starts and applications for financing C-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade C-43. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories G-44. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Prices : G-45 C-46 C-47 C-48 C-49 Consumer Consumer Consumer Wholesale Wholesale price price price price price indexes indexes indexes indexes indexes by major groups by special groups selected commodities and services by major commodity groups by stage of processing Money supply credit and finance : C-50. Money supply C-51. Bank loans and investments C-52. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors C-53. Selected liquid assets held by the public C-54. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves C-55. Bond yields and interest rates C-56. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding C-57. Instalment credit extended and repaid C-58. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing C-59. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender C-60. Net public and private debt Government finance : G-61. Federal budget receipts and outlays G-62. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt C ~ Relation of the Federal Budget to the Federal sector of the national income and -product accounts G-64. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts C-65. Public debt securities by kind of obligation C-66. Estimated ownership of public debt securities C-67. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt C-68. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts C-69. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts G-70. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Page Corporate profits and finance : G-71. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations C-72. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) C-73. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) by industry group C-74. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business C-75. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporations C-76. State and municipal and corporate securities offered C-77. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit C-78. Business formation and business failures Agriculture : C-79. Income from agriculture C-80. Farm production indexes C-81. Farm population employment and productivity C-82. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio C-83. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs C-84. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture Page International statistics : C-85. United States balance of payments C-86. United States merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups C-87. United States merchandise exports and imports by area C-88. United States overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years C-89. International reserves and C-90. United States reserve assets : Gold stock holdings of convertible foreign currencies and reserve position in the International Monetary Fund C-91. Price changes in international trade C-92. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current prices Symbols used : Preliminary __ Not available ( also not applicable ) * Amount insignificant in terms of the particular unit ( e.g. less than $ million where unit is billions of dollars ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE C-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Total gross national product Government purchases of goods and services * Personal consumption expenditures ^ Gross private domestic investment2 exports of goods and services Net Federal Total Total National defense5 Other State and local '28478 ; I960. v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II IV : I II III IV : L II III IV See Table C-10 for detailed components a See Table C l l for detailed components * See Table C-6 for exports and imports separately < Net of Government sales * This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Total gross national product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Serv- Total ices Total Change in busi- Total oiructures Producers ' durable equipment Cfriif Residential structures nessinventories A 'ftf v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : ! ____ II III. I : L___ II.. Ill IV.. : I II.. Ill IV * See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-2.- Gross national product or expenditure in prices Continued [ Billions of dollars prices ] Net exports of goods and services Government purchasesl of goods and services Year or quarter Net exports Exports Imports Total Federal State and local -L0 I960... P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I : I : I II. III IV. III IV III IV i Net of Government sales Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE G-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Gross private domestic investment * Personal consumption expenditures Fixed investment Total gross national Year or quarter Nonresidential ucH Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures ResiProdential ducers ' strucdurable tures equipment ? 51'. v : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV p See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product by sector Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Private General government S IV p v : II... Ill IV... : II III IV : II III Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Gross national product less compensation of general government employees. See also Tables C-7 and C-8 Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-4. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Year or quarter Total gross national product Total Final sales Nondurable g Durable goods Final Total sales = ? C CO fj-5 Final Total sales II | Final Total sales II Gross Serv- Struc- auto tures prodices uct C TO 12K0 p l ! l Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III. IV. : I II III. IV. : I II. III IV v Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics l82 TABLE G-5. Gross national product by major type o ] product in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Goods output Year or quarter Total gross national product Durable goods Total Nondurable g Serv- Strucices tures Final ll Final Total sales Final Total sales > o F Final Total sales Gross auto product .'6 * i 1966._ p Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II.. III. IV.. : II.. III. IV.. : II. III IV P Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups ( Billions of dollars ] Persons Government Disposable personal income Year or quarter Net receipts Expenditures Surplus or PerLess : Perdeficit sonal sonal Inter- Equals : ( ) con- saving Tax Less : Less : Equals : est naTotal and TransTransPurpaid exclud- sumpor tional tion nonfers Equals : Total fers chases inand disex- saving tax interNet exinterof come Total i trans- ing in- penditerest reest pendi- est goods reand fer ( ) tures and ceipts ceipts and tures and and prodpayservor ac- subsubuct acments transfers cruals sidies a sidies ices counts to foreigners * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II... III.. IV.. : IL_._ III.. IV.. : I L I I I See footnotes at end of table T A B L E G-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] International Business Net exports of goods TransExcess and services fers to of Gross fortranspriExcess eigners Gross fers revate of in- by peror tained domes- vestsons Less : Equals : of net earn- tic in- ment Exand Net Imexings vestGovexports ports ( ) ports ment * ernports <- ) ment Year or quarter 1963__ * _ * * Gross naTotal Statis- tional income tical proddisor reuct ceipts crep- or exancy penditure * * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L_ II III.. IV : II III.. IV : II.. III IV v _ > Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest paid by government and subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and wage accruals less disbursements * Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing See Table C l l Net foreign investment with sign changed Note. Corporate profits tax and related items for reflect repeal of investment tax credit Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-7. Gross national product by sector J929-69 [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private productl Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Total Total Nonfarm2 Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product ? * Seasonally adjusted annual rate : | | III IV : II III IV : II III IV v * Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. The Post Office and public power systems are examples of government enterprises ; on the other hand State universities and public parks are part of general government activities s Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C Gross national product by sector in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Gross private product i Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Tntal i oiai Nonfarm2 Total Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government products L.2 L.3 p Seasonally adjusted annual rates : : l II. III IV. : ! III IV : II. III. IV p Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation. The Post Office and public power systems are examples of government enterprises ; on the other hand State universities and public parks are part of general government activities Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE G-9. Gross national product by industry in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Manufacturing AgriTotal culture Congross forestract nats contional and strucproduct fishtion Year Total eries sale and retail trade GovFinance erninsurment ance Servand All and ices govern- other real ment estate enterprises VA/hnlo Transportation comNonDurmuniable durable cation goods goods and indus- indus- utilitries tries ties ^ i Mining rest of the world and residual ( the difference between gross national product measured as sum of final products and gross national product measured as sum of gross product by industries ) Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-10. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] tion Durable goods Service : > Nondurable goods Q Year or quarter Is CO Q a P i g Is co I if o a is I = CO JEL " o h- O o TJ { = .Q a o lo = s DO C | c " o o a> O I | 0> CO O X o 1933._ [ I960... ~ " I " .'. p Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II. Ill IV : 1.II Ill IV : II III IV Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics O l89 TABLE C-ll. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixed investment Year or quarter Total gross private domestic investment Nonresidential Structures Total Residential structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonfarm Nonfarm Farm Nonfarm l ! l ( ) P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I III. " IV._ : I II. III. IV. : I II. III Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE G-12. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Total national income1 Total Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Business and professional income Compensation of employees Income Rental inInSupof Net come Inven- farm come pleof Corpo- Inven- interof tory proWages ments tory est perrate unin- valuto prieand valusala- wages Total corpo- ation tors sons Total profits ation before adjustrated adjustand ries taxes < ment enter- ment sala2 prises ries * * * * ~ L7 v * * Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' | | III IV.. : II ML IV : II III. IV v National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table C > Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items Includes change in inventories < See Table C-71 for corporate tax liability and profits after taxes Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-13. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Gross national product Less : Capital consumption allowances Equals : Net national product Plus : Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Less : Indirect business taxes Total Federal State and local Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income * v_ ( 137J Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. III IV. : I II.. III. IV. : I II.. III. IV p Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics T A B L E G-14. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment National income Year or quarter Equals : Plus : Less : GovContri- Wage butions accruals ernment transfer less for payments dissocial insur- burse- to persons ments ance Interest paid by governDividends ment ( net ) and by consumers Business transfer Persona income payments 1969P Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV _ : L II III IV : II III IV P o o i Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-15. Disposition of personal income Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPerEquals : sonal Interest sonal Percontransfer sonal sump- paid by paysaving contion ments expend- sumers to foreigners itures Personal outlays Total Billions of dollars Consumption expenditures Personal saving Percent I960... v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I. II.. ML IV.. : I.. II. III. IV. : I.. IV p Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-16. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and prices Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Current prices prices Current prices prices Current prices I960. v prices Current prices Population ( thousands ) i prices Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. III. IV. : I II.. III. IV. : I II.. III IV i Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE C-17. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Wage and salary disbursementsl Total personal income Year or quarter Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distrib- Service utive indus- industries tries Propri e tors ' income Government Other labor income Business and professional Farm '5 " 1L4 I960 1969P Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' II III IV * II III IV : I II III IV v See footnotes at end of table I96 TABLE C Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Rental income Diviof per- dends sons Year or quarter Personal interest income Old-age survivors disability Total and health insurance benefits State unemployment insurance benefits Veterans ' benefits Less : Personal contributions Other for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income3 * * * * * * I960 _ v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L. II III IV : II III IV : II III... IV p The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table C-12 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Includes change in inventories Nonagricultural-income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE G-18. Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Year or quarter Total Gross investment Total Personal saving Gross business saving Total Federal State and local Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment i Statistical discrepancy ^ ~ ! ( ) i * l * * ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L_ _ ._._ II III IV : L II III IV : II III IV v Net exports of goods and services less net transfers to foreigners Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Note. Corporate profits tax and related items for reflect repeal of investment tax credit Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-19. Saving by individuals * [ Billions of dollars ] Increase in financial assets Year or quarter CurTotal Total demand deposits Net investment in Less Increase in debt Securities InsurNon- Mortance Savand Con- cor- gage Corpoings pen- Non- sumer podebt Con- Other Govrate Corpo- sion farm rate acon sumer debt9 duounts ernand homes rables busi- non- credit rate rement for- stock4 serves ness farm bonds3 eign assets homes bonds ( Z- * " II.. III. IV.. : l _ II.. III. IV.. * : I II.. III. ! ? * * ! ! Individuals'saving sector includes households private trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate businesses. Revisions in account structure and estimation procedure are reflected in these data Includes miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately U.S. Government and agency securities and State and local obligations Includes investment company shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Security credit policy loans noncorporate business debt and other debt Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-20. Number and money income ( in prices ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of heady Total White With incomes Total under $ number Median Num ( mil- income ber Perlions ) ( mil- cent lions ) Year FAMIUES : i $ _ Total number Median ( mil- income lions ) $ " Negro and other races With incomes With incomes under $ Total under $ number Median NumNumPer- ( mil- income ber ber Per ( mil- cent lions ) ( mil- cent lions ) lions ) $ With incomes under $ With incomes under $ Number ( millions ) UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS ^ With incomes under $ Percent NumPerber ( mil- cent lions ) Number ( millions ) Percent The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family Based on revised methodology The term " Unrelated individuals " refers to persons years old and over ( other than inmates of institutions ) who are not living with any relatives Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE G-21. Population by age groups : Estimates and projections 1970-85l [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Under Estimates : Total and over ? 1968.// 196,92fr< | >7 ^ ^ \ } | /j } } : Series C _ Series D } } : Series C.___ Series D ) : Series C Series D___ Projections : : Series C Series D } i | } } } i Two of four series projected by the cohort method and based on different assumptions with regard to completed fertility which moves gradually toward a level of children per women for Series C and children per women for Series D. For further explanation of method of projection and for additional data see " Population Estimates Current Population Reports Series P-25 No. " December Note. Data for Armed Forces overseas included beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning 1950>> Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE G-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Noninstitutional population Year or month Total labor force ( including Armed Forces ) Employment Armed Forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Total Unemlabor force as ployment percent as perof non- cent of institu- civilian tional labor popuforce lation Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent I960. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. ! See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Total labor force ( including Armed Forces ) Employment Armed Forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Total Unemlabor force as ployment percent as perof non- cent of institu- civilian tional labor popuforce lation Percent : Jan. Feb Mar_ AprMay June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July._ Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb. Mar__ Apr. May._ June JulyAug__ Sept. Oct.. Nov._ Dec Note. Labor force data in Tables C-22 through C-25 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-23. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Unemployment Employment Males Males Females Females Year or month Total Total years Total years years and years and over Total Total over years years and over Total years years and over ; ! ; ! ; \ 5J7S d65774is } | ; " " * Ul,342r * J ' ^ ^ 44,859l27 ^ J07 ! ) 3'430 | 45v Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr Apr Vlay May June July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. MarApr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. L,434 [ : Note See Note Table C-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-24. Selected unemployment rates [ Percent ] By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years Men years and over Women years and over : White By color Negro and other races By selected groups Experienced wage and salary workers Married men * Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers Labor force time lost * Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar_ Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec * Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March Data for are for May Includes craftsmen operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October < Man-hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force man-hours Note.-See Note Table C-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics O TABLE G-25. Unemployment by duration Duration of unemployment Total unemployment Year or month Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Thousands of persons years of age and over __. '._ _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted l : Jan Feb Apr May June _ _ _ _ _ _ _ July Aug Sept Oct _ __ _ _ _ Nov Dec : Jan Feb ._ Mar _ _ _ ___ Apr __ June _ __________ May July. __ _ Aug Sept oct : : : _ : : : Nov Dec ____ : __ Mar I Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not necessarily add to totals Note. See Note Table C-22 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Covered employ-1 ment Year or month State programs Insured Total unem- benefits Insured ploypaid unemment ( milploy ( weekly lions ment averof dolage ) s lars ) Thousands p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : J a n Feb Mar Apr May June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov p.Dec p U,973 P58,833 P59,179 P59,036 P58 P58,865 s Exhaustions Unadjusted Weekly average thousands P57,969 Initial claims Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of Seasondolally ad- lars ) justed Average weekly check ( dollars ) Percent 3>8 n,806 Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unemployment compensation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State programs for temporary extension of benefits from June through June expiration date of program Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment * Includes benefits paid under extended duration provisions of State laws beginning June Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Preliminary ; December is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Manpower Administration TABLE C-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Total wage and salary workers Year or month Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Government Services Federal State and local ^ ^ ; ^ ^ ^ ._ v See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons } Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Government Services Federal State and local Seasonally adjusted : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July.. Aug.. Sept._ Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July._ Aug._ Sept. Oct.. Nov p_ Dec v Note. Data in Tables C-27 through C-33 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables C-22 through C-25 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers and which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-28. Average weekly hours of work in selected nonagricultural Year or month Total nonagricultural private i v Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods Contract construction Retail trade Wholesale trade industries Bituminous coal and lignite mining : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June _ July Aug Sept Oct.. Nov Dec : Jan Feb MarApr May. June Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Class railroads Telephone communication <37 * * MO M0 M0.7 * a Jnadjusted Seasonally adjusted S Mn addition to industries shown separately total includes other mining ; other transportation and public utilities ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April Beginning data include eating and drinking places * Eleven-month average ; excludes data for July Note. Hours and earnings data in Tables C-28 through C-33 relate to production workers in manufacturing and mining to construction workers in contract construction and generally to nonsupervisory employees in other industries. See Table C-31 for unadjusted weekly hours in manufacturing. See also Note Table C-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-29. Average gross IVlanufactu ing Total non- Year or month agricultural private hourly Total NonDurable durable goods goods earnings Contract construction Retail trade in selected industries Bituminous Whole- coal and sale lignite trade mining Class railroads Telephone communica tion Agricultures $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ ? v : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr MayJune.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov Dec.. : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept Oct... Nov * >._ Decp.. " " " * For coverage see footnote Table C-28 Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April * Beginning data include eating and drinking places Eleven-month average ; excludes data for July Note See Note Tables C-27 and C-28 Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Department of Agriculture $ T6iT I. ~ ~ I. ~ 2T TABLE C-30. Average gross weekly earnings in selected nonagricultural Year or month Total nonagricultural private i Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurabie goods $ $ $ ' v : Jan Feb.. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec.. Retail trade Wholesale trade $ Contract construction industries Bituminous coal and lignite mining Class railroads Telephone communication $ $ $ $ $ $ 99/47 ' : Jan Feb Mar Apr _ MayJune | July Aug Sept Oct p Nov Dec p For coverage see footnote Table C-28 Nine-month average April through December because of new series started in April * Beginning data include eating and drinking places Note See Note Tables C-27 and C-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-31. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries Durable goods manufacturing industries Al manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Average hourly earnings Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Year or month Gross Excluding overtime Gross $ * Ex- Adjusted Exclud- hourly cluding earnings Gross ing over- ( 1957over59 = time time ) i $ $ : " " : : : : Apr May... June July Aug Sept oct Nov Dec $ May June July : Jan Feb Mar Apr Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec P ExExExcludcludcluding Gross ing Gross ing overoverovertime time time : Jan Feb Mar Gross $ Earnings in current prices adjusted to exclude the effects of overtime and interindustry shifts Annual average not available ; April used Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Note See Note Tables C-27 and C-28 See Table C-28 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics $ TABLE G Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings2 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current prices prices * Worker with no dependents Current prices pricesl Worker with three dependents Current prices prices1 $ $ $ $ $ $ Earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Note. " Total private " consists of manufacturing ; contract construction ; retail and wholesale trade ; mining ; transportation and public utilities ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services See also Note Tables C-27 and C-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-33. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and prices Average spendable weekly earnings2 Average gross weekly earnings Worker with no dependents Year or month Current prices pricesl Current prices prices ' Worker with three dependents Current prices prices * $ $ $ $ $ $ June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec. : Jan. Feb. Mar_ Apr. May June July. Aug Sept Oct__ Nov p Dec p P : Jan. Feb Mar. Earnings in current prices divided by the consumer price index Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Note See Note Tables C-27 and C-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy [ = ] Output per man-hour Nonfarm industries Year Total private Farm Total Man-hours2 Output i NonMan- manufac- ufactur- turing ing Nonfarm industries Total private Farm Total NonMan- manufac- ufactur- turing ing Nonfarm industries Total private Farm Total NonMan- manufac- ufacturturing ing Establishment basis v_ Labor force basis v Output refers to gross national product in prices Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data * Man-hours estimates based primarily on labor force data Note. For information on sources methodology trends and underlying factors influencing the measures see Bureau of Labor Statistics Department of Labor Bulletin No. " Trends in Output per Man-Hour in the Private Economy " December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics 2l6 PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE G-35. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ] Total industrial production Year or month Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable I960 ' Seasonally adjusted C S : Jan.Feb Mr a Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec S : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June. July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-36. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = Final products Year.or month Total industrial production Consumer goods * Materials Equipment Total Automotive products Home goods Total including defense Business Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods " Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug_ Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov_ Dec Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2l8 TABLE G-37. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ] Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Instruments and related products Chemical petroleum and rubber products Primary metals Machinery I960. P. Transportation equipment Clay glass and lumber Furniture and miscellaneous Textile apparel and leather products Fabricated metal products Year or month Paper and printing Foods beverages and tobacco Seasonally adjusted Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec p : Jan.. Feb.. Mar_ Apr__ May. June. July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate Utilization rate Output Capacity * Period Total Advanced products output = Primary products Percent .._ v Seasonally adjusted IV : II III IV : II III IV : II Ill IV : _ III IV " * | | V HI v IV * _ IN II III IV : II For description and source of data see " A Revised I ndex of Manufacturing Capacity " Frank de Leeuw Frank E. Hopkins and Michael D. Sherman " Federal Reserve Bulletin " November pp. See also McGraw-Hill surveys on 'Business Plans for New Plants and Equipment " for data on capacity and oparating rates Output as percent of capacity ; based on unrounded data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( output ) and sources in footnote ( capacity and utilization rate ) TABLE C-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment 1947-69l [ Billions of dollars ] Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Transportation Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Railroad Other Public utilities Commercial and others P Seasonally adjusted annual rates III IV.. : II... III ' II III IV : Excludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural service ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account Commercial and other includes trade service finance insurance communications and construction Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures Series revised beginning Comparable data prior to are not available. A full description of the new actual expenditure series will appear in the January issue of the " Survey of Current Business " and of the revised expectations data in the February issue Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Securities and Exchange Commission O TABLE G-40. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential building ( nonfarm ) Public construction Nonresidential building and other construction Total Total Total * New housing units Total Commercials Industrial Federally owned State and locally owned * Others 17,8S9 New series5 New seriesfl See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-40. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Public construction Private construction Residential building ( nonfarm ) Total Year or month new construction Total Total * New housing units Nonresidential building and other construction Total Commercial Industrial Total Others State Fedand erally locally owned owned Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr... May... June.. July... Aug Sept... Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan Feb... Mar... Apr May... June... S e p t O c t N O V P July Aug Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants and garages Farm institutional public utilities and all other private Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and locally owned projects New series in reflects differences due to the new higher level series of housing starts and farm construction expenditures and the reduced level value in place series for public utilities. See " Construction Report C30-61 ( Supplement ) " for6 a description of the differences New series differs from old in that it reflects differences in due to the introduction of new series for private nonresidential buildings and differences in due to the introduction of new series for State and locally owned public construction. See " Construction Report C30-65S " for a description of the differences Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census except as noted TABLE G-41. New housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Private i Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Proposed home construction Nonfarm Type of structure Nonfarm Total Government home programs Total One family Two or more families FHA3 VA New private housing AppliReunits author- cations quests for for ized * VA FHA apcompraismitals ments New series P. Monthly totals unadjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-41. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public ^ Year or month Private Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Type of structure2 Nonfarm Proposed home construction Government home programs Total Total One family Two or more families FHA3 VA New private housing AppliReunits author- cations quests for for ized * FHA VA comapmitpraisments als Monthly totals unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar... Apr May... June July Aug Sept... Oct... Nov * >-._ Dec * >___ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. JuneJuly. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar__ Apr.. May. JuneJuly.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct.. Nov p. Dec p. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly financed starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts Not available prior to except for nonfarm for s Units are for to family housing < Data beginning cover approximately permit-issuing places. Data for are based on places and places. The addition of approximately permit-issuing places in contributed an increase of percent in total permit authorizations Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction FHA program approved in June : all activity included in i Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) and Veterans Administration ( VA ) except as noted TABLE C-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month InvenInvenSales i tories Ratio Sales i tories Ratio s Sales i Inyen- Ratio Salesi Inven- Ratio tories tories " ; " _ K Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb.._ Mar... Apr May.. June.__ July.. Aug Sept Oct.__ Nov.. Dec : Jan..__ Feb..__ Mar.. Apr.._ May. June__ July. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov * > Decp ; i,082 " " J.733 ; ' " ; 152i Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period 31nventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month < Manufacturing sales prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " page September Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Mote. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE C-43. Manufacturers9 shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ] Inventories Shipments i Durable goods industries Year or month Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Materials and supplies Work Finin ished process goods Nondurable goods industries Total Materials and supplies Work Finin ished process goods ' : * Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept..- Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov * _- Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " page September < Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE C-44. Manufacturers1 new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] New orders Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Machinery and equipment Unfilled orders2 Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Unfilled orders-shipments ratio Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries I960. * Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May_ June July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar_ Apr_ May. June July.. Aug.. Sept Oct... NOVP Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period. Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December * Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. Comparable data for new orders ( total durable and nondurable ) are available for and only. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " page September for these data Where December data not available data for year calculated on basis of no change from November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE G-45. Consumer price indexes by major groups For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Housing Yeaf or month All items Food Total Rent Apparel and upkeep Transportation Reading Other Medical Personal and goods recreaand care care tion services * : Jan. Feb... Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan.. Feb Mar Apr._ May June. July Aug Sept.._ Oct Nov Dec in. i Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-46. Consumer price indexes by special groups For city wage earners and clerical workers [ = ] Commodities All items Year or month All items less food All items less shelter Services Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable Nondurable Total AM nondura- services ble Rent All services less rent ? : J a n Feb.. Mar._ Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec- Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-47. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For city wage earners and clerical workers ( = ) Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Services less rent NonHouse- Trans- MedApparel durahold porta- ical House- House bles Used hold comfurcare Other * tion less Total services cars dura- nish- Total modserv- servfood ities less bles ings ices ices and rent apparel Total i New cars : Jan.. Feb_ Mar. Apr_ May. June. : July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec 10&0 : Jan_ Feb_ Mar_ Apr. May. June JulyAugSept Oct. NovDec Includes certain items not shown separately Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE G-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = ] Industrial commodities Year or month All commodities Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related Chemicals products and allied and products power tO ( T8 July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sent Oct Nov Dec S * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Pulp Metals Rubber Lumber paper and and and and metal rubber wood allied products products products products Year or month : Jan. Feb. Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct_ Nov.. Dec : Jan... Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. Dec A100 v. ioi. Y Machinery and equipment " " ~ ~ ~ Transportation equipFurniment : ture and NonmeMisceltallic Motor houselaneous mineral vehicles products hold and durables products equipment i i Index for total transportation equipment available only beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE C-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = 100J Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials Materials and components for manufacturing Year or month All commodities Foodstuffs Total and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Vlaterials Total ComFornon- For durable durable ponents manu- manufactur- factur- facturing ing ing Total Fuel For food Materials and components for construction 8S.3 [ " y... ? l..X 10L1 lr ^ Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec r _ i965 y : Jan Feb : Jan Feb See footnotes at end of table 1UU TABLE G-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = Special groups of industrial products Finishec1 goods Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Producer finished goods Crude materials InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods exand com- cluding ponents foods I960 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec > Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies > Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco > Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY SUPPLY CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE C-50. Money supply [ Averages of daily figures billions of dollars ] Year and month Total money supply and time deposits adjusted Money supply Total CurDerency mand com- deposit pocomnent ponent2 Time deposits adjust- Total money supply and time deposits adjusted Money supply Time Aa Total Seasonally adjusted CurDeposits rency mand adcom- deposit justpo- com- ed nent ponent U.S Government demand deposits Unadjusted : Dec : Dec : Dec : : : : : : Dec : D e c : Dec. : Dec. : Dec : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec : : : : : Dec. Dec. Dec Dec. Dec p : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr. May. June. 1I88.6 July. Aug_ Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec p. Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve System and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve banks Time deposits adjusted are time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government Deposits at all commercial banks Note. Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans are reclassified for reserve purposes and are excluded from time deposits reported by member banks. The estimated amount of such deposits at all commercial banks ( $ billion ) is excluded from time deposits adjusted thereafter Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-51.- -Bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting large commercial banks All commercial banks End of year or month * June June June June June Total loans and investments Investments Loans U.S. Government securities Other securities Business loans * Seasonally adjusted P : J a n Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June June July Aug Sept Octp Nov v Dec v _ _ ._ s s M8.7 C Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates used for all commercial banks ) Adjusted to exclude interbank loans beginning s Loans by weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning and formerly weekly reporting member banks * Commercial and industrial loans and prior to agricultural loans. Beginning July loans to financial institutions excluded. Prior to published data adjusted to include open-market paper s Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans e New series beginning June ; for details see " Federal Reserve Bulletin " August Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE C-52. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfinancial sector Total funds raised All other sectors Public debt securities. Budget agency issues U S Government Corporate equity shares Debt capital instruments... State and local governments Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages ! Savings institutions net Insurance Finance n e c net. Funds advanced Less funds raised * Funds advanced Less funds raised U S Government U.S. Government credit agencies net Total funds supplied directly Bank loans n.e.c Consumer credit.. Open-market paper Other Other private credit Home. Other residential. Commercial Farm Federal Reserve System Commercial banks net Private nonbank finance Capital market instruments Business State and local government general funds Households Less net security credit * Foreign Private domestic nonfinancial See footnote at end of table TABLE C Total funds raised in credit markets by nonjinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarter- seasonally adjusted ly totals annual rates Nonfinancial sector III Total funds raised II II III Budget agency issues Public debt securities U.S. Government * 56J. * Savings institutions net Insurance Finance n.e.c net Funds advanced All other sectors Capital market instruments Corporate equity shares Debt capital instruments State and local governments Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages Home Other residential Commercial Farm Other private credit Bank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Open-market paper Other Total funds supplied directly U.S. Government U.S. Government credit agencies net Funds advanced Less funds raised Federal Reserve System._ Commercial banks net Private nonbank finance Less funds raised Private domestic nonfinancial Business State and local government general funds Households Less net security credit Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Foreign TABLE G-53. Selected liquid assets held by the public * [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Time deposits U.S Government securities maturing within year4 Postal savings system Savings and loan shares U.S Government savings bonds4 " Jan Feb MarApr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June i Demand deposits and currency2 Commercial banks v End of year or month July Aug Sept Octp Nov * Dec p Total Mutual savings banks Excludes holdings of the U.S. Government Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial banks and Federal Reserve banks. Adjusted wherever possible to avoid double counting Agrees in concept with the money supply Table C-50 except for deduction of demand deposits held by mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data are for last Wednesday of month. Data prior to July have not been revised to conform to the money supply revision Time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government ( same concept as in Table C-50 ) Data are for last Wednesday of month except that June and December call data are used where available Excludes holdings ot Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial and mutual savings banks Federal Reserve banks and beginning February savings and loan associations Effective June balances accumulated for the payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from time deposits at all commercial banks and from total liquid assets Estimates for Tuesday December rather than last Wednesday of December Beginning data have been adjusted to conform to the new budget concept Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-54. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Member bank reserves Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings All other mainly float Total Required Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) : Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec. Dec.. Dec Dec Dec il,822 : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec.. Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec.. Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec.. Dec Dec Dec : : : : : : : : : : Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec * : Jan Feb Apr. May June Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * ? t ? Mar July.. Aug Sept Oct Data from March through April are for licensed banks only Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G-55. Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i month issues year issues Taxable bonds4 Aaa Baa Average rate on Highshortgrade term municbank ipal loans bonds ( Stand- to busiard & n e s s Poor 's ) selected cities ( ) ( ) ( ) Prime commercial paper months Federal Reserve Bank discount fate FHA new home mortgage yields s i Apr May June I1 i July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec I1.86 I960... : Jan. Feb Mr a I1.95 See footnotes at end of table ( ) ( ) v> ( ) io TABLE G-55 Bondyields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treasury bills i month issues2 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ Taxable year issues bonds Average Highrate on Prime grade shortcommunicterm meripal bank cial bonds loans ( Stand- to busi- paper ard & nessPoor 's ) selected months cities Aaa Baa Federal Reserve Bank discount rate FHA new home mortgage yields s * Rate on new issues within period. Issues were tax exempt prior to March and fully taxable thereafter. For the period series includes issues with maturities of more than months Certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) Selected note and bond issues. Issues were partially tax exempt prior to and fully taxable thereafter First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissible interest rate ( JlA percent beginning late January ) Thru July computed on 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages prepaid in years Treasury bills were first issued in December and were issued irregularly in ' Not available on same basis as for and subsequent years > From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Beginning series revised to exclude loans to nonbank financial institutions Beginning February series revised to incorporate changes in coverage in the sample of reporting banks and in the reporting period ( shifted to the middle month of the quarter ) Note. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service Standard & Poor 's Corporation and Federal Housing Administration TABLE C-56. Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of year or month Total _ Total Automobile paper Addendum : Policy loans by life inOther surance companies Noninstalment credit .._r_. Other Repair conand conand sumer moderngoods ization paper loans i PerPersonal loans _ Total Charge ac- counts ? : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec1969 : Jan. Feb. Mar AprMay JuneJuly Aug Sept Oct_ Nov Dec * Holdings of financial institutions only ; holdings Single-payment loans and service credit of retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " Year-end figures are annual statement asset values ; month-end figures are book value of ledger assets. These loans are not included in consumer credit series * Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) TABLE C-57. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Automobile paper Total Other consumer goods paper Repair and modernization loans Personal loans Year or month Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Extended Repaid I960 i Extended Repaid Extended Repaid Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr.. May. JuneJuly. AugSept. Oct.. NovDec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec i_ * Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE G-58. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Yonfarm properties r Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional2 FHA-VA underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total to 4family houses ComMulti- mercial family properties i to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses v v P : II III IV : \ v II * > p IV P__ : r \ \ v.. Ill p IV P.. : p II p Ill p IV p i Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations > Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE C-59. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender [ Billions of dollars ] Selected financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Other lenders Commercial banks * Life insurance companies U.S agencies2 Individuals and others i1.9 I i t1.3 I : p _ II p III p IV p : p II v III v IV p P P P : II III IV * p II p IN p IV p i Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not bank trust departments Includes former FNMA and new GNMA as well as FHA VA PHA Farmers ' Home Administration and in earlier years RFC HOLC and FFMC. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA and Federal Land Banks. Other U.S agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE C-60. Net public and private debt * ( Billions of dollars ] Public Private Individual and noncorporate End of year Total Federal Federal financial agencies Nonfarm State and local Corporate Total Total Farm * Total Mortgage Commercial Conand sumer financial i Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt > Net Federal Government and agency debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Figures shown here are subject to revision This comprises the debt of federally sponsored agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included here beginning in ; the debt of the Federal Home Loan Banks is included beginning in ; and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Secondary Market Operations Federal Intermediate Credit Banks and Banks for Cooperatives are included beginning with * Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed t o life insurance companies by policyholders Sources- Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) Treasury Department Department of Agriculture Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Land Banks and Federal National Mortgage Association GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE C-61. Federal budget receipts and outlays [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Administrative budget : Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Consolidated cash statement : Unified budget : I960 i i Estimate Note. Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in ; comparable data are not available for prior years Source : Bureau of the Budget T A B L E G-62. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING : Expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) Expenditure account deficit ( ) surplus or Total budget : Receipts Outlays ( expenditures and net lending ) Budget surplus or deficit ( ) BUDGET FINANCING : Net borrowing from the public or repayment of borrowing ( ) Other means of financing Total means of financing OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by the public BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes and contributions Unem ployment insurance _. _ Contributions for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts3 MEMORANDUM : Federal funds. Trust f u n d s BUDGET OUTLAYS ( EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING ) National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development Natural resources Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health I ncome security Veterans benefits and services Interest General government Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions See footnotes at end of table TABLE G-62. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description Estimate RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING : Expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excluding net lending ) _ Expenditure account surplus or deficit ( ) ___..__-_ Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending Total budget : Receipts. -_-_.__ Outlays ( expenditures and net lending ) Budget surplus or deficit ( ) BUDGET FINANCING : Net borrowing from the public or repayment of borrowing ( ) ._ Other means of financing .'___ Gross Federal debt Held by the public BUDGET RECEIPTS Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes and contributions Unemployment insurance Contributions for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes.. Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts MEMORANDUM : Federal fundsTrust funds. __ BUDGET OUTLAYS ( EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING ) National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development... Natural resources Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health..... Income security Veterans benefits and services Interest General government Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions _ _ MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds.._ ._ Intragovernmental transactions Total means of financing OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : ^ Excludes changes due to reclassification and to conversion of mixed-ownership enterprises to private ownership. ( See footnote to Table of the Budget Document. ) Includes Federal funds of $ million in Includes both Federal funds and trust funds Source : Bureau of the Budget TABLE C-63. Relation of the Federal Budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Receipts and expenditures Estimate RECEIPTS Total receipts budget- '.9 Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) _ Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other * EXPENDITURES Total outlays budget. __ Loan account __. Financial transactions in the expenditure accountGovernment contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) : Other netting and grossing. _.._ Defense timing adjustment. Dollar expenditures to finance agricultural exports Other..... q Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures ! Note. See Special Analysis A " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " for description of these categories Sources : Bureau of the Budget and Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) T A B L E G Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Year or quarter Fiscal year : : Calendar year : _ 1954._ v : II.. III. IV__ Total Expenditures Indirect Dar rerCor- busisonal fny poness lax rate tax and profits and nontax nonId A actax fay ceipts cruals accrualc ais Transfer payments Contributions for social insurance Total Purchases of goods and services To persons To foreigners ( net ) 25U Seasonally adjusted : l _ _ II.. III. IV v_ annual rates Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Grantsin-aid to State and local governments Net interest paid b i Estimates Note. Includes the transactions of the trust accounts and excludes certain financial transactions. Corporate profits taxes are included in receipts on an accrual basis ; purchases of goods and services from business are timed with delivery ; and CCC guaranteed price-support crop loans are counted as expenditures when the loans are made not when CCC redeems them Receipts for reflect repeal of investment tax credit Sources : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) and Bureau of the Budget TABLE G-65. Public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] interest-bearing public debt Other Matured public debt and debt bearing no interest 3.J 2.J ( ( 2.S l.J ( l.J l.J l.J ( l.J l.J l.J ( l.J ( Total public debt securities End of year or month Marketable public issues by maturity class years and over Nonmarketable public issues Special issues1 U.S savings bonds ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Within year to years _ ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ Foreign and international Issued to U.S. Government accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December Includes sales of U.S. savings notes beginning May Source : Treasury Department TABLE C-66. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values,1 billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities Held by private investors End of year or month Total _ : J a n Feb Mar.. Apr May June. July.. Aug.. Sept Oct Nov Dec : J a n Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Held Held by by Govern- Federal ment Reserve acbanks counts Total Mutual savings State banks ComOther and mercial and in- corpolocal banks surance rations * governcomments panies Miscellaneous Individuals investors ? t ^ S C C United States savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in 4Table C-51 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers Federal oriented agencies not included in Government accounts and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund the Internationa } Development Association the Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government Source : Treasury Department TABLE C-67. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt Maturity class End of year or month Amount outstanding Within year to years to years to years Average length years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Years : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr.. May. June. : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May_ June. July. Aug. July... Aug Sept Oct Nov... Dec Nov. Dec- Note. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) Source : Treasury Department T A B L E C-68. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures I960 * 174'. State and local government Federal Government * national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures Surplus or deficit Receipts Expenditures national income and product accounts national income and product accounts * E : Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : Ill IV : II Ill IV * -'.B iSee Note Table C-64 Surplus of $ million Deficit of $ million Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Federal receipts for reflect repeal of investment tax credit Digitized Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics for FRASER http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis T A B L E G-69. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; calendar years ] Receipts Year or quarter Expenditures Indirect ContriPerCorsonal porate busi- butions Fedness tax for eral tax Total and profits and social grantstax nontax accruals nontax insur- in-aid receipts accruals ance Total Less : Pur- TransCurrent chases fer surplus of payNet govgoods ments interest ofernand to paid ment servperenterices sons prises Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts 1948___ 1950_ n n q y T> Seasonally adjusted annual rates ' II III IV : II III IV : II III IV p * Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE G State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source2 Fiscal year * Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes Corporation net income taxes General expenditures by function Revenue All from other Federal reveGovern- nue ment Total Education Highways Public All wel- other * fare ! 9,857j * _.__ : " ~ i Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded * Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues * Includes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures > Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table C-60 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE G-71. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Manufacturing Year or quarter All industries _ _ _ _.. ._. " Transportation All comDur- Nondur- muni- other able able indusTotal goods goods cation tries and ininpublic dus- dustries tries utilities Corporate profits before taxes liability i '.7 Corporate tax UnDivi- disdend tribTotal pay- uted ments profits Corporate capital consumption allow-2 ances Profits plus capital consumption allowances Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II III IV : II III IV : | l III IV p ^ Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes depreciation and accidental damages Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances Note. Corporate profits tax and related items for reflect repeal of investment tax credit Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers * ) { Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Profits Sales ( net ) Before taxes After taxes Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits Stockholders ' Sales equity2 ( net ) Before After taxes taxes Profits Stockholders ' Sales equity ( net ) Before After taxes taxes Stockholders ' equity2 I960 : II III IV : II III IV : l IP... Ill i ncludes newspapers beginning Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. Specific information about the effects of the more significant changes and revisions is contained in the following issues of the " Quarterly Financial Report " : third quarter third quarter first quarter and first quarter Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission 26l T A B L E G Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders1 equity and to sales all turing corporations { except newspapers1 ) by industry group Year or quarter Durable All manufacElecturtrical ing MamacorMoFabchin- chinporator Airriery ery tions Total vehi- craft ( ex- cated ( exdurcles and equip- cept metal cept able and parts ment elec- prodand newsequiptrical ) ucts suppapment plies ers * ) manufac- goods industries Primary iron and steel industries LumPriber Inmary and struStone Furnonwood ments clay ferniture prod- and and rous and ucts remetal glass fix ( exlated prodintures cept products dusfurni- ucts tries ture ) Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent : I II III IV : l IP.... Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents : I II III. IV. : IM IIP ~ ~ 2.y See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-73. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers1 ) by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries PrintTotal nondurable : : Food and kindred products _ : II... Ill IV... : II i._ IIH- : II III.. IV-. : \ K.. II i III * Year or quarter Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products and publishing ( except newspapers i ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products Leather and leather products Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annualjrate ) to stockholders ' equity percent ' 5.i 8.S < S t ( J 8.C Profits after taxes per dollar of sales cents ? f > i.8 i.9 ! i. ; i. : I.I I.I : ( Includes newspapers beginning Includes certain industries not shown separately a Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission. See also Note Table C-72 Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C Sources and uses offunds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Sources total- Internal sources l Undistributed profits i Corporate inventory valuation ad-.3 justment Capital consumption allowancesL External sources Stocks. Bonds Mortgages Bank loans n.e.c Other loans Trade debt Profits tax liability Other liabilities Uses total _..._-<- l. * Nonresidential fixed investment- Residential structures Change in business inventories. _ Purchases of physical assets Increase in financial assets Liquid assets Demand deposits and currency Time deposits U.S. Government securities Open-market paper State and local obligations Consumer credit Trade credit Other financial assets Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) J ~ * '.5 ; ! * The figures shown here for " internal sources " " undistributed profits " and " capital consumption allowances " differ from those shown for " cash flow net of dividends " " undistributed profits " and " capital consumption allowances " in the gross corporate product table in the national income and product accounts of the Department of Commerce for the following reasons : ( ) these figures include and the statistics in the gross corporate product table exclude branch profits remitted from foreigners net of corresponding U.S. remittances to foreigners ; and ( ) these figures exclude and the gross corporate product figures include the internal funds of corporations whose major activity is farming Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-75. Current assets and liabilities of United States corporationss [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter _ New series : II ML IV : II III IV : II III Cash on Total hand and in banks U.S Government securities Current liabilities AdRevances ceiv- Notes and Notes FedOther eral ables and preand Incurinfrom acpayacven- rent Total ments counts come U.S. counts astax Gov- receiv- tories sets < U.S pay- liabiliernable Govable ties ments ernment & ? ? ? ? ? " Net Other working current capital liabilities * E C f C ' < ? \ ? A C ? ? C ( Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations ' books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books * Includes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well as sundry current assets s Generally reflects definitions and classifications used in " Statistics of Income " for Note. Data relate to all United States corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations insurance companies and beginning with the new series for investment companies. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of I ncome " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C--76. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal amounts ) Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Industry of corporate user Manufacturing Electric and water Transportations Communication 3>804 ',657 Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of state municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE C-77. Common stock prices,earnings and yields and stock market credit Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price index * Year or month Total ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) Public utilities ( stocks ) Railroads ( stocks ) Stock market credit Dividend yield ( percent ) Price/ earnings ratio Customer credit ( excluding U.S. Government securities ) Total = _.. __.,.. P : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov... Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Deep _ _ Bank loans to brokers Net Bank and debit loans dealers balto ances * " others " Millions of dollars * $ ' 4,96C 4,53S ^ : 4,37S $ Annual data are averages of monthly figures and monthly data are averages of daily figures Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by the aggregate monthly market value of the stocks in the group. Annual yields are averages of monthly data s Ratio of quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day in quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Includes net debit balances of all customers ( other than general partners in the reporting firm and member firms of national exchanges ) whose combined accounts net to a debit. Balances secured by U.S. Government obligations are excluded through and included thereafter. Data are for end of period Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday of 6period Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) for purchasing or carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday of period Revised series ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange TABLE C-78. Business formation and business failures Business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) New business incorporations ( number ) Business failure rate Liability size class Total Under $ Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Number of failures $ and Liability size class Total over Under $ $ and over 165T Seasonally adjusted * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Seot Oct. : : : : Nov Dec * Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Failure rate per listed enterprises 3Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE T A B L E G Income from agriculture Income received from farming Personal income received by total farm population Net to farm operators Realized gross Year or quarter From From nonTotals all farm farm sources sources1 sources2 ProducCash tion ex- Exclud- Includreceipts penses ing net ing net from inven- inventory markettory change change * ings Billions of dollars ._ Net income per farm including net inventory change Current prices prices5 Dollars ^ _ _ * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV 4.21C 4,03C 4.14C 3,99C : II III IV v ( Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments s Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms * Includes net change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at the average price for the year Income in current prices divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture O http : //fraser.stlouisfed.org/Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis TABLE C Farm production indexes = ] Livestock and products Crops Year Farm output * Hay Food Vege- Fruits Feed Total grains and grains tables and nuts forage Cotton Meat ToOil anibacco crops Total mals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs P. Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules Includes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately s Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture 27O TABLE C-81. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April l ) i Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total populations Farm employment ( thousands ) s Total Family Hired workers workers Farm output Per unit of total input Per man-hour Total Crops Livestock and products Index = I960. * v iFarm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population n o ocuptin living on farms regardless of occupation. l population of United States as of July including Armed Forces abroad Includes persons doing farm work on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Th d t b l i h d b th Reporting Service diff f S i differ from tho on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table C-22 ) because of those giclt differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected feec th m o d approac See monthly report on " Farm Labor * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year CAA m A nth I if r * iwyt \ r+ An " Carm I Knr " Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE G-82. Indexes of prices received and prices paid byfarmers and parity ratio { = Prices received by farmers Livestock and products Crops Year or month AH farm prodAll Food ucts i crops * grains Feed grains " and hay Total Cotton Tobacco Feed grains Oilbearing crops Aii livestock and products i Meat animals Dairy products Poultry and eggs May June July Aug Sept Octl5_ Novl5 Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octl5....... Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr See footnotes at end of tabie TABLE G-82. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Continued [ = ] Year or month Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octl5 Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Octl5 Nov Dec Prices paid by farmers All Commodities and service items interest Production items taxes Famand ily All AH wage items l i v i n g Motor F a r m marates i t e m s produc- Feed vetion ( parity hicles c h i n items i ery index ) inter- Taxes3 Wage ests rates * Parity ratio Fertilizer ) ) s ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ( ) ( L ) ( ) ( ) L15 IB ( n ? ) ( ) ( ( n i ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ? ) f8fi ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ? ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) on fan ) Includes items not shown separately Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index on a = base. The adjusted parity ratio ( shownFRASER in the table ) reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Digitized for in parentheses Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-83. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) ManCrops harvested ( millions of acres ) i Year _ hours of farm work ( billions ) Total Farm real estate Farm labor Mechanical power and machinery Fertilizer and liming materials Feed seed and livestock purchases Miscellaneous 1937_ 324v P * Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens Includes service buildings and improvements on land Nonfarm portion of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-84. Comparative balance sheet of agriculture [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Other physical assets Beginning of year MaHousechinhold Real DeTotal estate ery Live- and Crops equip- posits ment and stock i motor and curfurnish- rency vehiings cles Financial assets ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' U.S ment debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives \ 1952_ ? * _ v ( ^ 224./ ( J C * Beginning with horses and mules are excluded Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled $ million Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE C-85. United States balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Income on investments Year or quarter Total Merchandise ^ Military sales Other services Total Merchandise i Military expenditures Private _ _. ( ( ) ) Government Other services Balance on goods and services Remittances and pensions I960. 1969W Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III.--IV... : II III P. See footnotes at end of table TABLE C-85. United States balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Year or quarter U.S Government grants and capital net U.S. private capital net Direct investment Other longterm Shortterm Balance Foreign capital net Errors and Offiomiscial Lisions quidity reserve transbasis s actions basis * Changes in selected liabilities ( decrease ( ) ) To foreign official holders Liquid Nonliquid Changes in gold convertible currencies and To IMF other gold foreign hold- tranche position ers ? ( increase ( ) M57 Seasonally adjusted annual rates Quarterly totals unadjusted : L II.._ III. IV.. : l.._ II.. IIL IV.. -U : L._- II.... Ill p. Adjusted from customs data for differences in timing and coverage Includes certain special Government transactions Equals changes in liquid liabilities to foreign official holders other foreign holders and changes in official reserve assets consisting of gold convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF * Equals changes in liquid and nonliquid liabilities to foreign official holders and changes in official reserve assets consisting of gold convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF Includes short-term official and banking liabilities foreign holdings of U.S. Government bonds and notes and certain nonliquid liabilities to foreign official holders Central banks governments and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the United States Private holders ; includes banks and international and regional organizations ; excludes IMF s Not reported separately Includes change in Treasury liabilities to certain foreign military agencies ; excluding these changes data ( $ millions ) are ( ) ( ) ( ) Average of the first quarters on a seasonally adjusted annual rates basis Note. Data exclude military grant-aid and U.S. subscriptions to International Monetary Fund Source : Department of Commerce Office of Business Economics TABLE C-86. -United States merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise exports * Total including reexports Domestic exports Year or quarter Seasonally Unad- Total 2s adjusted justed I9601961 General imports * Total * Food Crude Food Crude bever- mate- Manbever- mate- Manufacufacrials ages Seaages tured sonally Unad- and to- rials tured and to- and goods and goods8 bacco fuels adjusted bacco fuels justed j I Merchandise imports Gross merchandise trade surplus seasonally adjusted7 II ill IV. : Ill IV : II III. IV : Beginning I960 data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in 2Totals exclude Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments * Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils s Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items include military grant-aid shipments Exports excluding military grant-aid less general imports ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted s Quarterly data have not been revised and therefore do not add up to annual totals which are based on more recent data Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Export statistics cover all merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Export values are f.a.s. port of export and include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments. Import values are defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excluding the U.S. import duty and transportation costs such as ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE C-87. United States merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Area Exports ( including reexports and special category shipments ) : Total _. Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hemisphere Western Europe i Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa General imports : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hemisphere Western Europe i Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries2 Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Consists of certain low-valued shipments not identified by country Note. Developed countries include Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and the Republic of South Africa. Developing countries include rest of the world except Communist areas in Eastern Europe and Asia and unidentified countries Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE C-88. United States overseas loans and grants by type and area,fiscalyears. [ Millions of dollars ] Type of program and fiscal period Total Near East and South Asia Latin America Vietnam East Asia Africa Europe Other and nonregional Total economic loans and grants ( net obligations and loan authorizations ) : average Loans Grants * * * * Loans Grants Economic loans and grants to less developed countries by program : Net obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Agency for international Development : Net obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Export-Import Bank long-term loans : Loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Food for Peace : Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average Contributions and Subscriptions to International Lending Organizations : Obligations : average Peace Corps and other : Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average 2C C A Some data are preliminary Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. On this basis " less developed " countries include all countries receiving U.S. loans or grants except the following which are considered " developed " : Japan Australia New Zealand Republic of South Africa Canada and all of Europe except Malta Spain and Yugoslavia Includes capital subscriptions and contributions to the inter-American Development Bank the International Development Association and the Asian Development Bank * Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) Source : FRASER Digitized for Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE C-89. International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] v Area and country September All countries Developed areas December United States United Kingdom Other Western Europe Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Finland Norway and Sweden ) Spain-. : Switzerland Other Canada Japan Australia New Zealand and South Africa & ) Less developed areas Latin America Middle East Other Asia. Other Africa Not available separately In addition to other Western European countries includes unpublished gold reserves of Greece and an estimate of gold to be distributed by the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold Includes unpublished gold holdings not allocable by area * Estimate Note. Includes gold holdings reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange of all countries except U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Communist China and Cuba ( after ) Beginning when most of the major currencies of the world became convertible data exclude known holdings of inconvertible currencies balances under payments agreements and the bilateral claims arising from liquidation of the European Payments Union Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " 28l TABLE G United States reserve assets : Gold stock holdings of convertible foreign currencies and reserve position in the International Monetary Fund [ Millions of dollars ] Gold stock i End of year or month Total reserve assets Total Treasury Convertible foreign currencies Reserve position in International Monetary Fund * U3,806 : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. AprMay. June. July_ Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec * Includes gold sojd to the United States by the International Monetary Fund with the right of repurchase which amounted to $ million on December Beginning September also includes gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas. Amount outstanding was $ million on December The United States has a corresponding gold liability to the IMF Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund * Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System In accordance with Fund policies the United States has the right to draw foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund virtually automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could draw additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a U.S quota increase which became effective on February In figures published by the Fund from June through January this gold subscription was included in the U.S. gold stock and excluded from the reserve position Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of the United States Sources : Treasury Department and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE C-91. Price changes in international trade = Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade i United States * Exports Terms of trade Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade iLatin America Exports Terms of trade * Southern and Eastern Asia Exports Terms of trade i- World export price Indexes Foodstuffs Coffee tea and cocoa. Cereals Other agricultural commodities Fats oils and oilseeds. Textile fibers Wool Rubber Minerals Metal ores. fi Manufactured goods : Total Nonferrous base metals5. ii ii Primary commodities : Total. Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Includes foreign trade of Alaska Hawaii and Puerto Rico Data are for second quarter * Excludes Japan Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Includes nonfood fish and forest products Note. Data exclude trade of Communist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Commerce ) TABLE C Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries [ 1SC3- United States Period Canada Japan = ] France Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom 12L.0 IV : L II III IV : | | Ill IV _. : II Ill IV : | | _ Ill Except for the United States averages are for January-September for Italy ; and January-November for all other countries October-November average for all countries other than the United States Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development