ECONOMIC OF THE TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY 197S Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress January TOGETHER WITH THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Washington D.C. Price $ CONTENTS Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * ECONOMIC REVIEW AND PROSPECT A SUMMARY CHAPTER PERFORMANCE AND POLICY TO MID-AUGUST CHAPTER INFLATION CONTROL UNDER THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT CHAPTER OUTLOOK AND POLICY CHAPTER EFFECTIVE USE OF RESOURCES CHAPTER T H E UNITED STATES AND THE WORLD ECONOMY APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION * For a detailed table of contents of the Council 's Report see page Ill ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : The American economy is beginning to feel the effects of the new policies launched last August I undertook the New Economic Policy because it was becoming clear that not enough was being done to meet our ambitious goals for the American economy. The new measures are designed to bring the Nation to higher employment greater price stability and a stronger international position The essence of the New Economic Policy is not the specific list of measures we announced on August ; it is the determination to do all that is necessary to achieve the Nation 's goals Nineteen hundred and seventy-one was in many ways a good economic year. Total employment total output output per person real hourly earnings and real income after tax per person all reached new highs. The inflation which had plagued the country since began to subside. In the first months of the year the rate of inflation was percent less than in the same months of But I did not believe this was enough to meet the Nation 's needs Although the rate of inflation had declined before August it was still too high. Although unemployment stopped rising it remained near percent. In the first part of the year our international balance-ofpayments deficit the excess of our payments to the rest of the world over their payments to us had risen far too high The conditions called for decisive actions. On August announced these actions First I imposed a 90-day freeze on prices wages and rents Second I suspended conversion of dollars into gold and other reserve assets Third I imposed a temporary surcharge on imports generally at the rate of percent Fourth I proposed a number of tax changes intended to stimulate the economy including repeal of the excise tax on automobiles a tax credit for investment and reduction of income taxes on individuals. At the same time I took steps to keep the budget under control The package of measures was unprecedented in scope and degree. My Administration had struggled for 21/ ^ years in an effort to check the inflation we inherited by means more consistent with economic freedom than price-wage controls. But the inflationary momentum generated by the policy actions and inactions of was too stubborn to be eradicated by these means alone. Or at least it seemed that it could only be eradicated at the price of persistent high unemployment and this was a price we would not ask the American people to pay Similarly more than a decade of balance-of-payments deficits had built up an overhang of obligations and distrust which no longer left time for the gradual methods of correction which had been tried earlier The measures begun on August will have effects continuing long into the future. They can not be fully evaluated by what has happened in the little over months since that date. Still the results up to this point have been extremely encouraging The freeze slowed down the rate of inflation dramatically. In the months of its duration the index of consumer prices rose only percent compared to percent in the previous months. The freeze was a great testimonial to the public spirit of the American people because that result could have been achieved with the small enforcement staff we had only if the people had been cooperating voluntarily The freeze was followed by a comprehensive mandatory system of controls with more flexible and equitable standards than were possible during the first days. General principles and specific regulations have been formulated staffs have been assembled and cases are being decided This effort is under the direction of citizens on the Price Commission and Pay Board with advice from other citizens on special panels concerned with health services State and local government and rent. These citizens are doing a difficult job doing it well and the Nation is in their debt While this inflation-control system was being put in place vigorous action was going forward on the international front. The suspension of the convertibility of the dollar was a shock felt around the world. The surcharge emphasized the need to act swiftly and decisively to improve our position. Happily the process of adjustment began promptly without disrupting the flow of international business. Other currencies rose in cost relative to the U.S. dollar. As a result the cost of foreign goods increased relative to the cost of U.S. goods improving the competitive position of American workers and industries. International negotiations were begun to stabilize exchange rates at levels that would help in correcting the worldwide disequilibrium of which the U.S. balance-of- payments deficit was the most obvious symptom. These negotiations led to significant agreements on a number of points : Realignment of exchange rates with other currencies rising in cost relative to the dollar as part of which we agreed to recommend to Congress that the price of gold in dollars be raised when progress had been made in trade liberalization Commitment to discussion of more general reform of the international monetary system Widening of the permitted range of variation of exchange rates pending other measures Q reform f Commitment to begin discussions to reduce trade barriers including some most harmful to the United States Assumption of a larger share of the costs of common defense by some of our allies Elimination of the temporary U.S. surcharge on imports The third part of the August action was the stimulative tax program. Enactment of this package by Congress although not entirely in the form I had proposed put in place the final part of my New Economic Policy In part as a result of this program economic activity rose more rapidly in the latter part of the year. In the fourth quarter real output increased at the annual rate of percent compared with about percent in the previous quarters. Employment rose by about million from July to December and only an extraordinarily large rise of the civilian labor force million kept unemployment from falling Nineteen hundred and seventy-two begins on a note of much greater confidence than prevailed or months ago. Output is rising at a rate which will boost employment rapidly and eat into unemployment. There is every reason to expect thisv rate of increase to continue. The Federal Government has contributed impetus to this advance by tax reductions and expenditure increases. The Federal Reserve has taken steps to create the monetary conditions necessary for rapid economic expansion The operation of the new control system in an economy without inflationary pressure of demand holds out great promise of sharply reducing the inflation rate. We are converting the fear of perpetual inflation into a growing hope for price stability. We are lifting from the people the frustrating anxiety about what their savings and their income will be worth a year from now or years from now For the first time in over a decade the United States is moving decisively to restore strength to its international economic position The outlook is bright but much remains to be done. The great prob- lem is to get the unemployment rate down from the 6-percent level where it was in It was reduced from that level in the sixties by a war buildup ; it must be reduced from that level in the seventies by the creation of peacetime jobs It is obvious that the unemployment problem has been intensified by the reduction of over million defense-related jobs and by the need to squeeze down inflation. But percent unemployment is too much and I am determined to reduce that number significantly in To that end I proposed the tax reduction package of Federal expenditures will rise by $ billion between last fiscal year and fiscal Together these tax reductions and expenditure increases will leave a budget deficit of $ billion this year. If we were at full employment in the present fiscal year expenditures would exceed receipts by $ billion. This is strong medicine and I do not propose to continue its use but we have taken it in order to give a powerful stimulus to employment We have imposed price and wage controls to assure that the expansion of demand does not run to waste in more inflation but generates real output and real employment We have suspended dollar convertibility and reduced the international cost of the dollar which will help restore the competitive position of U.S workers and thereby generate jobs for them We have instituted a public service employment program to provide jobs directly for people who find it especially hard to get work We have expanded the number of people on federally assisted manpower programs to record levels We have established computerized Job Banks to help match up jobseekers and job vacancies We have proposed welfare reform to increase incentives to employment We have proposed special revenue sharing for manpower programs to make them more effective We have proposed revision of the minimum wage system to remove obstacles to the employment of young and inexperienced workers We expect that these measures and others will contribute to a substantial reduction of unemployment In addition to getting unemployment down a second major economic task before us is to develop and apply the price-wage control system which is still in its formative stage to the point where its objective is achieved. The objective of the controls is a state of affairs in which reasonable price stability can be maintained without controls. That state of affairs can and will be reached. How long it will take no one can say We will persevere until the goal is reached but we will not keep the controls one day longer than necessary The success of the stabilization program depends fundamentally upon the cooperation of the American people. This means not only compliance with the regulations. It means also mutual understanding of the difficulties that all of us working people businessmen consumers farmers Government officials encounter in this new and complicated program Our experience in the past few months convinces me that we shall have this necessary ingredient for success We embarked last year on another great task to create an international economic system in which we and others can reap the benefits of the exchange of goods and services without danger to our domestic economies. Despite all the troubles in this field in recent years both the American people and our trading partners are enjoying on a larger scale than ever before what is the object of the whole international economic exercise consumption of foreign goods that are better or cheaper or more interesting than domestic goods as well as foreign travel and profitable investment abroad We do n't want to reduce these benefits. We want to expand them. To do that we in the United States must be able to pay in the way that is best chiefly by selling abroad those things that we produce best or more cheaply including the products of our agriculture and our other hightechnology industries. This is our objective in the international discussions launched by our acts of last year and continuing this year These tasks in which Government takes the lead are superimposed on the fundamental task of the American economy upon which the welfare of the people most depends and which is basically performed by the people and not by the Government. That fundamental task is the efficient and innovative production of the goods and services that the American people want. That is why I have emphasized the need for greater productivity and a resurgence of the competitive spirit The outstanding performance of the American economy in this respect provides a background of strength which permits the Government to face its economic problems with confidence and to bring about a new prosperity without inflation and without war January THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report January in accordance with Section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully HERBERT STEIN Chairman f -D L o u ^ EZRA SOLOMON CONTENTS Page Economic Review and Prospect A Summary The Longer View Urgent Problems of Early Performance in The New Economic Policy First Results Outlook for Progress in the World Economy CHAPTER PERFORMANCE AND POLICY TO MID-AUGUST Demand Output and the Labor Market Demand Patterns Labor Market Prices and Costs Prices Compensation and Wages Productivity and Labor Costs Corporate Costs and Prices Incomes in Agriculture Financial Policy and Financial Markets Monetary Policy Interest Rates Fiscal Policy to August The New Economic Policy Where We Stood on August The August Decisions Fiscal Elements in the New Economic Policy CHAPTER INFLATION CONTROL UNDER THE ECONOMIC STABILIZATION ACT The Construction Program August : The Wage-Price Freeze Phase I I : Issues and Organization Price Commission and Pay Board Standards Phase II Operations Extension of the Stabilization Authority Assessment Page CHAPTER OUTLOOK AND POLICY Developments in the Fourth Quarter of The Outlook for Prices and Price-Wage Policy Employment and Unemployment Inflation and Unemployment in the Long Run The Control of Demand Views of the Inflation and Unemployment Problem Characteristics of the Labor Force CHAPTER EFFECTIVE USE OF RESOURCES National Commission on Productivity Energy Environmental Quality Research and Development Rationale for Government Involvement Recent Developments Expanded Support for R&D Surface Freight Transportation Regulatory Modernization Act of Factors Affecting the Transition Rail Passenger Service Health and Medical Care Trends in Health Indicators in the United States Financing Medical Care National Health Insurance Proposals CHAPTER T H E UNITED STATES AND THE WORLD ECONOMY The Recognition of Disequilibrium Reactions to the U.S. Deficit August Balance-of-Payments Analysis Balance on Goods Services and Remittances Cyclically Adjusted Balances The Capital Accounts Balance on Current Account and Long-Term Capital The Size of the Required Correction Developments After August Alternative Routes to Realignment Realignment Through Floating Reluctance to Revalue Against the Dollar Reluctance to Revalue Against Other Currencies Reluctance to Correct by Revaluation Alone Final Negotiations on Exchange Rate Realignment Ill Ill CHAPTER T H E UNITED STATES AND THE WORLD ECONOMY Con Page International Monetary Reform Trade Policy Developments in Export Policy Easing the Adjustment to Imports Agricultural Trade East-West Trade Generalized Preferences for Exports Countries A Positive Program for Freer Trade of Developing APPENDIXES : A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production List of Tables and Charts Tables Changes in Gross National Product in Current and Constant Dollars III to III Changes in Personal Income Taxes and Disposable Income III to III Changes in the Working-Age Population Armed Forces and Labor Force to III Employment Attributable to Defense Expenditures and Personnel Requirements and Selected Unemployment Rates IV-1971 IV Changes in Consumer Prices for All Items and All Items Less Food and Mortgage Interest December to August Alternative Measures of Price Changes for Gross National Product and Gross Private Product I to IV. Rates of Increase of Hourly Compensation During Expansions and Recessions IV to IV Changes in Adjusted Average Hourly Earnings of Private Nonfarm Production or Nonsupervisory Workers III to III Wage Rate Increases in Major Collective Bargaining Agreements Rise of White-Collar Salaries Selected Occupations in Private Industry to Changes in Compensation Productivity and Labor Costs in the Private Nonfarm Economy to III Changes in Prices Costs and Profits Per Unit of Output for Nonfinancial Corporations III to III List of Tables and Charts Continued Tables Continued Page Distribution of Gross Product Originating in Nonfinancial Corporations Amount and Composition of Individuals ' Saving III Sources and Uses of Funds Nonfarm Nonfinancial Corporate Business III Interest Rates Flows of Savings Deposits Through Savings Institutions III Effect on Fiscal Year Budget of Tax and Expenditure Changes in New Economic Policy Changes in Consumer Prices Selected Months Changes in Consumer Prices Selected Items October to November Changes in Wholesale Industrial Commodity Prices Selected Months Required Reporting of Price and Wage Increases Employment Status of Male Vietnam Era Veterans and Nonveterans Years of Age Fourth Quarter Hypothetical Unemployment Rates Based on Unemployment Rates and Distribution of Civilian Labor Force by Age and Sex : Selected Years and Projections Distribution of Funds for Research and Development by Funding Source and Performer Calendar Year Distribution of Federal Expenditures for Research and Development by Major Function Fiscal Years and Return on Stockholders ' Equity for Class I Railroads Class I Motor Carriers Classes A and B Inland and Coastal Water Carriers and All Manufacturing Corporations Freight Ton-Miles Shipped by Type of Carrier Selected Years Measures of Life Expectancy and Mortality in the United States and Other Countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Various Years Changes in Exchange Rates of Major Currencies Against the Dollar January to December Official Reserves by Country U.S. Balance of Payments Changes in U.S. Relative Cost and Price Position List of Tables and Charts Continued Charts Changes in GNP and Prices and the Unemployment R a t e Labor Force Employment and Armed Forces Unemployment Rates Changes in Consumer Prices Changes in Wholesale Prices Changes in Selected Price Measures Changes in Compensation Productivity Labor Costs and Prices ( Private Nonfarm Sector ) Interest Rates Post-Freeze Organization Foreign Exchange Rates page Economic Review and Prospect A Summary Rarely has economic policy made so much news as in The freeze and Phase II closing the gold window and prospective devaluation domestic and international meetings at Camp David the Azores the Smithsonian Institution and Bermuda Key Biscayne and San Clemente all were continuing headline stories. These dramatic events were part of the process of dealing with problems in the forefront of public attention inflation unemployment the international position of the U.S. economy These policies and their sequels and consequences will be the economic news of Most of this report is devoted to them. But this inevitable concentration on the news whether in the press or in this report can give a misleading impression of what is happening. The most important part of what is happening at least in the field of economics is not what was new last year or what will be new this year but what is continuing THE LONGER VIEW Before turning to the news it is worthwhile to point out some of the facts that are not news. The simplest and most far reaching is that total output per capita in was higher in the United States than anywhere else in the world. Output per worker per hour of work and as far as can be estimated per unit of all resources were also the highest in the world. In all of these dimensions the economy continued to progress in In all of them the figures showed record highs last year. Labor productivity output per hour of work rose more rapidly than it had for several years In as in and there was a major shift in the allocation of total output from military to civilian uses. Measured in yearend dollars the annual rate of national defense spending declined by $ billion from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of or from percent of GNP to percent. In as in most other years the largest part of the increase in total output was devoted to private consumption. Real private consumption increased percent from to or percent per capita. It amounted to $ per capita in prices Most of the national income and most of the increase of the national income is the compensation of employees. In recent years an extraordinarily large share of the increase of the national income percent from to has gone into labor compensation. Real compensation per hour of work increased percent from to compared to percent average from to On the average during there were million people at work the highest number on record. In November the count passed million for the first time The efficient use of resources reflected in these figures is so commonplace in America that it is rarely news. However in the context of world history the American achievement is exceptional. It has not occurred automatically but is the result of private and public efforts. In as in the past measures to improve efficiency were important components of government policy In Chapter of this Report we discuss issues relating to the continuing effectiveness of the economic system that are now of special concern. They are issues of national policy with respect to improvement of the environment the supply of energy research and development surface freight transportation and the provision of health care. Each of these issues has its unique features but one aspect common to all of them should be emphasized at this time when we are engaged in comprehensive regulation of prices : They all reveal the difficulties that arise in the absence of an adaptive price system whether that absence results from the natural condition of the private economy or from government regulation The basic environmental problem for example is that some resources like air are common property and consequently the private economic system does not put a price on their use. The result is overuse or misuse such as the dumping of excess pollutants into the air. Similarly much of the knowledge that can be created by research and development becomes a free good so that private people do not have an adequate incentive to produce it A part of the health problem is the difficulty of finding a pricing system for medical care which gives an incentive to economy in its use but at the same time assures adequate service for all. In the field of energy we see that a shortage and high prices of fuels may be caused by regulation intended to hold down the price of fuel. And in surface freight transportation too stringent regulation of rates keeps goods from being moved in the most efficient and cheapest way The lesson of all this is not laissez-faire. There are conditions where a functioning price system does not naturally exist and has to be created or simulated. But the lesson is of the great and cumulative losses likely to result from continued suppression of the price system where it is functioning in anything like the normal manner URGENT PROBLEMS OF However important such matters are for the long run they were overshadowed in by the urgent questions of unemployment inflation and the balance of payments. At the beginning of each of these problems had already been around for a long time. The balance-of-payments problem was the oldest. There had been uninterrupted concern with the excess of U.S. payments abroad over receipts from abroad since Attempts had been made from time to time to limit the outflow of dollars by controls on capital flows and in other ways but without lasting success The inflation problem had its origin in the middle of with the increase of spending for the Vietnam war the steeply rising budgetary deficit at high employment and the monetary expansion that accompanied it. Unemployment had been high although declining throughout the early 's until the Vietnam inflationary boom forced it down to low levels As opened there was common expectation that progress would be made on all these fronts. The rise of output which began in the spring of had been interrupted in October by the General Motors Corp strike. But after the strike settlement the general expectation was that recovery would be resumed at a faster pace and unemployment would decline moderately in That was expected to be followed by a more certain and larger decline in Moreover a widespread belief prevailed in and out of the Administration that would see a clear reduction in the rate of inflation Certainly the acceleration of the inflation rate had come to a halt. Persistent operation of the economy below potential in even though the economy was rising seemed to offer reasons for expecting a reduction of the inflation rate. The inflation would still be proceeding too fast when the year ended ; but the rate would have declined and further decline would be in sight. Steady expansion in the U.S. economy with rising productivity and a declining rate of inflation would also help to strengthen our net export position and set us on the way to regaining balance-of-payments equilibrium The Administration 's goals went beyond this common appraisal of the year It believed that a more rapid expansion of the economy than was generally forecast was desirable and feasible. The desirable and feasible path was believed to be one that would bring the unemployment rate down to the zone of 4l/2 percent by the middle of The Administration believed that existing policy would move the economy along that path. That policy consisted of a budget that would keep expenditures from exceeding the revenues that would be collected at full employment but that would show large deficits in fiscal years and and a complementary monetary policy. More important the Administration emphasized its preparedness to adjust policy if evidence indicated the need to do so. The Administration 's forecast that the economy would move along the feasible path was a forecast that policy would be adapted to achieve the desired result The Administration also indicated in the Economic Report of its readiness to move directly to restrain price and wage increases that were not justified by competitive market conditions and were helping to prolong the inflation and unemployment. It did not however forecast conditions that would make comprehensive mandatory price and wage controls appropriate EARLY PERFORMANCE IN In the first quarter of real output rose at an annual rate of percent the highest quarterly rise since early The unemployment rate de- clined from percent in December to percent in February The annual rate of increase of consumer prices in the first months of was percent compared to percent in the corresponding period of The surplus in foreign trade rose in the first quarter ( seasonally adjusted ) Total output continued to rise throughout the year and in the end it was close to the common expectations with which the year had opened However as the months of spring and early summer passed it became increasingly clear that the economy was not meeting the more ambitious goals of the Administration. First quarter GNP had been bolstered by the makeup from the General Motors strike to a greater degree than had been expected and to a lesser degree by products other than automobiles. The rate of increase of real GNP fell to percent in the second quarter not enough to reduce the unemployment rate. The decline of the unemployment rate from December to February had not turned out to be the beginning of a steady improvement ; by May the rate had returned to its December level. The decline in the rate of increase of the consumer price index had not continued nor had the slowdown of inflation been confirmed by other measures. Although almost all measures showed that the rate of inflation was lower than it had been at its earlier peak they gave little assurance that the rate was still declining The second quarter also brought a rapid deterioration in the U.S. balanceof-payments position. The trade balance which had improved briefly in the first quarter fell sharply in the spring. In addition the decline in U.S. interest rates relative to interest rates abroad in the early part of the year sharply increased the outflow of funds from the United States. These events gave rise to speculation which worsened the position further The combination of problems created a dilemma for economic policy A rate of expansion and a level of unemployment less favorable than policy had projected could have been remedied by more expansive fiscal and monetary measures. But this remedy would have made the other problems worse It would have stimulated the still lively expectations of continuing or even accelerating inflation and it would have speeded up the flight from the dollar. The problems had to be dealt with simultaneously THE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY This combination of facts and possibilities led to the decisive change of policy that was announced on August The United States suspended the convertibility of the dollar into gold or other reserve assets for the first time since It imposed a temporary surcharge generally at the rate of percent on dutiable imports. Prices wages and rents were frozen for days to be followed by a more flexible and durable but still temporary system of mandatory controls. A package of tax reductions was proposed to stimulate economic expansion The suspension of dollar convertibility and the freeze were the dramatic elements in the announcement and this might have led to an impression Chart Changes in GNP and Prices and the Unemployment Rate PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM PRECEDING QUARTER ! / GNP _ IMPLICIT GNP PRICE DEFLATOR PERCENT ! / I II III IV I II III IV I J/SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES 2/UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR II III IV that the program was aimed primarily at solving the problems of the balance of payments and inflation rather than the problem of unemployment. In fact the program was directed at all three problems. The international measures and the price-wage controls were both designed to create conditions in which a more expansive budget policy would be safer and more effective. The measures to deal with inflation and the balance-of-payments deficit were also expected to contribute to a reduction of unemployment The import surcharge and the expected realignment of currencies would raise U.S. net exports and as a byproduct contribute to employment in that way. Similarly the price-wage control system was intended to stimulate spending and employment by reducing the inflation-anxiety of consumers and businessmen The two dramatic steps the price-wage controls and the suspension of convertibility had quite different roles in the future of the American economy. The price-wage controls were meant to be emergency expedients required in a particular historical context but expected to fade away leaving no permanent change in the system except the eradication of inflationary expectations. The suspension of convertibility on the other hand signalled the determination of the United States to achieve a permanent reform of the international monetary system By the end of substantial progress had been made in putting in place the policies announced on August The Revenue Act of signed on December incorporated the President 's tax recommendations with some revisions On December the United States and other major industrial countries agreed to a new set of international currency relationships and to intensive negotiations looking toward short-term measures of trade liberalization. At the same time they agreed to push on with longer-term discussions on new trade policies and on the international monetary system The price-wage freeze had given way to Phase II on November The basic machinery had been established : The Pay Board the Price Commission and other bodies had been set up under general coordination by the Cost of Living Council. Overall principles had been set forth and specific regulations issued on a great many subjects. Individual cases were being decided. The system would be evolving as long as it lasted but it was operational by the end of FIRST RESULTS Some of the first results of the New Economic Policy were already visible before ended. The most obvious were in the behavior of prices. The consumer price index rose percent seasonally adjusted from August to November compared to percent in the previous months. The index of industrial wholesale prices declined percent seasonally adjusted compared to an increase of percent in the previous months. In December both indexes rose more rapidly as was to be expected for a while imme- diately after the freeze. Nevertheless it was clear that the inflation rate had been slowed Expansive effects of the new policy were less clear and prompt except in the case of automobile sales. The annual rate of sales of domestic autos rose to million in the months after August compared with million in the previous months. This increase was due in part to the elimination of the 7-percent excise tax on automobiles ; this change was not enacted into law until December but it was known that it would be retroactively effective on August The increase of sales was also influenced by the expectation of a price rise after the freeze. Total output of goods and services increased in the fourth quarter at the annual rate of percent compared to percent in the third quarter. How much of this acceleration was due to the New Economic Policy was not measurable OUTLOOK FOR At the end of the year the prospect was that would see rising output diminishing unemployment a reduced rate of inflation and a stronger U.S position in the world economy A general indication of the prospective rise of the economy from to is that the gross national product ( GNP ) will probably increase by about $ billion compared with an increase of about $ billion from to The increase in real output will be about percent compared to percent in and the increase in prices from year to year will be around * percent compared to percent in There are several reasons for expecting a significantly faster rate of increase of GNP from to than was experienced from to It seems likely that in every major category of expenditures for goods and services will rise more or decline less than in except for investment in new houses. After a period in which total sales have been rising and inventories have hardly changed a sizable increase in business investment in inventories is probable. As a result of the adjustment in exchange rates U.S. net exports should during this year stop falling and begin rising. After years in which Federal purchases of gjoods and services have hardly risen in money terms and have actually declined in real terms purchases by the Federal Government will begin rising again. The general growth in output plus the incentives of the recently enacted Job Development Credit and depreciation liberalization will speed up business investment in plant and equipment Consumer expenditures will increase more rapidly spurred by rising earned incomes tax reductions larger social security benefits and greater confidence in the future Federal budget policies will contribute to the increase in GNP in through tax reductions that stimulate both consumption and investment as well as through increases in transfer payments to individuals increased grants to Stale and local governments and increases in its own purchases. The actual path of the economy in and the forecast for would result in a budget deficit around $ billion in fiscal ( ending June ) and $ billion in The outlays that would be made at full employment would exceed revenues that would be collected at full employment by about $ billion in fiscal In the next fiscal year however the budget would return to its target position of balance at full employment The role of monetary policy in the expansion ahead will be to provide for the increase of liquidity required to support increases in activity and income This outcome will involve a resumption of the growth of the stock of currency and demand deposits after months in which there has been relatively little growth. The expectation of an increase of GNP around $ billion is based on the assumption that the required monetary growth will be forthcoming The prospect is that we will have in not only a more rapid increase of GNP than in but also a slower rate of inflation. There are two reasons for expecting a slower rate of inflation. One is the accumulating effect of the continued operation of the economy below normal rates of employment and plant utilization even though those operating rates will be rising in The other is the effect of the price-wage-rent control system The standards put forth by the Price Commission and the Pay Board and the early experience with their application give grounds for confidence that the system operating within the general economic conditions in prospect for will contribute to a lower rate of inflation. These controls are operating in an environment in which other forces are contributing to a return to stability. If our fiscal and monetary policies are prudently managed there is little likelihood that the controls will be exposed to the pressure of excess demand With output rising at a rate of something like percent a year employment will rise strongly. This implies a fall in the unemployment rate to the neighborhood of percent by yearend. The number of people experiencing some unemployment and the average duration of their unemployment would both be reduced These estimates like all economic forecasts are subject to a considerable margin of possible error. Circumstances are conceivable in which the rise of the economy would be less than these estimates suggest. The rise in the rate of inventory accumulation which is assumed to occur early in might be delayed. The demand for new housing may be less than is implied here with a resulting decline of construction activity later in the year. The timing of the effects of the exchange rate realignment on trade flows is not certain On the other hand it is conceivable that the rise of the economy would be more rapid than projected here. The picture drawn here is not one of takeoff into a cyclical boom. At some stage the rise of final sales may trigger the above-average rise of inventories characteristic of strong recoveries Increased utilization rising profits and reduced anxiety about inflation of cost could stimulate larger business investment expenditure. The estimates we have made presuppose continuation of personal saving at a higher rate than normal ; a decline of that rate could significantly raise the economy Even given the course of the GNP in money terms uncertainties would remain about the prospect for employment unemployment and prices Variations in the rate of growth of the labor force and productivity within the limits of historical experience could significantly affect the outcome And although the character and operation of the price-wage control system give grounds for confidence it must be recognized that there is little relevant precedent for predicting its effects Uncertainties of this kind must be taken into account in policy decisions The possibility that the rise of the economy and the decline of unemployment might lag behind the estimates made today calls for readiness to take additional steps if this should turn out to be the case. But the possibility that with the policy now in place the economy will rise even more rapidly than we foresee today is a strong reason for not seeking to stimulate the economy more now. One of the most common causes of the breakdown of price-wage control systems has been excess demand for goods and labor which places upon the control system the burden of resisting market forces. The control system which has just been established is meant to assist market forces that would be working to hold down inflation ; it is not meant to resist market forces working to accelerate inflation If excess demand is avoided the control system can help to break the habitual or contractual repetition of large price and wage increases that keeps inflation going. It can generate the expectation of reasonable price stability that is essential to the achievement of reasonable price stability. And as that happens it will be possible to eliminate the controls. How soon that can be done will have to be determined in the light of experience The policy of restrained expansion of demand coupled since August with controls of prices and wages will finally eradicate the continuing inflationary consequences of the boom that started in mid-1965. However they will still leave questions that have troubled students of the American economy for many years. Are there persistent structural characteristics in the modern American economy that make inflation inevitable or inevitable in the absence of high unemployment ? If so can these characteristics of the economy be changed ? Upon the answers to these questions will depend the possibility of holding down the rate of inflation after Phase II ends not only below the heights reached after the Vietnam war expansion but to an even lower level. These questions will be the subject of study by the Council of Economic Advisers PROGRESS IN THE WORLD ECONOMY The expected rise of the economy in results in limited part from an expected increase in U.S. exports relative to imports. This in turn results in part from the realignment of the dollar relative to other currencies. While this contribution to the recovery is a welcome consequence of the stepc that have been taken in the international economy it is not their motivation or primary significance. By mid-1971 it was obvious that something had to be done to correct the U.S. balance-of-payments deficit and that almost certainly required measures which would raise exports relative to imports. The question was how to bring that about. The August decisions expressed the U.S. determination not to do it either by depressing the American economy or by imposing controls on foreign trade. The reasons for avoiding such controls need constant repetition. Americans have much to gain from being able to buy what they like where they like and being able to sell what they like where they like. The moves in the international monetary field were taken in an effort to solve the balance-of-payments problem by means that would preserve this freedom Moreover the object of the steps taken was not just to solve the U.S problem but to move toward better solutions for the future problems of the United States and the world. Since the United States suspended convertibility agreed to propose to the Congress an increase in the dollar price of gold and achieved a realignment of currencies everyone is much more aware that the problem of one major currency is the problem of all and that the international financial system must be made more compatible with prosperity and freedom for all. The events of have created a favorable atmosphere for progress in reforming the system The events of also helped to revive the possibility of resuming movement toward reduction of international trade barriers. The international economic community was suddenly confronted with the prospect that if it could not agree to move forward together toward liberalization it could easily fall backward. Fortunately the decision was to move forward together and negotiations are underway which promise improvement in trading conditions for the United States and others The agenda of economic policy for is a heavy one. The expansion of the economy must be guided along a steady path. The new price-wage control system must be developed and refined further. Negotiations now begun for trade liberalization must be pursued. Serious work must be carried forward on the international monetary system. And as always we must be prepared with new initiatives to meet needs that are not now foreseen. But while much remains to be done we can be confident that we are now on our way to goals that have eluded the American people for many years CHAPTER Performance and Policy to Mid-August O N AUGUST the President announced a far-reaching New Economic Policy designed to check the rise in prices and wages strengthen the Nation 's external economic position and stimulate economic activity at home. To curb the rate of inflation prices wages and rents were subjected to a 90-day freeze which was followed by a comprehensive but more flexible system of mandatory controls. To improve the Nation 's balance of payments the President suspended the convertibility of the dollar into gold and other reserve assets and imposed a temporary 10-percent surcharge on imports. And to strengthen the domestic economy the President proposed in addition to these measures a fiscal package whose stimulus came from a set of tax cuts which were passed by the Congress in December in somewhat altered form Results of the new program were visible in varying degrees by the end of the year. They were most apparent in the slowdown of price and wage increases during the freeze. On the international front the major industrial countries agreed to a realignment of currencies more favorable to the U.S competitive position and to prompt discussions concerning trade barriers and long-term monetary reform. The strong upsurge in purchases of automobiles from mid-August through November was partly a result of the proposed removal of the Federal excise tax but much of it was apparently an attempt by consumers to buy automobiles before prices were increased in the post-freeze period. Perhaps the most significant effect of the combined package was the impact on public confidence. From mid-August to the end of the year there was slow but steady improvement in confidence that the rate of inflation was subsiding and the pace of the economic recovery was gathering strength The decision to embark on the New Economic Policy ( NEP ) came from an increasing awareness in the Administration that the ambitious goals it had set at the beginning of the year were not being met. Progress in the fight against inflation was proceeding too slowly and its future success was uncertain. At the same time the recovery was also progressing but not fast enough to cut the rate of unemployment. More crucial than either of these for the timing of the decisions was the serious weakening of the dollar in international markets. As the summer wore on there were no signs of a resolution of the financial crisis that in May caused the Swiss franc and the Austrian schilling to be revalued and the German mark and the Netherlands guilder to be set free to float in value. In the second quarter the U.S. balance of payments on the official reserve transactions basis had recorded a deficit of $ billion at a seasonally adjusted annual rate and in July and August pressure against the dollar reached enormous proportions Funds totaling about $ billion moved into foreign official reserve accounts in the week ended August The time had come to deal decisively with the international financial problem that had persisted for at least a dozen years despite the efforts of four successive Administrations The domestic aspects of the New Economic Policy are discussed at the end of this chapter and in Chapter and the international aspects in Chapter The rest of this chapter deals with events and policies in generally up to the midsummer shift in policy DEMAND OUTPUT AND THE LABOR MARKET The year was one of limited recovery in demand and production During the Administration had actively sought to slow down the economy in order to control inflation. Those efforts had their major impact at the end of and early when the rise in demand slowed considerably and output dipped after which policy shifted in the direction of expansion A fragile recovery was reversed toward the end of by the lengthy and severe strike at General Motors. The underlying course of the economy was upward throughout and its pace was moderate for most of the year but the actual course of events was irregular because of strikes and their aftermaths ( Chart p ) Changes in demand and output as measured by GNP through the third quarter of are reviewed in the following pages. Although the NEP was announced in mid-August it would be difficult to measure changes through the middle of the third quarter. In any case the measured demand conditions of the third quarter are probably generally representative of the demand conditions at the time the August decisions were made although the increase of GNP in the quarter has turned out to have been lower than was expected at that time DEMAND PATTERNS From the third quarter of to the third quarter of total GNP rose percent or by $ billion ( Table ) This was considerably more than the $ billion rise over the preceding quarters. The rise was dominated by increases in residential construction and State and local government purchases both of which were especially responsive to the improvement in credit conditions. Consumption expenditures showed an above-average gain while Federal purchases and business fixed investment were weak. The overall increase was held down by a reduction in business investment in inventories and by unexpectedly severe weakness in net exports. Indeed if our economic performance were measured by domestic TABLE Changes in gross national product in current and constant dollars III to III [ Billions of dollars ] Change in seasonally adjusted annual rates Component III to III III to III to III III III to I I to III Current dollars : Total GNP Personal consumption expenditures. Business fixed investment Residential structures Change in business inventories Net exports of giods and services Federal Government purchases State and local government purchases ^ Gross auto product * All other product Constant ( ) dollars : Total GNP Personal consumption expenditures. Business fixed investment Residential structures Change in business inventories Net exports of goods and services Federal Government purchases State and local government purchases Gross auto product All other product Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce final sales that is by GNP excluding inventory investment and net exports the rise over the period would have been about a full percentage point greater [ Percentage change ] III to III GNP Domestic final sales III to III III to III The 7.1-percent increase in GNP reflected a 4.6-percent rise in prices and a 2.4-percent increase in physical volume. Although this increase in volume was an improvement over the decrease of and the 2.2-percent gain of it fell short of the rate required to keep unemployment from rising. Unemployment reached a peak around the beginning of and thereafter remained essentially on a plateau Consumer Income and Spending Fiscal policy helped to buttress consumer income last year as it had in Because the demand for labor was weak the expansion in payrolls was TABLE Changes in personal income taxes and disposable income III to III [ Billions of dollars ] Change in seasonally adjusted annual rates Item III to III Wage and salary disbursements Other earned income Transfer payments Less : Personal contributions for social insurance III to III III to III III to III Equals : Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce limited. Indeed personal income excluding transfer payments rose only percent from the third quarter of to the third quarter of ( Table ) However transfer payments rose almost percent mainly because in the second quarter of Social Security benefits were increased the change being retroactive to the beginning of Altogether the rise in total personal income during this period came to percent. Because of the tax reductions under the Tax Reform Act of that became effective at the start of personal taxes declined relative to income. The 7.5-percent increase in disposable ( after-tax ) income was somewhat more than the average annual gain for the past decade in current dollars but not in real terms Personal consumption expenditures rose percent from the third quarter of to the third quarter of or percent in real terms. Spending on durable goods which had changed little over the preceding year rose much more than average even when allowance is made for the sharp increase in automobile purchases after August What was noteworthy about consumer behavior during this period was the persistence of a very high rate of personal saving. The 8.3-percent rate from the third quarter of through the second quarter of was higher than any 4-quarter average since The rate peaked in the second quarter coincident with the large payment of Social Security benefits and edged down thereafter Business Investment Despite the improvement in profits and cash flow and the greater availability of credit in business fixed investment in real terms changed little during ; the 4-percent rise in outlays from the third quarter of to the third quarter of was slightly less than the rise in prices. Excess plant capacity was the main factor discouraging investment Investment was not uniformly weak last year. The sluggishness centered in manufacturing and railroads both of which showed typical cyclical re- sponses and in airlines. With their output decreasing from to to a level far below capacity manufacturers cut back their investment by ^ percent from to after holding it even from to Increases were large for electric utilities whose investment rose percent over the year Although real investment declined during gauged by recessions in the postwar years the decrease was very mild if allowance is made for the GM strike. As a share of real GNP business fixed investment has remained high. The 10.6-percent share for although below the high average of percent from through was above the average of percent for the years from through At the start of the Administration announced that depreciation rules would be liberalized to stimulate fixed investment. The main features of this liberalization were a shortening of permissible useful lives of equipment and a change in the regulations affecting the calculation of depreciation in the year of acquisition. The Treasury Department estimated that in the first full year following these changes depreciation would be raised by $ 6/ billion and taxes on business income reduced by $ billion. The liberalization with first-year benefits considerably reduced later became part of the Revenue Act of The new regulations were not expected to exert a large influence in the main benefits were expected to be achieved subsequently but they may have played a role in the step up of appropriations and new orders for capital goods after the middle of the year The mildness of the recovery and uncertainty about the outlook caused businessmen to pursue cautious inventory policies during most of The $ billion added to stocks during the year was even less than the small addition in Last year special factors associated with strikes had the effect of stimulating inventory investment at first and depressing it subsequently. Automobile stocks were built up in the first half following the pronounced liquidation of stocks caused by the General Motors strike in late Prospects of a possible steel strike after July the expiration date of the labor contract caused steel consumers to build up stocks in the first months of after which these inventories were liquidated The pattern of GNP change is altered if the change in investment in auto and steel stocks is excluded from the total as is done below. On this basis the rise in GNP strengthened rather than weakened from the first to the third quarter as compared to the rise over the preceding quarters [ Billions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] III to Change in GNP Less : Change in investment in auto and steel stocks Equals : Adjusted change in GNP_ to II Residential Construction Housing was the strongest sector of the economy in Private housing starts totaled more than million units the largest number recorded for any year. Residential construction outlays rose almost percent or $ billion from the third quarter of to the third quarter of This was one-fifth of the rise in total GNP The rise in housing was an extension of the recovery in starts that began in the spring of and reflected exceptionally strong demand in a setting of easing credit. Government subsidy programs and Government assistance in mortgage markets also contributed to the housing expansion. Demand for new homes had been partially frustrated during the second half of the 's largely because of competing demands for credit by business and government in an environment of restrictive monetary policy in and in Traditional mortgage lending institutions which were inhibited in their ability to attract savings deposits reduced mortgage credit sharply Mortgage interest rates rose to unusually high levels in and early From a peak in the first quarter of to a trough in the first quarter of private starts declined percent. The decreases in private starts of percent in and percent in occurred at a time when increases in family formation and replacement demand suggested the production of more rather than fewer homes. Consequently a backlog of housing demand evidenced by extremely low vacancy rates was carried into The shift to an easier monetary policy in was the decisive factor in the turnaround in housing. This change along with growing support from a number of Government-related housing institutions and a flood of savings deposits into mortgage lending institutions greatly increased the availability of mortgage credit and brought the secondary market yield on FHA mortgages down slowly from the 9.29-percent peak that had been reached in March The strength of demand showed up in several different ways. Sales of new one-family homes from January through October were percent greater than the corresponding total. The ratio between the inventory of unsold homes and homes sold was lower than in any earlier year at least since when numbers of this sort werefirstcollected. Vacancy rates were low for both rental and homeowner units. Homeowner vacancy rates through the third quarter remained at their lowest levels in over a decade ; and although the rental vacancy rate rose from percent in the second quarter to percent in the third it remained low by the standards of the 1960Js Other Demand Purchases by State and local governments rose about as much during as during the preceding year. Improving credit conditions facilitated financing Jby State and local governments. There was no evidence of any slowdown in the growth of payrolls which make up close to three-fifths of State and local purchases ; however the rise in employment continued to slow down while wage increases accelerated The deterioration in the Nation 's trade balance is discussed in Chapter Here it need only be noted that the deterioration had a significant effect on the change in GNP. In the third quarter of for example net exports were at the comparatively high rate of $ billion. In the third quarter of the balance had fallen to zero with imports rising much more rapidly than exports. As a result U.S. output of goods and services rose less than the domestic U.S. demand because more of that demand was met from imports LABOR MARKET Although growth of the labor force slowed down and civilian employment expanded somewhat before the start of the NEP the unemployment rate remained near percent through August and indeed through all of ( Chart p. ) The stickiness of the jobless rate reflected primarily the slowness of the cyclical recovery of private demand the continuing downward adjustments occurring in the defense sector and the strong cost-cutting efforts in all sectors of the economy that resulted in greater output per hour of work Labor Force The total labor force increased by about million from the third quarter of to the third quarter of or by nearly one-third less than would normally be expected from population growth and long-run trends in labor force participation. Because of reductions in the Armed Forces the civilian labor force expanded more than the total labor force rising by about million. For men aged to increases in the civilian labor force were particularly large again in reflecting the return of ex-servicemen to civilian activity ( Table and Chart ) TABLE Changes in the working-age population Armed Forces and labor force to III Change ( millions of persons years and over ) Group to average Noninstitutional population Men to years Men years and over _ Women years and over Both sexes to years ( i ) U i Decrease of less than Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor to Total labor force Armed Forces Civilian labor force to average III to III to ( i ) U Chart Labor Force Employment and Armed Forces MILLIONS OF PERSONS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL LABOR FORCE CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE I i i J L I I i I I MILLIONS OF PERSONS ( enlarged scale ) I I I I I I ! I I I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I I I I I I I I I I I Long-run increases in the size of the Nation 's labor force are governed primarily by the growth of the working-age population ( persons years of age and older ) Over shorter periods labor force changes are affected by cyclical changes in economic activity. On balance when labor demand is strong additional workers enter the labor force attracted by plentiful job opportunities and when labor demand is not strong there is often a net decline in participation. This responsiveness to changing demand conditions can not be measured with great precision ; but during the period of very tight labor markets in the late 's when unemployment was low overall labor force participation rose sharply. From early to about mid-1971 participation rates declined Employment Reflecting the relatively mild expansion of aggregate demand and employers ' efforts to raise productivity total civilian employment rose only over the year ending in the third quarter. A large share of the employment increase occurred in State and local governments. In the private nonfarm sector continued growth of employment in service-producing industries was largely offset by further small declines in the goods-producing industries This pattern of employment changes was similar to patterns after earlier recessions with one major exception : There was no rebound in manufacturing employment. Within manufacturing reductions by producers of defense goods and their suppliers continued to be large ; from December to August employment in three industries primarily engaged in the production of military hardware ordnance aircraft and parts and communications equipment declined at an annual rate of jobs. By August after the sharp layoffs in the steel industry manufacturing employment had fallen below million its lowest point since December Total man-hours worked in factories in the third quarter of were down nearly percent from the peak reached in late Defense Adjustment The progressive winding down of the U.S. military involvement in Vietnam and a general realignment of defense spending have sharply reduced manpower utilization in defense activities. Although the largest cuts caused by this realignment are now behind us imbalances and distortions arising from the transition are still an important factor in the labor market In all there has been a net reduction of about million persons in defense during the past years ( Table ) The steady flow of young veterans out of the Armed Forces which was more than twice as large as the net reduction in the Armed Forces in and created a special unemployment problem because most young men leaving the service require somewhat longer than the average period to find work in local job markets Unemployment among former defense industry workers also tends to last longer than the average because of their relatively specialized skills and TABLE Employment attributable to defense expenditures and personnel requirements and x [ Millions of persons ] Type of employment Federal military Federal civilian. Private employment. Defense-generated employmentPublic employment Estimates primarily based on national income and product accounts which include atomic energy programs Preliminary estimates Note. Data are calendar year averages Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor their residence in communities where large defense contractors are the major employers. Persons and communities affected by defense cuts have been beneficiaries of a variety of Government programs which are tailored to their particular problems ( see Chapter pp. ) Unemployment After rising steeply to approximately percent of the work force at the end of unemployment leveled off in Jobless rates for most groups were unusually steady from late to late ( Table ) TABLE Selected unemployment rates IV-1971 IV [ Percent seasonally adjusted * ] Selected groups of workers IV IV II All workers2 IV III Sex and age : Men years Men years and over Women years and over Both sexes 16-19years Race : White Negro and other races Occupation : White-collar workers Blue-collar workers Service workers Other categories : State insured workers Married men Full-time workers Part-time workers Unemployment as a percent of civilian labor force in group specified Reflects revisions for See note Appendix Tables B-22-24 Source : Department of Labor Chart Unemployment Rates % or more to % to % ^ to % | Under % NOTE : UNEMPLOYMENT RATES BY STATES ARE ESTIMATES BASED ON PRELIMINARY DATA FOR THE FIRST MONTHS OF SOURCE ; DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The average duration of unemployment continued to rise in moving up from about weeks in to nearly weeks in Toward the year 's end about persons had been jobless for at least months the maximum period for unemployment insurance payments under regular programs. Many of the long-term unemployed were former aerospace and defense workers living in Washington California Massachusetts and a number of other States that were heavily affected by reduced defense purchasing ( Chart ) Some additional income protection was provided to many of these workers under the provisions to extend unemployment benefits contained in the Employment Security Amendments of This Act signed into law by the President on August established a Federal-State program to provide up to additional weeks of unemployment compensation when local or national unemployment became high. In all States established eligibility under the individual State program at some time during About wrorkers were drawing extended benefits at the peak The extended benefits program became effective throughout the Nation in January because the national insured unemployment rate had been above percent for successive months Regular unemployment insurance programs continued to provide shorterterm income protection to experienced unemployed workers who had been jobless for shorter periods. An average of million workers the largest share of whom are men in the prime working age groups drew weekly unemployment benefits averaging $ under regular State unemployment insurance programs during PRICES AND COSTS At the start of there were signs that the fight against inflation was yielding tangible results and there were expectations that it would continue to do so in the coming year. During both the wholesale price index and the consumer price index rose less than they had in Less pronounced than the moderation in the rise of all wholesale prices but really more significant was the slowdown in the rise of wholesale industrial prices. There was considerable slack in the economy. With activity recovering prospects were good that there would be an improvement in productivity the growth of which had lagged seriously in the preceding years. Indeed the rise in unit labor costs had already slowed significantly during To be sure the then current evidence and the prospects were by no means uniformly reassuring. The rise in the comprehensive GNP deflator increased sharply in the fourth quarter of after declining from a peak in mid1969. And a slower rise in wage rates was yet to be seen. The automobile industry had just concluded a costly wage settlement that was followed by a sizable increase in prices and the 3-year contracts in the can aluminum and steel industries were due to expire at varying times by the end of July Still the evidence at the beginning of viewed in the light of past experience gave support to the conclusion that the disinflationary policies were bearing fruit PRICES The behavior of prices from the end of to mid-August and especially after April heightened concern about inflation. Although the rise in consumer prices continued to decelerate for several months early in the year it quickened in the spring as did the rise in wholesale industrial prices ( Charts and ) The evidence provided by the more comprehensive measures of price change the GNP deflators also suggested at least a partial setback to earlier progress No single price index can tell the whole story of price behavior. For this reason special indexes are reviewed below and after this a summary statement is given Consumer Prices The consumer price index ( CPI ) which had increased at rates of percent during and percent during rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent in the first quarter of ( Chart ) The improvement had been due mainly to a slower rise in food prices The further slowdown in early however reflected a much reduced rate of increase for nonfood commodity prices which in the past had displayed a cyclical behavior but during had failed to decelerate. Lower interest rates on mortgages were also important in the first-quarter slowdown The improvement proved to be short-lived as the second quarter brought a rise of percent ( annual rate ) in the CPI. Not only was there some stepup in the rise of food prices but nonfood commodities also rose more rapidly at about their rate while mortgage interest rates leveled out Prices in July and August rose less rapidly than in the second quarter ; the slowdown was especially pronounced for food but it was also evident for nonfood commodities The behavior of the CPI excluding mortgage interest and food has a special interest because the short-term movements of food prices are exceptionally sensitive to changes in supply as well as demand and because mortgage interest costs are governed by factors rather different from those influencing most other prices. This calculation also shows a slower rise in the first quarter of as compared to a setback in the second quarter and a slowdown from June to August ( Table ) Wholesale Prices Mainly because of pronounced declines in farm prices the rise in the wholesale price index ( WPI ) slowed considerably from to from percent during to percent during Conversely in the first half of a strong recovery in farm prices was mainly responsible for the acceleration to a 5.0-percent rate of increase Chart Changes in Consumer Prices PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM MONTHS EARLIER * / SERVICESi/ \ V \ J \ Jf ^ ^ V V \ \ \ V J ALL ITEMS V n i i i i i I FOOD I l I l I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I [ I I I I I I I I I I I I/SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES 2/CHANGES BASED ON UNADJUSTED INDEXES SINCE THESE PRICES HAVE L I T T L E SEASONAL MOVEMENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The industrial component of wholesale prices representing nearly threefourths of the weight of the WPI is more significant as an index of the TABLE Changes in consumer prices for all items and all items less food and mortgage interest December to August Percentage change Period All items December to December December to December All items less food and mortgage interest costs Seasonally adjusted annual rates December to March March to June June to August Source : Department of Labor underlying inflationary trend because it is little influenced by short-run supply fluctuations. There had been some progress in restraining industrial prices. After rising percent during they rose percent during and in the first quarter of a further deceleration was apparent However this improvement was reversed in the second quarter. Industrial prices rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent and then at a much faster rate in July and August. In general the quarterly pattern of price change by major industry groups was very diverse and one can not easily categorize the industries showing the largest increases ( Chart ) GNP Deflators The broadest measure of price change is the implicit GNP deflator which is obtained as a by-product of the calculation of real output. A related measure is the deflator for gross private product ; this excludes the pay of government workers and thus their pay raises which have often distorted the interpretation of the behavior of overall prices because the raises have come at irregular intervals and because no allowance is made in the accounting for increased productivity of government workers. Unlike commonly used indexes such as the CPI and the WPI whose movements reflect price changes of fixed bundles of goods and services movements in the implicit deflators reflect not only price changes but also shifts in the composition of output which are sometimes very pronounced. To abstract from the effect of changes in the composition of output the Commerce Department has calculated alternative deflators ; some use fixed weights and others are chain indexes utilizing weights of the preceding quarter. Some of these measures appear in Table All show some progress toward lower rates of inflation around the second or third quarters of some setback Chart Changes in Wholesale Prices PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM MONTHS EARLIER ! / ALL COMMODITIES I 1II I I II1III III I1I I II I II I I 1II I I II I I 1I I III1II II I INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES EXCLUDING LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS A L L INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES I I II I 1I1II II III I II I II I I I I I1II 1I II I I I I II III II I I I J/SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR TABLE Alternative measures of price changes for gross national product and gross private product I to IV [ Percentage change from preceding quarte r ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross national product Gross private product Quarter Implicit deflator weights Chain i Implicit deflator weights Chain : : II Ill IV : II III : II III IV II Ill IV | V2 Weighted by quarter preceding quarter shown Preliminary Source : Department of Commerce in late and early and varying degrees of improvement from the setbacks in the second quarter of Summary of Price Behavior Chart summarizes the behavior of several price measures in order to describe the progress against inflation prior to the freeze. Six measures have been selected all but one of which the GNP price deflator for personal consumption expenditures have already been discussed. These indexes have all been computed quarterly and in all cases the measure used is a base-weighted index. The charts illustrate calendar quarter-to-quarter changes calculated at seasonally adjusted annual rates An examination of Chart indicates the following : ( ) Most of the indexes show a peak rate of increase at some time in ; ( ) most of the indexes show a trough at some time in ; ( ) in the second quarter of the last full quarter before the freeze we find that the rate of increase is above the trough in all instances but below the peak in all but one instance wholesale industrial prices. That of course is a serious exception. Although it does not negate the improvement shown in the other indexes the exception was important enough and the other improvements small enough to leave uncertainty about the future decline of inflation COMPENSATION AND WAGES Increases in average hourly compensation in the private nonfarm sector accelerated sharply from late until then leveled off at an average annual rate of increase of about percent until the freeze was instituted in August A careful examination of these data on a quar45 Chart Changes in Selected Price Measures PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM PRECEDING QUARTERN GNP PRICE INDEX ( WEIGHTS ) I i I I I I | | PRIVATE GNP PRICE INDEX ( WEIGHTS ) I | I o PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES PRICE INDEX ( WEIGHTS ) > * * N n \ IV I II IV II III J/SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES * LAST QUARTER BEFORE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE | III IV I III IV Chart Changes in Selected Price Measures PERCENTAGE C H A N G E FROM PRECEDING QUARTERV WHOLESALE PRICES-ALL COMMODITIES I WHOLESALE PRICES-INDUSTRIAL I I I I | _ I I I I COMMODITIES CONSUMER PRICES I I i II III l J IV I I I II III I IV I/SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES LAST QUARTER BEFORE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I I II III i IV I II III IV terly basis does not reveal any clear sign of a slowdown in compensation growth. To have halted the acceleration in the rise of hourly compensation was an accomplishment but as long as increases of percent persisted there would be a continuation of considerable price inflation Historically increases in hourly compensation have slowed significantly during periods of slack economic activity ( Table ) mainly but not excluTABLE Rates of increase of hourly compensation during expansions and recessions IV to IVx [ Percentage change ; seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Cyclical turning points Trough Peak Manufacturing Private nonfarm economy Year before peak to peak Peak to trough Year before peak to peak Peak to trough : II : III : III ' II : II : : IV : IV CO CO CO CO -J : IV P : IV * Hourly compensation estimates include salaries wages and supplemental benefits for self-employed Quarter designated as cyclical turning point by National Bureau of Economic Research workers including the Source : Department of Labor ( except as noted ) sively as a result of cyclical reductions of overtime and a shift in the mix of employment away from high-wage industries. Such a respite was anticipated for but did not materialize either then or in As is indicated further on the underlying causes of this continued rapid rate of increase are not clear. A technical factor that has hindered an understanding of wage developments has been the lack of comprehensive time series data on wage and salary rates. However the information that is available suggests that average increases in wage and salary rates remained high for most occupation groups in most industries until mid-August Figures on average hourly earnings are available for production and nonsupervisory workers in private nonfarm industries a group that accounts for over four-fifths of all employees in the private sector. These data can be adjusted so that they more nearly approximate average wage rates by eliminating both the effects of employment shifts between high- and low-wage industries and the effects of overtime changes ( the latter adjustment is carried out only for manufacturing ) The adjusted earnings increased nearly percent during the year ending in the third quarter about the same rate as in the preceding years ( Table ) Although different patterns were evident among the individual industries rates of increase in adjusted hourly earnings for all these broad industry groups were above percent an indication of the pervasiveness of the wage spiral. In the trade finance and services industries where wage rates have ordinarily been more TABLE Changes in adjusted average hourly earnings of private nonfarm production or nonsupervisory workers III to III * Percentage change Industry III to III III to III III to III Mining Construction Manufacturing Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services -_.-.._ Private nonfarm industries Adjusted for interindustry shifts and for manufacturing for overtime also Source : Department of Labor sensitive to the business cycle hourly earnings continued to advance rapidly despite ample supplies of labor and the relatively mild expansion of demand Statistics on negotiated wage rate changes are available for workers covered by large collective bargaining agreements. Wage increases negotiated in major collective bargaining agreements in the first quarters of averaged a bit less than in ( Table ) However these average changes are significantly affected by the mix of industries and by the unions involved in bargaining. Moreover they exclude the potential effects of wage increase TABLE Wage rate increases in major collective bargaining agreements Mean percentage increase Item first quarters Negotiated annual wage rate increases averaged over life of contract : Construction,. Other Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing All industries Negotiated first-year wage-rate increases : All industries Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing __ _ Construction.- Other General wage increases in manufacturing : ! Union establishments Nonunion establishments i Data relate only to establishments in which a decision was made to increase wages Note. Data relate to contracts covering workers or more and exclude possible increases in wages from cost-ofliving escalator clauses except where guaranteed Source : Department of Labor agreements with open-ended cost-of-living escalator clauses. In there was a large increase in the number of workers covered by such cost-of-living escalator clauses although the total number so covered remains a small proportion of the work force. Much of the slowing in the rate of increase for negotiated wage rates in occurred in the construction industry apparently as a consequence of actions of the Construction Industry Stabilization Committee ( see Chapter ) Collective bargaining agreements in manufacturing provided larger wage increases in than in with average first-year wage increases accelerating from percent in to percent in the first months of Since average wage increases have been larger in nonmanufacturing industries than in manufacturing. Efforts of manufacturing workers to reverse this pattern to regain old wage differentials and to obtain gains more nearly like those in the transportation and construction industries were partly responsible for the acceleration in manufacturing Data for manufacturing point to differences in wage behavior between nonunion and union firms. Among nonunion establishments that made decisions to raise wages in the first quarters of the increases were a little less than in Union establishments however granted much larger increases than those of the year before. Nonunion wage rates appeared to be responding more promptly to the weakness in labor demand just as they had responded more promptly to the inflation that gained headway after At that time nonunion wage rates rose more sharply than union wages Some statistics are also available on changes in salary rates in quite narrowly classified white-collar occupation groups. To judge from these data the rise in salary rates accelerated further in even though unemployment in most of these occupations had risen in and remained high in ( Table ) Thus although our statistics on wage and salary rates and changes are imperfect it appeared in the summer of that the expected slowdown in wage and salary increases had not materialized. On the contrary increases were persisting at an inflationary pace TABLE Rise of white-collar salaries selected occupations in private industry to Percentage increase Occupation White-collar workers to average Professional administrative and technical Clerical to to to to to Note. Changes are based on data for June of each year and relate to weighted averages of a cross section of representative occupations ( subdivided into levels of responsibility ) designed to compare Federalpay with private pay Source : Department of Labor PRODUCTIVITY AND LABOR COSTS The rise in output from the third quarter of to the third quarter of was accompanied by a slight decline in man-hours of work. The resulting rise in productivity output per man-hour was an extension of an upturn that began after the first quarter of and followed years in which output per man-hour was essentially unchanged ( Chart ) From then until the third quarter of output per man-hour in the private nonfarm economy increased at an annual rate of percent. This did not make up the earlier shortfall from trend The pattern of productivity change described above was broadly consistent with patterns during previous business cycles although there were some significant differences. First the period of no appreciable increase in average output per man-hour was unusually long nearly years. In the first part of this period from roughly mid-1968 to the summer of employers increased their employment rolls rapidly even though the rise in output was slowing down. That period was one of low unemployment and high labor turnover one also in which employers seemed to be engaged in labor hoarding because of their expectations of rising demand and difficulties in hiring experienced help. An extended interval of insignificant productivity growth while output is still rising is not a characteristic of cyclical experience. In the second part of the period output declined while work forces continued to expand until early and then were maintained or cut very little. Developments of this kind have been observed in other mild recessions Second after quarters of output growth total man-hours remained about unchanged instead of rising as in previous recoveries. The failure of man-hours to rise probably reflected a heightened emphasis on cost control resulting from the continuing profit squeeze and the mild recovery of output With the rise in hourly rates of compensation holding steady the upturn in productivity growth moderated the rise in unit labor costs. After having risen at an annual rate of percent during the previous years unit labor costs rose at a rate of percent from the third quarter of to the third quarter of ( Table ) CORPORATE COSTS AND PRICES The labor costs discussed above are not the full story of cost inflation Data pertaining to nonfinancial corporations provide a useful framework for breaking down the price of output into labor costs nonlabor costs ( depreciation indirect business taxes and net interest ) and profits. This particular sector of the economy accounts for a large proportion of the Nation 's output constituting percent of private GNP in A special advantage of analyzing corporate data is that the line between wages and salaries on the one hand and profits on the other is fairly distinct whereas in the noncorporate sector the income earned by a partner or sole proprietor is a mixture of labor and property income Chart Changes in Compensation Productivity Labor Costs and Prices Private Nonfarm Sector PERCENTAGE CHANGE FROM PRECEDING YEAR OUTPUT PER MAN-HOUR UNIT LABOR COSTS NOTE : DATA RELATE TO ALL PERSONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR TABLE Changes in compensation productivity and labor costs in the private nonfarm economy to III [ Seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percentage change Item to Compensation per man-hour Output per man-hour Unit I'bor costs Implicit price deflator Real compensation per man-hourl _ to to III to III III to III Compensation per man-hour adjusted for changes in the consumer price index Note. Data relate to all persons Source : Department of Labor In the short run prices are viewed as being responsive to total costs as well as to demand but a rise in a particular component of cost does not necessarily mean a rise in price. For example a rise in depreciation costs may reflect a substitution of capital for labor which has the net result of leaving total costs unchanged From the third quarter of to the third quarter of the price of corporate output rose percent a little more than in and considerably more than in any one of the years preceding The rise in total costs slowed and profits before taxes per unit of output rose percent or percent if allowance is made for the liberalization in depreciation Despite the increase unit profits were extremely low by post-war standards Unit costs of all types rose less rapidly during than the year before but the slowdown in nonlabor costs was less than that of labor costs ( Table ) The rise in capital consumption allowances per unit during the past year was partly influenced by the more liberal depreciation permitted by the Treasury in Because of changing regulations affecting depreciation and the use of historical costs in calculating depreciation changes in this component of costs are difficult to interpret. One can not infer that a rise in measured depreciation costs means a more rapid using up of the stock of physical capital held by nonfinancial corporations When corporate output fell in indirect business taxes accounted for a rising share of total price. To some extent this was a cyclical response since some of these taxes are relatively fixed and their share increases as volume declines. The increase in output in was too small to keep these costs from rising still more despite the decline in taxes due to the elimination of the excise tax on motor vehicles Interest costs per unit rose less rapidly last year partly because the decline in interest rates slowed the rise in the effective interest charge paid on all nonfinancial corporate indebtedness TABLE Changes in prices costs and profits per unit of output for nonfinancial corporations III to III III to III Item III to III III to III to III HI to III Dollar change per unit of output : Price Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes J Interest Employee compensation Other costs Total costs Profits Percentage change per unit of output : Price Employee compensation Other costs Total costs Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes Interest Profits Output Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Cost and Profit Shares Table shows the distribution of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations. The profit share in ( before taxes and including the inventory valuation adjustment ) was percent up from the very low percent for but well below the 15.1-percent average from to Without the new depreciation regulations the profit share would have been only slightly higher at percent The profit share is sensitive to the stage of the business cycle and one reason for the present low share is that the economy is operating considerably below capacity. As noted above changing depreciation regulations also affect the profit share but this can be remedied if depreciation is calculated on a uniform basis. The Commerce Department has done this in special calculations shown below on line for selected high-employment years and the more recent period. On this basis the decline in the profit share from is less than the decline in the reported share but the decline since is the same on the two bases A comprehensive analysis of property income requires consideration of interest charges which have become substantially more important in postwar years. When the interest share is combined with the adjusted profit TABLE Distribution of gross product originating in nonfinancial corporations ^ [ Percent ] All other costs Compensation of employees Total Year Total Capital consumption allowances Indirect business taxes Profits J Net interest I960 Also includes business transfer payments less subsidies Before taxes and including inventory valuation adjustment Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce share the total property share appears to have declined from earlier years but less than the share of reported profits alone [ Percent of gross product of nonfinancial corpDrationsl ( ) Reported profits ( ) Adjusted profits ( ) Net interest Total ( ) INCOMES IN AGRICULTURE Agricultural incomes often fluctuate widely from year to year for reasons only partially related to output and price developments in the general economy. The demand for farm products is relatively insensitive to changes in overall output and prices. Farm prices therefore fluctuate primarily in response to supply conditions for agricultural products. On the other hand since many farm inputs are purchased from the nonfarm sector price increases in the nonfarm economy have a direct impact on farm production costs In the past years farm production expenses have been increasing at a slightly faster pace than the general rate of inflation reflecting primarily higher input prices but also some increases in quantities of inputs purchased During this period the value of farm sales increased percent in only percent in and percent in Net income of farm operators increased sharply in to the highest levels in over years and then declined in According to preliminary estimates net income ( including increases in the value of yearend inventories ) recovered slightly in The pattern of the decline and recovery has also been significant. Income of farm operators declined in each consecutive quarter through and improved in each quarter of The improvement was particularly strong in the second half of last year Aggregate measures do not give a complete picture of recent changes in the income situation of farm families. Because of the continuing secular decline in farm numbers average net income per farm declined only slightly in and the recovery returned it to the record level of This indicator is also imperfect because the current census definition of a farm includes many places only nominally engaged in farming. Many people who are counted as living on farms are primarily dependent on nonfarm earnings ; others supplement their farm income with nonf arm work. Earnings from nonfarm sources by the farm population have been increasing regularly for many years and in they constituted over percent of the farm population 's total personal income. Because the growth in nonfarm jobs has been limited income from this source has expanded at a slower rate the last years than in earlier years FINANCIAL POLICY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS The economic goals of required considerable aid from monetary policy. In the first half of the year monetary growth proceeded at very high rates but expansive effects upon the economy normally associated with such rapid growth in money were not forthcoming. This shortfall from expectations came about because a large part of the increase in the money stock went to satisfy an increased desire by the public for money balances. The year saw generally lower interest rates than and sectors sensitive to the costs of credit particularly housing enjoyed a considerable expansion MONETARY POLICY The Federal Reserve 's stated goals of monetary policy in were " the resumption of sustainable economic growth while encouraging an orderly reduction in the rate of inflation moderation of short-term capital outflows and attainment of reasonable equilibrium in the country 's balance of payments. " After August the success of the New Economic Policy became one more goal of monetary policy. Throughout the year the Federal Reserve sought monetary growth rates that would best bring about attainment of these goals At the beginning of there was concern that monetary growth in the last quarter of had been less than desirable. The growth rate for the money supply ( currency and demand deposits ) or Mx during that quarter appeared at that time to have been about * /2 percent at a seasonally adjusted annual rate ( measured from the final month of the third quarter to the final month of the fourth quarter ) and it was decided that a rate of growth of about 7/2 percent in the first quarter of would compensate for this shortfall. Policy in January was thus directed at attaining " some moderate easing of money market conditions. " Accordingly open market operations were aimed at lowering market interest rates. As the quarter progressed preliminary reports showed that the money stock was not growing as rapidly as the Federal Reserve 's analysis had predicted it would under the attained money market conditions and greater ease was sought In the second quarter revised data showed that the money stock had in fact grown faster than had been anticipated. Because this was faster than desired policy was then directed at slowing the monetary growth rate. To this end temporary " minor firming of money market conditions " was sought and market interest rates increased. Nevertheless the rate of monetary growth in the second quarter exceeded the rate in the first quarter despite an increase in interest rates. For the quarters combined monetary growth was very high even after allowance for the shortfall in the fourth quarter of From December to June the money stock rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent and the broadly defined money stock that includes all time deposits at commercial banks except large certificates of deposit ( M ) climbed at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent. These were high not only compared to but compared to the preceding decade. During Mi had risen at a 5.4-percent rate M at an 8.1-percent rate. In the years ending December the average annual rates of growth were and percent respectively In June the Federal Reserve showed less explicit concern with money market conditions and continued its effort to moderate monetary growth rates. Although in July the money stock continued to grow rapidly despite a considerable rise in interest rates in August the rates of expansion for both Mi and M fell sharply and * the rate for Mi turned negative in September The rise in Mi came to percent for the third quarter as a whole. In contrast to the first half of the year the Federal Reserve at this time overestimated the monetary expansion resulting from the money market conditions that had been produced Despite the stated policy to place emphasis on the monetary growth rate in actual operations were designed to influence interest rates and conditions in short-term money markets with the intention of thereby achieving the desired monetary growth rate. In practice the Federal Reserve operated most directly on the interest rate on loans among banks called the Federal funds rate relying on its appraisal of how monetary growth rates would respond to various levels of the interest rate. If the money stock responded to the Federal funds rate in a way that differed from the expected response the monetary growth rate would differ from that desired In the first half of the public apparently wanted to hold more money balances at the prevailing level of interest rates and income than past relations among income interest rates and money balances suggested The bulk of the increases in money holdings appeared in individuals ' accounts and the pattern was part of a larger shift in the public 's desire for additional financial liquidity in the first half of Table shows that in TABLE Amount and composition of individuals3 saving HI [ Billions of dollars ] Type of saving Seasonally adjusted annual rates Total saving by individuals Less : Increase in debt Mortgage debt on nonfarm houses Noncorporate business mortgage debt Consumer credit Other debt Net investment in tangible assets Insurance and pension reserves. U .S. savings bonds Other U.S. Treasury and agency securities State and local obligations Corporate and foreign bonds Investment company and other corporate shares Currency and demand deposits Savings accounts. Securities Increase in financial assets Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System the first half of unusually large increases occurred in individuals ' holdings of money savings accounts and U.S. savings bonds while decreases or smaller than usual increases were recorded in their holdings of other U.S Treasury and U.S. Government agency securities corporate bonds and corporate stock. This shift in the composition of assets was also influenced by the substantial decline in interest rates after mid-1970 especially in the rates on short-term securities The shift in assets by individuals in favor of more liquidity was accompanied by particularly large increases in debt incurred by the public notably in the form of mortgage and other personal debt. There were also important changes in the structure of business borrowing. As Table shows in the past year and a half corporations have shifted their financing toward equities and long-term bonds and away from bank loans and TABLE Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business III [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds III Seasonally adjusted annual rates Sources total I nternal sources External sources Stocks Bonds Mortgages Bank loans Trade debt Other loans and liabilites Uses total Purchases of physical assets Increase in financial assets Liquid assets Currency and demand deposits Time deposits U.S. Government securities Open-market paper State and local obligations Consumer credit Trade credit Other financial assets Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System short-term open market instruments. The shift of both individuals and corporations toward longer-term debt and shorter-term assets reflects in part a reaction to the period of restrictive credit conditions in In that year business and individual borrowers had considerable difficulty obtaining funds at rates they deemed reasonable. As a result they began insulating themselves from the pressures of credit markets when conditions eased in and by refunding short-term debt with long-term and rebuilding their holdings of liquid assets INTEREST RATES With monetary policy more expansive and with growing sentiment that progress was being made against inflation market interest rates early in continued their downward trends of the second half of reaching levels that turned out to be the lowest of the year ( Table and Chart ) Fluctuations in long-term rates are typically smaller than in short-term but the differential movement last spring also reflected in part the continued shift from short- to long-term financing by business borrowers who were attempting to insulate their liquidity position TABLE Interest rates [ Percent per annum ] Type High End of year Low High Aug. 13i 3-month Treasury bill rate ( new issues ) Jan. Mar. July month prime commercial paper rate Jan. Mar. Aug. June Nov. Jan. July Feb. June June Jan. July High-grade municipal bond yield ( weekly ) May Nov. July FHA new home mortgage yield Mar Apr Jan Long-term taxable Treasury bond yield Corporate Aaa bond yield New Aaa corporate offering rate ( weekly average ) i Rates for Aug. or nearest date for which data are reported Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service Standard & Poor 's Corporation and Department of Housing and Urban Development After March interest rates began rising as a result of the reversal of inflationary expectations and attempts by the Federal Reserve to curtail the monetary growth rate in the face of a shift in the demand for liquidity. By July many market rates had risen to roughly the levels prevailing in November and December but all remained below the peak levels Reinter mediation The year saw a continuation of the process of " reintermediation " which had started in as a correction of the preceding year 's " disintermediation. " Most thrift institutions are constrained in their ability to retain deposits during periods of rising interest rates. Because the yields on their assets which are generally long term change very slowly it is difficult for them to change rates paid on their liabilities which are generally short term. Partly in recognition of this problem most of these institutions have regulatory ceilings on the rates they can pay on deposits. Under conditions of rising market interest rates earnings on long-term assets would generally not rise quickly enough to enable institutions to pay rates on their deposits that would be competitive with unconstrained money market instruments. The rate ceilings also curtail the ability of institutions to retain funds. As a result when interest rates rise very sharply as they did in and financial intermediates both lose funds and acquire fewer new funds more of which are invested directly in primary assets such as Treasury bills and bonds or municipal and corporate bonds. This process has been termed " disintermediation " and as Table shows it occurred in In that year banks Chart Interest Rates PERCENT PER A N N U M SHORT-TERM PRIME BANK RATE FEDERAL RESERVE DISCOUNT RATE \ \ I ^ V / V N v x " > ^ n 3-MONTH TREASURY BILLS ( New Issues ) I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I LONG-TERM FHA NEW HOME MORTGAGES HIGH-GRADE MUNICIPAL BONDS U.S. GOVERNMENT BONDS I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I I II I I I I I I I I I I I I SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENTJREASURY DEPARTMENT BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE,AND STANDARD & POOR 'S CORPORATION and other savings institutions experienced a $ billion net decrease in total time and savings deposits compared to a $ 33.4fbillion rise in Since short-term rates in the second half of and all of were generally below the high levels of this process of disintermediation was reversed. Table shows that the net increase in the flow of total time TABLE Flows of savings deposits through savings institutions III [ Billions of dollars ] Institution III Seasonally adjusted annual rates Total net increase. Savings deposits at commercial banks Large certificates of depositOther time deposits. _ Savings at savings and loan associations.. Savings at mutual savings banks Savings at credit unions Preliminary Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and savings deposits through commercial banks and thrift institutions in exceeded the levels by percent. The increase for the first quarters of expressed at an annual rate was percent above Mortgage Interest Rates Mortgage interest rates responded sharply to the general movements in market rates and to the reintermediation process. In March reduced deposit inflows and restrictive monetary policy had helped push secondary market yields on mortgages to a postwar peak of percent from a 7.13percent average in As market rates rose the maximum rates permitted on FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgages were raised from percent in to percent in January Subsequently as open market rates declined and reintermediation occurred the ceiling rate was reduced to percent in December and down to percent in February In the early months of mortgage rates fell much more sharply than other long-term rates. The secondary market yield on FHA new-home mortgages fell percentage points from December to April reaching the year 's low of percent. Mortgage yields last spring were about equal to those paid on new long-term debt issues of the highest rated corporate borrowers. This drop in mortgage rates made an important contribution to the record demand for housing in In early summer mortgage rates began rising somewhat faster than other long-term rates as the housing expansion gained momentum. As the summer wore on discounts on insured mortgages rose to as much as or points to equate the 7-percent maximum permissible rate with the higher yields ( percent as of early August ) demanded by permanent mortgage investors. At the time the ceiling rates on FHA and VA mortgages were not raised in order to avoid adversely affecting inflationary sentiment. As an alternative to raising this mortgage rate ceiling several Government agencies and Government-sponsored private institutions supported the market by mortgage purchases thus reducing the number of discount points ( lowering the yield ) on these mortgages. Partly as a result of these actions yields on insured mortgages began a downward trend in early August Assistance to Mortgage Markets Because reintermediation in the first half of produced a large volume of private funds for investment in mortgages the housing boom proceeded with little assistance from Federal programs. However when the general rise in interest rates in the spring threatened the expansion in housing Federal mortgage market assistance programs assumed much greater prominence. In June the Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) a privately owned Government-sponsored institution sharply increased its purchases of insured mortgages. FNMA 's net acquisitions of mortgages totaled $ billion in as compared to $ billion in and $ billion in But the bulk of the purchases came after May with approximately $ billion of the year 's purchases in Government-subsidized loans. The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation also made purchases of $ million of participations in conventional ( uninsured ) mortgages and $ million of FHA-insured mortgages during In the third quarter the Federal Home Loan Bank System took several steps to aid the mortgage market. It liberalized terms on mortgage loans by allowing percent conventional loans. In August shortly after the NEP was announced the FHLB Board reduced the liquidity requirements of member savings and loan associations from percent to percent to free more liquid assets for lending. Simultaneously the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation raised the price at which it purchased FHA-insured mortgages from to percent of par and reduced from % percent to % percent the yields it required on participations in conventional mortgages These moves closely followed a new program in which the Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) used a $ billion authorization to purchase unsubsidized FHA-insured and VA-guaranteed mortgages in cooperation with FNMA and other purchasers This plan subsidizes FHA and VA mortgage rates when rate ceilings produce high discounts. GNMA purchases these mortgages at or percent of par and sells them to any authorized purchaser at lower prices that reflect market interest rates. GNMA absorbs the difference between the support price and the market price enabling home buyers to obtain mortgage financing at lower rates FISCAL POLICY TO AUGUST The Administration 's fiscal policy as reflected in the budget submitted in January was in general to keep expenditures from exceeding the revenues that would be yielded by the existing tax system under conditions of full employment. There were two reasons for the Administration 's adoption of this principle. First the conventional notion of balancing the actual budget more or less all the time had proved to be unworkable because either tax increases or expenditure cuts would ,be required whenever revenue was depressed by an economic slowdown and this would be precisely the wrong time for a restrictive fiscal policy. In fact this standard of fiscal policy had not been followed by an Administration for almost years. Second some rule of policy that would confine expenditures within the limits of what the Government was willing to raise in taxes was necessary to enforce economy in Government. The principle that expenditures should not exceed full-employment revenues has the advantage that fiscal action likely to intensify the slowdown would be avoided while the discipline of the basic relationship between revenues and expenditures would be retained In conformity with this principle the Administration 's January budget called for the following relationship between expenditures and the revenues that would be collected at full employment : [ Billions of dollars ] Outlays Fiscal Fiscal Revenues at full employment Excess of revenues The outcome for fiscal was close to these plans. Estimated fullemployment revenues after the end of the fiscal year were only $ billion below the January estimates. Outlays were $ billion or about one-half of percent under the estimate. Instead of an excess of full-employment revenues of $ billion there was an excess of $ billion as then defined ( see footnote p. ) Developments in the first months of more significantly changed the estimates of the full-employment budget for fiscal On the revenue side the postponement from to of the increase in the base for Social Security contributions reduced estimated fiscal receipts by $ billion. This was expected to be offset in part by an increase in the Social Security contribution rate to take effect January The net effect of these and other smaller changes was to reduce the estimated fullemployment receipts by $ billion. Estimated expenditures were raised by $ billion. The largest item in this total was an increase of $ billion of Social Security benefits above the budget. Other major items were an increase of $ billion in the estimated payments for unemployment compensation because of the continued high rate of unemployment and a pos- sible increase of $ billion in military pay as a result of congressional action Thus there was in prospect an excess of expenditures over full-employment revenues of $ billion in fiscal compared to an excess of revenues of $ billion in fiscal * On the national income accounts basis the surplus would show a decline of about $ billion between the fiscal years This estimate for fiscal as it appeared in July depended heavily on action still to be taken by Congress. Although the estimate made some allowance for probable delays in the enactment of expenditure programs that had been proposed by the Administration even longer delays were possible. And although the estimate also made some allowance for pending congressional proposals above the budget not all of those possibilities were expected to materialize. Despite these uncertainties it seemed highly probable in the summer of that there would be a significant shift from a fullemployment surplus in fiscal to a full-employment deficit in fiscal The Administration considered this development appropriate in view of the sluggishness of the economy. At the same time the Administration was averse to making decisions that would add substantially to expenditure commitments for the future. Even within the limits of fiscal while more fiscal stimulus was desired there was danger of excessive expansion in the prevailing inflationary atmosphere THE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY WHERE WE STOOD ON AUGUST As the summer of progressed these facts became increasingly clear : The economy was rising and a continued rise could be expected ; but the rise was not as fast as was desirable especially from the standpoint of reducing unemployment Although the rate of inflation had stopped rising and might have declined the decline was not clear cut and there was some danger that the rate might rise again The U.S. international balance-of-payments position was deteriorating sharply and willingness abroad to hold dollars was ebbing While these facts were clear their reasons and their implications were unclear. The rate of economic expansion in the first half of the year was not less than many forecasters had predicted but two aspects of the limited expansion were puzzling. As noted earlier the rate of expansion of the money supply had been extraordinarily large much larger than had been commonly * In this calculation expenditures for unemployment compensation payments are not standardized for the unemployment rate that would prevail at full employment It should be noted however that the estimates for fiscal made in July assumed about the same average rate of unemployment for the fiscal year as was actually experienced in fiscal This procedure has been changed for the fiscal budget which standardizes for the unemployment rate expected at the beginning of the year. Even when allowance was made for some lag between the increase in the stock of money and any consequent increase in economic activity the response of the economy to the monetary expansion was less than many studies had found in previous experience One possible explanation was that recollection of the liquidity squeeze of left individuals and businesses with an extraordinary desire to rebuild their money balances when interest rates declined as happened in early This attitude might have been reinforced by the belief that rapid monetary expansion presaged a future rise in interest rates. In any case the rapid growth of money in the first half of seemed to have resulted from a rapid growth in the demand for money and did not imply a growth of money relative to desired cash balances which in time would have stimulated more economic expansion The other unusual feature of the limited expansion was the exceptionally high saving rate of Personal saving for the first quarters of the year represented percent of disposable personal income as compared to an average of percent in the preceding years. The high rates of unemployment and inflation in and may have contributed to the high saving rate as households tried to protect themselves against those hazards. Whether there was another independent factor " lack of confidence " as commonly claimed is difficult to say. The measurements we have of this factor are weak and their historical connection with savings is loose Even in retrospect the reasons for the exceptionally high saving rate of are not entirely known Why the slowdown in the inflation was so halting and uncertain is another question which has not been clearly answered. Although this phenomenon is often ascribed to " structural " changes in the economy these structural changes are not unmistakably evident. And although the delay in the disinflationary process was undoubtedly connected with the strength and duration of the inflation in the preceding years one could not be sure that this explanation alone was sufficient The third part of the picture the great enlargement in of the balance-of-payments deficit also had its share of unanswered questions. On the basis of past experience the sharp swing in the trade deficit was somewhat more than one might have expected from the rise in domestic demand and the slower expansion of foreign economies. Nor was it clear why the trade balance turned to deficit at a time when the rate of inflation in the United States was less than in most other industrial countries Policy in the summer of had to address the uncertainties as well as the obvious facts of these three interlocking problems. The relations among the problems greatly complicated the choice that had to be made The Administration 's economic targets and projections at the beginning of the year were predicated on the idea that if the economy failed to rise at the desired rate steps could be taken to make it rise more rapidly. This option was open in the middle of In fact the planned fiscal policy for fiscal had already been made more expansive than had been contemplated in the January budget and further moves in this direction were possible. Also the rate of increase of the money supply had been larger than had been expected at the beginning of the year and actions already taken by the Federal Reserve to slow this expansion could have been modified or reversed However consideration of these expansive moves in the summer of ran first into the fact that the rate of inflation was still high and then into the danger that it might rise again. It could have been argued that a more rapid rate of economic expansion would help to slow down the inflation because it would speed up the growth of productivity and cut the rise in unit labor costs. Although this argument was quite plausible early in a half year later it seemed less convincing in the existing psychological atmosphere where any action that looked inflationary tended to increase the expectations of inflation even though the indication was superficial. In fact some were concerned at the time that action intended to be expansive might really be restrictive because the expansive measures might intensify fears of inflation raise interest rates weaken confidence and thereby depress consumer and business spending. Moreover there was a related danger that fiscal and monetary expansion might make America 's international financial problem more difficult by increasing the supply of funds available for investment abroad and by arousing fears that American inflation would speed up again At the same time the continued high rate of unemployment ruled out the restrictive approach to the problems of the rate of inflation and the balance of payments. Moreover the Administration was determined not to try to solve the balance-of-payments problems solely by tightening up controls on international transactions. This had been tried repeatedly in the preceding decade without yielding a satisfactory long-term solution THE AUGUST DECISIONS The key to unraveling this knot of difficulties was the necessity for dealing with the international financial problem promptly and the Administration 's determination to deal with it in a bold and lasting way. The decision initiated two policy actions in the international economy. First the United States suspended the convertibility of dollars into gold or other international reserve assets in order to protect the U.S. reserve position from further drain and to signal to other countries our determination to achieve meaningful improvement in our own position as well as needed reform of the international trade and payments system. Second the United States imposed a temporary surcharge on imports generally at the rate of percent to help protect the U.S. payments position until other more satisfactory actions could be taken that would assure a stronger ,balance-of-payments position for this country These international decisions tipped the scales on an issue that had been the subject of intense consideration in the Administration for many months and indeed since January This was the question whether the Administration should intervene directly in holding down wages and prices adopting what had come to be called an " incomes policy " and if so on what scale and in what way There were two fundamental objections to adopting such a policy : Experience with such policy as it had been practiced abroad suggested that it would not work or at least not with much effect or very long for the natural reason that success would require that powerful groups suspend the effort to reap the full advantage of their power Such a policy at least if continued for very long would interfere with the efficiency of the economic system and might create an undesirable increase in the power of the government over its citizens On the other hand a number of considerations argued for some direct intervention : Progress against inflation was disappointingly slow and despite the unspectacular record of incomes policies elsewhere the possibility of some assistance from that source even if temporary could not be ruled out or discounted There seemed to be a large and growing sentiment in the country for some kind of incomes policy and steps in that direction might relieve anxiety strengthen confidence and improve the economy. This sentiment also increased the chance of getting the kind of voluntary self-restraint required for success The Administration 's acute consciousness of the pitfalls encountered in previous attempts might enable it to avoid on the one hand premature collapse of the control system and on the other hand its unnecessary prolongation The Administration took limited steps to influence wage and price behavior directly in and These included actions with respect to lumber and the construction industry generally as well as the institution of the National Commission on Productivity the Regulation and Purchasing Review Board and the Inflation Alerts as described in the Economic Report of the President. Early in the Administration took a much stronger step establishing a system of wage controls in the construction industry with parallel actions intended to affect other cost elements in the industry ( see Chapter where the construction program is described ) This action was the first use of the mandatory control power given to the President by the Congress through the Economic Stabilization Act of The steps decided upon for dealing with the international situation introduced a potent new argument into the Administration 's consideration of the merits of a comprehensive system of controls. Improvement of our international position would require effective and convincing action on domestic inflation in addition to the action the United States was seeking in the international sphere. Such action on the domestic front would assure our trading partners of our intentions and provide the framework for a cooperative approach to the solution of international payments problems These considerations combined with others already present led to the decision to institute a powerful but temporary price-wage control system Once this decision had been made it altered the balance of considerations with respect to a more expansive fiscal policy. Action to make fiscal policy more expansive had been limited by the need to avoid intensifying any inflationary expectations and stepping-up the inflation. The establishment of the direct wage-price controls created room for some more expansive measures because it provided a certain degree of protection against both the fact and the expectation of inflation. This situation had to be approached with caution because excessive expansion could make the price-wage control system unworkable. Still there could be no doubt that the tolerable rate of expansion had been increased Thus the decisions of August consisted of a three-part integrated package : ( a ) International measures aimed at the balance of payments ; ( b ) controls aimed at checking inflation ; and ( c ) fiscal measures aimed in combination with the international measures and controls at speeding up economic expansion and reducing unemployment The international measures taken on August and their sequels are described in Chapter The controls are discussed in Chapter Here we take up the fiscal measures and the expected effect of the total program FISCAL ELEMENTS IN THE NEW ECONOMIC POLICY The fiscal package proposed by the Administration on August ( as described in detail by the Secretary of the Treasury to the House Ways and Means Committee on September ) was primarily motivated by the desire to stimulate at once a more rapid expansion of the economy. The composition of the package reflected a number of other objectives : To improve the balance of trade to accelerate productivity growth by raising investment to minimize the loss of long-term revenue-raising capacity and to hold down the deficit in the budget for fiscal while recognizing realistically the likely outcome for the budget The package included the following items whose effects on the budget are shown in the table : A job development credit. This would provide businesses with a tax credit of percent for new investment in the first year of the program and percent for investment thereafter. The two-tier form of credit would create a strong incentive to push investment forward into the first year of the program and would also hold down the revenue loss in subsequent years Repeal of the 7-percent excise tax on automobiles. This change was expected to have a stronger immediate effect on spending production and employment than a reduction in say the corporate or individual income tax with an equivalent revenue loss. Repeal of the tax would also reduce the price level a little Two steps changing the timing of tax cuts that had been previously legislated. One change would raise the individual exemption to $ on January instead of to $ on that date and $ on January The other would increase the standard deduction on January to percent with a $ maximum. Both of these moves would increase the after-tax incomes of individuals and both were expected to increase consumer spending in without reducing the revenues after A temporary surcharge on dutiable imports generally at the rate of percent. ( When all exceptions to the 10-percent rule were taken into account the effective rate of surcharge came down to percent. ) The surcharge was not imposed to raise revenue but to provide the U.S. external position with some temporary protection. The surcharge would raise revenues ; but unlike the conventional revenue-increasing measure it would stimulate rather than restrain the economy Provision for the Domestic International Sales Corporation ( DISC ) Through this new type of organization U.S. exporters would be able to obtain a deferral of income tax on their earnings from qualified export sales The purpose was to eliminate the previous bias that had worked against exporting and in favor of manufacturing abroad and thus to stimulate exports Recognition that certain proposed expenditure programs had been delayed in the legislative process and thus required a reduction of estimated fiscal outlays. The main items involved were general and special revenue sharing and welfare reform Deferral for months of the Federal pay increase scheduled to take effect on January This was the Federal counterpart of the wage freeze being put into effect on August A 5-percent reduction in Federal employment. Such a reduction would be the most effective way to reduce Federal outlays with minimum shortrange loss of service to the citizens Miscellaneous small reductions in expenditures. These included a 10-percent cut in foreign aid As Table shows the effect of this package was to reduce estimated expenditures for fiscal by about $ billion more than the reduction in estimated receipts. At the same time the program was intended and expected to be expansionary. The primary reason as already noted was that the surcharge while revenue-yielding was foreseen as having an expansive effect on domestic production and the two-tier investment credit as exerting an unusually powerful effect on investment in the next year relative to the revenue loss in that year In addition a common view was that both business spending and consumer spending had been held down in the early part of the year by anxiety over the inflation. One motive for the freeze on prices wages and rents was the TABLE Effect on fiscal year Budget of tax and expenditure changes in New Economic Policy Type of change Revenue reductions Billions of dollars Job development credit Accelerated increase of personal exemptions. Elimination of auto excises Revenue increase Import surcharge * Revenue reductions net.. Expenditure reductions Freeze of Federal pay increase o g Deferral of general revenue sharing. Reduction of F d l em ployment. Rdti f Federal m l t Deferrals of some special revenue sharing rial ; Deferral of welfare reform.. Other Excess of expenditure reductions over net revenue reductions i It was arbitrarily assumed that the surcharge would continue until June Source : Treasury Department hope of relieving this anxiety and encouraging more spending. If these ends were accomplished there could be a major expansive effect without any prior change in the budget Many aspects of the full package that is the freeze the international measures and the fiscal steps were unprecedented and therefore any reliable calculation of the size of their effects was exceedingly difficult. The Council of Economic Advisers estimated at the end of August that the Administration 's package would make real GNP in prices about $ billion greater than it would have been without the new program but this figure was recognized as subject to a wide range of uncertainty The legislative outcome followed the general outline of the Administration 's proposal but differed in several respects. Congress did not enact the 10-percent-5-percent job development credit but instead passed a permanent 7-percent credit. Congress disapproved the revision in the treatment of first-year depreciation which the Treasury had made administratively Congress also cut back the Administration 's proposal which had already been passed by the House in to defer taxes on profits from exports. On the other hand Congress not only raised the personal exemption to $ for calendar year but also raised the exemption to $ Congress went beyond the Administration 's proposals in several other respects : It raised the " low income allowance " or minimum standard deduction to $ from $ for and repealed the 10-percent excise tax on light trucks. Other legislation made the Federal pay increase effective on January contrary to the Administration 's proposal. A new deduction for child care and household help was also introduced The effect of the congressional action was to reduce the net revenue loss for calendar about $ billion below the cost of the Administration 's proposal. Possibly more significant was the failure to adopt the job development credit in its original form which provided a strong incentive for investment in Nevertheless the enactment of the tax bill contributed to the expectation that a strong economic advance lay ahead an expectation which was becoming general as ended CHAPTER Inflation Control Under the Economic Stabilization Act Public Law the Economic Stabilization Act Amendments of requires that the Economic Report of the President include a section " describing the actions taken under this title during the preceding year and giving an assessment of the progress attained in achieving the purposes of this title. " This chapter is intended to fulfill that requirement. There is however no intent to represent the description of the control regulations contained herein as legally binding interpretations A T THE BEGINNING of the Administration and the President were hopeful that reliance on appropriate monetary and fiscal policies along with the competitive forces of the free market would be sufficient to curb inflation. At the same time there was recognition that the course of events during would critically affect the choice of instruments to achieve the desired goals The Government 's instruments for inflation control include a range of policies which are appropriate to various phases and types of inflation. One of these instruments is the authority to impose direct controls as provided under the Economic Stabilization Act of as amended. It became necessary to employ this authority in at first to restrain excessive wage and price increases in the construction industry and subsequently to initiate overall restraints on wages prices and rents in the face of an exceptionally stubborn inflation In his Economic Report of February the President noted situations where the Government had taken action to reinforce market resistance to inflationary pressures. Included were these actions : Measures to augment the supply of lumber and thus counteract excessive price increases Steps to increase oil production on Federal offshore leases and to expand oil imports in order to restrain crude oil price increases A review of the steel industry 's economic problems with special refer- ence to inflationary price increases in early on some steel products. ( After the Administration had publicly expressed its disapproval these increases were reduced by about one-third. ) The President 's Report also emphasized his particular concern about excessive increases in wages costs and prices in the construction industry especially in view of the high unemployment that existed among construction workers. He reiterated his December request that labor and management in the industry develop a plan to bring wages costs and prices into line with the requirements of national economic policy saying that a workable plan would avert the need for Government action THE CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM Concern with wage-price trends in construction was founded on the experience of the previous years. Construction workers had received abnormally large wage increases in the late 's. During the upward trend accelerated as nearly union construction workers negotiated collective bargaining agreements which provided wage and benefit increases averaging percent in the first contract year and percent annually during the life of the contract. These increases were a major factor in the sharp rise in construction costs and prices and they may have served as a spur to inflationary wage demands by both union and nonunion workers in other sectors of the economy The appeal for a voluntary program of cost restraint was not successful Late in February the President suspended the Davis-Bacon Act which sets wage standards for federally funded assisted or insured construction By late March the Administration working with labor and industry leaders had developed a cooperative program designed to restrain cost increases On March the President reinstated the Davis-Bacon Act and by Executive Order formalized the cost restraint program. Under the authority provided by the Economic Stabilization Act of this Executive Order established the administrative rules organizations and procedures to be used in the stabilization of wages and prices in the construction industry The administrative mechanism for restraining wage increases took the form of a 12-member tripartite Construction Industry Stabilization Committee ( CISC ) With the aid of Craft Dispute Boards made up of labor and management representatives for individual construction trades the CISC was to review and pass upon the acceptability of all economic adjustments in all collective bargaining agreements negotiated in the construction industry Executive Order spelled out two basic criteria for evaluating proposed increases in compensation. They were : ( a ) " Acceptable economic adjustments in labor contracts negotiated on or after the date of this Order will be those normally considered supportable by productivity improvement and cost-of-living trends but not in excess of the average of median increases in wages and benefits over the life of the contract negotiated in major con- struction settlements in the period " ; and ( b ) " Equity adjustments in labor contracts may where carefully identified be considered over the life of the contract to restore traditional relationships among crafts in a single locality and within the same craft in surrounding localities. " Because of the large number of contracts to be reviewed by the CISC the time needed to install administrative procedures and the return of some proposed contracts to Craft Dispute Boards for renegotiation a backlog of unapproved cases quickly developed. Its existence caused problems when the wage-price freeze wras instituted on August The freeze applied to construction as to all other industries but it was not retroactive. Because the construction contracts in the backlog had been decided prior to August the Cost of Living Council had no jurisdiction ; the contracts could with CISC approval go into effect as agreed. Thus the CISC continued to operate during the freeze and subsequently in Phase II under the jurisdiction of the Pay Board to clear up the backlog of old cases ; this process continued until late December In all the CISC reviewed over new collective bargaining agreements that had been settled by the parties. Over one-fifth of these were not approved in their initial form by CISC. Construction industry collective bargaining agreements settled and approved in the second and third quarters of provided first-year wage and benefit increases of about percent a significant reduction from when such increases averaged percent CISC thus retarded the rate of growth in the compensation of unionized construction workers and its existence appears to have been an important factor in a reduction of strike activity in the industry. How much greater the effect of the construction industry program would have been if the general wage-price control system had not been established will never be known but real progress was undoubtedly made during the period of its independent existence Executive Order also established an Inter-Agency Committee in the Federal Government to develop criteria for establishing acceptable pricing policies for construction contracts and acceptable compensation changes for management and staff employees in the industry. The Inter-Agency Committee had developed and published draft regulations and was in the process of drafting final regulations when its activities were superseded by the broader price and compensation controls of the New Economic Policy AUGUST : THE WAGE-PRICE FREEZE Acting under authority of the Economic Stabilization Act of the President announced on August an immediate 90-day freeze on prices rents wages and salaries and creation of a Cabinet-level Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) to administer the freeze and to advise on further stabilization policies and actions The combination of conditions that led to direct Government action to restrain prices and wages was discussed earlier. These conditions did not automatically determine the type duration or rigor of the policy initially undertaken which could of course have ranged from a noncompulsory type of policy operating mainly through moral suasion to the comprehensive mandatory freeze that was actually applied During the first half of the Administration was under increasing pressure to adopt some form of incomes policy preferably a noncompulsory one. However such a policy was not considered appropriate for two reasons First there was reason to believe that public opinion would regard such a " soft " control policy as merely the first in a series of moves towrard compulsory controls. The result would be widespread efforts to increase prices and wages in anticipation of a more stringent program ; the Government 's likely reaction successive escalations of controls would result in more inequities distortions and ultimately administrative difficulties than would a comprehensive freeze. Although the situations were considerably different experience with controls in the initial stages of the Korean conflict suggested that this would be the likely pattern of response to voluntary guidelines Second the nearest American approach to a policy of persuasion the guidelines of the previous Administrations had been abandoned in The Administration believed in that exhortation had lost most of its force Beyond an incomes policy supported only by exhortation there were of course many possible variations of compulsory controls. The Phase II controls that followed the freeze represent one of those variations. Common to all such systems including the Phase II apparatus is a need for time to formulate the program to set up the administrative organization and to write and disseminate regulations. Such preliminary processes instantly become public knowledge with the predictable result that during the startup phase of a complex restraint program all elements of the economy attempt to improve their relative position before the controls become effective ; the net effect is to make the inflationary spiral even steeper The chief virtues of the freeze were its decisiveness comprehensiveness and administrative simplicity. The President 's announcement that practically all wage and price increases were prohibited left no doubt of a drastic change in the upward trend of prices and wages. Equally important a freeze could be and was imposed immediately precluding anticipatory price and wage increases and providing time to prepare and set in motion more lasting and flexible measures The Administrative System The Cost of Living Council ( CLC ) consisted of the Secretaries of the Treasury ( Chairman of the CLC ) Agriculture Commerce Labor Housing and Urban Development the Director of the Office of Management and Budget the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers ( Vice- Chairman of the CLC ) the Director of the Office of Emergency Preparedness and the Special Assistant to the President for Consumer Affairs. The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System was named adviser to the CLC. A small staff headed by a full-time executive director supplied services including policy review planning and analysis public information legal counsel and administrative services The CLC under the authority delegated by the President in Executive Order issued a series of orders putting the general freeze into operation and made the principal policy decisions during the freeze. Policy was implemented through an organizational system headed by the Director of the Office of Emergency Preparedness ( OEP ) which was delegated the authority to administer monitor and enforce the freeze. The OEP through its nationwide organization ( which is designed to meet national emergencies or natural disasters and plan for economic contingencies arising from possible emergencies ) successfully carried out this assignment during the freeze period. The OEP was assisted in interpreting and enforcing the freeze regulations by the Treasury Department 's Internal Revenue Service a specially designated unit of Department of Justice attorneys and Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service field offices Freeze Policies Reflecting the basic objectives of the freeze the CLC 's policy decisions tended in the direction of the most emphatic possible stop to the inflation Only a minimum of exceptions to the freeze on prices wages and rents was permitted. Because of the complexities of the markets for many goods and services however it proved difficult to develop precise definitions that applied with equal effect in all situations. The basic principle of the freeze as applied to wages prices and rents was that the rate of payment during the freeze period August to November could not exceed the rate in effect during the base period July through August Wages and Salaries. The crucial question in applying the basic principle of the freeze was what " in effect " meant in cases where a prefreeze contract or other arrangement called for a larger wage payment during the freeze period than had actually been paid during the base period. It was argued at the time that contracts have a sanctity which must be respected and that a logical line could be drawn to distinguish contracts from other arrangements incorporating the expectation of a wage increase. However the opposing argument was that there was neither a logical nor an equitable distinction in this type of situation and to give preferential treatment to contracts as the bases for granting wage increases would discriminate against workers not covered by contracts This issue was resolved by deciding that wages would be limited during the freeze to the rates actually paid workers during the base period even though they might have entered into an agreement calling for higher rates to take effect sometime during the freeze. Such resolution of the issue was deemed to be the most explicit and straightforward application of the freeze. Moreover approval of these higher rates would have seriously undermined effectiveness of the freeze and probably would have eroded public support which was based on equal treatment of all groups. Another important concern in this decision was the desire to avoid negative effects on production or investment. To allow wage increases to go into effect during the freeze while keeping an immovable lid on prices would have squeezed profits severely in some cases and might have resulted in some firms ' temporarily curtailing production and employment especially since relief might have been expected after the freeze. To identify such cases and permit selective price increases only where they were necessary to prevent this result was not administratively feasible in the time limits of the freeze period Prices and Rents. The decision not to permit wage increases to take effect during the freeze even if they had been contracted for earlier was paralleled in the CLC regulations for both prices and rents. Rent increases were not allowed even though tenants before August had signed leases secured by deposits calling for increases In the case of prices the ceiling for the freeze period was the highest price at or above which a " substantial volume " ( interpreted to mean at least percent of the total ) of transactions had taken place in the days preceding the freeze. If no transactions had taken place during that period the nearest preceding 30-day period in which transactions occurred was to be used as the base. A price transaction was deemed to have occurred when the seller shipped a product to the buyer not when the order for the product was received. Thus sales contracts entered into before August providing for deliveries during the freeze at higher than base period prices were set aside In keeping with the principle of the freeze price increases were not sanctioned on the basis of cost increases ; inequities and hardships arising from this rule were assumed to be endurable for the 90-day duration of the freeze. Raw agricultural products were exempted in the Executive Order however and certain limited exceptions for example import price increases and seasonal price adjustments were allowed Raw Products. The exemption of raw agricultural products including seafood products from price control created problems for some processors who found their operating margins squeezed between uncontrolled costs and frozen selling prices of the processed foods. Nevertheless increases in the uncontrolled prices were not allowed to be passed through although there were some minor extensions of the definition of " raw " products Imports. Imported products were subject to price increases during the freeze at the level of the importer from three sources : The surcharge on dutiable imports ( generally percent of the customs valuation ) No surcharge was applied to duty-free imports or those under quota An increase in dollar price resulting from fluctuations in international exchange rates Price increases in world markets which were reflected in the delivered price in the United States On the principle that U.S. Government actions were directly responsible for the surcharge the CLC permitted the dollars-and-cents amount of the surcharge on a particular imported product to be passed through successive transactions including processing to the final purchaser. Increases due to dollar depreciation or price changes on world markets were allowed to be passed on as long as the imported good retained its original form. If an import was physically transformed the price increase had to be absorbed Seasonal Price Adjustments. Sellers of goods and services which were characterized by a marked seasonal fluctuation in price were likely to be unfairly penalized by ceiling prices based on the immediate prefreeze period Therefore the CLC ruled that prices showing a " large distinct fluctuation at a specific identifiable point " in each of the past years would be allowed to increase to the level reached during the same seasonal period of the preceding year New Products. As in past periods of price control the definition of a product became controversial. The CLC decided that to be considered new a product or service must be " substantially different " and not merely changed in fashion style form or packaging. In the event of introduction of a'genuinely new product or service during the freeze two alternative methods of pricing were permitted ; the price could be based on the price of comparable products or services or on the unit cost plus the normal markup of similar products or services Other Rulings. The CLC determined that price ceilings did not apply to exports and that increases in various welfare payments workmen 's compensation and employers ' contributions to previously effective fringe benefits were not covered by the freeze. Pay increases resulting from bona fide promotions to jobs of greater responsibility and progression of apprentices or learners to more skilled levels according to preestablished programs were permitted on the grounds that they were not increases in the wage for a given job. Actual wage increases were also permitted to meet requirements of minimum wage laws or to eliminate illegal discriminatory employment practices Exemptions. In all nearly requests for exemptions and exceptions to the freeze regulations were considered by the CLC ; five individual exemptions were made. Many requests were from persons in financial difficulties not due to the freeze. Many others were from persons whose proposed changes were permissible under existing regulations The freeze generated numerous problems for its administrators but most of their concern was occasioned by a small proportion of the economy 's millions of different wages prices and rents. The public was kept informed by a series of questions and answers that amplified and interpreted the definitions of the original Executive Order released by the CLG ; the substance of these interpretations and definitions was incorporated in the more extensive regulations and circulars published in the Federal Register by the Office of Emergency Preparedness Dividends and Interest. The Economic Stabilization Act of did not include provisions for regulating interest or dividends. Control of dividend payments during the freeze period was carried on through a program of voluntary compliance. The Secretary of Commerce sent telegrams to about large corporations asking them voluntarily to forego increases in dividends during the freeze and he received practically unanimous support Although interest rates were not controlled during the freeze most rates dropped significantly in part because of the abatement of inflationary expectations Administrative Record of the Freeze Little administrative planning and no organizational preparation could be carried out before August Such activity might have given public notice to the impending control program and jeopardized its prospects for success. As a result the freeze was as much a surprise to almost all of the people who were to help administer it as it was to the Nation at large. Given these circumstances at its initiation the administration of the freeze program must be accounted outstandingly effective In exercising its authority to administer monitor and enforce the freeze regulations OEP had the benefit of its established facilities including a system of regional offices ( two of which were specially opened during the freeze ) connected to Washington headquarters by private teletype. In addition to OEP 's employees personnel from many other Government departments and agencies including IRS employees were engaged at least part time in the program Inquiries and Complaints. During the freeze period approximately million inquiries regarding the stabilization program were received ( mostly by telephone ) ; of these two-fifths concerned prices and the rest were equally divided between wages and rents. Most of these were requests for interpretations but nearly were complaints of alleged violations percent of Which concerned prices. Rents accounted for percent of the complaints and wages percent. Over percent of these complaints were found not to involve actual violations ; almost all of the remaining cases were brought into compliance informally or through routine investigation In addition over spot checks carried out by IRS indicated over percent in compliance. Of those in violation over half promptly and voluntarily complied when the violation was pointed out Litigation. About cases of violators who refused to comply voluntarily after initial contact were forwarded to OEP regional offices during the freeze ; all but a few of these cases were resolved without court action. Eight cases had reached court and more were in various stages of prepara- tion in the Justice Department as the freeze ended. This relatively small volume of litigation reflects the widespread compliance with the freeze Effectiveness of the Freeze Viewed as a whole and against the circumstances of its initiation the freeze was a major success. Its primary purpose was of course to reduce the rate of inflation and its success in that respect may in some degree be inferred from the behavior of the major price indexes Consumer Price Index. During the freeze the rate of increase of consumer prices as measured in the consumer price index slowed by more than half from the prefreeze rate ( Table ) The index did not show a comTABLE Changes in consumer prices selected months [ Seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Percentage change from months earlier ( annual rate ) Item February May November August Food Nonfood commodities Services * All items i Not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor plete halt because prices of some items in the index ( about percent of the total weight ) were unaffected as a result of exemptions exceptions and inapplicability of the controls. In addition the rate of price increase was somewhat overstated by the index during this period because time lags in the collection of price data caused some prefreeze price changes to be reported during the freeze. The exemptions and the measurement problem led to a continued rise in the index during the freeze. Partly because of this special analyses of price changes item by item were undertaken. These showed that except for raw agricultural products the prices were unchanged between October and November for percent of consumer items for which comparisons could be made ; for about * /2 percent prices declined and for about percent prices increased ( Table ) A similar pattern was found TABLE Changes in consumer prices selected items October to November Percentage distribution of October to November changesl Group Total Total * Decrease Food at home ' Nonfood commodities Services Based on special analysis of individual price comparisons * Excludes raw agricultural products Source : Department of Labor No change Increase for the September-October period. Some increases were of course permitted by the GLC regulations but it was not possible to determine from these data whether the small proportion of increases that did occur were entirely the result of allowable increases Industrial Wholesale Prices. The effect of the freeze on wholesale prices which is easier to observe because there are fewer lags in the collection of data was even more impressive than in the case of the consumer price index The index of industrial commodity prices which had risen at an accelerating rate after the first months of declined at an annual rate of percent from August through November ( Table ) The decline affected TABLE Changes in wholesale industrial commodity prices selected months [ Seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Percentage change from months earlier ( annual rate ) Commodity group February August May November Industrial commodities Textile products and apparel. Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power Chemicals and allied products Rubber and plastic products Lumber and wood products. Pulp paper and allied products Metals and metal products Machinery and equipment Furniture and household durables Nonmetallic mineral products Transportation equipment Miscellaneous products i Not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor most of the industrial commodity categories ; the few increases that did occur were attributable to import price increases or factors such as the seasonal fluctuations associated with introductions of new automobile models Average Hourly Earnings. The freeze on the wage and salary side also was effective. Hourly earnings ( adjusted to more nearly approximate wage rates ) had shown an annual rate of increase of about percent prior to August ; this dropped to an annual rate of about ^ percent between August and November PHASE I I : ISSUES AND ORGANIZATION The broad support of and compliance with the freeze reflected a national willingness to support a rigorous anti-inflationary program even at the cost of some hardship. But it was clear from the outset that the freeze had certain important limitations if extended indefinitely. An indefinite freeze is unworkable in a dynamic economy where technology new products and changing demand patterns exert a continuing strong influence on prices. Movements of prices and wages serve the essential purposes of organizing and guiding the allocation of resources and to suppress them for long would seriously distort resource allocation. The proper goal of the stabilization program is to reestablish an acceptably low rate of price increase by reducing expectations of continued strong inflation and eliminating to the extent possible practices and behavior which sustain or promote inflation But underlying expectations of a continuing inflationary trend could not be arrested by a short freeze. A sequel would therefore be required ; this plan was reported to the Nation in the President 's October announcement It was vital to the success of the effort to disinflate through a system of controls that the transition from the freeze to Phase II should be orderly well understood and widely supported. Many possible paths could have been followed in the Phase II price-wage control system. In a free nation with a market economy however these paths are somewhat circumscribed by social political institutional and economic constraints. In this instance these constraints required that the control system employed in Phase II be as effective and equitable as possible in reducing the inflation while still permitting the maximum operation of normal market mechanisms and ensuring an early return to a free market economy. Administratively the system also had to be streamlined and efficient and to work it had to earn a high degree of public support. These considerations raised certain decisive issues. Paramount among them were these questions : Should the program be mandatory ? How comprehensive should the program be ? How should the program be administered and enforced ? Who should set standards of price-wage behavior ? What standards should be set ? In addressing these problems of Phase II the President and his Cost of Living Council consulted with numerous representatives of each major interest in the control program : labor and business farmers and consumers State and local governments and the Congress. The discussions revealed an almost unanimous belief that the anti-inflationary effort should be continued to a successful conclusion but a great diversity of strongly held opinion about the best strategy and procedures for achieving price stability A consensus was ultimately fashioned upon the belief that Phase II required : ( a ) A clear-cut publicly supportable goal for the disinflationary effort ; ( b ) machinery allowing the public and major elements of the economy to participate in setting policy and administering the program ; ( c ) an essentially self-administered system embodying strong incentives to encourage anti-inflationary behavior ; ( d ) provision in the system for maximum continued operation of competitive pricing and free collective bargaining In the interests of equity and effectiveness ( and for the reasons noted earlier in this chapter with respect to the freeze ) it was decided that Phase II controls would be mandatory and initially as comprehensve in their direct coverage as was administratively feasible. In large measure this decision was based on the intensity and pervasiveness of the prefreeze inflation. The intention was to preserve the psychological benefits already realized by the freeze to prevent an outbreak of renewed inflationary increases in prices or wages in any uncontrolled sectors and to establish a broad pattern of restraint and thus reassure the public that the process of stemming inflation would be as widely and evenly distributed as possible. This decision for almost universal coverage at the outset did not preclude the possibility of a subsequent relaxation of the controls by stages as the effectiveness of the system was demonstrated confidence in the control of inflation was strengthened and sectors of the economy no longer requiring control wrere identified A major issue of post-freeze control strategy was which of two courses to pursue. One alternative was to follow up the freeze period with what might be called a semifreeze holding close to the rigid standards of the freeze as long as possible. The danger here was that inequities and hardships caused by the freeze had built up so much pressure that there would be an explosion that might wreck Phase II before it got underway ; also there would be increasing problems of resource allocation. The other alternative was to move quickly to the more flexible and durable standards that would eventually be needed recognizing that this would cause a transitional bulge of wage and price increases. Because of concern that a rigid stance wrould both undermine the operation of normal market functions and force major confrontations that might endanger the continuation of the whole program the second of the two courses was followed. The cost of this choice was a temporary period of wage and price increases in excess of the goal Maintenance of maximum cooperation and support was also a vital consideration in structuring the policy-setting bodies. On the wage side it was evident that participation of labor and management would be required to give both groups a voice in the direction of the program and to ensure equal treatment. It also was abundantly clear that administration and policymaking in this unique situation would require great expertise in the area of pricewage determination and that such ability was best found among persons with long experience and training in the field. Also large segments of the Nation including business unions and the general public had increasingly supported a control program in and their insights and participation were believed to be an important factor in the successful operation of the controls program Structuring of the policy-setting bodies could have taken several directions but the considerations summarized above pointed toward a tripartite combination ( equal representation of labor management and the public ) for policy determination in the wage area and toward public membership only on the price-policy body. In matters of pay the different types of expertise and above all the need and desire for cooperation dictated a tripartite board Announcement of Phase II On October the President announced the outlines of the Phase II program. The goal of the program as proposed by the CLC was to reduce the rate of inflation to the to percent range by the end of a reduction to about half the prefreeze rate. The development of guidelines and standards to attain this goal was to be in the hands of policy-setting units comprised primarily of personnel drawn from various sectors of the economy outside of Government but acting in the public interest. The ~ ] controls were to cover the economy broadly were to be mandatory and were j to be removed when in the President 's judgment conditions had been \ achieved which promised the maintenance of reasonable price stability without them In its specific provisions the administrative machinery ( established in Executive Order ) was to operate along participatory lines to the greatest extent practicable. The CLC consisting of high Government officials and representing the President 's direct interest was assigned the responsibility of establishing broad goals determining the coverage of the control program overseeing enforcement and coordinating the anti-inflationary effort in line with the overall goals ( Chart ) The primary bodies created to develop standards and make decisions on changes in all prices ( including rents ) as well as compensation ( wages salaries and fringe benefits ) were respectively the Price Commission composed of seven public members and the tripartite Pay Board of members who were divided equally among business labor and public representatives Advisory committees were also established to promote a voluntary program to restrain interest rates and dividends elicit State and local government cooperation and to suggest means to curtail price increases in the health services industry. A rent advisory board including landlord tenant and public representatives was created to counsel the Price Commission while the preexisting tripartite Construction Industry Stabilization Committee was placed under the authority of the Pay Board. The National Commission on Productivity was expanded and assigned the advisory role of ensuring that the entire stabilization program encouraged productivity growth For purposes of administrative efficiency the CLC decided that smaller economic units should not be required to give advance notice or to report price and wage increases which were consistent with the basic guidelines established by the Price Commission and Pay Board. The largest firms and employee groups were required to obtain advance approval from the Commission and the Board for any change and an intermediate group was required to report after wages or prices were increased in accordance with the stabilization rules. These tiers are shown in Table The CLC also recognized that prices of some products and services were either insignificant in the overall inflation problem relative to the administrative difficulty of controlling them or were subject to direct controls outside the Economic Chart Post-Freeze Organization Committee on Interest and Dividends COST OF LIVING COUNCIL National Commission on Productivity Committee on Health Services Industry Committee on State and Local Government Cooperation PRICE COMMISSION PAY BOARD RENT ADVISORY BOARD EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION SUBCOMMITTEE Construction Industry Stabilization Committee STABILIZATION OFFICES ( INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE ) Agriculture Stabilization and Conservation Service TABLE Required reporting of price and wage increases Tier Action required ( a ) Prenotification of Price Commission or Pay Board ( increase to be effective with approval of Commission or Board ) Price increases ( size of firm ) Wage increases ( number of workers ) Sales of $ million and over ( firms with percent of all sales ) Affecting or more workers ( percent of all employees ) Sales of $ million to $ million ( firms with percent of all sales ) Affecting to workers ( percent of all employees ) Sales of less than $ million ( million enterprises with percent of all sales ) Affecting less than workers ( percent of all employees ) ( b ) Tier firms to submit quarterly price cost and profits reports to Price Commission II ( a ) Report to Price Commission or Pay Board ( b ) Tier II firms to submit quarterly price cost and profits report to Price Commission III No reports ( but increases to be made only in accordance with Price Commission and Pay Board regulations and to be subject to monitoring and spot checks ) Source : Cost of Living Council Stabilization Act. These were exempted from direct control. By year end this group included : Raw agricultural products Raw seafood products Life insurance United States Postal Service Certain custom products and services Exports Imports ( first sale into U.S. commerce ) International ocean shipping rates Damaged and used products Sales of U.S. Government property Real estate both improved and unimproved ( except for improvements completed after August for a predetermined price ) Rentals of residential units constructed ( or substantially rehabilitated ) after August Securities and financial instruments ( including commodity futures on organized exchanges ) State and local government fees and charges for services Tuition fees and charges of private nonprofit educational organizations Pay of Americans working and living abroad Federal pay fees and charges Wages below the Federal minimum Prices rents and wages in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico Rents of farm industrial and nonresidential property PRICE COMMISSION AND PAY BOARD STANDARDS Members of the Price Commission and Pay Board assumed their duties in late October. From then to mid-November when the freeze ended they had to organize staff publish specific guideline regulations and establish prenotification and reporting procedures. Both groups were also under immediate pressure at the opening of Phase II to deal with special problems created by the 90-day freeze Price Standards In assuming its responsibilities the Price Commission announced a goal of holding the rate of average price increases across the economy " to no more than * /i percent per year. " This conformed to the CLC 's goal of getting the inflation down to no more than to percent by the end of The Price Commission also set forth the general rule that no price might be increased beyond the ceiling price established for the freeze period except in accordance with its regulations. The terms of these regulations were as follows : Manufacturers and Service Organizations. These firms were permitted to increase their prices to reflect allowable cost increases which had occurred since their last price increase but not before January The cost increases were to be reduced to reflect productivity gains. Such price increases could not have the effect of increasing the firm 's profit margin ( profits before taxes as a percentage of sales ) over its margin prevailing in a base period ( defined as the highest average of two of a firm 's fiscal years ending prior to August ) ; Retailers and Wholesalers. These firms were permitted to increase their prices consistent with maintaining : ( a ) Their customary initial percentage markup on products equal to or less than that prevailing during the freeze period or ( at the firm 's option ) during the firm 's last fiscal year ending before August and ( b ) the before-tax profit margin of the firm equal to or less than that prevailing in the base period ( defined as for manufacturers above ) These regulations had the effect of placing a ceiling on the firm 's overall ratio of profit to sales the ceiling being determined by the experience in the past years. The formula for permissible price increases normally precluded an increase in the profit margin on individual products ; in the event that product mix factors had the effect of increasing the firm 's overall profit margin the ceiling became operative. However absolute profits could continue to advance in step with expanded production and sales. Since the regulations applied to individual producers and sellers competitive influences could continue to operate as an additional downward pressure on prices This factor was immediately apparent in cases where some manufacturers ' effective price increases were below those justified by their cost increases because major competitors had been permitted a smaller increase. This procedure also avoided the costly and time-consuming process of setting individual price ceilings for individual products with attendant problems of product definition and of assembling and analyzing data Immediately after the freeze the Price Commission gave priority to decisions on requests from Tier I firms for price increases based on long-term contracts written before the freeze on adjusted base prices or on price adjustments posted or announced prior to August as well as for price increases based on contractual wage and other cost increases where price adjustments had been deferred by the freeze. Other price increases calling for advance notification were to be dealt with on the basis of approval or disapproval by the Price Commission within days Labor Cost Pass-Through. The Price Commission made clear soon after assuming its duties that it would not necessarily grant price increases reflecting the full amount of increases in labor costs i.e. increases in wages and benefits minus gains in productivity. It promised " to look very carefully at any labor cost increase even if allowed by the Pay Board to determine its impact on price inflation " and said that " in general " it would not recognize wage increases that exceeded the Pay Board 's basic standard Rents. Price Commission rules for increases in residential rents provided that the landlord could : Increase his rent charge by * /2 percent annually above the base rental upon 30-days notice to the tenant In addition increase his rent charge by the dollars-and-cents amount of the increase of State and local government taxes fees and charges for services allocable to the individual unit Increase monthly rents by ^ percent of the total cost of major capital improvements made after August In the case of leases which had not been renewed within days prior to August establish a new base rent defined as that in effect on May plus percent Fire and Casualty Insurance. Price Commission policies covering all nonexempt insurance coverage restricted projection of increases in companycontrolled costs ( as opposed to actuarial factors ) to 2J/2 percent limited the projection of inflationary trend factors to percent of what they would have been in the absence of an economic stabilization program stipulated that no changes could be made in ratemaking formulas which would increase rates and in lieu of the general profit margin test imposed a l/i -percent limit on increases in the profit portion of the premium. Insurance departments of the various State governments are responsible for administering these guidelines although final authority to review rate increases remains with the Commission Public Utilities. Under the Price Commission 's rules all public utilities with $ million or more in annual revenues in their most recent fiscal year were required to notify the Commission when they request a rate increase from their respective regulatory agency as well as when the increase is permitted to be effective ; public utilities with revenues of between $ million and $ million were required to notify the Commission when they were granted an increase. The Commission relies initially upon certification by the regulatory agency that the increase conforms to criteria specified by the Commission ; however the Commission retains the right to disapprove an increase within days after it has been granted Firms Showing Losses or Low Profits. Notwithstanding its other regulations the Price Commission authorized all firms currently sustaining a loss to increase their prices to the break-even level. In addition firms with annual sales of $ million or less were permitted to increase prices to bring their profit margins on sales up to percent regardless of their experience in the previous years Health Care Services. The Price Commission approved policies for this sector recommended by the Health Services Industry Advisory Committee which operated under the jurisdiction of the CLC. The guidelines divided the industry into two categories : Institutional providers such as hospitals and nursing homes were to be permitted only such price increases as were justified by allowable costs adjusted for productivity gains. Increases from ^ to percent had to be reported to the Internal Revenue Service with supporting justification and to the appropriate medicare intermediary ; and increases above percent required an exception granted by the Price Commission Noninstitutional providers including physicians were permitted average aggregate increases in their prices based on allowable cost increases of no more than 2J/2 percent per year. Such increases might not have the effect of increasing profit margins of the providers above the average of the highest two of the past years. Nonprofit providers were not permitted to increase the ratio of their net revenues to their gross revenues as compared to the base-year average Term Limit Pricing. The Price Commission late in established a simplified approach to approvals for price increases by Tier I companies : Under the term limit principle ( TLP ) a company might apply for a weighted average price increase covering all product lines for a 12-month period without specific Commission approval of changes in individual product prices. This modification was particularly useful to firms with complex product lines which included thousands of individual items. The Commission required such a firm to keep records and file quarterly reports ; and the firm had also to establish a monitoring procedure which would assure that the weighted average of increases did not exceed the approved limit Prices Fees and Charges of Federal State and Local Governments. The distinction between prices fees and charges on the one hand and the taxes le \ ied by State and local governments on the other is often very arbitrary. Since taxes can not be controlled under the economic stabilization authority an inducement to raise taxes rather than increase fees might be present if the latter were controlled. Therefore these fees ( except those of hospitals and public utilities ) were exempted from control. However all State and local governments were requested to take steps to make sure that such fees did not increase more than 2J4 percent per year ; their chief executive officers were also asked to report semiannually on fee increases. Similarly the Federal Government was scheduled to report the fee increases at the end of each fiscal year Interest and Dividends Interest rates were lower during than and net borrowing by households and nonfinancial business units increased substantially. The decline of interest rates may have reflected some abatement of inflationary expectations. Despite the decline of interest rates there was considerable public concern about the future course of interest rates and the Committee on Interest and Dividends was directed by the CLC to maintain close surveillance of interest rates with a view to formulating and preparing to implement a program of voluntary restraints on such rates particularly for home mortgages and consumer loans The Committee proposed voluntary compliance with dividend guidelines that requested that companies limit dividend increases to percent per share in ( adjusted for splits and stock dividends ) over the largest per-share dividend paid in fiscal and or in calendar Various special guidelines carefully defined acceptable procedures where new companies mergers and special situations were involved Pay Board Policies General policies governing pay adjustments were adopted by the Pay Board early in November. These became effective at the end of the freeze and were applicable to all employees other than Federal employees and persons earning less than the Federal minimum wage. These guidelines included three provisions. First permissible annual pay increases would be those normally considered supportable by productivity improvement and cost-of-living trends. The initial general standard for new contracts and adjustments was set at 5l/2 percent and was subject to periodic review by the Board. Second existing contracts and pay practices established before November would be allowed to operate subject to challenge by five members of the Board or a party at interest. Third retroactive payments for wage increases temporarily foregone during the freeze would be permitted only upon approval of the Board The Pay Board delegated to the CISC the responsibility of carrying out Board policy with respect to the construction industry. The Board also agreed upon and issued a series of definitions. Among the most important of these were a base date ( November ) from which future wage increases were measured against the standard and definitions of employee units. The Board also waived reporting requirements for existing contracts until year 's end a deadline later extended to January In mid-November the Pay Board issued standards regulating certain permitted exceptions to the general bl/i percent pay standard. These exceptions provided that : ( a ) Pay increases of up to percent would be permitted where tandem relationships ( situations where pay rates for certain employees or firms are based on rates for other groups of workers or firms ) could be proven to exist under certain stringent definitions ( b ) Pay increases of up to percent would be permitted where they were deemed necessary within certain narrow criteria established by the Board to attract or retain essential labor ( c ) Pay increases of up to percent would be permitted until March where pay increases had aggregated less than the sum of percent per year for each of the past years ( under this exception only the difference between the sum of percent per year for years and the sum of the actual increases might be added to the 5/2 percent increase normally permissible ) ( d ) The portion of a pay adjustment tied to changes in the cost of living might be calculated as a weighted annual average increase provided that the sum of this portion and the remainder of the adjustment did not exceed the general pay standards. The first and second exceptions required prior approval by the Pay Board and the maximum permissible adjustment under any or all of these criteria was not to exceed percent Policies on executive and incentive compensation not covered by collective bargaining agreements were announced late in December. Essentially these provided that executive compensation increases ( including salaries fringe benefits and perquisites of all types ) were not to exceed the * /2 percent general standard. Existing incentive compensation and bonus plans were permitted to continue as long as their costs did not rise by more than 5J/2 percent from the appropriate base period. Existing stock option programs were permitted to continue if they met certain detailed legal and historical tests including the stipulation that the number of shares made available should not exceed the average number made available during a 3-year base period. Also late in December the five business members of the Pay Board reported their intention to challenge all deferred pay increases in excess of percent called for by existing labor contracts Government Pay. Federal Government employees ' pay subject to existing legislation and executive decision was to be monitored by the Federal Pay Agent to ensure consistency with the stabilization program. The CLC was to advise the President on the consistency of future Federal pay decisions with the economic stabilization program. The pay of State and local employees wras subject to the Pay Board 's rules but advance notice of such increases within the Board 's general standards was waived. If a governmental unit certified to the Pay Board that it would abide by the Board 's standards it was required to report pay increases only semiannually PHASE II OPERATIONS At yearend the economic stabilization machinery of Phase II had been operating about weeks. Progress had been made by the Price Commission and Pay Board in adopting and publicizing standards for price and wage behavior in establishing criteria for evaluating individual cases in recruiting and organizing necessary staff and in setting up reporting procedures and internal systems for handling applications To expedite the evaluation of applications and to consider regulatory issues the Price Commission had recruited a supporting staff of approximately people while the Pay Board whose needs for staff were much smaller had recruited A stabilization office was established under the Internal Revenue Service ; it utilized local IRS offices with about persons to administer interpret monitor and enforce the wage price and rent regulations of Phase II. A special unit of the Justice Department provided legal support with people assigned to this task Price Commission By early January there had been advance notifications of price increases filed with the Price Commission by an estimated companies ( among the estimated companies in Tier I ) The Commission had approved requests of industrial companies for price increases covering products having a sales volume of $ billion. ( The total sales of all Tier I firms was estimated at over $ billion. ) A total of companies were denied requested price increases. The approved increases averaged percent on a weighted basis measured against sales of affected products by applicant companies and percent of total sales of the companies covered Companies receiving approval for increases were among the Nation 's largest producers in the automotive steel aluminum and coal industries The average approval rate should not be construed as a general indicator of the price behavior of all Tier I firms. In fact at the end of the year the trend shifted to lower approvals. In addition many large companies had indicated to the Price Commission their intention to hold the line on prices The Price Commission was giving close attention to a more detailed articulation of the standards for price behavior which would provide clear rules both for the large companies required to report to the Commission and for the millions of smaller businesses and individuals in the economy Particular priority was accorded to interpretation of the requirement that " productivity gains " be taken into account Pay Board Up to mid-January the Pay Board had received applications for pay increases from prenotifying Tier I organizations. The Board had acted upon applications approving and disapproving five. Two of the contracts that were approved the coal contract and the railroad signalmen 's contract provided initial wage and benefit increases in excess of percent. Both contracts represented special situations : The coal pact was actually signed before the November deadline after which Phase II rules became effective and part of the signalmen 's increase had been legis93 lated by the Congress. Deferred increases in both contracts are subject to review in and The Board had also approved a 4-percent increase for municipal workers in Chicago Early in January the Pay Board rejected five proposed contracts covering over aerospace workers. The proposed contracts had provided firstyear wage and benefit increases of about percent. Also in early January the Board approved wage and benefit increases of less than * /2 percent for workers in eight major organizations in the prenotifying category Inquiries Complaints and Litigation Inquiries about various aspects of the stabilization program averaged over per day from Phase IPs initiation to mid-January. Inquiries about rent regulations accounted for more than half the total ; the remaining inquiries were divided equally between wages and prices Complaints about alleged violations of Phase II rules averaged nearly per day during Phase II a somewhat lower volume than during the latter days of the freeze. Complaints about prices averaged percent of the total ; rent complaints were percent and wage complaints percent. The cumulative total of complaints during Phase II was over of which about two-thirds had been resolved by IRS action. Of some requests received for exemptions or exceptions from stabilization rules over had been resolved. The bulk of the remainder involved rent questions There were only a few court cases involving Phase II regulations by yearend. Two injunctions had been issued against threatened evictions and proposed rent increases. In a case covering Phase I and Phase II the Government had brought action against a municipal transit company to remedy violations involving fare increases and reduction of service Program Administration Because of the newness of the controls and systems as well as the new staffs and procedures there was some early confusion in the control system and some misunderstanding. Probably the most notable example of confusion involved specific price ceilings and the lists of base prices ( applicable during the freeze period ) which the Price Commission required each retailer to post. Under the regulations prices of the same product could vary from store to store and products essentially similar sold by different firms could also vary in price. Moreover the legal ceiling prices in retail stores could vary with fluctuations in the stores ' wholesale purchase prices. During earlier periods of price controls ceiling prices were set by product and were therefore more uniform. Under the present system it was difficult for the public to assess accurately whether actual prices when they were above the posted base price had been increased in accordance with Price Commission regulations or not. Therefore in cases where prices increased substantially beyond the posted base price the public was encouraged to ask the store to explain the increase. If not satisfied the consumer could file a complaint with the IRS stating the basis for his complaint In the final analysis however effective enforcement depended on the advance notification reporting and spot-check system which permitted the authorities to analyze cost and profit data EXTENSION OF THE STABILIZATION AUTHORITY The Economic Stabilization Act of the legal basis for the freeze and Phase II control programs was scheduled to expire at the end of April In response to a Presidential request the Congress extended the Act to April Extension of this authority provides sufficient continuity and duration of the stabilization program to permit it to succeed. In extending the Act however the Congress substantially amended it and some provisions of these amendments may significantly modify certain policies developed under the initial economic stabilization program. Under the revised Act : Wage and salary increases which were scheduled to take effect after the freeze according to contracts entered into before August were to be paid unless " unreasonably inconsistent " with Pay Board standards The President was directed to take action to permit wage and salary increases which were scheduled to take effect during the freeze according to contracts negotiated prior to the freeze but not paid because of the freeze to be paid retroactively unless " unreasonably inconsistent " with Pay Board standards The President was directed to take action to require the retroactive payment of wage and salary increases provided for by law or contract prior to August where prices had been advanced productivity increased taxes had been raised appropriations had been made or funds had otherwise been raised or provided for in order to cover such increases regardless of Pay Board standards Employer contributions to pensions profit-sharing annuities and savings plans qualified under the Internal Revenue Code as well as contributions to group insurance and disability and health plans were not to be included in the definition of " wages and salaries " for control purposes unless they were " unreasonably inconsistent " with standards for wages salaries and prices Wage increases to any individual whose earnings were substandard or who was a member of the working poor were not to be limited in any manner until such time as his earnings were no longer substandard or until he was no longer a member of the working poor ASSESSMENT The Economic Stabilization Act requires this Report to give " an assessment of the progress attained in achieving the purposes of this title. " As stated in the Act the aims are " to stabilize the economy reduce inflation minimize unemployment improve the Nation 's competitive position in world trade and protect the purchasing power of the dollar. " These purposes can not be achieved by operations under the Economic Stabilization Act alone. The freeze and Phase II contribute to their attainment as part of a combined program which also includes fiscal and monetary measures exchange rate readjustment and trade measures. The relation of the wage-price controls to the rest of the package is important. If monetary and fiscal policy keep the growth of demand moderate the price and wage controls can bring about more quickly and surely the lower rate of inflation that competitive forces would cause in such circumstances. But if demand is allowed to grow excessively the price and wage control system will lose its value. Correspondingly if the presence of the price and wage control system becomes an excuse for laxity in monetary-fiscal policy the system 's effect on controlling inflation will be negative As discussed in Chapter we believe that the combination of policies in effect in including the price-wage control system will produce substantial progress toward the goals of the Stabilization Act. The goals may be summarized as less unemployment less inflation and a U.S. economy which is more competitive in international markets. In this section of the Report we concentrate on the contribution of the steps taken under the Economic Stabilization Act Evolution of Prices and Wages In the accomplishment of its own objectives the freeze was an unqualified success. It had the desired shock effect on the public 's inflationary psychology and it held the line on prices and wages allowing time for a more flexible and durable system to be devised and put in place. The statistical evidence on price behavior during the freeze is presented in Tables and Assessment of Phase II is obviously more difficult. It has been in operation too short a time to generate any substantial body of evidence statistical or other about its effects. The data on prices and wages for December the latest available are not a measure of the effectiveness of Phase II and should not be so interpreted. A temporary period of faster than desired wage and price increases was an inevitable byproduct of decisions made with respect to the transition from the freeze to Phase II. Several months of experience are required before Phase II regulations and rulings will be fully reflected in price and wage trends. At this time therefore the future outcome of policies which have only just been inaugurated is chiefly a matter of speculation. The principal questions are : Will the standards of the Pay Board and the Price Commission lead to the desired results ? Will the standards be observed ? The standards announced by the Pay Board and the Price Commission imply the following arithmetic : If compensation per hour of work rises by / percent per annum and if output per hour of work rises by percent per annum labor costs per unit of output will rise by approximately 2l/2 percent per annum. If prices rise in the same proportion as labor costs which are the largest element in total costs for the economy as a whole then prices will also rise by / percent a rate within the range of the goal set by the CLC Pay Board Decisions A number of important factors must be taken into account in assessing the prospects of achieving the goal. The basic standard of the Pay Board is a 5l/2 percent permissible pay increase. Under certain circumstances however existing Pay Board regulations permit increases in excess of this average standard. One of the most important of these exceptions is the rule that permits wage increases scheduled under existing contracts to be granted even if they exceed 5J4 percent unless they are challenged by five members of the Board or a party to the contract ; in that case they will be reviewed by the Board. If all the known deferred increases in excess of } percent that are scheduled for under major collective bargaining situations were granted and increases arising from cost-of-living escalator clauses were restrained by a small rise in the CPI ( to percent ) they would add about percent to the average rate of pay increase for the year ( i.e. if the average outside of situations providing deferred increases were percent and scheduled deferred increases were all granted the average rise in hourly wages for all private sector workers would be about percent ) The business members of the Pay Board have indicated their intention to challenge all deferred increases in excess of percent. If all known deferred increases that are in excess of percent were limited to percent then deferred increases would add a little more than percent to the average rate of wage increase in The Pay Board rules also permit increases in excess of 5l/2 percent if they are necessary to bring the cumulative increase during the last years to percent a year or to preserve certain limited traditional relationships with other wages or to attract labor in shortage situations. Pay increases allowed under any or all of these exceptions may not exceed percent ( that is V/2 percent above the general standard ) and the 3-year catchup provision expires on March While the direct impact on increases in compensation for the entire economy of these exceptions probably will be small their impact through tandem wage relations and relative wage pressures could be significant As this Report is written the Cost of Living Council has not yet issued an interpretation of the terms of the Economic Stabilization Act which excludes from control substandard wages and wages of the " working poor. " Neither has the Pay Board interpreted the exclusion of increases in certain fringe benefits unless they are " unreasonably inconsistent with the standards for wage salary and price increases. " The foregoing are all provisions of the regulations which would permit wage increases to exceed ] / % percent in certain circumstances. Moreover even if no particular wage rate rose by more than ^ percent the average compensation per hour of work could rise by more than that percentage because of increased overtime or a more than average increase in employment in sectors where wage rates are above the average. Both of these causes tend to operate in a period of economic expansion such as is envisaged for In addition labor costs per hour of work will rise slightly in from an increase in employers ' Social Security contributions arising from an increase in the taxable earnings base On the other hand and this point is most important the standards of the Pay Board are only the standards of permitted wage increases not the standards of required wage increases. Certainly in the conditions of when labor shortages will be highly infrequent we should expect many wage increases to be below the normally permissible amount. In when the average wage increase in large union contracts was percent percent of all the workers covered by such contracts received increases below percent. If in it develops that 5J/2 percent is the standard or most common wage increase there will be many increases below that including many instances of no wage increase at all. Some support of this expectation may be found in the fact that several of the pay increases approved thus far by the Pay Board have been significantly below the standard Our expectation is that the combination of the Pay Board rules and the natural forces at work will after the initial post-freeze bubble hold the rate of increase of compensation per hour close to 5j/i percent. Certainly the rules themselves contain nothing which makes this rate clearly unobtainable. However the course of events and decisions will have to be closely observed to see what wage outcome is in fact being generated by the system Unit Costs The simple arithmetic outlined above assumed that output per hour of work in the private economy would rise by percent per annum which is about the average rate of the post-World War II period. The rise of productivity was below average in and but faster in ; it could reasonably be expected to be even higher in since the rate of increase in productivity commonly exceeds the historical average in years of strong expansion. One reason is the same as that which makes the rate of increase of average compensation relatively high a shift of employment and output to industries with above-average productivity and wages Thus it seems not inconsistent with the existing rules that the rate of increase of labor cost per unit of output should be in the range of to percent. Other costs will also be taken into account in the price ceiling formula notably depreciation costs indirect business taxes and interest The anticipated rate of increase of these nonlabor costs combined in would probably not be so large as to force the rate of increase of total costs per unit of output outside of the to 3-percent range Price Commission Decisions Whether the average behavior of prices will in fact approximately follow the behavior of unit costs is an important question. Under the general rules of the Price Commission price increases are permitted in proportion to cost increases. However there are several circumstances in which permitted price increases may be either larger or smaller than actual cost increases Prices may not be raised as much as costs if the effect would be to raise the net profit margin above that of the best two of the past years The Price Commission will not automatically recognize all cost increases in calculating " allowable cost " for determining permitted price increases The price regulations for wholesale and retail trade do not permit such firms to pass on cost increases except increases in the costs of purchased goods The operation of the term limit principle may result in a firm 's acceptance of a smaller average permitted price increase than its costs would justify in order to qualify for use of simpler and more flexible procedures If it is necessary to use industrywide trend estimates of productivity in the absence of other information in projecting costs permitted price increases will turn out to be larger or smaller than actual cost increases where the actual productivity increase is larger or smaller than the estimate used. In a period when actual productivity rises may be exceeding the trend this would mean price rises exceeding cost rises on the average but this effect would be limited by the profit margin ceiling As a result of specific exemptions by the CLC or the statute items in the CPI comprising percent of its total weight are not controlled by the Price Commission Public utilities may be granted above-standard rate increases where necessary to meet essential service demands Exceptions from the general cost-justification rule have been provided for firms with losses or very low earnings If costs decline the system does not require price reduction unless the " windfall profit " situation is encountered In the foregoing circumstances and possibly others legally permitted price increases may be greater or less than cost increases. The net of all this is impossible to estimate. Without more experience no more can be said than that the rules and procedures do not seem inconsistent with permitted price increases coming out on the average fairly close to permitted cost increases The actual behavior of prices will be determined not only by what the Price Commission permits but also by what the market permits. The limitation of the market including competition by firms with relatively small cost increases will work in the direction of holding price increases below those legally permitted Although much remains to be seen a reasonable judgment at this time is that the standards so far promulgated applied in the context of stronglyrising productivity without excess demand are probably consistent with achievement of the anti-inflation goal for the end of This is not of course inconsistent with the expected bulge of prices in the early part of the year as the transition from the freeze is completed. The longer-run effect of the present standards will depend on specific policy decisions and interpretations by the control authorities as well as on the cooperation of business and labor. And the outcome of the system as a whole will depend on the ability to amend the rules if it should appear that the existing rules are not leading to the desired end Compliance A further question which must be asked is whether the rules of the system are likely to be observed by businesses landlords and unions. In fact the question is twofold : Whether the rules will be overtly defied and whether they will be covertly evaded. This issue also allows only a judgment on the basis of limited experience. Overt defiance seems unlikely given the extensive support for the system which seems to prevail among the public and the legal sanctions provided by the Economic Stabilization Act. Evasion may be a greater problem. A control system is imposed upon millions of economic units by an administrative staff of or Whether control measures can succeed will depend upon three things : ( a ) The continued belief of the American people that compliance with the program is essential to the national interest ; ( b ) The ability of the managers of the system to devise self-executing rules ; ( c ) The judgment of the Cost of Living Council in excluding from the system at the appropriate time sectors of the economy which do not add greatly to inflation but make important inroads on the resources of the control system. In mid-January the CLC moved along this path by exempting from coverage all retailers with annual volume of less than $ and under certain circumstances rental units owned by individuals with fewer than four such units. Exclusion of these numerous small units from coverage will permit the administrators of the controls system to focus their efforts and resources on large economic units which have a far greater impact on markets and whose competition will in turn limit price increases by the uncovered units On the basis of the experience so far we believe that the program will help achieve the economy 's transition to a situation in which reasonable price stability can be expected without controls. The outcome will depend in large part upon decisions made and still to be made by the Cost of Living Council the Pay Board and the Price Commission. However it will depend even more upon the support and self-restraint of the American people. This is the inescapable character of the system CHAPTER Outlook and Policy I N THE SUMMER OF the American economy was beset by a conflict among four objectives faster growth higher employment greater price stability and a more balanced external position. The danger was that steps to speed up growth and boost employment by expanding demand would worsen both the inflation and the balance-of-payments deficit The steps initiated on August greatly increased the possibility of simultaneous progress on all four fronts. The price and wage control system has provided more room for expanding growth and employment even while inflation and inflationary expectations are being reduced. The realignment of exchange rates promises an improvement of the U.S. external position even while the domestic economy is expanding. The measures taken last year did not eliminate potential conflicts among these goals. Expansive measures must still be moderated by concern with both inflation and the balance of payments. But the area of consistency among the objectives has been greatly widened At the end of we were already seeing more rapid growth of output and employment and a lower rate of inflation. During we expect continued economic expansion which will reduce the unemployment rate significantly. The lower rate of inflation should be more durable by the end of after a longer period of greater price stability. Progress should have been made toward a stronger external position The U.S. economy will expand substantially in All major components of domestic demand will increase and the aggregate demand for goods and services will rise by about $ billion to around $ billion. This is an increase of ^ percent over the level of GNP in The real increase will be around percent while the implied increase in the GNP price deflator is around 3J4 percent. This is compatible with the interim objective of an inflation rate of to percent by the end of There are several reasons for expecting that the forecast pace of expansion will be realized. In the fourth quarter of real output had already begun to rise much more rapidly than in the preceding quarters. Except for a decline in net exports all sectors of demand rose in the fourth quarter A second reason is that fiscal and monetary policy has become more expansionary. Third the existence of price and wage controls will reduce the pressure both of inflation and of inflationary expectations. This permits fiscal and monetary policy to exert a more expansive thrust than was prudent earlier when the inflation objective was more vulnerable. It has also strengthened consumer confidence and should strengthen consumer spending DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FOURTH QUARTER OF Preliminary data show that GNP rose by about $ billion in the fourth quarter of or at an annual rate of percent. Most prices were subject to the freeze during the first half of the quarter and to Phase II controls thereafter and the GNP price deflator rose at the very low rate of percent per annum. Real GNP expanded at an annual rate of percent. Manufacturing production which had declined from May to August rose from the third quarter to the fourth at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of percent Rises in real economic activity were accompanied by strong increases in employment and productivity. Civilian nonagricultural employment rose more than from the third to the fourth quarter the average workweek lengthened by hours and in the private nonfarm sector output per man-hour rose at an annual rate of nearly percent. As a result of the strong productivity gain unit labor costs showed their smallest increase since late Because the rise in the labor force was very large the unemployment rate was virtually unchanged Government purchases of goods and services accounted for $ billion of the total $ billion rise in demand in the fourth quarter. Of this $ billion represented a rise in Federal purchases. This.was the largest increase in Federal purchases since the first quarter of ; it was attributable to larger defense outlays partly to cover the volunteer army program and to increased outlays for agricultural price supports Investment expenditures also rose in the fourth quarter. Fleet sales of cars were very strong as were purchases of trucks. New orders for producers ' capital equipment averaged percent higher during September to November than in the preceding months. Housing production in the fourth quarter continued to show great strength ; starts in December reached a seasonally adjusted annual rate of million units bringing the average rate for the quarter to million units. Investment in business inventories which had declined by $ billion in the preceding quarter rose by $ billion The New Economic Policy induced a sharp rise in automobile sales. Prior to the August announcement sales of domestic-type new cars were running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about million units. In September sales rose to a rate of million and in October to million ; the rate fell noticeably after mid-November when the price freeze ended. For the fourth quarter as a whole sales were not greatly different from the third quarter rate but the rate from September through December was percent higher than the average for the months immediately preceding the NEP. Some of the early rise was at the expense of foreign car sales and subsequent domestic sales THE OUTLOOK FOR The outlook for each of the major components of expenditures on GNP in is discussed below Business Fixed Investment Business fixed investment in will rise significantly for the first time since The Department of Commerce-SEC survey taken in November and December indicates plans for a 9-percent increase over in outlays for new plant and equipment. The survey shows stronger than average spending intentions for nonmianufacturing firms especially airlines electric and gas utilities and communications companies. For the nonmanufacturing segment as a whole the anticipations data show that capital outlays will rise by percent in However the manufacturing sector which was utilizing capacity at a relatively low level in the fourth quarter expects capital outlays in to be only percent above the level Business should have little difficulty in financing this year 's planned investment. With rising output aggregate profits are expected to show a sizable advance and retained earnings should rise significantly. The revised regulations on depreciation and the 7-percent job development credit will increase after-tax corporate cash flow by an additional $ billion Those components of business fixed investment not included in the plant and equipment survey are likely to rise as well but at a lower rate than capital outlays included in the Commerce-SEC survey. The overall increase in total business fixed investment is estimated to be around percent on a year-to-year basis Inventory Investment The level of business inventories has changed relatively little over the past years and the ratio of stocks to sales has fallen. Although inventories held by wholesalers were on the high side in late inventories held by manufacturers and retailers were lower relative to sales than at any time since the fall of With favorable sales prospects following the sizable increase in real output in the fourth quarter business investment in inventories should show a strong increase in The expected expansion of defenserelated ordering should also add to the demand for inventories. Inventory accumulation for the year as a whole is expected to be around $ billion Residential Construction The total number of private housing starts in is expected to be million units. Within this total single-family units are expected to be much stronger than starts of multifamily units. This shift from multifamily to single-family units will strengthen total residential outlays in which are expected to exceed by percent or more In early market interest rates continued the declines which began in and financial intermediaries continued to enjoy heavy inflows of new deposits. These developments provided increased funds for home mortgages and induced a decline in mortgage interest rates. The outlook for the remainder of is that the availability and cost of mortgage funds will remain at levels that would be unlikely to limit the expansion forecast for the housing sector The Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation will continue their mortgage purchase programs and secondary market activities and the Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) will continue guaranteeing mortgagebacked pass-through securities and standard mortgage-backed bonds. At present GNMA 's insured-mortgage market support operation in conjunction with FNMA is not operating because mortgage market rates have declined relative to the FHA ceiling rate. If these conditions change the coordinated FNMA-GNMA purchase plan will be automatically resumed with likely support from other Federal agencies as well Net Exports In U.S. net exports of goods and services declined from a level of $ billion in the first quarter to minus $ billion in the final quarter of the year. The outlook for net exports in is subject to a wider margin of uncertainty than usual. Underlying factors point to a rise in net exports within the year. The substantial realignment of the dollar 's exchange rate relative to other major currencies will improve the relative competitive position of U.S. goods and services. The abatement of inflation in the United States and the increase in productivity that is expected will reinforce the effects of realignment. While the influence of these positive factors is clear both the magnitude and timing of the improvement they will bring are difficult to specify. In addition there are two short-run factors in which can be expected to affect net exports adversely. The U.S economy will be expanding faster than it has in several years. At the same time the rate of expansion in several major markets abroad will be relatively low. Also the initial effects of currency realignment may actually be perverse because import contracts predating the change will entail higher dollar outlays. Because of these factors it will be some months before U.S net exports of goods and services are positive once again. The average for the year as a whole will probably be close to zero Government Purchases of Goods and Services Government purchases at all levels will constitute a highly expansive force for economic activity in Total purchases are expected to rise percent with Federal purchases increasing by percent and State and local purchases by percent. The increase in State and local purchases reflects the proposed revenue-sharing program of the Federal Government and the continuing favorable conditions in credit markets Federal expenditures are discussed in more detail in the subsequent section on fiscal policy Personal Consumption Expenditures The expectations just outlined show that the demand for GNP other than consumption in the aggregate will rise by around percent between and Such a rise by itself should produce significant increases in employment. In spite of the slower rate of increase in wage rates expected as a result of wage and price controls total payrolls will also increase significantly. The growth in earned income will be augmented by increases in Social Security benefits. In addition as a result of the high rate of personal saving during the past years the financial position of consumers as measured by their liquid asset holdings is extremely strong. The impact of these financial factors on consumer expenditures will of course depend on changes in the level of consumer confidence In consumers increased their spending by percent over They also maintained their rate of saving out of disposable income in the neighborhood of percent. The ratio of saving to disposable income observed in these years is significantly higher than the percent rate for the period to While this might represent a shift in consumer preferences for say liquid assets it has also been interpreted by some as being due at least in part to the confidence factor which tends to decline when the rate of unemployment and the pace of inflation are high There is already evidence that consumer confidence has improved since last summer. The expectation is that it will improve further as employment increases and the rates of unemployment and inflation decline. If the reasoning which relates the saving rate to the confidence factor is correct consumer spending will rise at a faster rate than the rise in disposable income However the forecast for consumer spending projected in this Report does not assume that consumers in will reduce the high rate of saving that prevailed in and In the first place clear evidence of a sustained drop in the saving rate is not yet available. Second the tax cuts which consumers will enjoy in the first half of and the increase in transfer payments scheduled for midyear will tend to keep the saving rate high because the response of spending to such increases in income is typically delayed Consumer spending is expected to rise by around percent in Together with the forecast for nonconsumption expenditures the total expected rise in GNP adds to about $ billion Fiscal and Monetary Policy Fiscal policy will make a major contribution to the achievement of an expansive economy in Federal expenditures on the national income accounts ( NIA ) basis are expected to total $ billion in calendar a rise of $ billion or percent over calendar A substantial part of the rise will occur during the first half of calendar Federal purchases of goods and services which had been declining gradually since have already begun to rise. The larger purchase figures reflect previously announced increases in military pay the Federal pay increase in January and additional increases in purchases. The rise in defense purchases would reverse a fairly steady trend from the fourth quarter of to the third quarter of during which the rate of defense spending measured in current dollars declined by about percent and in constant dollars percent. These expenditures are scheduled to rise in In addition there is a sharp increase in Federal grants to State and local governments which reflects the new revenue-sharing proposals of the Administration as well as proposed increases in welfare grants to States Tax cuts will also provide considerable stimulus in From calendar to the net reduction in tax receipts due to changes in tax laws and regulations is estimated at $ billion on an NIA basis. The tax reductions are estimated at $ billion but these are partly offset by increases in the social security base starting in January Most of the economic impact of these social security tax increases will not be realized until the second half of ; consequently these tax increases should not depress consumer spending significantly in In both and receipts are considerably less than expenditures primarily because the economy in these years is below its full potential. For calendar NIA receipts are estimated to be $ billion and NIA expenditures $ billion. Thus the projected deficit for calendar year is $ billion on an NIA basis compared to $ billion in This expansion of the deficit as computed on the forecast path for the economy indicates that the fiscal policy is stimulative. The faster rise of expenditures than receipts will increase demand either by direct government purchases or by bolstering private incomes and private demand. The unified budget measured on a full-employment basis moves from a surplus of $ billion in fiscal year to a deficit of $ billion in fiscal The budget on the same basis returns to balance in fiscal year The steady strong expansion we seek and expect will require support from monetary policy. An abundant supply of money and other liquid assets and favorable conditions in money markets should encourage an expansion of outlays by consumers businesses and State and local governments. This process would involve a more rapid rise of currency and demand deposits than occurred in the second half of Steps have already been taken by the Federal Reserve System to start this acceleration Major Uncertainties The Council 's projection for aggregate demand for falls within the fairly narrow range of projections made by private organizations and individuals. Nonetheless there are important uncertainties which could produce a level of economic activity either higher or lower than the level forecast The plans for fiscal expansion require action by Congress which might be slower in coming than has been assumed. Expansive policies can be thwarted if consumers decide to increase their already high saving rate The expected adjustment of U.S. net exports might involve a longer lag than we have posited. The change in business inventory policy may not turn out to be as substantial or as rapid as the path assumed in the forecast On the other side there is a good possibility that consumers will increase their rate of spending faster than the projected rise in disposable income This would have important secondary benefits in other sectors notably in business investment outlays and business demands for inventory GNP forecasts made by the Council have been qualified in the past by the caveat that they should be viewed as the midpoint of a range of plus or minus $ billion around the forecast. When GNP was $ billion this was the equivalent of a band of uncertainty of percent. The equivalent band of uncertainty for today 's larger numbers would be $ billion PRICES AND PRICE-WAGE POLICY The rate of inflation in ( as measured by the GNP price deflator ) is expected to fall to about 3J4 percent the lowest year-to-year change since Toward the end of the year the rate of price change is expected to be percent per annum The estimate made here of the rate of inflation during assumes two things. First it assumes a growth of money demand that is strong and steady but not so exuberant that significant shortages of products or labor would be created if price and wage increases were held to the forecast path. Second it assumes that the price-wage control system given such demand conditions will be of the character force and duration needed to maintain that path The Administration 's policy is to create and maintain both of these conditions. Earlier in this chapter we have described the demand conditions we foresee for and the fiscal and monetary policies expected to help bring them about. In Chapter we described the existing state of the price-wage control system. We expressed the view there that the existing system of standards and procedures is consistent with the achievement of the antiinflationary goals the Administration has laid out barring difficulties not now foreseen. The important point however is that the system will be adapted as necessary to achieve the goal The control system will be retained as long as is necessary to reach its goal which is a condition of the economy in which we can have a significantly lower rate of inflation without controls than we were experiencing in the first part of Speculation that the Administration will abandon the controls prematurely out of fatigue ideological aversion or other causes is groundless. Having embarked upon this course the Administration has no intention of departing from it in circumstances where it would risk either resumption of inflation or the need to reimpose the controls The basic premise of the price-wage control system is that the inflation of and was the result of expectations contracts and patterns of behavior built up during the earlier period beginning in when there was an inflationary excess of demand. Since there is no longer an excess of demand the rate of inflation will subside permanently when this residue of the previous excess is removed. The purpose of the control system is to give the country a period of enforced stability in which expectations contracts and behavior will become adapted to the fact that rapid inflation is no longer the prospective condition of American life. When that happens controls can be eliminated How long that will take no one can say. The conditions now existing and the policies in operation are unprecedented. The only sensible course is to observe the behavior of the economy closely and to avoid commitment to either a minimum or a maximum duration of controls During the control period there will be decisions to exclude from coverage one or another sector of the economy as has recently been done for retail stores with less than $ annual sales and single-family houses and apartments with two to four units under certain conditions. Such exclusions should not be interpreted as signs of the weakening of the system or portents of its early termination. They may in fact make the system stronger and more durable by permitting the administrative effort to be concentrated on the sectors most significant for inflation. This is especially true when as is often the case price increases in the excluded sector would be effectively limited by competition from the parts of the economy that remain under legal control EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENT Our estimate implies an increase of percent in real GNP between and This is about the rate of increase achieved in the fourth quarter of There is no easy way to separate the forecast rate of real growth into employment and productivity gains. Clearly it should yield substantial increases in both. The extent to which the employment gains will reduce the unemployment rate depends on the size of the increase in the labor force It is estimated that the unemployment rate should decline from the percent level of December to the neighborhood of percent by the end of Reduction of the unemployment rate in is a primary objective of this year 's economic policy. It is to this end that the Government is pursuing a highly expansive fiscal policy. And it is in large part to this end that prices and wages are controlled so that the expansion of demand will generate more jobs not more inflation Concern with unemployment is also the primary motivation behind a large variety of other Government efforts more specialized in their impact but nevertheless critical for achieving full employment. Many of these are now focused on the problems arising in the transition from high levels of military and civilian employment in national defense The number of male Vietnam era veterans in the civilian population has increased by over million over the last years ( Table ) In June the President launched a new program designed to aid veterans in the job market. As part of this coordinated program Project Transition a predischarge counseling training and placement program was expanded and extended overseas. Training opportunities for veterans under existing manpower programs were increased additional veterans ' employment counselors ( many of them veterans ) were added to the Employment Service and perhaps most importantly a new regulation which requires all Federal contractors to list job openings with the Employment Service should provide veterans with opportunities to apply for a much wider selection of jobs. A coordinated effort was also launched in the private sector. During the year over Job Fairs which bring veterans and potential employers together were sponsored by the Jobs for Veterans Committee in cooperation with the National Alliance of Businessmen which also plans to place veterans in jobs by June These efforts resulted in an estimated direct job placements between June and October. Civilian employment of Vietnam era veterans rose by over the year ( Table ) When unemployment is high the development of additional jobs in areas of unmet public needs is possible and desirable. Initiation of the Public Employment program which was authorized by the Emergency Employment Act of was a major step forward in this area. This Federal program which temporarily subsidizes most of the cost of adding new employees TABLE Employment status of male Vietnam era veterans and nonveterans years of age fourth quarter [ Thousands of persons except as notedl IV Group IV IV Veterans : Civilian population- Labor force Employment Unemployment. Unemployment rate ( percent ) Nonveterans : Civilian population Labor force Employment Unemployment Unemployment rate ( percent ) Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor to State and local government payrolls is designed both to meet the need for improved public services and to provide transitional career employment opportunities for jobless workers especially veterans and the disadvantaged At year 's end funds had been provided for about positions and about three-fifths of the jobs had been filled Retraining and job-finding services for engineers scientists and technicians previously employed in defense or space efforts were greatly increased in under the new Technology Mobilization and Reemployment program and related programs. These will be expanded further in The realignment of defense expenditures after has had substantial adverse impact on some communities whose economies depend on defenserelated activities. The Federal Government operates a continuing community aid program which is under the jurisdiction of the Inter-Agency Economic Adjustment Committee ( chaired by the Secretary of Defense and comprised of policy-level personnel drawn from all major domestic agencies ) The Committee 's mission is to provide organized aid in the transition from a defense-based local economy to a balanced local economy. To carry out its responsibilities the Committee ensures that all Federal Government services and facilities are focused on viable economic adjustment plans designed in the local communities. On various occasions the Committee working through a local community task force has aided in the adjustment process by the transfer of surplus Federal property initiation or expansion of manpower training programs and related social services small business loans feasibility studies and public facilities grants. Thus far communities in States and Puerto Rico have been aided by this ongoing program One of the traditional areas of Government action in labor markets is assistance to the rapid and inexpensive exchange of information between those seeking work and those seeking workers. For many years the Government has provided job information and direct placement services through the U.S. Employment Service a cooperative Federal-State program This information-placement effort has been and will continue to be improved by increasing the amount and reliability of data ( especially increased information on job vacancies ) by the use of modern data processing techniques ( computerized listings of job openings called " Job Banks " ) to cover ever-larger market areas and by instituting flexible special placement programs focused on particular groups or areas most affected by special unemployment problems Direct governmental investments in training programs of various types are being reoriented to put special emphasis on training that will hasten the transition to career employment. These programs are intended to assist the unemployed and underemployed by developing their job skills so that they may qualify for primary jobs that provide adequate incomes and increased output. Manpower training programs enhance the flexibility and mobility of the workforce and provide disadvantaged workers with opportunities to improve their well-being. Although already constructive these manpower programs can be greatly improved by making them more flexible innovative and most importantly responsive to local conditions and needs. This could be accomplished by passage and implementation of the President 's proposed Manpower Revenue Sharing Act which is now under consideration by the Congress. This Act would ( ) consolidate most manpower-type programs under a single large-scale program ( ) eliminate most narrowly-targeted categorical grants ( ) shift detailed program decisionmaking from Washington D.C. to State and local governmental units and ( ) increase training investments INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE LONG RUN We believe that the combination of the steady growth of demand the temporary price-wage control system and the manpower programs now in effect will make possible an unemployment rate much lower than the percent we were experiencing in and an inflation rate without controls much lower than the to percent we were experiencing before the freeze This will not of course be the end of either the inflation problem or the unemployment problem. The remaining problems can be summarized in two questions : How can we avoid in the future the kind of inflationary surge of demand that occurred after and which determined the unique features of the economic problem with which the Nation has been wrestling for the past years ? Even if such surges of demand are avoided will the economy be left persistently with unsatisfactorily high unemployment or unsatisfactorily high inflation or both even though both may be lower than at their or peaks ? If so what can be done about it ? THE CONTROL OF DEMAND With respect to the first of these questions probably the greatest contribution would be to keep alive the memory of our recent experience. We have now come to see more vividly than ever before how long and painful is the effort to halt the inflationary process once it has been let loose. The avoidance of inflation is always of course an objective of national policy and was an objective in when the present episode began. But this objective may not get its proper weight because of failure to foresee the losses of output and employment that will later be entailed in ending the inflation. Remembering the experience of should help to correct this error Adherence to the principle of keeping expenditures that would be made at full employment within the level of the receipts that would be yielded by the existing tax system under conditions of full employment would contribute to the avoidance of inflationary surges of demand. Certainly the shift of the budget position from approximate balance at full employment in fiscal to a large full-employment deficit in fiscal was a major cause of the current inflation. There are rare circumstances in which a deficit or surplus at full employment may be unavoidable or even appropriate economic policy. But in general more reliable results will be achieved from minimizing such departures than from following any of the alternative courses trying to balance the actual budget continuously disregarding budget balance or making annual ad hoc decisions about the proper size of the deficit or surplus. Continuous balancing of the actual budget would require the perverse action of increasing expenditures or cutting tax rates when the private economy was booming and generating a large amount of tax revenue. Disregarding the budget balance rule would leave the enormous impact of the budget a random and destabilizing force on the economy. And a policy of ad hoc decisions about deficits or surplus is exposed to the political bias in favor of spending and deficits A similar precept of steadiness with respect to monetary policy would also help to avoid inflationary excesses of demand. The problem is that there is no single measure or objective combination of measures of monetary policy that is a completely satisfactory or completely superior measure of monetary policy by which a principle of steadiness could be calibrated Judgment must be exercised. However there is probably a presumption against extreme values or variations of the rate of change of narrowlydefined money i.e. currency plus demand deposits The problems of managing fiscal policy or monetary policy or both have apparently been underestimated. It may well be that more has been promised than can be delivered with existing knowledge and instruments Certainly there is need for much additional research. But if the question is not one of keeping the economy on a narrowly-defined path but one of avoiding violent aberrations like the one that began in our tools are probably adequate and the problem is more the national will than the techniques of economics and economic policy Two years ago in this Report we recommended the establishment of a Commission to study the structure of financial institutions in the United States. One reason for this study although not the primary one was to see if ways could be found to make the financial structure a better vehicle for transmitting monetary policy into the economy. A distinguished group of citizens has now completed and published this study which will be reviewed by this Administration and others to determine what action should be taken on its recommendations VIEWS OF THE INFLATION AND UNEMPLOYMENT PROBLEM The persistence of a combination of high unemployment and rapid inflation for a longer period in and than seemed consistent with earlier experience appeared to support the view that inflation or unemployment or both had become structural features of the American economy This is not the only possible explanation of the developments of The preceding inflation had been exceptionally long and strong. Estimates of the likely duration of the disinflationary process based on extrapolations from milder inflations might simply have been wrong without implying that there was a permanent problem. Nevertheless even if a great deal of weight is properly placed as we think it should be on the specific inflationary residue of the history the hypothesis of a more durable problem still requires examination The problem might take one or more of three forms : ( a ) A tendency to an unsatisfactorily high rate of inflation which persists over a long period of time and is impervious to variations in the rate of unemployment so that the tendency can not be eradicated by any feasible acceptance of unemployment ( b ) A tendency to an unsatisfactorily high rate of unemployment which persists over a long period and which is only temporarily influenced by increasing aggregate demand at an inflationary rate ( c ) A persistently unsatisfactory " trade-off " between inflation and unemployment such that it is permanently possible to have less inflation by accepting more unemployment and vice versa but with no combination possible that would be regarded as satisfactory Listing these possible problems does not imply that they exist. Nor would their existence imply any particular solution. Nevertheless the questions raised are obviously highly relevant to future economic policy. The Council of Economic Advisers will be making an intensive study of them during with the assistance of experts from other agencies of Government CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LABOR FORCE One subject of major significance in identifying a satisfactory combination of employment and inflation conditions and a policy to achieve it is the character of the labor force and the labor market When what later became " The Employment Act of " was first being discussed under the title of " The Full Employment Act " there was a common notion that full employment meant zero unemployment. However upon consideration it became clear that a situation of zero unemployment was not feasible at least in a free society nor indeed desirable in view of the costs that might be involved in achieving it. Some young people just entering the labor force or women reentering it or people dissatisfied with their previous place of residence or jobs or having lost their previous jobs in the normal rise and fall of firms that goes on endlessly would be in the process of looking for work. Unless there could be instantaneous adjustments which there could not be there would be a number of people between jobs even in what might be ideal conditions of the labor market This type of unemployment is frequently termed " transitional " and includes all or part of unemployment arising from the mobility of the American population normal market frictions seasonal variations and some structural problems. In other words it is that component of total unemployment which would respond to an expansion of demand only at high social cost if at all Efforts were made when the Act was passed and shortly thereafter to estimate the normal size of the transitional group. This was difficult because the country had not been at anything like peacetime full employment since and relevant data were spotty. However estimates converged on percent as the proportion of the labor force that would be unemployed at " full " employment. This highly uncertain estimate became solidified over the ensuing years as a result of repetition even though the percent rate was seldom achieved This " minimum " unemployment rate whatever it is would not be expected to be stable over time. For one thing persons of different age sex school attendance and other characteristics would presumably have different rates of transitional unemployment Normal differences in transitional unemployment appear to explain much of the relatively high unemployment rates of young people and of women In the unemployment rate for year-olds was percent compared to a rate of percent for married males ; in a year of very tight labor markets the rate for teenagers was percent compared to percent for married males. The persistence of this large differential in both good times and bad suggests that factors other than the lack of aggregate demand cause the differential The primary activity of most teenagers is school. In October percent of all year-olds and about percent of the teenage labor force were enrolled in school. For these youngsters summer vacations reentering school going in and out of training programs or college or military service are all reasons for entering or leaving the labor force or for changing jobs. With many of these changes some unemployment is normal and it is not surprising that more than two-thirds of all teenage unemployment is associated with entering or reentering the work force The amount of labor force turnover of adult women appears lower than that of teenagers but greater than that of men. Because of child care and family responsibilities women are likely to enter and leave the work force more frequently than men both over the course of a year or a lifetime. By contrast adult males have a very stable attachment to the labor force. About percent of males years and over are in the labor force ( percent of those years ) and only a trivial proportion are voluntary part-time or part-year workers Differences in turnover are reflected in differences in the reasons for unemployment of the different groups. In percent of all unemployed year-olds were unemployed as a result of voluntarily leaving their last job or of entering or reentering the labor force. The proportion of adult females in this category was percent but for adult males the proportion was only percent. Job loss is the primary reason that adult males are unemployed During year-olds accounted for percent of all unemployment compared to percent in The relative increase in teenage unemployment reflects both an increase in the teenage population and an increase in their unemployment rate. Given that work in the market is less and less a primary activity for teenagers their labor force turnover and hence their transitional level of unemployment may have increased Job opportunities for teenagers may be limited by a variety of factors The pool of jobs available at any given time may require more experience or education than that typically found among younger workers. Available jobs may also require certain continuity of work ( hours per week or weeks per year ) which many teenagers are unable to meet because of the conflict with normal school hours. All these factors tend to direct teenage job seekers into occupations which are marginally productive and where demand may be particularly vulnerable to adverse employment effects of the minimum wage. The rising levels and expanded coverage of the minimum wage since the middle fifties may have been a factor in the upward drift of the teenage unemployment rate. For this reason the Administration has urged the provision of a lower minimum wage for teenagers to prevent any further narrowing of job opportunities TABLE Hypothetical unemployment rates based on unemployment rates and distribution of civilian labor force by age and sex : selected years and projections [ Percent ] Group Hypothetical unemployment rates : Using age-sex rates1 M.I Percentage distribution of civilian labor force : Civilian labor force Females years years years years and over. Males years years years years and over. Assumes unemployment rates by detailed age-sex groups ( generally by 10-year age groups ) Actual Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers ; based on Department of Labor data To the extent that these transitional unemployment problems are unique to different ages and stages of life the total amount of such unemployment will depend on the proportions of the labor force represented by persons in the various groups. Table shows the change in the composition of the labor force by age and sex that occurred in the past years and that projected for It also shows what the average unemployment rate would have been or will be if the unemployment rate in each age-sex category were at its level ( was selected as a base because it was a peacetime year of high employment and low inflation ) This calculation does not reflect changes that may have occurred in the exposure of a particular age-sex category to transitional unemployment such as may have been caused by lengthened school attendance or any offsetting factors arising from increased education or more efficient labor market mechanisms. It is presented here as an example of one of the more obvious problems of attaining full employment in a dynamic and changing economy. The projection that women will continue to constitute a high proportion of the labor force suggests a continuing relatively high level of transitional unemployment The fact that the amount of " transitional " unemployment may be rising implies something about what can be achieved by general expansive measures alone although the full implication will not be known until we can observe the behavior of unemployment in the current expansion. However these developments also imply the need to do more directly about transitional unemployment. In fact over the past years Federal efforts to deal with this problem have increased substantially and this Administration has supported intensification and improvement of these efforts CHAPTER Effective Use of Resources W HILE PROGRAMS to deal with the problems of inflation expansion and the balance of payments captured the spotlight during measures to assure the efficient use of our resources and productive capability continued to be an important feature of economic policy. Two conditions must be met if the performance of the U.S. economy is to match the rising demands placed upon it : Our productive resources must be employed efficiently in producing each good or service and the economy should produce the combination of goods and services most preferred by society In many sectors of the economy the discipline of the competitive market is enough by itself to ensure efficiency. In certain areas however resources may not be allocated efficiently without at least some Government intervention. The proper nature and degree of Government intervention in such sectors is always a central issue in economic policy. Changing circumstances mean that Government must continually reexamine its role All the segments of the economy covered in this chapter are under critical review to determine the Government 's proper role. In some instances such as energy and transportation certain aspects of Government regulation prevent the best use of resources. In other cases such as environment and pollution the Government 's role is being expanded to prevent overuse of environmental resources by other sectors of the economy Finally there are sectors such as health and research and development where the evidence suggests that Government 's role should be redirected NATIONAL COMMISSION ON PRODUCTIVITY Large demands will continue to be placed on the Nation 's total resources in the future. In order to respond to these demands today 's private decisions and public policies must be formulated to foster tomorrow 's productivity of the Nation 's resources Productivity can be denned in a variety of ways the most common one being real output per hour of work. This definition gives a rough measure of how well we use our most important productive resource. A more comprehensive definition of productivity is output per unit of all resources. This definition is more suitable for topics in this chapter because they deal with selected adjustments that would improve the total output of goods and services produced from our capital labor and natural resources Historically there has been a steady improvement in productivity. Much of this progress has been achieved through incentives within private markets Yet private markets do not ensure that all potential productivity gains are achieved in the private sector nor can they be expected to bring about improved productivity of resources employed in the public sector Recognizing the importance of achieving improvements in productivity the President established the National Commission on Productivity in June The Commission is composed of representatives from industry labor agriculture the public and Federal State and local governments. The Commission makes recommendations to the President for actions to improve productivity in the public and private sectors The responsibilities and duties of the Commission were substantially expanded by the Economic Stabilization Act Amendments of During the Commission gave primary attention to four specific aspects of productivity : " Productivity Bargaining " Between Labor and Management. Such bargaining focuses on mutually beneficial agreements that enhance labor 's productivity. The Commission believes that bargaining practices should give greater attention to work rules group incentives work scheduling job enrichment and other practices that can improve productivity Manpower Adjustment Policies. Improvements in productivity lead to higher average incomes but they can also result in dislocations for individual workers. The Commission believes that public and private adjustment policies should be strengthened and refined to make the human costs of change where they exist less burdensome Education and Research and Development. Since productivity is closely linked with education and with research and development the Commission has studied current institutional arrangements that may inhibit desirable performance in these fields and believes that added incentives for experimentation and innovation in such arrangements would be advantageous Government Productivity. Government employment is expected to continue to grow rapidly in the future particularly at State and local levels. The Commission believes that greater attention should be given to improving the productivity of government employees in order to increase efficiency and reduce costs for this expanding service sector of the economy ENERGY The growth in consumption of fuels by automobiles electric generating plants homes and factories is closely associated with increases in our material levels of living. Historically however energy use has not grown as rapidly as GNP. While real GNP ( in dollars ) rose from $ billion in to $ billion in for a compound annual growth of percent energy consumption rose from quadrillion btu 's to quadrillion btu 's during the same period an annual growth rate of only percent. The use of energy per dollar of GNP ( again in dollars ) therefore fell from btu 's in to in During this same period energy was becoming cheaper relative to other goods and services. While the price index of all goods and services ( the GNP deflator ) rose percent during this period the wholesale price index of fuels and electric power rose only percent. Thus although energy consumption was growing it was not growing as rapidly as GNP and although energy prices were rising they were not rising as fast as the prices of other goods and services Since however a sharp upturn in the energy-GNP ratio has occurred From btu 's used per dollar of real GNP in the number rose to in While output for the economy as a whole was growing at percent per year energy consumption grew at percent. This sharp upturn in energy use was associated with a more rapid increase in prices Prices of fuel oil and bituminous coal in particular rose sharply in These developments gave evidence of at least a short-run shift in energy demand and prices. At the same time more fundamental changes were occurring in the domestic supply picture that were less noticeable to the typical consumer. Between and crude oil production was steadily rising but the size of proved reserves actually fell in absolute terms. At current rates of production proved reserves declined from years of production in to only years in The addition of the enormous Prudhoe Bay field in Alaska to the statistics increased our proved reserves by almost one-third but this oil will not be available unless it can be transported to market in an environmentally acceptable way Natural gas reserves have also been falling in recent years. Proved reserves in including the natural gas associated with oil in the Prudhoe Bay field were lower than in With production of natural gas rising at percent per year since reserves have fallen from years of annual production in to years in The importance of these developments is underlined by the fact that domestic oil and gas contributed almost two-thirds of our energy supply in The accelerated growth in energy demand relative to GNP in recent years is not expected to continue. Most observers forecast an annual average growth in energy consumption of just over percent paralleling the expected growth in GNP. A comparison of earlier forecasts and current realities however suggests that any assumptions about future demand and supply must be regarded as tentative to be modified as new evidence becomes available Future energy problems involve even more than a growing demand in relation to supply. The Nation will not only consume more energy in the future but will also insist that this energy be cleaner. The full social cost of producing transporting and consuming energy should be counted in decisions about how much of each kind of fuel to use. If this were done it would result in a new pattern of fuel consumption. Natural gas a sulfur-free fuel would face soaring demands while coal consumption processes would have to be improved to reduce harmful emissions Recognizing the Nation 's growing energy problem the President on June sent an energy message to Congress the first Presidential message devoted exclusively to this subject. Some initiatives in the message emphasize direct measures to increase the supply of clean energy : Development of the nuclear breeder reactor acceleration of oil and gas leasing on the Outer Continental Shelf a leasing program for our oil shale and geothermal resources expansion of our uranium enrichment capacity and support for other efforts in energy research and development Other actions included in the message will indirectly help to expand potential supply. For example support for developing sulfur oxide control devices will lead to clean uses of our abundant coal resources and a system of planning the sites for our power plants and transmission lines will help to reconcile the need for energy with environmental demands. The President has also announced steps to conserve energy by requiring better insulation on federally insured homes. To balance energy and environmental needs he also proposed a tax on sulfur oxide emissions to help ensure that the full social cost of energy consumption is built into the price of energy Despite much discussion about an energy problem even an " energy crisis " the problem is not always precisely stated. The problem is that domestic supplies of environmentally acceptable energy are becoming ever more scarce in the face of a growing demand. This scarcity can manifest itself in three ways In markets where prices are permitted to equate supply and demand upward pressures on prices may develop. In markets where prices are not permitted to rise to equate supply and demand shortages may emerge in the form of gaps between desired consumption and actual supply. If imports are not restricted there will be increased dependence on foreign sources. Because some of these sources may be insecure the Nation will be exposed to supply disruptions or costs incurred from domestic stockpiling to guard against potential interruptions in imports. Depending on the market therefore the problem may take the form of rising prices shortages or reliance on uncertain foreign supplies Insofar as price increases are needed to call forth supply they are a proper response to an underlying condition of scarcity. An example would be the worldwide increases during in the prices of heavy fuel oil particularly the low-sulfur type. A temporary scarcity of tankers and limited facilities for refining and desulfurization coupled with rapidly accelerating demand caused the price of fuel oil to rise sharply. As tanker rates returned to more normal levels price declines began to occur. During the entire episode of high prices however there were no cases of domestic shortages that some had feared Currently a shortage does exist in the natural gas market. Wellhead prices of gas for interstate delivery which are regulated by the Federal Power Commission ( FPC ) have not been high enough to induce a supply equal to the growing demand. As a result not only has the demand itself been unmet but there have also been geographical distortions in the consumption of gas higher prices for competing fuels and greater difficulty in meeting our environmental goals Because gas marketed in the State in which it is produced has not been subject to FPC price controls producers have found it more attractive to commit new reserves to intrastate markets. From to reserves earmarked for interstate markets fell by trillion cubic feet. Comparable statistics for intrastate commitments do not exist but the fact that the estimated total for proved reserves excluding Alaska fell by only trillion cubic feet suggests that intrastate commitments may actually have risen Although residential consumers in the East and Midwest might have been willing to outbid intrastate buyers they have not had the opportunity to do so. Electric generating plants in the major gas-producing States of Louisiana Oklahoma and Texas which could have been designed to use other fuels are fueled almost entirely by natural gas. Thus some markets lack gas because of artificially low ceiling prices whereas in other markets this fuel is used excessively and its price is depressed to the level of interstate ceiling prices It is sometimes argued that low ceiling prices for gas result in low prices for competing fuels. Actually the opposite is more likely to be true. Large supplies of gas would tend to depress prices of both gas and competing fuels so that in those circumstances low gas prices would be associated with low prices of competing fuels. But artificially low gas prices lessen supply and create shortages. Since unmet demands for gas are transferred in part to other fuels the result is greater demand and higher prices for these other fuels. The gas shortage itself therefore contributes to price increases in other energy markets. Indeed the sharp increases in the price of low-sulfur fuel oil in came about partly because natural gas supplies were unable to respond to the increased demand for clean fuels The Nation 's gas shortage is particularly serious at this time ; large metropolitan areas badly need more gas if they are to meet air quality standards. Not only is the total supply of gas reduced by low ceiling prices but the available supply tends to be used disproportionately in intrastate markets where acceptable air quality is ordinarily less difficult to achieve In the past years the FPG has taken steps that could increase gas supplies. New ceiling prices substantially above the prices previously authorized by the Commission have been set for each of the major production areas. Weighted by area production new wellhead ceiling prices average about cents per thousand cubic feet compared to cents for previously authorized prices. The Commission has also issued a ruling that small producers who together accounted for about percent of production shall be exempt from ceiling prices Despite these steps toward prices that more nearly reflect the market situation important policy issues remain. The large interstate pipeline companies being unable to meet their customers ' demands with domestic natural gas and pipeline imports from Canada are turning toward imports of natural gas in liquefied form from overseas and to synthetic gas produced from imported crude oil and naphtha. Although these imports would tend to increase the supply they cost far more than supplies from conventional domestic sources. Prices at the refinery or vaporization plant would frequently be $ or more per thousand cubic feet. Delivered to the same markets domestic natural gas at new ceiling prices would cost about half that amount Thus we could afford to pay significantly more for domestic gas thereby appreciably increasing its supply and still have lower prices than would have to be paid for gas from the alternative sources now being considered ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY Environmental resources are common property : They are free for those who use them and thus are not rationed as they would be if they were private property and users were required to pay a price for their use As a consequence such environmental resources as clean air and water have been overconsumed in certain uses particularly the disposal of growing amounts of industrial municipal and agricultural wastes. The same excesses have been evident in thermal and noise pollution. The right to dump noise into the air for example carries no discipline of a price that must be paid to encourage restraint or to compensate others adversely affected by such pollution The question is How can Federal State and local governments limit the uses of environmental resources so as to balance their value for such different purposes as breathing drinking recreation natural beauty and absorption of wastes ? In assuming this task governments face two major problems. First the value of environmental resources in alternative uses must be assessed to provide a basis for determining a balanced use pattern. Second governments must design rules that will achieve a balanced use at the least cost to the economy. The economic efficiency of different approaches to this rationing problem was examined in the Economic Report of the President The pending decision about issuing a right-of-way permit to the Trans Alaska Pipeline illustrates the considerations involved in government allocation of environmental resources. On the one hand there are urgent energy needs that would be served by the large supplies of low-cost crude oil from the North Slope. The Prudhoe Bay field is one of the largest and one of the lowest-cost oil fields discovered by man. Its development would supply additional domestic energy to the West Coast of the United States at costs to the Nation well below those of less secure imports. On the other hand the pipeline would pass through some of the most remarkable wilderness areas in the United States and there is no certainty that environmental contamination could be avoided altogether The Secretary of the Interior as custodian of the public lands must decide whether to issue the right-of-way permit. To help him assess the costs and benefits of alternative decisions the Council of Economic Advisers examined the economic costs to the Nation of not building the pipeline Other agencies reported on such matters as the effects of the pipeline construction on the Alaskan economy the impact on our national security and the possibility of pipeline failures. According to the National Environmental Protection Act the Secretary of the Interior himself must file a state- ment with the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality describing the probable environmental impact of the action. Having completed these tasks he will then be in a position to make a decision based on full consideration of the costs and benefits In calculating the labor and capital costs to the Nation of not building the pipeline the Council of Economic Advisers compared the pipeline project with one of the other principal ways of meeting the Nation 's demands for low-cost energy importing the same amount of oil from overseas as would be produced at Prudhoe Bay. According to the Council 's study the real resource cost of imported oil would be more than twice that of the Prudhoe Bay crude delivered to the West Coast. Development of the 10billion-barrel field and transportation of the oil to the West Coast would save the Nation $ billion to $ billion during the expected 20-year life of the field. These costs must of course be weighed with other considerations mentioned above in arriving at an ultimate decision Most environmental decisions are not of an all-or-nothing character. Instead they involve setting quantitative limits on the use of our environmental resources assessment of charges for use or the distribution of subsidies to parties investing in facilities to control pollution These cases offer a wide range for judgments about where incremental costs and benefits will come into balance. In the control of water pollution for example costs of improvements rise more rapidly as we approach the total elimination of pollutants. According to estimates made by the Environmental Protection Agency to percent of water pollutants from municipal and industrial sources can be removed by with aggregate new expenditures of just over $ billion during the next decade. To remove another percent would cost almost another $ billion ; to achieve zero discharge of pollutants would cost roughly $ billion more or over $ billion for each percentage point of additional removal. At this level the incremental cost is so enormous as to raise serious questions about the appropriateness of carrying removal this far. The substantial resources that would be needed to improve effluent quality only slightly beyond levels of purity that would already be high could be used to benefit the economy in dozens of more significant ways. Public policy must decide where these resources would produce the greatest benefits Problems of controlling water pollution are complicated by other factors First the level of benefits provided by removal of pollutants from a particular water basin depends on the potential uses of that basin. Where potential recreational uses are important for instance the benefits of removing pollutants are likely to be higher than in a major shipping channel. Final water quality standards should reflect the benefits attainable ; controls on pollutant emissions can then be aimed at the achievement of those standards. Second our knowledge about the effect on water quality of removal of different amounts of given pollutants is still incomplete. Even if final water quality goals can be appropriately established the extent to which emissions of a given pollutant need to be reduced in order to reach that quality level is not clearly known. A third problem is presented by the fact that pollutants result from both " point sources " ( municipal and industrial waste facilities ) and " general sources " ( fields farms or mines ) while controls generally have been enforceable only at point sources. There are instances in which even with the removal of all pollutants from point sources desired water quality could not be achieved ; there are other instances in which current levels of pollutant emissions produce no deleterious effects Since in practice both benefits and costs of pollution control vary from basin to basin participation from the local State and regional levels is appropriate in setting the goals for water quality A similar problem of estimating costs and benefits is posed by a system of charges to discourage the emission of pollutants. Here the choice explicitly requires assessing the value to the public of removing pollutants and setting a charge that reflects the dollars and cents value of these benefits The Administration is considering a legislative proposal for a charge to be levied on sulfur oxide emissions. To fix a charge per pound of sulfur emitted means calculating the costs of abatement and the benefits accruing to natural beauty vegetation property and health from reducing these emissions The Environmental Protection Agency has made rudimentary estimates of the more readily measurable benefits and costs of reducing sulfur oxide that will provide a basis for setting the charge As a method of limiting pollution emission charges or effluent fees as they are sometimes called possess distinct advantages. For one thing they result in an efficient allocation of the resources devoted to pollution abatement. Because each source of pollution will reduce emissions to the point where the costs of doing so just equal the charge those sources that can clean up a given proportion of their emissions at low costs will press their abatement activities farther than sources incurring higher costs. In contrast to what would happen if equal standards were applied to each source a larger share of abatement activity will be undertaken by sources with low costs. Insofar as abatement costs differ from source to source a charge would achieve a greater reduction in emissions for a given amount of labor and capital resources committed to pollution abatement than would be achieved by a uniform standard. Conversely a given reduction in emissions can be achieved more economically by setting a charge rather than a standard Another advantage of emission charges lies in the information they generate. Disagreements frequently occur about the technological feasibility or the costs of meeting specific standards. Polluters argue that the standards either can not be met or can be met only at heavy cost while environmental advocates minimize the difficulties. An emission charge always makes it in the interest of polluters to reduce emissions as long as the cost of doing so is less than the charge. The charge will therefore reveal the reduction in emissions that is economical at a cost equal to the emission charge itself Since environmental regulation should always be carried out with as much knowledge as possible of costs and benefits an emission charge can be a valuable tool in supplying information about actual costs. As more information becomes available the charge can be adjusted to equate benefits and costs RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT Investments in scientific knowledge and in its application to productive uses have become an important characteristic of the American economy Benefits from the development and utilization of knowledge are many and varied. They are evident in improved health for millions of Americans as well as in our greater understanding of outer space. They include entirely new products that enhance the quality of life and new techniques that expand the productivity of the Nation 's human and physical resources. While an accurate evaluation of those benefits that directly improve economic performance is difficult to say nothing of the less tangible benefits it is widely agreed that the group of activities called research and development ( R&D ) plays a central role in our economy. It has led to new products and industries ; and it can contribute in important ways to solving today 's complex economic and social problems Research and development has become a major economic activity. In recent years over $ billion nearly percent of the Nation 's total expenditures has gone into R&D. Two-fifths of the expenditures for this purpose reported in were made by private profitmaking firms. The Federal Government paid for most of the remainder ( Table ) TABLE Distribution of funds for research and development by funding source and performer calendar year Percentage distribution of overall total ] Source or performer Research Development Total Applied Basic By funding source : Federal Government Universities and nonprofit institutions Industry Total By performer : Total Federal Government _ Universities and nonprofit institutions Industry. Based on $ billion reported by performers of R&D. Funding and performing estimates for universities include $ billion financed by State and local governments Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : National Science Foundation The Federal Government is itself an important performer ( as well as funder ) of research and development ; in nearly percent of all R&D was performed directly by Federal agencies. But the Federal Government 's influence on the R&D industry is even larger than its actual share of these activities might imply. Government policy influences the supply of scientific manpower ; it also affects incentives for private investment through cost-sharing arrangements tax policies patent laws and other legal mechanisms RATIONALE FOR GOVERNMENT INVOLVEMENT Government is a large purchaser of goods and services and many of the things it buys have a large R&D component. Defense equipment and the exploration of space are obvious examples. Government as the purchaser of such goods and services must also support whatever research and development is required for their production either through direct Federal funding of the R&D or indirectly through the price it pays for the production of the final goods themselves. The bulk of Federal expenditures for R&D fall in this category ; national defense and space alone accounted for percent of R&D funding in fiscal ( Table ) Research and development done for these purposes have had applications in other fields. Therefore the amount of R&D supported for defense and space is relevant to the scale of appropriate Federal support for R&D in the private sector But Government has an appropriate role in R&D even when its results will not be incorporated in Government purchases because private firms would underinvest in R&D for goods normally purchased by the private sector. Although an investment in R&D may produce benefits exceeding its costs from the viewpoint of society as a whole a firm considering the investment may not be able to translate enough of these benefits into profits on its own products to justify the investment. This is because the knowledge which is the main product of R&D can usually be readily acquired by others who will compete away at least part of the benefits from the original developer This is particularly true of basic research where the output frequently occurs in the first instance not as a marketable product but rather as an advance in basic knowledge that can subsequently be used in applied research and development by a wide and often unforeseeable range of firms One way to encourage more spending on R&D for private goods is of course by direct funding. When this approach is followed it is sensible for Government 's share of total expenditures to be greatest for basic research and to decline at subsequent stages. The difference between social and private benefits is largest for basic research and diminishes when investments begin to provide returns that can be obtained through private markets Increasingly it is recognized however that even at the developmental demonstration and diffusion stages of innovation social benefits may exceed private benefits There are also indirect ways the Government can promote R&D investment for private goods. Public policy has long encouraged and rewarded innovation and the progress of science through patent laws which permit inventors to capture a larger portion of benefits than would otherwise be possible. Other legal mechanisms including those that deal with " trade secrets " also permit the entrepreneur to internalize benefits that otherwise would accrue outside his firm The difficulty of a firm undertaking its own R&D efforts may be especially great when the firm is small in relation to the scale required for efficient R&D efforts. In some cases this difficulty is overcome by the R&D activities of larger firms which supply machinery or materials to smaller firms for example by producers of farm machinery or seeds for farmers. In other cases there are firms and institutions that specialize in research and development as such. Also firms may be able to share risks or pool their support of R&D through formal or informal consortia under today 's legal and institutional arrangements. For example in fragmented industries in which several such consortia are probable joint R&D would not normally be considered a violation of the antitrust laws. On the other hand joint efforts among leading firms in highly concentrated industries would normally be considered undesirable. In general actions taken by private groups which lead to improved allocation of resources would not be in conflict with the antitrust laws ; actions which lead to excessive market power would be It must be recognized that in some industries the small firm is the most effective institution for accomplishing R&D. This is perhaps the case most frequently at the early stages of development of a new technology. Large firms sometimes prove to be insufficiently flexible to adapt to rapidly advancing technological innovation. In other instances large regulated firms facing relatively assured markets sometimes achieve only a slow pace of innovation. The benefits of innovation may be capturable but the spur of competition is absent When private action or patent protection is not sufficient to achieve scale economies or capture external benefits direct Government support for R&D may be appropriate. This would be especially true in an established industry with many small firms. Under such conditions an individual firm may have little incentive to undertake its own research or to participate in an ongoing venture in R&D conducted jointly by a group of other firms ; it would have difficulty capturing the benefits of its own efforts and the benefits of their efforts would probably be available without the firm 's financial support. Federal support for agricultural research for instance started because individual farms were too small to undertake their own research and lacked the incentives and institutions to support joint arrangements While it is clear that Federal involvement is essential to prevent underinvestment in R&D the optimal amount of this activity is much less clear. The proper allocation of R&D among alternative activities presents a further problem. In theory benefit-cost analysis can answer these questions but in practice it is difficult to measure reliably either the aggregate benefits from R&D or the benefits from investing in particular projects. This is inherent in the conditions which lead to government intervention benefits are often widely diffused in society and thus difficult to measure. Comprehensive analysis is further hindered because the transformation of research into new knowledge and of new knowledge into public and private innovations and workable technologies is not yet adequately understood. Until better analysis is available to show the benefits costs and processes associated with R&D informed judgment will continue to be the major element in shaping public policy REGENT DEVELOPMENTS Several recent developments have raised serious questions about the adequacy of this Nation 's research and development program. Recognizing these developments the President in directed the Domestic Affairs Council to undertake an intensive review of Federal policy in this field The most prominent development has been in total expenditures for research and development ; they grew rapidly until about the mid-1960 's but have recently been rising quite slowly. Indeed if total outlays are adjusted for rising costs " real " outlays for R&D have actually been declining since As a result research and development amounted to a smaller percentage of GNP in than in any year since Federal R&D spending in real terms declined at an annual rate of percent between its peak and principally because of scheduled reductions in space exploration from $ to $ billion. Nonfederal spending continued to show a real increase through and then declined the past years New Emphases New national priorities have been reflected in substantial reallocations of Federal R&D expenditures ( Table ) All of the recent declines in total Federal outlays for R&D have been in national defense and space National defense accounted for percent of Federal R&D expenditures in ; during this proportion declined to percent and remained near that level through The major growth in Federal support from to was in space research and technology which by accounted for one-third of the total Federal R&D expenditures. Since space R&D has declined each year both in absolute terms and as a share of the total Expenditures for R&D related to human resources ( mainly in health and education ) and economic affairs increased rapidly throughout the decade Between and the share of the total devoted to these fields doubled ; together they accounted for percent of Federal R&D expenditures in TABLE Distribution of Federal expenditures for research and development by major function fiscal years and [ Fiscal years ] Percentage distribution Function Total 197U National defense Space research and technology Human resources2 Natural resources and environment Economic affairs3 Other< * Estimate Health ; education and manpower ; income security ; veterans benefits and services ; and community development and housing Commerce and transportation ; and agriculture and rural development International affairs and finance ; and general government Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : National Science Foundation Unemployed Scientific Manpower Declines in " real " research and development expenditures especially the shift in Federal programs away from defense and space and a slowing of general economic activity have increased unemployment among the Nation 's scientific workers. Statistics available on the extent of this unemployment indicate that nationally it is lower than overall unemployment ; but it is clear that for certain skills and in certain localities unemployment has become a severe problem especially in contrast to the tight supply situation only a few years ago. The amount of actual unemployment however would probably not indicate the full extent to which scientific personnel are underutilized since some people are employed at jobs which do not fully use their technical skills International Developments During the last decade the United States has devoted a larger share of its GNP to research and development than any other country and a larger portion of these dollars to basic research the type that provides the greatest external benefits. Experience of recent years has demonstrated that the benefits of R&D go beyond the borders of the performing nation. Basic research findings from all parts of the world are generally available for all nations to use and the same increasingly appears true for applied and developmental research efforts as well. This has become evident in the shortened period between the time a new product is introduced and the time it is replaced by newly developed competitive products These developments are in part a natural result of expanding national economies throughout the world and of improved networks of international communications. They also result partly from specific policies of some nations to import the findings of basic and applied research conducted elsewhere and to concentrate domestic efforts on developing and refining applications These and other trends in national and international R&D policies have implications for the international competitive position of U.S. exports which have been concentrated in high-technology goods dependent on R&D investments. The conditions which underlay this Nation 's comparative advantage in such goods in the past no longer appear so prominent. Both the level and the mix of U.S. research and development have changed considerably in recent years. The level of all R&D as a percentage of GNP in the 's may remain below that of the 's. In many other industrial nations the reverse would appear likely. The nature of R&D activities will help determine tomorrow 's comparative cost conditions and the patterns of world trade EXPANDED SUPPORT FOR R&D The President 's budget for fiscal proposes an increase in R&D funding of $ billion or percent above fiscal This increase should help reverse the recent declines in " real " Federal funding for all R&D activities Federal support is being expanded in several critical areas : basic research ; national security ; and civilian R&D. In addition the Administration is moving to improve the overall management of R&D to ensure an appropriate level priority and efficiency of effort The Budget calls for a percent ( $ million ) increase for civilian R&D. Over one-half of the increase will be directed toward six priority domestic objectives. New emphasis will be given to potentially fruitful developments in the fields of energy environment transportation health natural disasters and drugs. In addition two experimental programs will be initiated to stimulate R&D investments and applications by private firms and nonfederal institutions. One program will be administered by the National Bureau of Standards ; the other program to be administered by the National Science Foundation will include efforts to help improve our understanding of the process of innovation and research application. A variety of approaches will be followed by both agencies including more joint activities among universities industry and Government demonstration of new technologies and encouragement for small innovative R&D firms SURFACE FREIGHT TRANSPORTATION The Federal Government has long been involved in regulation of the transportation sector. Railroad transportation was first regulated under the Interstate Commerce Act of Other modes later came under regulation motor carriers in and certain inland and coastal water carriers in Economic and competitive conditions have changed considerably since regulation was initiated but the changed conditions have not been adequately reflected in the regulations under which the Nation 's surface freight carriers are required to perform One of the most significant and negative outcomes of regulation has been the fixing of transportation rates in relation to the value of service to shippers rather than in relation to the costs of providing service. In the early years such value-of-service pricing was a form of price discrimination intended to benefit railroads Which operated under conditions approximating monopoly. As competition from other transport modes grew rail rates substantially above transportation costs for high-valued goods presented attractive competitive targets for motor and water carriers even though the railroads might have been the low-cost carrier of such freight. The process continues today and as a consequence the railroads are increasingly the carrier of low-value bulk commodities despite their comparative advantage as a long-haul carrier for general cargo. Through regulation value-ofservice pricing has been imposed on shippers requiring them to pay rates for services in excess of the costs of those services. This leads to the provision of less transportation services than is desirable for society. In addition transport pricing unrelated to the costs of providing efficient service causes mislocation of facilities for commerce and industry which must adjust to existing transportation rate patterns Regulation of carriers has also led to waste of resources within a given mode. For example the Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) certificates which grant motor carriers the privilege to operate require these carriers to traverse fixed routes and to pick up and deliver only at particular points on those routes. Regulation thus artificially imposes on motor carriers the disadvantages which accrue naturally to rail and barge lines Some motor carriers and regulated barge operators are further limited in the commodities they are permitted to carry. This limitation compounds the empty backhaul problem : That is largely as a result of restrictions in their operating certificates trucks from A may haul one or more commodities to B and return empty while others from B haul goods to A but also return empty. Removal of such restrictions on competition among carriers and of impediments to efficiency can mean significant savings to the economy as a whole without cost to any sector The railroads especially have faced another problem due to regulation They are required to continue operating branch lines when such lines are unprofitable and sometimes even when revenues do not cover their out-ofpocket costs To the extent that regulation has given one mode or sector artificial advantages in particular markets relaxation of regulation would lead to some adjustments among sectors. Improved resource allocation would mean the loss of such artificial advantages but in some cases it would also benefit more than one carrier. Abandonment of uneconomic branch lines for example would benefit rail carriers and simultaneously provide new markets for motor carriers in accord with their comparative advantage in short-haul carriage. Other shifts of traffic in accord with the comparative advantage of each mode could be expected There are no significant economies of scale for motor carriers and most major rail lines appear to be of sufficient size to achieve scale economies under current conditions. Thus there is little danger that competition once established could not remain viable Even though many regulations were designed for the benefit of railroads the financial position of these carriers is particularly weak a fact that became especially clear in and Though there is no single fully satisfactory indicator which summarizes the financial position of railroads especially in comparison with other modes and industries their return on investment provides some information particularly in year-to-year comparisons. The return on stockholders ' equity for the Nation 's Class I rail carriers dropped from percent in to percent in ( Table ) In comparison the figure for all manufacturing firms in was percent down from percent in Barge carriers approximately matched the performance of all manufacturing firms while motor carriers had somewhat lower returns TABLE Return on stockholders ' equity for Class I railroads Class I motor carriers Classes A and B inland and coastal water carriers and all manufacturing corporations,11967-70 [ Percent ] Type of business Class railroads Class motor carriers ' Classes A and B inland and coastal water carriers * All manufacturing corporations Profits after taxes as percent of stockholders ' equity > Carriers with more than $ million revenues Includes intercity motor carriers of property with revenues of more than $ in and more than $ million in 19S9-70 Class A and B inland and coastal water carriers with more than $ in revenues Note. The figures for various carriers have been the subject of some controversy. They are stated here as reported to Interstate Commerce Commission Sources : Interstate Commerce Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission The Nation 's largest rail carrier the Penn Central filed for reorganization in ; several other railroads had done so earlier and some including the Reading followed in The physical plants of many railroads are in serious disrepair because their long-term low-earnings performance has led to deferral of maintenance and delay in the purchase of new equipment Since railroads are the major long-haul freight carrier their difficulties have adverse effects on the entire surface freight system Changes in the earnings performance of the railroads and other carriers can not be attributed principally to the total volume of their traffic. While freight traffic during the last decade rose somewhat more slowly than total output in the economy the volume nevertheless increased at an average rate of more than percent annually from to Total surface freight traffic rose from billion ton-miles in to billion in The growth in traffic is shown for various modes in Table As suggested above much of the problem in the surface freight transportation system can be traced to regulation itself. Selective deregulation offers opportunities to improve the efficiency of the industry and increase its ability to meet growing demand TABLE Freight ton-miles shipped by type of carrier selected years Type of carrier Year Total i Truck Rail Barge Billions of ton-miles Number of ton-miles : Percent Percentage distribution : i Excludes pipelines which carried percent of all ton-miles shipped and air cargo which carried a minor portion of all ton-miles shipped Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Interstate Commerce Commission and Transportation Association of America REGULATORY MODERNIZATION ACT OF In the Administration proposed a relaxation of regulation in surface freight transportation. The Transportation Regulatory Modernization Act of would institute a series of regulatory changes leading to a more competitive market and a stronger surface freight transportation industry One of the most significant features the Act proposes is the removal of conditions in the ICG operating certificates that serve to reduce efficiency or restrict competition. It would permit greater freedom for carriers to serve points intermediate to the terminals specified in the certificates and permit removal of route-of-travel and commodity restrictions. Procedures for such removal are to be established by the ICG within months following passage of the Act. Certificates for the entry of carriers into the industry ( which would mainly affect motor carriers ) could not be denied as at present on the basis of the impact of new entry on a particular carrier ; instead decisions would have to be made in light of the impact on the total quantity and quality of service provided over the routes in question. These modified criteria would apply only to existing certificate holders during the first years following passage of the Act. After that they would apply to all The proposed legislation also would specify a " zone of reasonableness " within which surface freight carriers would be able to price their services Railroads truck lines and barge lines would not be permitted to charge prices below the variable cost of providing service. In the absence of " inter- modal " competition a maximum price limit would also be legislated equal to percent of fully allocated costs. For the first year however no rate change in excess of percent woud be allowed. In the second year the band would be widened to percent ; but in any case rate changes would be required to fall within the zone determined by the legislated minimum and maximum. ( The Department of Transportation has recently outlined to the Civil Aeronautics Board a zone-of-reasonableness approach for domestic airline rates. The move has received strong support from several air carriers and from the Department of Justice. Approval of such a zone if wide enough to encourage meaningful price experimentation would help materially to meet the goals for improved airline regulation set forth in the Economic Report of the President. ) Under specific criteria in the legislation railroads would be permitted to abandon more of their unprofitable branch lines than is currently allowed Approximately percent of the country 's railroad track miles are now deemed to be used too infrequently to be profitable. Also carriers whose management would be given greater freedom in setting their rates and in modifying their services would become subject to legal constraints similar to those imposed on competing firms in other industries FACTORS AFFECTING THE TRANSITION The continuing expansion in freight traffic augurs well for an orderly transition to a more efficient system following passage of the Act in substantially the form proposed. Gradual shifts in traffic among modes can be expected in accord with the comparative advantage of each. Average freight rates in trucking would be expected to show some reduction but this would not come at the expense of the typical operator 's profits or the wages of labor Instead it could flow from the orderly removal of inefficiencies that regulation has imposed on the industry in the past. Moreover the adjustments that would be brought about by the proposed legislation would occur over a 2to 4-year period in the context of rising demand for carriers ' services and under provisions of the legislation specifically designed to ease the problem of transition While relaxed regulations would lead to greater efficiencies in trucking without requiring major new investment ( partly because the Nation 's interstate highway system is nearing completion ) the same is not true for the railroads. To compensate for the years of deferred investment in new plant and equipment the railroads will have to make large capital outlays. Once these are in place railroads should be able to fulfill their role as an efficient and profitable component of our freight transportation network with average freight rates lower than they are today A number of proposals and developments will improve the situation of the railroads. The Transportation Assistance Act also proposed by the Administration provides new incentives for increasing railroad rolling stock through Equipment Trust Certificates and the modern scheduling and con- trol of rolling stock. An increasing earnings potential for the railroads is also possible from the resumption of a high level of general economic growth the additional stimulus to rail traffic which will result from rates more closely in accord with costs and where it has been unprofitable the removal of passenger traffic deficits from the private railroads. These steps will make it less difficult for the railroads to attract private capital Passage of the legislation proposed by the Administration would be a significant step toward a stronger and more efficient transportation system The legislation to relax regulation is expected to yield annual savings to the economy of roughly $ billion ; this will be reflected in some rate reductions and should also result in improved earnings in financially distressed segments of the industry. On the other hand failure to move forward or even excessive delay could mean continued unsatisfactory performance of this vital service in the economy and may lead to increasing direct involvement by the Federal Government accompanied by large subsidies RAIL PASSENGER SERVICE In direct Federal action was taken on rail passenger traffic. Past regulation often required railroads to continue passenger transportation services over a long period even when it was uneconomic to do so. This resulted both in prolonged losses to railroads and in deterioration of the quality of equipment and service Passenger traffic from a number of railroads was transferred to an autonomous quasi-governmental corporation known as " Amtrak. " Several actions were carried out by this corporation during its early months of operation Some unprofitable lines were discontinued ; a significant segment of activity was concentrated in a number of hi ^ h-density and potentially profitable travel corridors ; and new investments were made. However the funds initially appropriated for Amtrak have proved to be inadequate for continued operation. It is still too early to judge the success of this initiative HEALTH AND MEDICAL CARE Improvement in the health of the population has always been a concern of Government. This concern has recently been intensified by sharp increases in the demand for medical services and by rapidly rising costs in this sector In fiscal the Nation 's medical expenditures for all types of care were $ billion. At $ per person this sum represents percent of the gross national product. Five years ago medical expenditures amounted to just under percent of GNP or $ per person. In part of course this dramatic increase during the past years is due to price increases. The medical component of the consumer price index has risen much faster than the overall index. Even after adjusting for increases in the medical care price index however real resources spent on medical care increased faster than real GNP and grew at an annual rate of percent per capita since In the past fiscal year the growth rate of expenditures slowed down to percent per capita in real terms. This represented less of a slackening than occurred in the per capita GNP in real terms Although improvement in the health of the population was clearly the ultimate goal of these expenditures it is also true that the relation between good health and medical expenditures is less than direct. First our medical dollars may not always be used effectively. Ideally the preferences of consumers and capabilities of suppliers freely interact in the market to determine the price and amount of the commodity consumed ; and this interaction leads to the use of resources that best contributes to the material well-being of people. In the case of medical care however distortions in this process occur because on the demand side consumers are not always able to judge the service and on the supply side competition is often limited by restrictions on entry into medical practice and hospital services. Although these restrictions may have been intended to protect consumers as a side effect they may also impede the efficient utilization of resources. In addition the dominant position of nonprofit organizations in the market providing hospital services raises other questions about whether incentives to minimize costs are as great in medicine as in other parts of the economy Yet even great improvements in the market for medical care would not solve all health problems. Another important problem arises because good health is related to many factors in addition to medical care. Some of these factors are subject to an individual 's control : diet exercise smoking and consumption of alcohol. Other conditions such as the amount of pollution in the air and water depend rather on the actions of society as a whole. In addition there are more elusive influences like the tension generated by attitudes toward work and other circumstances of modern life. The importance of life styles and environment to health has become much more apparent in recent years To start to answer the general question of how we can best " produce " health we must find a way of measuring changes in the level of health. What must be measured is the actual output health not simply such inputs as amounts of medicine consumed days spent in hospitals or the hours in consultation with doctors. While no comprehensive measures of the national health have been developed and each existing measure has its limitations such indicators as mortality rates and disability days have been widely used to trace changes over time and to compare localities. The relationships observed between these measures of health and other variables have revealed a number of paradoxes It was once assumed that rising incomes would lead to improved health but this assumption is now open to question. Once an area or country reaches the level of income typical of the most economically advanced nations the correlation between income and health is less clear cut. It seems quite possible that beyond this level any further increases in income may call into play environmental factors unfavorable to health and these may counterbalance the favorable effects of better medical care per se. For example those States with the highest per capita income do not necessarily have the lowest mortality rates. Indeed there appears to be a slight positive association between income and mortality rates except for infant mortality even though States with the highest per capita income also tend to have more abundant medical care whether measured by medical expenditures or by such indicators as the number of doctors per capita A comparison of the United States with other developed countries provides another illustration of the difficulty of understanding the complex relations between medical expenditures income and health ( Table ) Although the United States has the highest per capita income as well as the highest per capita medical expenditures we do not have the lowest mortality rates. Our record of life expectancy at age particularly for males is below the average of the countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) However our infant mortality rate and maternal mortality rate while not the best are better than the average. Similarly the five OECD countries with the next highest per capita income ( after the United States ) do not consistently have the best mortality records particularly with respect to male mortality These patterns are puzzling. Does the activity of earning higher wages itself produce tensions which have adverse effects on health ? Or do hazards engendered by the style of life become more critical with higher incomes ? These considerations suggest that much is still to be learned about the complex " technology " of producing health TABLE Measures of life expectancy and mortality in the United States and other countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development various years Life expectancy at age in years Country Male OECD countries __ Female Infant mortality rate Maternal mortality rate White Negro and other races United States Five countries with highest per capita income after United States : Sweden ._ Canada. Switzerland Denmark France _ i Latest data for the countries vary from to a For countries without data for the given year data for the closest year were substituted Deaths under year of age per live births ; excludes stillbirths * Deaths per live births Unweighted mean * Excludes Luxembourg and Turkey Excludes Turkey * Excludes Iceland Luxembourg Turkey and Yugoslavia Sources : United Nations and Department of Health Education and Welfare Furthermore the health indexes that have been mentioned here can not by themselves be used to evaluate the effectiveness of medical care. When the probability of becoming ill varies among States and countries because environmental factors life styles and even genetic characteristics differ it can be misleading to base conclusions about the quality of medical care on simple comparisons between medical expenditures and measures of general health Since medical care is likely to remain a major instrument for improving the Nation 's health and since it is a focal point for public \ olicy there is a clear need for developing tests for the effectiveness of medical care. At present we do not have the data required to make such tests and thus we can evaluate only imperfectly the efficacy of alternative medical care policies TRENDS IN HEALTH INDICATORS IN THE UNITED STATES Within the United States trends in many of the health indicators have shown continuing improvement during the past years. Infant mortality rates which had declined very slowly percent from to dropped percent from to The number of restricted activity days which is one measure of morbidity has declined from an annual days per person in to days in Mortality rates for females over years of age have declined since On the other hand mortality rates for both male and female adults in the to 54-year-age range and for males over years of age have changed little. The lack of improvement in the mortality record of this latter group despite the large increase in medical expenditures is particularly puzzling One problem that the health indicators point up sharply is the difference in the health of different segments of the population particularly the differences observed between the white and Negro populations in the United States. Although Negro mortality rates have declined considerably over the past two decades they still remain much above the rates for the white population. Life expectancy for Negro males and females was about years less than for white males and females in Despite a decline of percent in infant mortality from to the Negro rate at per live births in is still percent higher than the white rate FINANCING MEDICAL CARE The foregoing discussion suggests that public policy for improving health should focus on a complex approach with provision of medical care as only one of many facets. We must therefore decide how to allocate our health dollars among the different routes to better health : medical care medical research and such programs as those to purify the air or improve nutrition Even when the appropriate role of medical care has been delineated however one is left with other problems such as how the care is delivered and financed One important influence on policy has been the growing consensus that access to medical care should not depend exclusively on an individual 's level of income. As a result public financing of medical services has become an increasingly large part of total outlays in these services growing from percent in fiscal to percent in fiscal The Federal component has grown even faster from percent in before Medicare was really underway to percent in Shifts have also taken place within the private sector. Whereas direct payments by users once accounted for the bulk of all private spending for medical care ( percent in ) by fiscal only percent came from this source. Private health insurance or payments by a third party have now replaced much of these user payments The element of risk complicates the financing of health because an individual 's need for medical care is much more variable than is his need for other goods and services. Insurance against high-cost illness has been the answer for most people. Hospital expenses for some percent of the civilian population ( almost percent of the population under years of age ) are covered by private health insurance. The proportion with coverage for surgical expenses is percent. A substantial part more than percent of the hospital expenses borne by the private sector are covered by health insurance Easy access to lower-cost group health insurance often depends on employment. It is therefore not surprising that many of the poor especially those not in the labor force do not have adequate private coverage. Medicare gives protection to most of the elderly. Medicaid provides additional protection for roughly million of the aged the blind the disabled and lowincome families with children but this protection is very uneven among the States. Moreover many of those who are not so poor and who have some protection nevertheless lack sufficiently comprehensive benefits This uneven coverage combined with the soaring costs of the past few years has led to considerable discussion about new methods of financing medical care. The criteria most frequently mentioned are not necessarily compatible. First many people believe that access to medical care should not be limited by a person 's financial resources. At the same time financing schemes should provide a mechanism for controlling costs and encouraging efficient resource use. But the more medical care is divorced from current ability to pay the greater the role of payments by a third party ; and when third party payments increase incentives for patients and doctors to economize tend to diminish. Medical services use scarce resources ; if they are to be efficiently allocated benefits must be compared with costs. Experience with Medicaid and Medicare and the growth of other third party insurance have shown that all too often the most expensive treatment is undertaken without giving sufficient consideration to what the treatment would cost and what it would contribute to the cure of the illness compared to the costs and benefits of other treatments The development of health maintenance organizations ( HMO 's ) has recently received attention as a possible solution. These organizations provide all-inclusive medical services for a fixed payment set in advance. Since an organization which receives a fixed sum has some incentive to budget its resources wisely to meet the needs of its clients this system offers the promise of encouraging a control of costs along with an efficient use of resources. For example it would be in the interest of the organizations to pay stricter attention to the benefits and costs of increasing well-patient care and diagnostic services to prevent future illnesses or to guard against overuse of facilities This leads however to another concern. Is it possible to ensure that HMO 's give high quality service ? If there were sufficient competition between them and if enough choice were provided among various forms of health insurance plans both the cost discipline and the quality of service could be safeguarded NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE PROPOSALS In his health message of February the President outlined a comprehensive program for improving the Nation 's health and specifically taking steps to resolve many of the problems mentioned above. The problem of making adequate medical care more widely accessible is covered through two plans in the proposed National Health Insurance Act. First is the National Health Insurance Standards Act which would require that employers offer a basic health benefit package to employees and their families ; under this plan over two-thirds of the cost would be contributed by the employer with the remainder coming from the employee The second plan proposed the Family Health Insurance Plan is intended to meet the needs of low-income families headed by an adult who is not usually employed and who would therefore not be eligible for coverage under the National Health Insurance Standards Act. In contrast to the Standards Act which would be privately financed the Family Plan would be federally financed : The Government would pay percent of the costs for families in the lowest income bracket ( up to $ annually for a family of four ) and other families ' premiums would be scaled to their incomes up to the eligibility limits for the program Both plans incorporate some features designed to improve efficiency in delivering health care and to encourage cost restraints. Requiring that insured persons pay part of the costs of the benefits they receive by means of deductibles and payment-sharing provisions would encourage more prudence in the use of services and discourage waste. With insurance expanded to cover visits to physicians ' offices as well as hospital care resources may be better allocated between the two kinds of service. As further protection for the public the Administration has urged measures to regulate the private insurers. Consumers would be protected against insurer insolvency. In addition annual audits would be required and rates would be disapproved if they were found to be unreasonable. Another provision would require a State 's approval of new capital investments. It is hoped that in this way unnecessary duplication of very advanced hospital equipment can be avoided. Other provisions are designed to assist the consumer by requiring that both insurers and medical care providers disclose certain kinds of information One important effect of the two plans would be the impetus they would offer to the formation of HMO 's. Both the National Health Insurance Standards Act and the Family Health Insurance Plan require that the option to join an HMO be provided as an alternative to health insurance. At present many States have legal barriers that prohibit the formation of HMO 's Federal legislation would preempt these barriers and allow HMO 's to compete with traditional fee-for-service medical care. The rapid formation of these groups would be further encouraged by proposed Federal grants and loans. As this relatively new form of health care organization grows it is possible that the competition thereby introduced will encourage experimentation with as yet undiscovered modes of delivery of health care Other parts of the Administration 's proposals for an overall health strategy include pollution control safety programs to reduce highway accidents and product hazards and programs to improve nutrition through financial aid to the poor and better information for all. In addition inspection and research efforts to control harmful food and drugs will be intensified. Research against sickle cell anemia has been intensified and the President has signed the National Cancer Act of which provides for strengthened efforts in cancer research The Administration has also made a major commit ] nent to solving our health manpower problems. The Comprehensive Health Manpower Training Act of and the Nurse Training Act of authorize institutional grants on a per student basis a sizable incentive to medical and other health profession schools to train additional health personnel. Problems will however remain. For example even with more and more physicians the problems of assuring an effective distribution of qualified doctors by geographical areas and specialties must still be solved. The Act provides incentives for physicians to practice in localities having a shortage of doctors as well as incentives for them to devote their time to primary care ( particularly family medicine ) a specialty which has been neglected in recent years CHAPTER The United States and the World Economy F OR THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY was a year of transition between two eras The monetary arrangements under which the free world operated after World War II had become subject especially from onward to increasing strains and frequent crises. In the system reached a critical turning point when the pressures of disequilibrium converged on its key element the United States dollar. The suspension of the dollar 's convertibility into gold and other reserve assets on August marked the end of the old order and initiated the reforms required to correct the basic disequilibrium from which it suffered Exchange Rate Realignment One major change that has already taken place is a significant multilateral realignment of exchange rates. This was achieved through a combination of market forces ( floating rates ) and negotiation ; the process culminated in the Smithsonian Agreement of December The United States agreed that a suitable means for devaluing the dollar in terms of gold to $ per ounce will be proposed to Congress as soon as a related set of shortterm trade expansion measures is available for congressional scrutiny. Upon passage of the required legislative authority the United States will propose the corresponding new par value of the dollar to the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Other countries notably Japan Switzerland and West Germany agreed to revalue their currencies in terms of gold while France and the United Kingdom agreed to hold to their previous par values The set of exchange Tates negotiated in the Smithsonian Agreement is designed to help correct the relative overvaluation of the U.S. dollar. At the same time the new structure embodies exchange rates among all major currencies which should reduce payments imbalances between each of the major countries and all the others The revaluation of each of the major exchange rates against the dollar relative to the parities which prevailed on January is shown in Table Wider Bands The Smithsonian Agreement also embodied a second important change Under the IMF Articles of Agreement each member was required to TABLE Changes in exchange rates of major currencies against the dollar January to December Percentage increase Currency Japanese yen Swiss franc West German mark Netherlands guilder Belgian franc French franc United Kingdom pound Swedish krona Italian lira Canadian dollar " Central value " of currency relative to January dollar parity rate Canada has announced that it will continue to allow the Canadian dollar to float. The value of the Canadian dollar on December ( U.S. cents ) was percent greater than the pre-May par value ( U.S. cents ) Sources : Treasury Department and International Monetary Fund maintain the exchange value of its currency against gold or the U.S. dollar within a band or range no wider than percent on each side of its parity value. It was agreed pending longer-term monetary reforms that this band could be widened to percent on each side by countries choosing to do so Trade Barriers and Mutual Security Costs Outside the monetary sphere the United States received commitments from its principal trading partners and allies to negotiate on measures designed to improve the access of U.S. exports to foreign markets and to increase their mutual security expenditures A New Monetary System Beyond the immediate changes discussed or settled in the world faces the more extended task of designing a new order for international monetary exchange and cooperation. Although the dimensions of this new order have not yet been defined it is clear that they will embody fundamental changes from the order under which the free world operated in the quarter century between and In particular both the role of the United States within the international system as a whole and the role of the U.S. dollar within the monetary sector of the international system will have to be redefined in ways consonant with future realities rather than with those prevailing in the past The sequence of events that led to the suspension of dollar convertibility on August is rooted in arrangements developed years ago. Similarly the events begun on August will have consequences that reach far into the future THE RECOGNITION OF DISEQUILIBRIUM The decision by the United States to close the gold window and to impose a temporary 10-percent surcharge on imports on August divides into two parts. Any analysis of the year must key itself to this division During the fLst half of the exchange markets became progressively unsettled and there was a massive flow of dollars which finally precipitated the August decisions. What caused so many more individuals firms and governments to become convinced so quickly that the value of the U.S dollar was going to fall relative to the other major currencies ? Why did this conviction develop after the apparently tranquil year which international finance experienced in ? The swing of opinion was not triggered by any single event : Rather it was built up through the cumulation of successive and mutually reinforcing layers of evidence and analysis. At least three tributaries of opinion about the position of the dollar converged in Together they contributed to speculation against the dollar on a massive scale One view was that the external monetary position of the United States had been in fundamental disequilibrium throughout the 's. A fundamental or long-run disequilibrium exists when the supply of a national currency to foreigners through the net balance of a nation 's payments and receipts consistently exceeds the potential foreign demand for it. With the exchange rates and trading conditions that prevailed in the 's the United States was unable to finance its entire set of external policy commitments on mutual security on trade on development aid on capital mobility except through the steady issuance of liquid dollar obligations. Balance could have been restored by a shift in relative exchange rates. However there was considerable inertia in the system 's mechanism for exchange rate adjustments especially with respect to the dollar. The rules and practices of the system put almost no pressure on surplus nations to revalue. At the same time given the dollar 's role as the major reserve currency there were strong inhibitions against a U.S. devaluation. Furthermore until the establishment of Special Drawing Rights ( SDR ) which were first issued in there was no adequate source of growth in world reserves other than U.S. deficits Such a situation permitted the U.S. liquidity deficits not only to continue but to grow Since this process was not regarded as sustainable the conclusion of the argument was that the disequilibrium would have to be recognized explicitly and corrected sooner or later by a fall in the external exchange value of the dollar A second basis for concluding that the U.S. dollar was overvalued in was the belief that the poor wage-price-productivity performance of the U.S. economy between and relative to that of its trading partners had significantly lowered the competitiveness of U.S. goods both in home markets and abroad. According to this view the persistent and sometimes large trade surpluses of the pre-1968 period could be expected to disappear and the already large U.S. payments deficits would get larger Such developments would lead inevitably to a correction via a relative devaluation of the dollar. These beliefs were reinforced by the comparatively poor trade performance of the United States in and In the United States was in a mild recession whereas the economies of most of its major trading partners were operating close to capacity Since the normal effect of a recession is to reduce imports and the normal effect of a boom is to increase imports the situation in should have brought with it a large increase in net exports from the United States to the rest of the world. Net exports of goods did increase from $ billion in to $ billion in but this increase was too small to be reassuring especially when compared with the average trade surpluses of $ billion from to and $ billion during the period On the contrary the $ billion trade surplus achieved in was regarded as an indication of relative weakness a sign that the trade surplus of the United States would inevitably turn to a trade deficit as soon as the U.S economy began to recover from its temporary recession. This is exactly what happened in Finally there was the belief that developments in the conduct of monetary policy here and abroad ( and hence in relative short-term interest rates ) would induce large outflows of short-term capital from the United States to Europe In the United States the recession of brought with it a fall in interest rates. As monetary policy was eased in order to help the recovery phase of the economic cycle interest rates especially money-market rates fell even further. For example the rate on 3-month Treasury bills which had peaked at percent in January and was percent in June declined to percent in March In Europe where the economic cycle lagged that in the United States by about a year there was a much smaller decline in money rates. In the United Kingdom for example the rate on 3-month Treasury bills which was percent in June was still percent in March The 3-month interbank loan rate in Germany declined somewhat more from percent in June to percent in March. The improvement in the liquidity of the U.S. banking system in had already induced a substantial return flow of short-term capital from the United States to Europe as U.S. banks repaid their borrowings from their branches abroad. The trend continued in the first quarter of The United States had been in heavy deficit in ( on an official reserve transactions basis the deficit was nearly $ billion ) ; with the additional short-term flows the deficit in was expected to be intolerably high When adverse developments in trade and money flows actually did appear all of the different reasons for believing that the external value of the U.S dollar might change converged. Actions based on these exchange-rate anticipations led to two massive flows of dollars : One was a substantial net outflow of liquid funds from U.S. residents to residents of other countries ; the other was a large conversion into other currencies of dollar funds held by banks and businesses abroad The size of the sales of dollars to foreign central banks was reflected in the size of the U.S. deficit measured on an official reserve transactions basis The deficit for the first quarter of was $ billion ( quarterly rate not seasonally adjusted ) Excluding the receipt in that quarter of Special Drawing Rights in the amount of $ million the deficit for the first quarter alone was $ billion a larger amount than in any full year except The quarterly deficit increased to $ billion in the second quarter and to $ billion in the third. By the end of September the total deficit for the preceding months reached $ billion which is equivalent to $ billion at a seasonally adjusted annual rate ( excluding the SDR allocation ) REACTIONS TO THE U.S. DEFICIT The effect of the massive outflow of dollars on the official reserve positions of the major industrial nations known as the Group of Ten is shown in Table * TABLE Official reserves by country [ Billions of dollars ; end of period ] Country March United States United Kingdom _ Belgium France Italy Netherlands West Germany September November June Canada Japan Sweden.. Switzerland 5.J ) i Includes $ billion SDR allocated on January and $ billion allocated on January The U.S. share in these allocations was $ million and $ million respectively Source : International Monetary Fund The recent large increases in these reserve positions began in but were not viewed as a problem in that year. Many European central banks and notably West Germany 's had lost reserves during the previous year when the flow of short-term funds was away from Europe and into the United States They and the Bank of Japan ( whose reserves had previously been low relative to its volume of trade ) were not unhappy to see their reserve positions increase. The continuing inflow of dollars into Europe however became a serious problem when the U.S. deficit widened in early * The Group of Ten or G-10 as it is called originated in when these members of the IMF agreed through the General Arrangements to Borrow to lend the IMF specified amounts of their currencies if a need should arise. Switzerland which is not a member of the IMF participates in the Group of Ten as an observer The U.S. monetary authorities took various actions designed to reduce or intercept the flow of short-term capital. The Export-Import Bank and the Treasury issued $ billion of securities to foreign branches of U.S. banks and thus intercepted funds that might have otherwise landed in foreign central banks. Steps were also taken in Europe to discourage the dollar inflow During West Germany had been the major recipient of the dollar outflow. This came about not only because of the general strength of the German economy and its large trade surplus but also because of the severely restrictive credit policy that West Germany was following which kept effective interest rates in that country well above international levels As early as February the West German authorities tried to discourage further short-term inflows by eliminating the main factor which was attracting these inflows the higher effective dollar-equivalent short-term interest rate available in West Germany. Because West Germany 's domestic situation required a policy of tight credit and high interest rates the authorities were not prepared to lower domestic interest rates to prevailing international levels. They tried therefore to achieve their objective by driving down the forward value of the mark by selling marks for forward delivery against the dollar. The operation proved to be unsustainable and was abandoned. The basic dilemma remained : How in the face of large potential dollar inflows could authorities simultaneously ( ) continue the policy of credit restraint ( ) avoid exchange controls and ( ) maintain the parity of the mark ? In early May reports by leading German institutes of economic research highlighted the dilemma and recommended that the best solution was either for the mark to be revalued to a new parity or for the market value of the mark to be freed from its parity value and allowed to float upward This recommendation was greeted with sympathy by some senior members of the German government and the market became more convinced than before that the mark was about to appreciate relative to the dollar Speculative funds poised as they were for action flooded into the German Central Bank at unprecedented rates in the early days of May. On May the rate of inflow rose to $ billion in the first minutes of trading. The Central Bank stopped buying and let the dollar value of the mark rise under market pressure Other nations had to face the prospect that as pressures on Germany eased with the rise in the mark-dollar rate some of these speculative pressures would converge on their currencies. The " strong currencies " that were particularly vulnerable were the Dutch guilder the Swiss franc the Austrian schilling and the Belgian franc The Netherlands permitted the guilder to float. Belgium which had two exchange rates one official and one " financial " permitted the latter to appreciate. Switzerland and Austria responded in more orthodox fashion During the weekend after May they raised their parities by and percent respectively The subsequent rise that took place in the dollar value of the floating mark and guilder reinforced convictions that the U.S. dollar was fundamentally weak not just against one or two currencies but against virtually all the major trading currencies During the second quarter of the U.S. performance on trade and payments deteriorated further. With increasing evidence of this deterioration appearing in current reports confidence in the sustainability of the dollar 's exchange value fell further Demand by foreign central banks on the U.S. Treasury to convert a portion of the dollars they were absorbing was restrained by the knowledge that such a move would be self-defeating if everybody tried it at the same time. The stock of reserve assets held by the United States ( around $ billion ) was far smaller than the stock of dollars held abroad. Nonetheless there were substantial reductions in U.S. reserve assets. From the beginning of to mid-August the U.S. Treasury paid out over $ billion in reserve assets about percent of this in early August. This depletion took place in spite of heavy temporary drawings of foreign currencies by the Federal Reserve ( under its swap lines of credit with other central banks ) which it used to absorb some dollars that central banks might otherwise have presented at the U.S. Treasury for conversion into gold or other reserve assets By August the private and public pressures to convert the dollar into other assets foreign currencies and ultimately reserve assets or their equivalent became overwhelming. The United States suspended convertibility of the dollar on August Its value in terms of several major currencies started to float AUGUST The President 's announcement suspending the convertibility of the dollar included other measures to protect the Nation 's trade and payments position. In particular it imposed " an additional tax of percent on goods imported into the United States. " As related measures the President ordered a 10-percent cut in foreign aid and pointed out that the time had come for other nations " to bear their fair share of the burden of defending freedom around the world. " The tax applied only to goods on which duties had been reduced under reciprocal trade agreements and in no case did it raise a duty beyond the statutory rate. Where it was limited by the statutory ceiling the surcharge was less than percent. On automobiles in particular the tax amounted only to percent. Furthermore all imports subject to mandatory quantitative restrictions were exempt from the new tax. Such goods included petroleum sugar meat and dairy products certain other agricultural products and cotton textiles covered by the Long-Term Textile Agreement. The surcharge affected about one-half of U.S. imports In addition subsequent statements of policy confined the Job Development Tax Credit proposed in the announcement to domestically produced new machinery and equipment as long as the import surcharge remained in effect These actions and the position taken by the United States in subsequent negotiations linked the questions of improved access to foreign markets for U.S. exports and a better sharing of the financial burdens of mutual security to the basic issue of exchange-rate realignment The issue of exchange-rate realignment immediately raised some fundamental questions How should realignment be achieved ? Should it be done through market forces ( freely floating rates ) or through negotiations ? If the realignment were to be arranged through negotiations how large an improvement in the U.S. balance would be required ? How should the counterpart of this improvement be shared among other nations ? And finally what set of changes in exchange rates would this require ? Starting in September the United States pursued both approaches to realignment. The second required an explicit analysis of the U.S. balance of payments BALANGE-OF-PAYMENTS ANALYSIS Any analysis of the nature and size of U.S. external disequilibrium must begin with an examination of balance-of-payments accounts. These data for the first quarters of ( at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and for earlier periods are shown in Table The table is arranged to show several " balances " which summarize different aspects of our trading and financial relationships. Unfortunately there is no single balance measure which adequately presents the total picture. In assessing the external accounts one must not only study the developments at the various levels shown on the table but also analyze these on the basis of evidence not contained in the table itself BALANCE ON GOODS SERVICES AND REMITTANCES This balance reflects the flow of payments in these categories : Merchandise trade ; services such as travel transportation and insurance ; income on previous international investments ; military expenditures involving foreign exchange ; and Government pensions and private remittances. It excludes the flow of Government grants and of long-term and short-term capital The table indicates a steady deterioration in this measure of the U.S position. During the first half of the 's the United States had a favorable balance averaging $ billion a year. But from the high point of $ billion reached in the balance declined in each succeeding year except In the first quarters of the balance was down to an annual rate of $ billion an adverse change of $ billion since The deteriorating trend in this measure largely reflected a parallel decline in our balance on merchandise trade. Like the balance on goods services and remittances the trade balance reached a high point in ( when there was TABLE U.S. balance of payments [ Billions of dollars ] average average Type of transaction first quarters Military transactions net.- Balance on investment income3 U.S. investment abroadForeign investments in the United States Balance on other services Merchandise trade balance Exports Imports -3.fi : Private remittances and government pensions. BALANCE ON GOODS AND SERVICES BALANCE ON GOODS SERVICES AND REMITTANCES Government grants4 BALANCE ON CURRENT ACCOUNT Balance on direct private investments U.S. direct investments abroad Foreign direct investments in the United States Balance on other long-term capital flows BALANCE ON CURRENT ACCOUNT AND LONGTERM CAPITAL ( ) Balance on nonliquid short-term private capital flows Errors and unrecorded transactions Allocations of special drawing rights -Kl NET LIQUIDITY BALANCE Transactions in U.S. liquid short-term assets net Transactions in U.S. liquid liabilities to other than foreign official agencies.net OFFICIALRESERVETRANSACTIONS BALANCE Financed by change in : Nonliquid U.S. Government and U.S. bank liabilities to foreign official agencies i Liquid liabilities to foreign official agencies._ U S official reserve assets net ( ) ! Average of the first quarters at seasonally adjusted annual rates * Includes direct investment fees and royalties Excludes transfers under militaryxgrants Excludes military grants of goods and services Excludes official reserve transactions and includes transactions in some short-term U.S. Government assets Less than $ billion Excludes U.S. Government nonliquid liabilities to foreign official agencies other than official reserve agencies Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce a positive balance of $ billion ) After that it declined steadily until the rise in During the first quarters of there was a deficit in the balance of trade at an annual rate of $ billion. The adverse swing in the trade balance from to was $ billion Underlying this trend was an extremely rapid increase in merchandise imports into the United States : From to imports rose by percent or at a compound rate of about percent per annum. U.S. merchandise exports also rose dramatically by percent but this increase did not match the growth of imports. The persistently faster rise since in U.S. imports compared to U.S. exports was not caused by a relatively more rapid increase in the level of U.S. income and product. Indeed measuring growth in terms of their gross national products either real or nominal all but one of our major trading partners were expanding at a faster rate than the United States. The demand aspects of this situation should have induced a more rapid rather than a slower rise in U.S. exports relative to U.S. imports Price-Cost Developments There is no simple explanation for the decline in the U.S. trade surplus One factor is that the relatively poor price-cost performance of the U.S economy associated with the inflationary developments after reduced the relative competitiveness of American goods Table gives two measures of the price competitiveness of U.S. products in the world economy. Neither measure is fully satisfactory. The index of unit labor costs in manufacturing is deficient for international comparisons because exports may have a product mix that differs from total production and because measures of labor compensation in different countries do not equally reflect changes in total labor costs. Likewise the index of unit values for exports of manufactured goods is sensitive to changes in the composition of exports and is subject to other technical deficiencies. Nonetheless changes in these two indicators do offer evidence that price and cost developments between and were significant enough to influence the U.S. trade balance During the first half of the 's price stability in the United States seems to have made U.S. goods more competitive in world markets. Unit labor costs in manufacturing fell in this country through while those in other industrial countries remained unchanged. The unit value of U.S manufactured exports held its own relative to our competitors ' export prices neither of the indexes changing significantly. These price developments together with the cyclical pattern of output changes in the United States and its markets contributed to rising U.S. trade surpluses through During the latter part of the 's however in a period of increasing inflation both in the United States and elsewhere the price and cost competitiveness of U.S. products was eroded. From to unit labor costs in manufacturing rose at percent per annum in the United States more than twice as fast as the percent per annum recorded for our major trading partners. Unit values of U.S. manufactured exports also increased more than twice as fast as those of our competitors In the relative price and cost position of the United States began to recover. This was partly the result df the earlier application of disinflationary policies in the United States than elsewhere and partly due to appreciations in the exchange-values of the West German mark and the Canadian dollar TABLE Changes in U.S. relative cost and price position United States Cost or price and period Competitors i = Ratio of U.S. to competitors Unit labor cost in manufacturing : 1971,1st half Unit value of exports of manufactured goods : 1963__ 1st half Weighted average for Belgium Canada France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Sweden and United Kingdom Ratio multiplied by Adjusted for changes in exchange rates * Preliminary Sources : Department of Labor International Monetary Fund and Council of Economic Advisers In the first half of export prices of foreign manufactured goods as measured by the index of export unit value increased less than the corresponding index for the United States. But unit labor costs in manufacturing abroad were rising much more rapidly than here. Data for the year as a whole are not yet available. Both the U.S. program of wage-price restraint after August and the revaluations of foreign exchange rates relative to the dollar will increase the relative price-competitive position of the United States significantly CYCLICALLY ADJUSTED BALANCES The steady deterioration since in the U.S. balance of trade and current balance appeared to have been reversed in This was not a genuine reversal of the otherwise strong underlying downward trend. Rather the cause was the conjunction of a recession in the United States with booming conditions abroad. In real gross national product fell in the United States ; abroad output continued to expand vigorously although at a somewhat lower rate than that experienced in In short the improvement of the U.S. current account balance in was a temporary phenomenon caused by the fact that cyclical influences operating in the United States were not in phase with those operating abroad The influence of such induced effects on the observed trade and current account balances can be eliminated by appropriate adjustments to provide a " cyclically adjusted " figure that better reflects the underlying position Several agencies including the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board have begun to develop data on " cyclically adjusted " balances For the OEGD 's cyclical adjustment estimates indicate that the observed U.S. surplus of $ billion on current transactions ( excluding Government grants ) in that year was $ billion higher than it would have been under " normal " conditions ( defined as a condition of normal high employment in all OECD countries ) U.S. calculations indicate a adjustment for cyclical and other special factors of $ billion. According to the latter estimate on an adjusted or normalized basis the United States in had an unfavorable balance of $ billion. Similarly after adjustment the underlying balance was much less favorable than is indicated by the observed figure of $ billion for the first quarters of When allowance is made for cyclical factors it becomes quite clear that during the past years there was an uninterrupted deterioration of the U.S position on current account ( excluding Government grants ) : From a surplus ( cyclically adjusted ) of around $ billion in to an estimated deficit ( cyclically adjusted ) of $ or $ billion for This is a significant swing in position even for an economy as large as that of the United States The fact that the move was steadily in the same direction made the change all the more significant THE CAPITAL ACCOUNTS The United States has been a net supplier of private and Government long-term capital and grants to the rest of the world in every year since World War II ended. A major component of the outflow of private capital is private direct investment abroad. This flow had grown from an average of $ billion a year in the first half of the 's to $ billion in the second half of the decade. It reached $ billion in and the annual rate was $ billion in This net outflow has been substantially exceeded in every year of the decade by the income from U.S. direct investments abroad which is included in the balance on goods and services There is a counterflow of foreign direct investment into the United States Until this counterflow was very small but in and it reached a rate of almost $ billion a year. In the inflow of direct foreign investment into the United States not only ceased but there were net capital transfers from foreign subsidiaries in the United States to their parent companies The other component of long-term capital flows in Table shows the net result of numerous long-term capital inflows and outflows. It includes : Longterm U.S. Government loans ( net of repayments received ) ; U.S. purchases of foreign security issues ; foreign purchases of U.S. securities ; and longterm loan transactions here and abroad. For the 's as a whole there was a net outflow for this component. But beginning in an expansion occurred in the inflow of foreign long-term investment to the United States including borrowing abroad by U.S. firms. In itself there was a net inflow particularly from Europe. In the inflows balanced the outflows. However in the inflows fell off and outflows rose ; as a result the net outflow rose to a rate of $ billion Taking the long-term capital ac zount as a whole net capital outflows rose by $ billion between and Much of this adverse swing was caused by capital movements influenced by the prospect of speculative gains BALANCE ON CURRENT ACCOUNT AND LONG-TERM CAPITAL The current account balance combined with the balance on long-term capital account plus Government grants provides an important yardstick ( sometimes called the " basic balance " ) for measuring and assessing the fundamental position of a nation relative to other countries. Starting in mid1971 the official U.S. presentations of balance-of-payments data have begun to recognize the importance of this yardstick and it is now published as a separate " balance. " In the United States was in deficit on basic balance by $ billion Between and the first quarters of the balance worsened by $ billion to reach an annual rate of $ billion. Of this $ billion was due to a worsening of the balance on current account and $ billion to a net increase in the long-term capital outflow. Although the basic balance generally reflects underlying forces it is sometimes subject to short-run movements. This appeared to be the case in THE SIZE OF THE REQUIRED CORRECTION Negotiations on exchange-rate realignments which began soon after August required an answer to the question : By how much should the United States improve its basic balance in order to achieve a stable equilibrium ? The U.S. representatives presented an analysis which showed that the required turnaround was about $ billion. The calculations were as follows : Under conditions of reasonably full employment both in the United States and in other major trading countries the U.S. deficit on current account ( excluding U.S. Government grants ) for was projected to be $ billion on the basis of the exchange rates and other trading conditions in effect in April The annual outflow for Government grants and credits plus private long-term capital flows from the United States to countries other than Western European nations Canada and Japan was estimated at $ billion or just over one-half of percent of the U.S. gross national product. The average annual outflow for these purposes during the 5-year period from through was about $ / billion A secure payments position would require that this estimated $ 6-billion capital outflow be covered by a surplus on current account. Since the projected " full-employment " current account for was in deficit by $ bil- lion achieving a surplus of $ billion required an improvement of $ billion in the U.S. current account Two other factors caused additions to this basic estimate. The first was an allowance of $ billion a year to cover a persistent outflow which the data collection network does not capture. This outflow which is shown as " errors and omissions " or unidentified transactions in the accounts fluctuates from year to year but it has been consistently negative since the average level being around $ billion. The second factor was an allowance of $ billion to provide the prospect of a small surplus on basic balance to cover persistent short-term capital outflows or to serve as a margin of safety against errors in the underlying assumptions and calculations. With the addition of these two factors the turnaround required for the United States to achieve a secure position was estimated to be $ billion DEVELOPMENTS AFTER AUGUST Reactions abroad to the August announcement were varied. The major European exchange markets closed during the week following the announcement. When the exchange markets were reopened no country except France attempted to hold the exchange value of its currency against the dollar within the 1-percent upper limit of its parity rate. The exchange value of the dollar in these markets declined and on average continued to decline during the succeeding months In France the exchange market was segregated. For dollars received as a result of transactions related to international trade the French government continued to intervene in order to support the parity rate. All other dollars received were diverted to a " financial franc " market ; here severe restrictions were imposed on inflows of funds but the rate was allowed to find its own level In Japan the exchange markets were not closed after the August announcement and the Japanese government continued to intervene by purchasing dollars at the official ceiling rate. During August alone the Japanese Central Bank took in $ billion an amount considerably larger than their $ billion of total dollar holdings at the end of Official intervention to hold the dollar rate at its ceiling was then suspended and limited intervention avowed the value of the yen to rise about percent relative to the dollar. In subsequent months the government continued to intervene in order to dampen the pace at which the yen would appreciate relative to the dollar. In the process dollar holdings by the Japanese Central Bank increased an additional $ billion to $ billion by the end of October ALTERNATIVE ROUTES TO REALIGNMENT Developments after August made one fact clear : The immediate operational issue facing governments was a realignment of the pattern of exchange rates especially a realignment of the U.S. dollar relative to the other major currencies Among the questions associated with this operation were these : How should the industrial nations arrive at a new set of equilibrium exchange rates ? One route was to let all currencies float freely for a transitional period until a new set of equilibrium rates emerged. The other was to negotiate a multilateral shift to a new set of fixed rates If the second route was to be used should the United States " contribute " to the realignment by a formal devaluation of the dollar against gold ? Or should negotiations concentrate on exchange rates among currencies expressed in dollars with the question of the gold price being left to subsequent negotiations on longer-range issues ? How large was the readjustment required to restore the U.S. balance of payments to an equilibrium position ? How large an average change in the dollar 's exchange rate did this require ? How should the effect of the proposed readjustment in the U.S. position be shared among other nations ? Mutually acceptable answers to all of these questions depended in part on related issues. The inclusion of trade practices and the question of mutual security costs as part of the overall negotiations involved other members of foreign governments besides financial officials. This affected the tempo and procedure as well as the substance of the negotiations REALIGNMENT THROUGH FLOATING One issue was whether market-determined exchange rates or negotiations provided the most efficient route to equilibrium In spite of intervention by central banks at first to hold rates within limits set by parity values and later to suppress the pace of the relative appreciation of the currencies a significant pattern of exchange-rate realignment did take place in particularly after dollar convertibility was suspended. The general path of these upward movements relative to previous parities against the U.S. dollar is shown in Chart The U.S. position on the issue was that a transitional period of free floating could lead the world swiftly and efficiently to a new pattern of equilibrium rates. This position was put forward by the Secretary of the Treasury on September in his address to the Annual Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank when he said : I believe we should welcome the help that the market itself can provide in reaching crucial decisions Many nations already are allowing their currencies temporarily to float but they have done so with widely varying degrees of intervention and controls. As a result some adjustments clearly needed are being delayed or thwarted the process of multilateral decisionmaking impeded and political questions multiplied. In this respect Chart Foreign Exchange Rates U.S. CENTS PER UNIT OF FOREIGN CURRENCY 31.0318-s WEST GERMAN MARK NETHERLANDS GUILDER SWISS FRANC FROM 5/10/71 THROUGH 5/9/71 FRENCH FRANC C A N A D I A N DOLLAR I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I l " JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUNE JULY AUG SEPT OCT NOV NOTE : HORIZONTAL RULE INDICATES PAR VALUE OF CURRENCY THROUGH DECEMBER ASTERISK INDICATES CENTRAL RATE ESTABLISHED DECEMBER SOURCE : FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK DEC Chart Foreign Exchange Rates U.S. CENTS PER UNIT OF FOREIGN CURRENCY .324675-i JAPANESE YEN BELGIAN FRANC : 260.57_L UNITED KINGDOM POUND ~ ITALIAN LIRA J i 1I I JAN FEB MAR I I I APR I1 II MAY JUNE JULY AUG SEPT OCT NOV NOTE : HORIZONTAL RULE INDICATES PAR VALUE OF CURRENCY THROUGH DECEMBER ASTERISK INDICATES CENTRAL RATE ESTABLISHED DECEMBER SOURCE : FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK DEC our surcharge and restrictions on capital flows could like those applied by other countries themselves be a disturbing influence If other governments will make tangible progress toward dismantling specific barriers to trade over coming weeks and will be prepared to allow market realities freely to determine exchange rates for their currencies for a transitional period we for our part would be prepared to remove the surcharge With few exceptions the suggestion of the United States was not accepted In most countries market forces were suppressed by a variety of new measures including regulation of inflows exchange controls and central bank intervention in the market. Eventually the question of realignment had to be settled through bilateral and multilateral negotiations The opposition to a policy of arriving at a new set of exchange rates via market-determined forces was motivated by a complex mixture of reasons RELUCTANCE TO REVALUE AGAINST THE DOLLAR Many nations were reluctant to let their currencies appreciate too far against the dollar. This attitude was not of course an argument against floating as such ; it applied equally well to revaluation via negotiation Raising the value of one 's own currency ( or permitting it to rise ) reduces the price competitiveness of export industries. For many countries expanding exports provided an impetus for overall economic expansion which these governments were reluctant to surrender. Even when governmental policies did not emphasize export expansion the export industries were highly visible politically ; governmental actions that might erode their prospects had to be taken with care. While revaluation also provided countervailing advantages to other segments of a revaluing economy especially to consumers importers and tourists going abroad these benefits tended to be spread more broadly and were therefore less visible. The reluctance of other countries to see their currencies appreciate relative to the dollar regardless of how this was accomplished was intensified in the second half of by the slowing of the boom conditions which had prevailed in many countries in prior years RELUCTANCE TO REVALUE AGAINST OTHER CURRENCIES Reluctance to revalue against the dollar was one reason why many nations did not permit market pressures to express themselves freely. A collateral reason was the unwillingness to have the national currency revalued against other currencies whose values were being held down by intervention or controls. When one nation revalues relative to the dollar which it may be willing to do in the interest of restoring equilibrium it is thereby revalued relative to all other nations that do not revalue and this it may not be willing to permit. Given the multilateral nature of the problem the idea of floating toward a new equilibrium requires the cooperation of all nations. The absten- tion of even one important nation from the joint action may be enough to hold up the entire process. This is what happened in the autumn of The French commercial franc was held to its previous parity value against the dollar ( established in ) When the West German mark moved up to a range of from to percent above its parity with the dollar ( also established in ) it moved up to the same extent against the French franc. Since France is West Germany 's largest trading partner both for exports and imports this to percent increase in the mark 's cross-rate against the franc was regarded as unacceptable by West Germany especially since this cross-rate had already been increased by nearly percent in the realignments Similarly the unwillingness of the Japanese authorities to let the value of the yen rise freely relative to the dollar was affected not only by a desire to limit the change in the yen-dollar rate ; it was also affected by the rates between the yen on the one hand and European currencies on the other RELUCTANCE TO CORRECT BY REVALUATION ALONE There was a third set of motives for rejecting the floating route to realignment. This process of arriving at new rates would leave the dollar standing still in relation to gold while other currencies moved up by varying amounts For one reason or another many nations were unwilling to accept such an outcome One of these reasons was that acceptance of the process would explicitly recognize the U.S. dollar as the benchmark against which all other national currencies set their values. There was a body of opinion in Europe that the benchmark should be an objective one or at least a multinational one which did not bear the stamp of any single country. The existence of this body of opinion has important implications for the choice of a basic monetary unit of account in the international system of the future A second reason was that if the United States devalued other countries could reduce or avoid the political onus of revaluing. Thus it was easier for the United Kingdom for example to stand still for an 8-percent U.S. devaluation than to revalue by an equivalent amount with the United States standing still even though the effect on exchange rates would be the same The third reason was that revaluation reduces the value expressed in the domestic currency unit of a nation 's stock of foreign monetary assets. The value of its gold holdings measured in the national currency falls to the extent of revaluation and so do its holdings of other reserve assets notably the U.S. dollar. This balance-sheet loss for each revaluing nation so far as the gold component is affected could be reduced by requiring the United States itself to contribute to a realignment through an increase in the dollar price of gold The floating route was therefore rejected in favor of a negotiated pattern of change in which the dollar itself made part of the adjustment by moving down relative to gold FINAL NEGOTIATIONS ON EXCHANGE RATE REALIGNMENT By the end of November floating had moved exchange rates some distance from the old parities. The French commercial franc was the only major currency that was held to the upper limit of the narrow band around its parity value. Bilateral and multilateral negotiations between the United States and its principal trading partners on trade and mutual security costs had also commenced At the ministerial meetings of the Group of Ten nations held in Rome a hypothetical devaluation of the dollar against gold was discussed as one aspect of a possible overall package agreement ( which included a pattern of currency revaluations by other nations and adjustments in existing impediments to trade ) The United States offered to consider a new pattern of exchange rates involving an average adjustment that would not fully meet its objective of a turnaround of $ billion The negotiations were completed on this basis at a later meeting of the ministers and governors of the Group of Ten nations held at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington on December The key elements in the agreement were a new set of exchange rates and provisions for a wider band within which market rates would be free to move up to percent above or below the new " central rates. " As part of the agreement the United States lifted the temporary surcharge on imports which it had imposed on August The agreement will not be formally complete until Congress acts on the dollar price of gold. In the meantime intensive trade negotiations have been in process with Canada Japan and the European Community. The results of these talks are to be available for congressional scrutiny when the gold price legislation is considered by the Congress The $ per ounce gold price reflects the exercise of authority given to the President ( in the " Thomas Amendment " of May ) to redefine the gold content of the dollar at not less than percent of its previous gold content. President Franklin D. Roosevelt by Executive Order set the price at $ an ounce in The President 's power under the Thomas Amendment was extended periodically until it expired on June The par value of the U.S. dollar communicated to the International Monetary Fund in was grams of fine gold equivalent to $ an ounce. Under the terms of the Bretton Woods Agreements Act of ( the Act which authorized U.S. membership in the International Monetary Fund ) the President must obtain congressional authorization before proposing or agreeing to a change in the par value of the dollar INTERNATIONAL MONETARY REFORM The Smithsonian Accord dealt with the most pressing issue which faced the international monetary system after August It thereby set the stage for the more extended task of designing a new order for international monetary cooperation on which more intensive work will begin in Measured by overall results the international economic arrangements in force since World War II were strikingly successful. The basic goals of the founders of the Bretton Woods system were achieved to a high degree. Trade and payments among nations were increasingly freed and grew rapidly. International consultation and cooperation developed to an extent previously unknown. The balance-of-payments problems which individual nations experienced at various times did not prevent the general pursuit of policies of relatively rapid and steady growth. In total the record of the 25-year period was one of unprecedented progress for the world economy and this is an impressive tribute to the functioning of the so-called Bretton Woods system At the same time the way the monetary component of the system actually operated departed in many important respects from the mechanics envisaged by the participants at Bretton Woods. As reviewed in past Reports of this Council a pronounced asymmetry developed between the role of the United States and the role of other countries. The stability of the system its ability to reconcile trade balance of payments and reserve goals of various countries to provide adequate liquidity and to achieve elasticity in financing came to be heavily dependent on the willingness and ability of the United States to lose reserves to absorb more or less persistent deficits in its external accounts and to maintain a passive role with respect to its own exchange rate. The dollar became the center of the system and this placed particularly heavy responsibilities on the United States to maintain stability domestically along with open trading and financial markets The system which evolved had advantages and disadvantages from the standpoint of both the United States and other countries. Whatever its merits the important underlying premises of a dollar-centered system are no longer valid. With the strong recovery of the European economies with the striking growth of Japan and with industrialization proceeding elsewhere in the world the position of the United States in the world economy is no longer as predominant as it was in the 's. The development and extension of the European Community with its plans for increasingly close economic and monetary integration of the region adds an important new if still uncertain dimension to the picture. In monetary terms the U.S. reserve position became inconsistent with a presumption of convertibility of the dollar into reserve assets. This was aggravated by the repercussions of domestic inflation since the mid-1960 's which weakened the U.S. trade and payments position Reform of the international monetary framework has been the subject of extensive discussion for many years. The creation in of a new international reserve asset Special Drawing Rights is a major innovation in the system. A thorough report by the Executive Directors of the International Monetary Fund on the role of exchange rates in the adjustment of international payments also issued in both reflected and contributed to the growing consensus that there is a need for greater flexibility in official exchange rates In further and more far-reaching negotiations on restructuring the international monetary system will begin. Although the eventual shape of the new order will not be known until these negotiations are completed the primary questions with which the negotiators must deal are clear One issue is the degree of " fixity " that should be provided for in the exchange rate mechanism. The Bretton Woods system contemplated that each IMF member government would establish a fixed par value for its currency and maintain this value in the exchange markets within a narrow margin of plus or minus percent. The par value would be adjusted only when a fundamental disequilibrium became manifest over a period of time and then presumably by a substantial amount. In practice this rigidity broken at intervals under heavy pressure may have become self-defeating in terms of maintaining the broader stability and continuity of the system Should the new system place an equal emphasis on exchange fixity by requiring all nations to establish official par values ? If so should the band of exchange rate variation permitted around par values be widened ? Alternatively under what conditions should countries be permited to let exchange values of their currencies be determined by market forces as Canada and others have found it convenient and useful to do in the past ? A second related issue concerns the mechanisms to be utilized for maintaining reasonably balanced international payments positions. As indicated the Bretton Woods system tended to think of an exchange rate change as an adjustment of last resort. Nations whose currencies became overvalued relative to other currencies have tended to delay unduly before making a change in the exchange rate. Furthermore because nations with undervalued currencies also resisted exchange rate changes and were able to do so longer most exchange rate changes have been downward. The operating question is how changes might be made in a less disturbing way in the future with pressure more evenly distributed among surplus and deficit countries and with the United States having the same degree of freedom of action as other nations As noted there is a growing consensus in favor of greater flexibility : However the correct degree of flexibility the rules for implementing the process and the role of the IMF in this implementation process need to be examined and defined The need for wider margins than the dt percent specified in the Fund 's Articles of Agreement is also well recognized. The Smithsonian Accord provides temporarily for margins of z ^ percent. The proper width of margins for the longer run must be determined Negotiations on the future adjustment process will also cover issues other than exchange rate flexibility. These will include ways and means of influencing short-term capital movements and the degree to which the mix of monetary and fiscal policy should be influenced by external considerations A third issue is the question of how much liquidity the system needs and how this liquidity should be provided. The amount of liquidity needed will depend on how the other questions are answered including particularly the flexibility and efficiency of the adjustment mechanism. The question of how liquidity is to he provided raises the issue of the role of alternative reserve assets. The United States and many other countries share the conviction that gold should and will play a diminishing role in the system. Already considerable progress has been made in developing the SDR as an alternative international reserve asset but many questions remain including the appropriate role of the dollar and other reserve currencies The agenda for negotiations is a large one. Fortunately there is wide agreement that the objectives of the Bretton Woods system remain as valid as before and negotiations will be based on the fundamental premises that nations want to promote international monetary cooperation balanced growth and increased freedom for trade and payments stability in the exchange markets and the avoidance of competitive undervaluation of rates. The challenge will be to find the mechanisms that will assure those results taking into account the realities of the 's and the new balance of economic power and responsibilities TRADE POLICY DEVELOPMENTS IN For over three decades the free world has been gradually liberalizing commercial policy to achieve the economic and political benefits of an open trading world. The United States has taken a position of consistent leadership in this movement. This course recently has faced and survived two major tests. There have been strong pressures in the United States itself to redirect policy toward quantitative restrictions on trade and investment While the United States extended import restraints to a few additional commodities in legislation that would apply quantitative restrictions broadly to imports has not been enacted. The second major test and one that became subject to spirited debate in came with the trade policy actions to combat the U.S. payments deficit taken in connection with the New Economic Policy. Although it provoked considerable controversy the import surcharge did not set off the series of retaliatory actions abroad that had been feared in some quarters. And it was removed before the end of when the currency realignment made it no longer necessary During a period when commercial policy is under major pressure for change as it has been during the past years it is particularly important that necessary preoccupation with month-to-month events not be allowed to blur appreciation for the long-term objective of U.S. international economic policy. That objective is an open world economy in which trade and investment flows among countries are not distorted by national barriers to free exchange. Moving toward that objective will enhance broad foreign policy objectives for this country and it will provide important economic benefits International exchange permits mutually beneficial specialization in production among countries ; it provides healthy competition to ensure efficiency in domestic industries ; it expands the variety of goods available to U.S consumers and producers ; and in times of inflation it provides a wholesome brake on price increases To many Americans the benefits of liberal trade policies are not highly visible because they are broadly diffused. But the short-run costs that trade liberalization sometimes imposes on specific groups are usually highly visible indeed. Thus the costs of liberalization are more keenly felt than the benefits and that tends to make removal of trade and investment restrictions difficult to achieve Substantial progress has nevertheless been made toward free international exchange in industrial goods during the past years mainly by reducing tariffs. But much work remains. The President anticipated the controversial and difficult policy issues confronting the United States when he appointed the Commission on International Trade and Investment Policy to study U.S. positions and to recommend a policy for the 's. He also recognized that proper formulation and implementation within the executive branch required better coordination among the agencies engaged in international economic policy. In early he established the Council on International Economic Policy in the White House The President 's Commission on International Trade and Investment Policy whose membership was drawn from business labor and the universities presented its report in July United States International Economic Policy in an Interdependent World The Commission 's recommendations included on the one hand measures designed to strengthen the capacity of U.S. industry and labor to compete effectively and on the other proposals for negotiations with our major trading partners. Specifically recommended were actions which might reduce the adverse effects on U.S. exports of the European Community 's Common Agricultural Policy and the Community 's widening preferential tariff arrangements and international action to deal with market disruptions due to imports For the longer term the Commission recommended negotiations " looking toward the progressive reduction and eventual elimination of barriers to trade and investment " including reform of the international monetary system with negotiations eventually leading to the " elimination of all barriers to international trade and capital movements within years. " The purpose of the newly organized Council on International Economic Policy is to strengthen the policymaking process. The Council is chaired by the President and its members are the Secretaries of State Treasury Defense Agriculture Commerce and Labor the Ambassador at Large the Director of the Office of Management and Budget the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs and the Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs. The President stated in his Executive Order that the Council was to ( a ) " achieve consistency between domestic and foreign economic policy " ( b ) " provide a clear top-level focus for the full range of economic policy issues " and ( c ) " maintain close coordination with basic foreign policy objectives. " The work of the Council is directed by its Executive Director who is also Assistant to the President for International Economic Affairs. As his first assignment the Executive Director was instructed by the President to prepare a review of the position of the United States in a changing world economy. This briefing was presented to the Council in April and was subsequently reviewed with leaders in Congress and others outside the Administration. The Council is now pursuing work programs in a variety of areas such as export promotion more comprehensive adjustment assistance programs and foreign investment policies and is planning for a series of foreign economic negotiations In addition to strengthening its own apparatus for policy formulation in the trade sector the Administration has extended contacts with our trading partners. The President 's Special Trade Representative has participated in the High Level Trade Group assembled by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to explore avenues for major negotiations which might lead in the next few years to a more effective climate for international trade and investment. This group began monthly meetings in November and aims to complete a report for the Council of the OECD in the spring of The Commission 's report and the coordinating work of the Council have helped to identify the major policy issues in the area of international trade and to initiate steps through which these issues will be resolved EXPORT POLICY The disappearance of the traditional U.S. trade surplus in itself raised a fundamental question. Is a trade surplus desirable or essential for the United States ? On one side of this question is a view that exports should always exceed imports by a wide margin because net exports are both a stimulant to the domestic economy and a symbol of relative economic strength. This position views exports as inherently desirable and imports unless unobtainable domestically as undesirable or at least suspect. The policy prescription corresponding to this mercantilist position calls for adoption of the measures necessary to keep ( the volume of U.S. exports higher than the volume of imports in every single accounting period regardless of cyclical circumstances or developments affecting other elements in the balance of payments In another corner are those who argue that after years of investment abroad the United States has achieved a special status in the world. It is a major creditor nation which receives a large and growing income from overseas investments. It is possible indeed appropriate for a nation in this position to use some of this income to finance a net inflow of imports. These net imports are the fruits of resources the Nation has foregone consuming or investing domestically in previous years In fact however the appropriate approach to exports depends upon the approach that is taken to all of the other elements in the balance of payments. While the United States is a major creditor nation the inflow of net investment income was over $ billion in and is expected to grow in the future a large net investment income does not mean that the country can afford an equally large trade deficit. U.S. policies involve other major payments commitments grants and loans to less developed countries mutual security costs pensions and remittances to citizens living abroad and funds for additional overseas investments. To the extent that these commitments are desirable as they clearly are they also have to be financed. Given the probable size of these flows in the immediate years ahead it is unlikely that net investment income will be large enough to cover them to say nothing of a trade deficit as well. Thus a trade surplus will be required if our goal is external balance. Moreover export growth will permit imports to expand For the long run the optimal policy toward exports as well as toward imports is one directed to achieving efficient resource allocation within a system of generally balanced international payments The preferred means of correcting any disequilibrium that might arise in a nation 's balance of payments is through a change in its exchange rate. This method unlike other ways of restoring equilibrium does not distort the relationships among transactions : All sellers and all buyers of foreign exchange are affected alike. A change in the exchange rate of the dollar was the process used by the United States in to correct its balance-of-payments deficit However in a world where trade and investment flows are subject to either special impediments or incentives more direct measures to stimulate exports may sometimes be justified. Legislation to authorize Domestic International Sales Corporations and steps to expand export credit facilities are examples of such measures Domestic International Sales Corporations The provisions of American and foreign tax laws in many cases have provided an incentive for U.S. firms selling abroad to establish production facilities overseas. U.S. tax liability is not incurred on income earned abroad until it is repatriated and effective foreign tax rates are often less than those in the United States. Exporters from domestic sources on the other hand face immediate tax liability This imbalance has been removed in part by the Revenue Act of Under provisions of the new law U.S. exporters will be able to enjoy tax treatment comparable to that of U.S. producers located abroad. The law provides for formation of a new type of corporation to be known as a Domestic International Sales Corporation ( DISC ) Taxes on percent of a DISC 's income may be deferred indefinitely provided that percent of the DISC 's receipts and assets relate to qualified exports. Loans to a parent company to finance research and development expenditures inventory accumulation or investment in plant and equipment can be counted as export-related assets so long as the proportion which these loans bear to total expenditures for such purposes does not exceed the proportion of the borrower 's total sales accounted for by exports. Dividends to DISC stockholders are to be fully taxed The Administration 's proposal concerning DISC underwent two major changes in Congress. First the 100-percent deferral originally requested by the Administration was reduced to percent. Second Congress added a proviso to discourage a DISC from investing tax deferred income in foreign production facilities. In the bill enacted the tax deferral on any DISC profits which are lent to parent companies will be terminated if such profits are judged to have been invested in foreign plant and equipment The potential for tax deferral in a DISC is intended to provide U.S. exporters with tax advantages similar to various advantages provided exporters in other countries. The availability of DISC will also blunt one incentive that has existed for U.S. firms to locate production facilities abroad rather than at home Export Credit Facilities The competitive position of sellers in different countries for third-country export markets is influenced by the export credit facilities they can offer and many governments have taken measures to provide especially advantageous financing for exports. In the United States export credit facilities are influenced by general monetary policy by various banking regulations by the operations of the U.S. Export-Import Bank and by policies of other governmental financing and procurement agencies. Apart from monetary and pricing policies which led to an easing of interest costs for all borrowers in two steps were taken which increased the special credit facilities for exporting On August legislation was enacted to exempt export credits from the Voluntary Foreign Credit Restraint guidelines administered by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The formula announced by the Board of Governors in November freed both bank and nonbank financial institutions to expand their lending for exports. It was also designed to remove some existing or potential inequities among the institutions participating in the program Legislation passed in August removed Export-Import Bank receipts and disbursements from Federal unified budget totals and provided new leeway for the Bank 's export financing activities. New short- and intermediate-term discount programs together with activity under its other programs should increase the Bank 's total authorizations for loans guarantees and insurance from $ billion in fiscal to $ billion in fiscal EASING THE ADJUSTMENT TO IMPORTS Changes in the volume and composition of a country 's imports usually reflect underlying changes in incomes tastes or comparative costs. The release of resources from industries that lose their competitiveness is offset by expansion in industries that become more competitive. The value of total production is increased by the reallocation of resources to what have become more productive uses In some cases however imports increase so rapidly that they displace domestic resources faster than these can be transferred to other uses. Public policy can not ignore such disruptions to individual markets or areas particularly if there is general excess productive capacity and limited opportunities for resources to shift. Positive programs of adjustment assistance are then required to facilitate the necessary transfer of resources into other uses and to ease the financial stress on the workers and owners involved. The adjustments can also be moderated by controlling the pace at which imports are permitted to increase Moderation of imports through arrangements with the main suppliers is a technique that has been used for several years both here and abroad. U.S steel imports are now subject to such agreements. Cotton textiles and certain meats have been for some time subject to intergovernmental agreements Government agreements to limit the rate of growth of manmade and woolen fiber apparel and textiles were concluded in Imports of textiles and apparel have long constituted a special problem for the United States. On the one hand textiles have an important place in the budget of all Americans and the benefits of low-cost imported products are widely shared. On the other hand the million persons employed in the textile and apparel industry in the United States tend to have characteristics that make adjustment to new employment especially difficult The rate of growth of cotton textile shipments to the United States came under regulation in the multilateral Long Term Arrangement on Cotton Textiles of Imports of yarns fabrics and apparel made of wool and manmade fibers however have continued to grow at a rapid rate. The volume of imports of manmade fiber textiles increased more than seven times between and ; and in the first months of the flow increased almost percent above the level of the corresponding period a year earlier After especially difficult negotiations memoranda of understanding were signed in October with the governments of Japan the Republic of China Korea and Hong Kong the leading sources of supply. Under the terms of these memoranda the parties agreed to limit their exports of manmade fiber and wool textiles to this country. The agreements limit the growth rates for various categories of these imports to levels in the range of to percent per annum. Such rates while much lower than the growth rates recently experienced still somewhat exceed the growth in the U.S. market. The agreements are intended therefore to provide time for the domestic industry to adjust while still permitting American consumers increasingly to enjoy the benefits of low-cost imported supplies The use by the United States of voluntary agreements with foreign governments or private groups to restrain shipments to the U.S. market has some attractions over other forms of import restraint such as tariffs or import quotas. Tariffs and quotas are often subject to international treaties and agreements and further resort to them may also require legislative action. Restraints that are built into law have often become permanent even when the original need for restraint was itself only a temporary one. In contrast the technique of requesting foreign suppliers voluntarily to limit their sales in the United States is simpler and avoids the complications of law However voluntary agreements also have serious disadvantages. While the limitation of foreign supplies in the U.S. market lifts domestic prices for the goods above what they would otherwise have been thereby providing the intended relief to domestic sellers the higher prices that American users pay in this instance are not offset through the higher government tax revenues that would have been collected had higher tariffs been used to achieve the same purpose. It is also not clear that voluntary agreements are always easy to remove. In order to make the restraints operative suppliers need to coordinate their production and sales plans. In the past export restraint mechanisms have frequently been used as instruments of monopoly power. Dissolving them has without exception been extraordinarily difficult. The fact that they originate now under duress from the buyers rather than from the volition of sellers may not in the end change their character There is a more fundamental danger in too widespread a use of the export restraint technique. This is the additional threat it poses to hopes for a world organized predominantly on free-enterprise principles. Marketoriented societies can be efficient and progressive when competitive forces are present to inhibit the exercise of arbitrary power. But competition requires nurture. Voluntary agreements which encourage foreign sellers to organize in order to restrain their American sales foster those cartels and exporters ' organizations which we have for many years sought to eliminate. Clearly voluntary agreements need to be used with circumspection The need to protect U.S. industries from market disruptions in the near future will be reduced significantly by the recent realignment of currencies Products imported from Japan and many Western European countries will be higher priced in U.S. markets as a result of the revaluations of these currencies. At the same time the impetus to U.S. export industries from the currency realignments together with the general thrust of economic expansion will provide more varied and more productive alternative uses for resources now employed in the industries most vulnerable to imports AGRICULTURAL TRADE International trade in agricultural commodities continues to be impeded by a variety of import restrictions. The economic and social conditions in nearly every major industrialized country present serious problems of adjustment for resources employed in agriculture quite apart from international trade considerations. Most governments have responded to this problem by adopting domestic price-support measures that are supplemented by restric- tive trade policies. Tensions over these policies have been growing and surfaced prominently in Unlike trade in manufactured products agricultural trade received little substantive attention in the successive rounds of negotiations which reduced international tariff barriers in the postwar years. Indeed many developed countries including the United States pursued domestic agricultural policies that resulted in an increased level of protection against agricultural imports. This was particularly true in the European Community where internal prices have been pegged substantially above import prices through a complex system of import levies and export subsidies During the United Kingdom partly in preparation for EC membership moved from a consumer-oriented relatively liberal import policy toward the EC system by raising minimum import prices on grains and other commodities. The support price to Japanese rice producers was nearly doubled during the 's and is one reason why Japan is no longer a significant importer but instead faces burdensome rice surpluses The United States has a significant comparative advantage in many agricultural products and therefore has a clear interest in reducing existing impediments to trade in these products. It is also clear that price-support techniques now used in most industrial countries including the United States are major impediments to the development of freer trade in agriculture Agricultural support policies in the United States have been substantially modified in recent years. Direct payments have been substituted for high price supports for major grains and cotton commodities that are traditionally exported. This change has permitted market forces to have more influence over actual prices and has reduced the necessity for large export subsidies and import restrictions. The Agricultural Act of extends these reforms and improves upon them by giving farmers greater freedom in their planning decisions Despite these reforms a number of commodities continue to receive support through the price mechanism and pose problems for a liberal trade policy. Price supports for milk for example have been increased over percent in the past years. Partly for this reason and partly because of distortions in world markets caused by similar programs abroad most dairy imports are now subject to quotas. Four additional dairy products were brought under quotas beginning in Also like most developed countries the United States maintains a sugar program that encourages domestic production through high internal prices. Quotas limit imports and thereby support internal prices. The U.S. sugar program was extended for years in Several traditional export commodities are supported by limitations on production and substantial export subsidies About percent of our rice production for instance is exported with the aid of export subsidies and concessional sales to developing countries There is now realization that agricultural trade is an important item on the negotiating agenda. There is also agreement that freer trade in agricultural products can occur only if the basic problem of agricultural adjustment and the techniques for providing assistance to farmers are dealt with in an international context. As the President 's Commission on International Trade and Investment Policy stated " the time is ripe for a concerted international effort to deal with all aspects of the problem including in particular the levels and techniques of agricultural support. " The Commission 's analysis and work done elsewhere suggest the following important guidelines for future negotiations on agricultural trade : Discussions over agricultural trade policies will be unproductive until domestic techniques of support are modified New policies will be needed to aid the adjustment of some resources particularly low-income workers to more productive and higher income pursuits Importing countries must participate with exporting countries in facilitating adjustment if an improvement in the international use of resources is to be obtained While each country must be free to provide income assistance to those employed in agriculture the mechanisms for this assistance should minimize interference with production consumption and trade EAST-WEST TRADE The widening of the political dialogue between the United States and Communist nations in was accompanied by trade expansion measures Commercial relations between state-controlled and free-enterprise economies present problems unlike those which are experienced in trade between predominantly market-oriented economies. Private firms for example can be at a disadvantage in dealing with large state-trading agencies and legal recourse by individual firms against foreign states may be difficult. It is awkward to apply commercial policy codes that have been negotiated among governments of market-oriented countries such as those embodied in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to rigorously socialized states And the Communist countries can more readily employ economic relationships for political ends than is possible for the free-enterprise states. Furthermore legislation in the United States and elsewhere places restrictions on private and public trade and credit in connection with Communist countries. And regulations in both the Communist countries and the West restrict the movement of trade representatives. Finally the Communist states are not party to a number of important international economic organizations and conventions Several significant changes occurred in U.S. trading relationships with the Communist countries in The President 's announcements that he would visit Peking and Moscow in were preceded by a proclamation in June lifting the embargo on imports from the People 's Republic of China and freeing a long list of U.S. goods for export to that area. A requirement that percent of U.S. exports of wheat flour and other grains to Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union be carried in U.S. vessels was also lifted. The termination of this requirement facilitated the sale in November of over $ million in U.S. feed grains to the Soviet Union the first such grain sales since An amendment to the Export-Import Bank Act in August authorized the President to extend Export-Import Bank credits to further exports to Communist countries when he finds this to be in the national interest. In his first use of this authority the President directed the Bank to participate in financing exports to Rumania Two Soviet Deputy Ministers of Foreign Trade visited the United States in and at the end of the year the U.S. Secretary of Commerce led a trade delegation from this country to Moscow and Warsaw. U.S.-Soviet talks on trade and shipping are to be continued in GENERALIZED PREFERENCES FOR EXPORTS OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES In October the President voiced his support for the adoption by all developed countries of a liberal system of generalized tariff preferences for the exports of lower-income countries. The step is seen as a means of facilitating the economic growth of less developed areas by encouraging their integration into an interdependent world economy. It is also a means of reversing the trend toward specialized preferences whereby a limited number of developing countries have secured access to the markets of particular developed countries especially those in the European Community. All too often this has occurred in conjunction with " reverse preferences " which open the developing countries ' markets in a discriminator ) way. Proposals made by the members of the OECD were accepted in by the United Nations General Assembly as a " mutually acceptable " basis for the establishment of a generalized preference system. The European Community and Japan have initiated systems based on their proposals Action on Generalized Preferences by the United States was delayed in by the unsatisfactory state of the balance of payments. The agreement of December on exchange-rate realignment in moderating the potential balance-of-payments problem for the near future enabled the President on December to announce his intention to submit Generalized Preference legislation to Congress in A POSITIVE PROGRAM FOR FREER TRADE In international trade as in domestic trade increased specialization and exchange offer prospects for large gains in productivity. Imports enrich both consumption and investment by increasing the variety of products available to users and by lowering their costs. At the same time imports into a country provide the funds with which other countries can purchase its exports. Re- ductions in impediments to freer flows of trade therefore lead to higher standards of living which are widely shared To prevent the changes in patterns of production and consumption which accompany a growing interchange of goods and services from being disruptive it is important that market adjustments of two kinds take place efficiently : When imbalances develop between the growth of exports and imports and if these lead to an overall payments imbalance a mechanism is necessary to bring about corrections. Variations of international exchange rates by realigning costs and prices among countries constitute one very efficient process When changes in demand patterns call for changes in the patterns of production and employment a mechanism of internal adjustment is needed to make sure that capital and labor in industries which lose market position can shift readily to growing opportunities in other fields In the United States initiated major steps to improve both of these forms of adjustment. Important measures were taken in the international monetary field notably a significant realignment of exchange rates and a broadening of the band within which exchange rates can move freely In the domestic economy general policies were adopted to curb inflation and to expand economic activity and employment opportunities and work was begun to develop broader arrangements for assisting adjustment by firms and workers affected by the liberalization of trade Measures were also taken which can enhance the contribution which two major sectors of the economy make to exports One of these sectors is high-technology industry. Such industries require large investments in research and development. This Nation 's comparative advantage in the sector depends on its continued technological leadership To maintain this leadership the Administration has developed proposals to stimulate research and development investment The other sector is agriculture. The potential for U.S. agricultural exports is not now realized because serious impediments bar the way to increased trade in agricultural products mainly in the form of high price supports in important markets abroad. While U.S. agricultural policy has been substantially revised in recent years away from high price support programs corresponding action has not been taken in other countries. Negotiations are in progress which have as their goal the reduction of impediments to agricultural trade Most of the postwar growth in international trade has come from increased exchange of manufactured products and it has taken place among the developed nations of the world. As less developed countries move away from heavy reliance on primary production into manufacturing activities they too will need to participate more actively in the interchange of manufactures. Agreement has been reached among the developed countries of the world and between them and less developed countries on a program through which exports from less developed countries will be given preferential treatment in developed country markets. In the implementation of this program the United States is seeking to minimize the discrimination which developed countries apply to such imports by source and to eliminate the practice by which " reverse preferences " have been granted by some of the developing countries to some developed ones. Legislation to implement a U.S. program in this area is in preparation Over the past years the major economies of the world including the United States have enjoyed very high rates of growth in output and income These rates have been higher than anyone predicted at the end of World War II and clearly higher than could have been predicted on the basis of experience prior to that time. One reason that these gains have been possible has been the rapid expansion in the interchange of goods and services that has been brought about by a steady dismantling of impediments to international trade Continued progress toward further reductions in existing barriers will require positive policies by both the United States and its trading partners The international monetary arrangements will have to be made more flexible to accommodate unpredictable changes in world production and consumption patterns. At the same time domestic and international policies will have to provide a milieu of expanding employment opportunities in order to facilitate the reabsorption of resources displaced by change If both sets of policies are successful the shifts which result from change will cease to be feared as harmful dislocations and will be recognized as part of a desirable movement toward higher economic benefits in which most people share Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully PAUL W. MCCRACKEN Chairman EZRA SOLOMON HERBERT STEIN Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During During a far-reaching program in economic policy was put in place the most far-reaching in the postwar period. The Council contributed to the formulation and implementation of this program and also continued to participate in many policy-oriented activities of Government Significant changes in the membership of the Council took place during the year. Hendrik S. Houthakker resigned in July to return to his position as Professor of Economics at Harvard University. He was succeeded by Ezra Solomon whose appointment was confirmed by the Senate on June Mr. Solomon is on leave from Stanford University where he is the Dean Witter Professor of Finance Past Council Members and their dates of service are listed below Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns NeilH.Jacoby Walter W.Stewart Raymond J.Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken. Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich James Tobin Kermit Gordon _ _ WalterW. Heller... Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis.. Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun. James S. Duesenberry. Merton J. Peck Warren L.Smith Hendrik S. Houthakker Position Oath of office date Separation date Chairman. Vice Chairman..Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member.. ChairmanMember-.Member.. Member.. Chairman. Member. Member.. Member.. Member.. Member Member.. Chairman. MemberChairmanMember.. Member.. Member.. Chairman. Member.. Member.. Member.. Member.. August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February November January February August January December February April January October January January January July December November February August February January June January January July Paul W. McCracken Chairman from February resigned to return to the chair of Edmund Ezra Day University Professor of Business Administration at the University of Michigan his resignation taking effect on January The President designated Herbert Stein also a Member of the Council from February to succeed Mr. McCracken as Chairman ECONOMIC POLICYMAKING AND THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COUNCIL The central responsibilities of the Council continued to be to provide the President with information and analysis of economic conditions to evaluate economic policy and to make recommendations designed to foster the goals of the Employment Act of In this act the Congress has declared that " it is the continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to use all practicable means consistent with its needs and obligations and other essential considerations of national policy to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " The challenge of economic policy in was to make progress toward the stipulated objectives of the Employment Act while at the same time recognizing such " other essential considerations of national policy " as strengthening the basis for a more stable price level and improving our external payments position The President is kept informed of economic developments and of the Council 's views through personal discussions and memoranda from the Chairman. Presentations and written comments are also made to the Cabinet and Domestic Affairs Council the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy the " Troika " the " Quadriad " other Administration officials and the Congress. Such communications reflect a continued careful monitoring of current economic developments and projections by the use of a variety of statistical and analytical tools The Council staff works with other agencies to appraise existing activities of the Federal Government and to develop new programs. It also reviews bills proposed for action by the Congress and submits recommendations. The Council 's recommendations give particular attention to economic implications of prospective programs and actions. During the Council formally expressed opinions on about bills in various stages of the legislative process As in previous years the Council and its staff participated in the Administration 's examination and formulation of programs and policies in many areas. These were directed toward such matters as energy environmental quality international trade and finance research and development transportation trade adjustment assistance and assistance to communities affected by defense cutbacks. The Council also provided leadership to interagency studies of the problems in particular industries and in relation to particular products notably steel and timber In addition to this variety of ongoing activities the Council helped to design the comprehensive new economic program that was instituted to deal simultaneously with domestic and international problems affecting the U.S. economy. Subsequent to its adoption members and the staff helped to resolve questions which arose early in the operation of the new program to explain the program to the public and to develop the policies further POLICY COORDINATION The Council and its staff maintained close contact with other Government officials in order to share viewpoints and coordinate policy activities Communication between the Treasury Department the Office of Management and Budget and the Council of Economic Advisers continued to be closely coordinated. The Secretary of the Treasury the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Chairman of the Council known collectively as the " Troika " met frequently to discuss economic developments and policy issues. There are also second- and third-tier Troika groups. The second tier consists of one of the other two Council Members the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy and the Economist for the Office of Management and Budget. The third tier comprises senior staff economists from the three agencies. Memoranda on the outlook were prepared periodically in by the latter group and submitted to the second tier of the Troika for approval before transmission to the three agency heads. The President met regularly with the Troika and from time to time the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System joined Troika meetings thus forming the " Quadriad. " One of the vehicles for coordinating broad economic policies within the Executive Office is the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy established by Executive Order of the President on January Members include the President the Vice President the Secretaries of the Treasury Agriculture Commerce Labor and Housing and Urban Development the Director of the Office of Management and Budget the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs. The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers coordinates the work of the Committee In the Chairman of the Council continued to serve as a member of the Domestic Affairs Council and as Chairman of its Subcommittee on the National Energy Situation. The Chairman also served as a member of the Property Review Board the National Commission on Productivity the Defense Programs Review Committee and the Regulations and Purchasing Review Board. Reflecting the Council 's wide range of interests the other two members and the Senior Staff Economists also participated in a number of inter agency committees task forces and study groups The Council 's active role in the development of the new economic program began with the meetings that preceded the President 's address on August The Chairman served as Vice Chairman of the Cost of Living Council and during the period of the freeze as Chairman of the Executive Policy Committee of the Cost of Living Council. Mr. Stein headed the Task Force of the Cost of Living Council which prepared recommendations to the Council for a program to follow the freeze The Council of Economic Advisers testified several times during the year before the Joint Economic Committee a committee with which the Council has a particularly close association. In accordance with annual practice testimony on the economic outlook was presented by the three Council Members on February following submission of the Economic Report to Congress. On February the Chairman joined the Secretary of the Treasury and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in testimony before the Senate Appropriations Committee ; similar testimony was given before the House Appropriations Committee on February The Chairman appeared before the Subcommittee on Foreign Economic Policy of the Joint Economic Committee on June to discuss issues related to the role of the United States in the world economy. Testimony was also given by the Chairman and by Mr. Stein before the Joint Economic Committee on July concerning the state of the economy at midyear and on August the Chairman testified concerning the new program for domestic and international economic policy. In addition the Chairman presented testimony on June to the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs in regard to the national energy situation ; and on December he appeared before the House Public Works Committee to discuss issues involved in amending the Federal Water Pollution Control Act In the international sphere Council Members and staff took part in meetings of the Economic Policy Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The Chairman of the Council was again head of the U.S. delegation to meetings of the Economic Policy Committee and in he served this Committee as Vice Chairman. Through this Committee member nations seek better understanding and coordination of their domestic economic policies. The Council Members and Senior Staff Economists also participated in several subcommittees of the Economic Policy Committee including Working Party III on the balance of payments and international financial problems the Working Party Group on ShortTerm Economic Prospects Working Party IV on inflation Working Party II on promotion of long-term economic growth and the Manpower and Social Affairs Committee on problems and policies relating to manpower and the labor market The Chairman of the Council was also a member of the U.S. delegation which engaged in joint Cabinet discussions with Japan in September NATIONAL COMMISSION ON PRODUCTIVITY The National Commission on Productivity was established by the President in June to recommend ways to improve productivity in the American economy. Members represent industry labor agriculture the public and State local and Federal governments. The Director of the Office of Management and Budget acts as Chairman. Other Federal Government representatives are the Secretaries of the Treasury Commerce and Labor the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Special Assistant to the President for Consumer Affairs. The staff of the Commission at the end of included an Executive Director and three other professional members. The Commission received administrative services from the Council of Economic Advisers and its budget was included in the budget of the Council in fiscal year The Economic Stabilization Act of as amended and extended in December sets forth a number of objectives for the Commission and contains authorization for appropriations to carry out its activities during the period ending April PUBLICATIONS The annual Economic Report is the principal means by which the Council provides the public with information and analysis of economic conditions and policies. About copies of the February Economic Report have been distributed. The Statistical Office of the Council prepares Economic Indicators which is issued monthly by the Joint Economic Committee. Approximately copies of this publication are currently circulated NEEDED LEGISLATION The Employment Act of requires that the Economic Report be transmitted to the Congress not later than January of each year. It is also a statutory requirement that the Budget be sent to the Congress " during the first days of each regular session " ; customarily the Economic Report is presented a few days after the Budget. The fact that in recent years the Congress has not convened until after mid-January however has resulted in a later date for the transmission of the Budget and hence for the Economic Report as well. These later dates for the convening of the Congress and the transmission of the Budget have repeatedly necessitated a joint resolution of the Congress to permit the Economic Report to be presented after the statutory deadline of January Accordingly it would be advisable to amend the Employment Act of to provide that the Economic Report shall be transmitted to the Congress not later than days after the Budget. This would retain the desirable features of a deadline but would automatically ensure its consistency with whatever date the Congress might set to conyene PUBLIC CONTACTS From time to time during the year the Council met with groups of academic business and labor economists to discuss questions of mutual interest. Many individuals including businessmen labor leaders foreign visitors students and educators also visited Council Members for discussions. Another important channel of communication was the substantial number of speeches on economic developments and policy made throughout the year by Council Members and Senior Staff Economists. Finally continuing contacts were maintained with representatives of the news media through personal interviews and telephone conversations ORGANIZATION AND STAFF OF THE COUNCIL OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN The Chairman is responsible for reporting the Council 's views to the President as officially provided by the Employment Act as amended by Reorganization Plan No. in This duty was discharged through direct consultations with the President and written comments on economic developments and policy considerations. The Chairman also represented the Council at Cabinet meetings and at many other formal meetings and other contacts with Government officials. He also exercised ultimate responsibility for directing the work of the professional staff COUNCIL MEMBERS The other two Council Members directly supervised the work of the professional staff. Although the Council is not organized into departments there has been an informal division of responsibilities by subject area Mr. Stein 's areas in included forecasting and analysis of economic conditions medium-term economic projections fiscal policy and taxation Federal budget matters Federal credit programs monetary policy financial institutions welfare and social security agriculture defense manpower and wages and industrial relations Responsibility for directing the work in international finance and trade policy foreign aid and economic development transportation and regulated industries individual price behavior technology environment antitrust health and education housing private finance energy and urban and regional problems was handled by Mr. Solomon in after Mr. Houthakker resigned PROFESSIONAL STAFF At the end of the professional staff consisted of Senior Staff Economists two Statisticians five Junior Economists and two Research Assistants. Members of the professional staff were responsible for economic analyses and policy recommendations in major subject areas involving the Council 's interests and responsibilities. In addition Staff Economists carried out many different Council and interagency assignments requiring a broad application of their general knowledge and analytical skills. The professional staff and their special fields at the end of the year were : John D. Darroch Murray F. Foss William E. Gibson Eric A. Hanushek A. Gilbert Heebner Alan K. McAdams Edward J. Mitchell J. Carter Murphy June A. O'Neill Mark J. Riedy Frank C. Ripley Bernard Saffran Gary L. Seevers James R. Wetzel Senior Staff Economists Prices and Industry Studies Economic Analysis and Forecasting Monetary Policy Financial Markets International Finance Urban Economics and Health Education and Welfare Special Assistant to the Chairman Environment Industry Regulation Research and Development Energy Policy Natural Resources Industry Problems International Finance and Trade Manpower Programs and Health Education and Welfare Housing Private Finance Business Conditions Economic Analysis and Forecasting Fiscal Policy and Public Finance Agriculture and International Trade Labor Economics and Manpower Statisticians Frances M. James Catherine H. Furlong Senior Statistician Statistician Junior Staff Economists Rayton Gerald William R. Keeton David C. Munro Lydia Segal H. Kemble Stokes Jr Financial Markets International Finance and Trade Economic Analysis and Forecasting Economic Analysis and Forecasting Monetary and Fiscal Policies Research Assistants Zell Berman Joanne M. Vinyard Frances M. James Senior Staff Statistician continued to be in charge of the Council 's Statistical Office. Miss James had major responsibility for managing the Council 's economic and statistical information system She supervised the publication of Economic Indicators and the preparation of tables and charts for the Economic Report and for a wide variety of meetings throughout the year. She also handled the fact checking of memoranda testimony and speeches. Dorothy Bagovich Catherine H. Furlong V. Madge McMahon and Natalie V. Rentfro assisted Miss James The Council also conducted a student intern program employing a limited number of promising students of economics both graduate and undergraduate for various periods but particularly during the summer months The interns were Daniel K. Benjamin ( University of California Los Angeles ) Philip A. Cummins ( Princeton University ) Leslie Farber ( University of Minnesota ) Keith R. McLaren ( Northwestern University ) Alan A. Rabin ( University of Virginia ) David H. Schaefer ( University of California Santa Cruz ) and Daniel L. Wisecarver ( University of Chicago ) At the end of the list of economists serving as consultants to the Council included John T. Dunlop ( Harvard University ) Ray C. Fair ( Princeton University ) Milton Friedman ( University of Chicago ) Alan Greenspan ( Townsend-Greenspan & Co. ) Gottfried Haberler ( Harvard University ) Arnold C. Harberger ( University of Chicago ) Hendrik S Houthakker ( Harvard University ) Stephen P. Magee ( University of Chicago ) John R. Meyer ( National Bureau of Economic Research ) Thomas G Moore ( Michigan State University ) Saul Nelson ( private consultant ) David J. Ott ( Clark University ) George J. Stigler ( University of Chicago ) Stephen J. Tonsor ( University of Michigan ) Lloyd Ulman ( University of California Berkeley ) Marina v.N. Whitman ( University of Pittsburgh ) Thomas D. Willett ( Cornell University ) and G. Paul Wonnacott ( University of Maryland ) In preparing the Economic Report the Council relied upon the editorial assistance of Rosannah C. Steinhoff ( University of Michigan ) SUPPORTING STAFF The Administrative Office coordinates the activities of all supporting personnel responsible for preparation and analysis of the Council 's budget procurement of equipment and supplies processing of legislative referrals distribution of Council speeches reports and congressional testimony and responding to correspondence and inquiries from the general public. James H. Ayres served as Administrative Officer assisted by Nancy F. Skidmore Elizabeth A. Kaminski Margaret L. Snyder and Bettye T. Siegel. The duplicating mail and messenger department was operated by James W Gatling Frank C. Norman and A. Keith Miles Secretarial staff members were Daisy S. Babione Mayme Burnett Evelyn D. DeZerne Mary Catherine Fibich Dorothy L. Green Lillie M. Hayes Laura B. Hoffman Bessie M. Lafakis Patricia A. Lee Karen J. MacFarland Eleanor A. McStay Joyce A. Pilkerton Earnestine Reid Linda A Reilly and Alice H. Williams DEPARTURES The Council 's professional staff is drawn primarily from universities and research institutions and these economists normally serve for or years. Senior Staff Economists who resigned during the year were Robert A. Kelly ( Department of Housing and Urban Development ) Marvin H Kosters ( Department of Labor ) Irene Lurie ( University of Wisconsin ) Michael H. Moskow ( Department of Labor ) Sam Peltzman ( University of California Los Angeles ) Rudolph G. Penner ( University of Rochester ) William L. Silber ( New York University ) T. Nicolaus Tideman ( Harvard University ) and Marina v.N. Whitman ( University of Pittsburgh ) Sidney L. Jones also resigned from the position of Special Assistant to the Chairman to return to the University of Michigan. Junior Economists who resigned in were Christine H. Branson and J. Michael Swint. Other resignations included Elizabeth F. Gray Secretary and Judson A. Byrd of the Administrative Office. Teresa D. Bradburn of the Statistical Office and Dorothy L. Reid ; Secretary retired from Federal service during Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION CONTENTS National income or expenditure : B l Gross national product or expenditure B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product B-4. Gross national product by major type of product B-5. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars B-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups B-7. Gross national product by sector B-8. Gross national product by sector in dollars B-9. Gross national product by industry in dollars B-10. Personal consumption expenditures B-l Gross private domestic investment B-12. National income by type of income B-l Relation of gross national product and national income B l Relation of national income and personal income B-15. Disposition of personal income B l Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars B-17. Sources of personal income B-18. Sources and uses of gross saving B-19. Saving by individuals B-20. Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individuals by race of head Population employment wages and productivity : B-21. Population by age groups B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force B-23. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age B-24. Selected unemployment rates B-25. Unemployment by duration B-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-28. Average weekly hours of work in private nonagricultural industries B Average gross hourly earnings in private nonagricultural industries and in agriculture B-30. Average gross weekly earnings in private nonagricultural industries B-31. Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross and excluding overtime in manufacturing industries B-32. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and dollars B-33. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and dollars B-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy Page Production and business activity : B-35. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions B-36. Industrial production indexes market groupings B-37. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures B-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate B-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-40. New construction activity B New housing starts and applications for financing B-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade B-43. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories B-44. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders Prices : B-45. Consumer price indexes by major groups B-46. Consumer price indexes by special groups B Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services B Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups B-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing B-50. Percentage changes from previous month in indexes for major groupings of the consumer price index B-51. Percentage changes from previous month in indexes for major groupings of the wholesale price index Money stock credit and finance : B-52. Money stock measures B-53. Bank loans and investments B-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors B-55. Selected liquid assets held by the public B-56. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves B-57. Bond yields and interest rates B Short- and inter mediate-term consumer credit outstanding B-59. Instalment credit extended and repaid B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing B-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender B-62. Net public and private debt Government finance : B-63. Federal budget receipts and outlays B-64. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt B-65. Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts B-66. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts B-67. Public debt securities by kind of obligation B-68. Estimated ownership of public debt securities B-69. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interestbearing public debt B-70. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts B-71. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts B-72. State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years Page Corporate profits and finance : B-73. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations B-74. Sales profits and stockholders ' equity all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) B-75. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations ( except newspapers ) by industry group B-76. Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business B-77. Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations B-78. State and municipal and corporate securities offered B-79. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit B-80. Business formation and business failures Agriculture : B Income of farm people and farmers B-82. Farm production indexes B-83. Farm population employment and productivity B-84. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-85. Selected measures of farm resources and inputs B-86. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector Page International statistics : B-87. U.S. balance of payments B-88. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups B-89. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area B-90. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area fiscal years B-91. International reserves and B-92. U.S. reserve assets B-93. Price changes in international trade B-94. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries General Notes Detail in these tables will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Government purchases of goods and services * Gross private domestic investment ' Net exports of goods and services ) ! Year or quarter Personal consumption expenditures i Total gross national product Federal Total Total National defenseJ Other State and local Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II Ill IV : IL III IV See Table B-10 for detailed components See Table B-ll for detailed components See Table B-6 for exports and imports separately * Net of Government sales This category corresponds closely to the national defense classification in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Total gross national product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Total Residential structures Change in business inventories i i I960. ? Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. : I II. IV * See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in dollars Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Net exports of goods and services Government purchasesl of goods and services Year or quarter Net exports Imports Exports Total Federal State and local v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV v __ II III IV * Net of Government sales Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product [ Index numbers = ] Gross private domestic investment * Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Fixed investment Total gross national Nonresidential ucU Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Structures Producers ' durable equipment Residential structures v Seasonally adjusted : II. III IV : II III IVr See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-3. Implicit price deflators for gross national product Continued [ Index numbers = Exports and imports lof goods and services Government purchases of goods and services Gross national product by sector Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Federal State and local Private * General government * Seasonally adjusted : L II III IV : II III IV * Separate deflators are not available for total gross private domestic investment change in business inventories and net exports of goods and services Gross national product less compensation of general government employees. See also Tables B-7 and B-8 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-4. Gross national product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ] Goods output Total gross national product Year or quarter Final sales la c o Durable goods Total Final Total sales II Total > o Final sales Nondurable goods II Total I Final sales II Gross Serv- Struc- auto ices tures product I " 9C.4 ? ? fi l.'l ? n _ ! ? l ! ? ? R ? ? ? ? fi S S ? ? I960 fi fi ? ? fi n fi ? q ? fi ? ? ? * i ! i ? ? i n fi ? ? ? ? ? 3h Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L___ II.. III. IV. : L I I ML. IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-5. Gross national product by major type of product in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter Final sales Inventory change Goods output Total gross national product > Final Total sales ? n ? q o I960 v II Final Total sales S.S Gross auto product c t Final Total sales Serv- Strucices tures II | l Nondijrable goods Durable go ) ds Total " io. " Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III.. IVP. : L II.. ML IV.. Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis C ) ( > ; I 6.JI 225./ ( ) ,J ) ( ) e> I ^ \ : $ ( ) 223.C TABLE B Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups [ Billions of dollars ] Government Persons Disposable personal income Year or quarter Less : Interest paid and Total transfer payments to foreigners I960. p Expenditures Surplus or PerPerdeficit sonal sonal <- ) Less : Tax Equals : Less : Equals : connaTotal sump- saving and TransTransPuror fers Equals : Total nontion fers excludchases tional disintax exexing ininterNet interof come est rerependiterest pendi- saving goods and tures ceipts and ceipts tures and and and prodtransor ac- subsubservuct acfers cruals sidies sidies ' ices counts Net receipts -L8 ZZ73 : I III... IV... : IIL. IV P. ! n.n Seasonally adjusted annual rates See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-6. Gross national product : Receipts and expenditures by major economic groups Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Business Year or quarter Gross Gross prirevate tained domesearntic ings investment * International Net transfers to forExcess of in- eigners vestby perment sons and Government Net exports of goods and services Exports Less : Imports Equals : Net exports 1971P_ R8.8 : I II. III. IV. : I II. III ! Excess of transfers or of net exports ( ) Total Statisincome tical disor recrepceipts ancy Gross national product or expenditure ] Seasonally adjusted annual rates Personal income less personal tax and nontax payments ( fines penalties etc. ) Government transfer payments to persons foreign net transfers by Government net interest paid by government subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises and disbursements less wage accruals Undistributed corporate profits corporate inventory valuation adjustment capital consumption allowances and private wage accruals less disbursements Private business investment purchases of capital goods by private nonprofit institutions and residential housing See Table B l l Net foreign investment less capital grants received by the United States with sign changed Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-7. Gross national product by sector [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private product Year or quarter Total gross national product House- Business Total Total Nonfarm2 Farm holds and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product * ? I960. 2L.5 1971J ' Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. III. IV.. : II.. III. IV p. Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-8. Gross national product by sector in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private product1 Year or quarter Total gross national product Business Total Total Nonfarm ' Farm Households and institutions Rest of the world Gross government product3 i v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II Ill IV : L II III IV * __ Gross national product less compensation of general government employees Includes compensation of employees in government enterprises. Government enterprises are those agencies of government whose operating costs are to a substantial extent covered by the sale of goods and services in contrast to the general activities of government which are financed mainly by tax revenues and debt creation Compensation of general government employees Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis 451-ft O TABLE B-9. Gross national product by industry in dollars [ Billions of dollars ] AgriTotal culture Congross fores- tract natry contional and strucproduct fishtion eries Year Manufacturing Total Transportation comDuNonmunirable durable goods goods cation and indus- indus- utilitries tries ties sale and retail trade GovFinance erninsurment ance Servand All and ices govern- other real ment estate enterprises Mining rest of the world and residual ( the difference between gross national product measured as sum of final products and gross national product measured as sum of gross product by industries ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-10. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] I h h il | | ce o Year or quarter o E o Nondurable goods Durable goods S < o T3 C CO o o " O c CO o u 3> c o o c co w'5 fl Is Services LU I " o c So o X o " v.. Seasonally adjusted annual rates II II IV : II. Ill IV : Includes standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Change in business inventories Fixet1 investment Total gross private domestic investment Year or quarter Nonresidential Producers ' durable equipment Structures Total Residential structures Total Total Total Total Nonfarm Total Nonform Nonfarm Farm Nonfarm L8 3.n v ._-_ _ ] It Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II Ill IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-12. National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter Total national income Total Business and professional income SuppleWages ments to and sala- wages ries and salaries * Total Income Inventory of valuunincorpo- ation rated adjustenter- ment prises Income of farm proprietors Rental income nf or persons Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Total Net Inven- intertory est rate profits valubefore ation taxes ' adjustment -A ? v ! o .'o n o Seasonally adjusted annual rates II III IV. : L II I I I IV v * National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross national product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-13 s Employer contributions for social insurance and to private pension health and welfare funds ; compensation for injuries ; directors ' fees ; pay of the military reserve ; and a few other minor items Includes change in inventories < See Table B-73 tor corporate tax liability and profits after taxes Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-13. Relation of gross national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Year or quarter Less : Capital consumption allowances Plus : SubEquals : sidies less Net current surplus tional of govprodernuct ment enterprises Less : Indirect business tax and nontax liability Total Federal State and local Business transfer payments Statistical discrepancy Equals : tional income <72.2 _ i _ _ l _ * '.5 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : | | III IV : II III IV v Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-14. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter National income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Equals : >lus Less : Contri- Wage Govbutions accruals ernment transfer less for social dispayments insur- burse- ; to perance ments sons Interest paid by governDiviment dends ( net ) and by consumers Business Personal transfer income payments -l ! L.7 P JO. Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II. III IV. : I.. II. III IV v Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-15. Disposition of personal income Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Total PerPersonal Interest sonal contransfer sump- paid by paytion con ments expendto foritures eigners Equals : Personal saving Personal outlays Total Billions of dollars Consumption expenditures Personal saving Percent " ^ I960. ^ I * v ! Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I.. II.. III. IV. : I.. II. ML IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-16. Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures in current and dollars Personal consumption expenditures Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Population ( thou- Per capita ( dollars ) dollars Current dollars 1,R31 Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars : * Current dollars dollars Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV * Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are for July ; quarterly data are for middle of period interpolated from monthly data Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-17. Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Wage and salary disbursementsl Year or quarter Total personal income Commodityproducing industries Total Total Manufacturing Distrib- Service utive indus- industries tries Proprietors ' inc Dme Government Other labor income1 Business and professional Farm> v Seasonally adjusted annua rates II III IV : II III.. IV p See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-17. Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ] Transfer payments Year or quarter Rental income Diviof per- dends sons Personal interest income Old age survivors disability Total and health insurance benefits State unemployment insurance benefits Veterans hpnpfifc Other Less : Personal contributions for social insurance Nonagricultural personal income v Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I IV : I Ill IV p The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-12 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements Includes change in inventories Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Sources and uses of gross saving [ Billions of dollars ] Gross private saving and government surplus or deficit national income and product accounts Government surplus or deficit ( ) Private saving Year or quarter Total Total Gross investment Gross Perbusisonal ness saving saving Total Federal State and local Capital grants received by the United States Total Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment ^ Statistical discrepancy _ _ _ v j o Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II.. III... IV * : L _ II III IV.. Net exports of Surplus of $ goods and services less net transfers to foreigners million Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-19. Saving by individuals [ Billions of dollars ] Increase in financial assets Net investment in Less : Increase in debt Securities Year or quarter Total Currency and Total demand deposits InsurNon- Mortance corgage and ConSavdebt Con- Other lorpopen- Non- sumer poings Govfarm rate on sumer debt * rate Corpo- sion duacernand re- homes rables busi- non- credit rate ounts ment forness farm serves stock * bonds : eign assets homes bonds I960. _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II Ill IV. : I IL Ill Individuals ' saving sector includes households private trust funds nonprofit institutions farms and other noncorporate business Includes miscellaneous financial assets not shown separately U.S. Government and agency securities and State and local obligations * Includes investment company shares Private life insurance reserves private insured and noninsured pension reserves and government insurance and pension reserves Security credit policy loans noncorporate business debt and other debt Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-20. Number and money income ( in dollars ) of families and unrelated individualst by race of head Total Year Total number ( millions ) White With incomes under $ Total number Median ( milincome NumPer- lions ) ber cent ( millions ) Median income $ $ Negro and other races With incomes under $ Total number Number Per- ( millions ) ( milcent lions ) With incomes under $ Median income Number ( millions ) Percent FAMILIES _ $ With incomes under $ With incomes under $ With incomes under $ Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( milI ions ) Number ( millions ) Percent Percent UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS : $ $ $ The term " family " refers to a group of two or more persons related by blood marriage or adoption and residing together ; all such persons are considered members of the same family Based on revised methodology The term " unrelated individuals " refers to persons years old and over ( other than inmates of institutions ) who are not living with any relatives Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B-21. Population by age groups [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over ^ i i ? i Data for shown here are based on the Census. See Table B-16 for total population for these years based on the Census. Data bv age on the Census basis are now available only for See below Based on the Census/ * * " " ~ ~ Note. Data for Armed Forces overseas included beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Total labor force ( including Armed Forces ) Employment Armed Forces Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over Total labor force as percent of noninstitutional population Unemployment as percent of civilian labor force Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Percent I ! ? I960. j > P0,793 ? t 3,P44 : Jan. Feb.. Mar. Apr. May. June. 139,09r U ^ 7P,357 39< ? July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov_ Dec ? 140,67C II * * See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-22. Noninstitutional population and the labor force Continued Civilian labor force Year or month Noninstitutional population Total labor force ( including Armed Forces ) Armed Forces I Imployment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Unemlabor force as ployment percent as perof non- cent of institu- civilian tional labor popuforce lation Percent < seasonally adjusted Jan Feb Mar Apr May June. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov. _ Dec ' f.q J ' > ' Note. Labor force data in Tables B-22 through B-25 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see " Employment and Earnings. " " ^ " ^ Seasonally adjusted data in this table hayg_been revised and do not agree with those published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics beginning in February They are " suBject to correction when the annual official revision of the series is published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-23. Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Employment Males Unemployment Females Males Year or month Total Total years Total years years and years and over over Total Females years years Total years and Total years and over over ; " " ! 42i " " " 4i ; " ! 2,686j26,397 ; I I 18J50 ! ! > I I Seasonally adjusted : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan... Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept._ Oct... Nov.. Dec.. 45,65C ( 45,64S 2,86C " : ; : " " : ; 49i I : " ' Note. See Note Table B-22 Seasonally adjusted data in this table have been revised and do not agree with those published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics beginning in February They are subject to correction when the annual official revision of the series is published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-24. Selected unemployment rates [ Percent ] By color By sex and age Year or month All workers Both sexes years Men years and over Women years and over By selected groups White Negro and other races Experienced wage and salary workers Married men * Fulltime workers Bluecollar workers Labor force time lost * Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb Mar_ Apr_ May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec * Married men living with their wives. Data for and are for April ; for March * Data for are for May Includes craftsmen operatives and nonfarm laborers. Data for are based on data for January April July and October < Man-hours lost by the unemployed and persons on part time for economic reasons as a percent of potentially available labor force man-hours Note. See Note Table B-22 Seasonally adjusted data in the first four columns of this table have been revised and do not agree with those published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics beginning in February They are subject to correction when the annual official revision of the series is published Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-25. Unemployment by duration Duration of unemployment Year or month Total unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Thousands of persons years of age and over ? < Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals Note. See Note Table B-22 Seasonally adjusted data in this table are as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics beginning February and therefore do not agree with data shown in Tables B-22 through B-24 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-26. Unemployment insurance programs selected data State programs All programs Year or month Covered employment i Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) Thousands p...... : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr Apr. May... June.. July... Aug Sept.. Oct Nov... Dec.. : Jan p Feb v. Mar p. Apr p.May p. June p July p.Aug p.Sept P- Oct p.. Nov p. Dec p. ' P58,918 * >60 '59 '58,715 nsured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions Unadjusted Weekly average thousands Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Seasonally adjusted Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) * Average weekly check ( dollars ) Percent Includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) and RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs. Beginning October also includes the UCX program ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemen ) Includes State UCFE RR UCX UCV ( unamploymant compansation for veterans October 1952-January ) and SRA ( Servicemen 's Readjustment Act September 1944-September ) programs. Also includes Federal and State programs for temporary extension of banafits for Juna through June and for Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Includes benefits paid under extended duration provisions of State laws beginning June Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Programs include Puerto Rican sugarcane workers for initial claims and insured unemployment beginning July Preliminary ; December is latest month for which data are available for all programs combined. Workers-covered by State programs account for about percent of the total Source : Department of Labor Manpower Administration TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Wholesale and retail trade Government Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local [ L0,623 v ( See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-27. Wage and salary workers in nonagr { cultural establishments Continued [ All employees ; thousands of persons ] Manufacturing Year or month Total wage and salary workers Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Contract construction Min- Transportation and public utilities Government Wholesale and retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services Federal State and local Seasonally adjusted Jan.. Feb.- Mar__ Apr.. May__ June. July. Aug__ Sept. Oct. Nov Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. Dec.. 70S : Jan__ Feb.._ Mar.. Apr.. May... June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct-._ Nov p Dec p : July. Aug.. Sept. Oct Nov Note. Data in Tables B-27 through B-33 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked during or received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-22 through B-25 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and unpaid family workers and which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc For description and details of the various establishment data see " Employment and Earnings. " Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-28. Average weekly hours of work in private nonagricultural industries Year or month v Total nonagricultural private Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods Mining Contract construction Transportation and public utilities Finance insurance and real estate Wholesale trade Retail trade M0.3 Services Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb.. Mar Apr.. May. June. July. _ Aug. Sept. Oct_Nov_ Dec.. : J a n Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov * _ Dec _ Beginning data include eating and drinking places Note. Hours and earnings data in Tables B-28 through B-33 relate to production workers in manufacturing and mining to construction workers in contract construction and generally to nonsupervisory employees in other industries. See Table B-31 for unadjusted weekly hours in manufacturing. See also Note Table B-27 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-29. Average gross hourly earnings in private nonagricultural industries and in agriculture Total nonYear or month agricultural private Manufacturing Total Durable goods Nondurable ? oods Contract Mining construction $ $ $ $ $ $ I L. K ? S. ? v : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July_____ Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Transportation V /holeand sale public trade utilities $ 3.8S Retail trade $ $ ? ? $ 3fiO ? ? SI SS L.76 > n ? i Weighted average of all farm wage rates on a per hour basis Beginning data include eating and drinking places Note-See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Sources : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Department of Agriculture Finance insurance and real estate Services $ Agriculture ^ $ TABLE B Average gross weekly earnings in private nonagricultural industries * Total nonagricultural private Year or month Manufacturing Total NonDurable durable goods goods TransContract portacontion and Mining strucpublic tion utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Finance insurance and real estate Services $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ i $ $ $ v : Jan Feb_.. Mar_.. Apr_.. May_ June__ July Aug Sept... Oct.... Nov... Dec.. : J a n Feb... Mar.. Apr... May... June.. J u l y A u g Sept.... Oct Nov * >_ Dec p * Beginning data include eating and drinking places Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-31 Average weekly hours and hourly earnings gross manufacturing industries Durable goods manufacturing industries All manufacturing industries Average weekly hours and excluding overtime Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Average hourly earnings in Nondurable goods manufacturing industries Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Year or month Gross Excluding overtime Gross Ex- Adjusted Excludhourly cluding earnings Gross ing over- ( overtime ) i time Gross Excluding overtime ExcludGross Gross overtime $ $ | 1.031J 5S.0 p : Jan. Feb. MarApr. May June July. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov. Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr May. June July. Aug.Sept Oct.. Nov p Dec p Excluding overtime $ $ : $ j I ! Earnings in current dollars adjusted to exclude the effects of overtime and interindustry shifts Annual average not available ; April used s Eleven-month average ; August excluded because of VJ Day holiday period Note See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 See Table B-28 for seasonally adjusted average gross weekly hours Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics $ TABLE B-32. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable total private nonagricultural industries in current and dollars Average spendable weekly earnings3 Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current dollars dollars1 Worker with no dependents Current dollars dollars1 Worker with three dependents Current dollars dollars1 $ $ $ $ $ $ P ' Jan Feb Mar Apr May June.. July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May.. June July Aug Sept. Oct Nov Dec I960 Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index > Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Note. " Total private " consists of manufacturing ; mining ; contract construction ; transportation and public utilities ; wholesale and retail trade ; finance insurance and real estate ; and services See also Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-33. Average weekly earnings gross and spendable in manufacturing industries in current and dollars Average spendable weekly earnings Average gross weekly earnings Year or month Current dollars dollars * Worker with no dependents Current dollars dollars * Worker with three dependents Current dollars dollars $ v : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec v $ $ $ $ $ Earnings in current dollars divided by the consumer price index Average gross weekly earnings less social security and income taxes Note. See Note Tables B-27 and B-28 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-34. Indexes of output per man-hour and related data private economy [ = ] Nonfarm industries Year Total private Farm Total NonMan- manufac- ufactur- turing ing Nonfarm industries Total private Output i Farm Total NonMan- manufac- ufactur- turing ing Nonfarm industries Total private Man-hours * Farm Total NonMan- manufac- ufacturturing ing Output per man-hour L04.8 1971v__ Compensation per man-hour * Implicit price deflator * Unit labor cost LOO. v i Output refers to gross national product in dMIars > Hours of all persons in private industry engaged in production including man-hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Man-hours estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers ' contribution for social insurance and private benefits plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Current dollar gross product divided by constant dollar product Note. For information on sources methodology trends and underlying factors influencing the measures see Bureau of Labor Statistics Department of Labor Bulletin No. " Handbook of Methods for Surveys and Studies " October Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B-35. Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ] Total industrial production Year or month v : / Manufacturing Mining Total Durable Utilities Nondurable Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June Julv Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec * > Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-36. Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = Materials : Final products Year or month Total industrial production Equipment Consumer goods i Total Total Automotive products Home goods Total Intermediate products Busi- Total Durable goods Nondurable goods I960. P Seasonally adjusted : Jan.. Feb. Mar_ Apr_ May._ JuneJuly. Aug. Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May_ June July. Aug_ Sept Oct._ Nov " Dec p Also includes apparel and consumer staples not shown separately Also includes industrial fuel and power not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-37. Industrial production indexes selected manufactures [ = ] Nondurable manufactures Durable manufactures Ordnance Instru- private and ments government Lumber clay and glass TexPaper Furnitiles ture and and apparel printmiscel- and ing laneous leather Chemicals petro- Foods leum and and tobacco rubber Primary metals Fabricated metal products Transportation Machinery equipment : I960. 1964_ p Year or month Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb. Mar-Apr. May. June 1C9.5 July. Aug Sept Oct. Nov. Dec. : J a n Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct. NOVP Dec * > Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System O TABLE B-38. Manufacturing output capacity and utilization rate 194S-71 IJtilization rate Period Output ^ Capacity Total output = Advanced products Primary products Percent ? v Seasonally adjusted III IV : v II P III P IV P II Ill IV II III IV : II III IV. : II III IV II May differ slightly from data shown in Table B-35 because of rounding Output as percent of capacity Note. For description of series see " Federal Reserve Bulletin " October pp. and " Federal Reserve Bulletin " November pp. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data of Federal Reserve Department of Commerce and McGraw-Hill Information Systems Company TABLE B-39. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment 1947-72l [ Billions of dollars ] Transportation Manufacturing Year or quarter Total Total Other Public utilities Communication Mining Commercial and other2 Durable goods Nondurable goods Railroad Air Ml Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II... III.. IV.. : II III.. IV... : II... Ill : | 3____ iExcludes agricultural business ; real estate operators ; medical legal educational and cultural service ; and nonprofit organizations. These figures do not agree precisely with the fixed investment data in the gross national product estimates mainly because those data include investment by farmers professionals institutions and real estate firms and certain outlays charged to current account 2Commercial and other includes trade service construction finance and insurance s Estimates based on expected capital expenditures reported by business in October-December Includes adjustments when necessary for systematic tendencies in expectations data Note. Annual total is the sum of unadjusted expenditures ; it does not necessarily coincide with the average of seasonally adjusted figures Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-40. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings l Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction i Total Total Total New housing units Total Commercials Industrial State Fedand erally locally owned owned Other * b68 New series See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-40. New construction activity Continued [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Residential buildingsx Total new Year or month construction Total Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction ' New housing units Total Total Industrial Commercials Other * State Fedand erally locally owned owned Seasonally adjusted annual rates J u l y Aug S e p t Oct N o v D e c _ : Jan Feb... Mar_._ Apr May... June.. July Aug Sept.. Oct.... Nov p_- : Jan Feb___ Mar_._ Apr_.. May.___ June.. Beginning farm residential buildings included in residential buildings ; prior to included in nonresidential buildings and other construction Total includes additions and alterations and nonhousekeeping units not shown separately Office buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential farm public utilities and all other private o Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and locally owned projects Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census except as noted TABLE B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Private i Nonfarm Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Nonfarm Proposed home construction Selected Government home programs Type of structure2 New private housing units authorized Total Total One family Two or more families FHA * VA AppliRecations quests for for VA FHA apcompraismitments * als U New series U36.8 * ( ) ( ) ( e ) ( ) See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-41. New housing starts and applications for financing Continued [ Thousands of units ] Housing starts Private and public i Private * Nonfarm Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Year or month Total ( farm and nonfarm ) Proposed home construction Selected Government home programs3 Type of structure2 Nonfarm New private housing units authorized s Total Total One family Two or more families FHA * VA AppliRecations quests for for FHA VA comapmitpraisments * als Seasonally adjusted annual rates : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr_ MayJune July. Aug_ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July_ Aug. Sept. Oct_ Nov Dec p t Units in structures built by private developers for sale upon completion to local public housing authorities under the Department of Housing and Urban Development " Turnkey " program are classified as private housing. Military housing starts including those financed with mortgages insured by FHA under Section of the National Housing Act are included in publicly financed starts but excluded from total private starts and from FHA starts s Not available prior to except for nonfarm for * Data are not available for new homes started under the Department of Agriculture Farmers Home Administration program * Units are for to 4-family housing s Data beginning cover approximately permit-issuing places. Data for are based on places and places. The addition of approximately permit-issuing places in contributed an increase of percent in total permit authorizations * Units in mortgage applications or appraisal requests for new home construction FHA program approved in June ; all activity included in * Monthly estimates for September 1945-May were prepared by Housing and Home Finance Agency Not available separately beginning January Sources : Department of Commerce Department of Housing and Urban Development and Veterans Administration except as noted TABLE B-42. Sales and inventories in manufacturing and trade [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Total manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Year or month InvenInvenSales i tories Ratio Sales i tories2 Inventories2 Ratio 196H Sales 1968__ Ratio Sales Inventories Ratio Seasonally adjusted : Jan... Feb... Mar.. Apr May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov.. Dec.. : Jan Feb... Mar.. Apr May.. June.. July.. Aug.. Sept.. Oct... Nov p. Dec- ; '34,876 T Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Inventory/sales ratio. For annual periods ratio of weighted average inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of inventories at end of month to sales for month * Manufacturing data prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Unofficial estimate Note. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of change in business inventories included in the gross national product since these figures cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-43. Manufacturers ' shipments and inventories \ [ Millions of dollars ] Inventories2 Shipments i Durable goods industries Year or month Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Materials Work Finand in ished sup- process goods plies _ * MateWork Finrials in and ished process goods supplies Total Nondurable goods industries Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb M ar. Apr May June July Aug Sept... Oct Nov Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May... June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Monthly average for year and total for month Book value seasonally adjusted end of period except as noted Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September * Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B-44. Manufacturers ' new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ] Unfilled orders2 New orders Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Producers ' capital goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Unfilled ordersshipments ratio ' Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries _ _ __ Seasonally adjusted : Jan Feb._ Mar_ Apr. May_June_ July__ Aug.Oct Nov. Dec.- : Jan. Feb__ Mar. AprMay June- Sept_ July. Aug.. Sept. Oct. Nov Monthly average for year and total for month Seasonally adjusted end of period Ratio of unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ; excludes industries with no unfilled orders Annual figures relate to seasonally adjusted data for December except as noted Data prior to not completely comparable with later data. Comparable data for new orders ( total durable and nondurable ) are available for and only. See Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census " Series M3-1.1 " September for these data Based on seasonally adjusted data through November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B-45. Consumer price indexes by major groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers ( = ] : Housing All items Year or month _ Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June -July Aug_ Sept Oct Nov Dec Food Total Rent Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Apparel Transand portaupkeep tion Reading Other Medical Personal and goods recreacare and care tion services TABLE B-46. Consumer price indexes by special groups For urban wage earners and clerical workers ( = ] Commodities Year or month All items All items less food All items less shelter Services Commodities less food All commodities Food All Durable Nondurable Total nonAll dura- services ble Rent All services less rent : Jan.. Feb. Mar__ Apr. May. June. July.. Aug__ Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec.. : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec.. Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-47. Consumer price indexes selected commodities and services For urban wage earners and clerical workers ( = Nondurable commodities less food Durable commodities Year or month Total New cars Used cars Services less rent NonHouse- Trans- MedApparel duraHouse- House hold porta- ical bles fur- Total comhold less Total servtion care Other * mod- food dura- nishices serv- servbles ities less ings and ices ices rent apparel : J a n Feb.. Mar.. Apr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec- : J a n Feb Mar.. May'. " June. July.. Aug.- s e o c f ! : : Nov.. Dec.. Includes certain items not shown separately Includes the services components of apparel personal care reading and recreation and other goods and services Not available Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-48. Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = 100J Industrial commodities Year or month All commodities Farm products Processed foods and feeds Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products ~ nd power Chemicals and allied products _ _ _ I960. 1969_ : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug._ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-48.- -Wholesale price indexes by major commodity groups [ = Continued ndustrial commodities Continued Year or month : Jan Feb Mar.. Apr May June July Aug.. Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan.. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug.. Sept Oct Nov _ Dec Pulp Metals Rubber Lumber paper and and and and metal wood plastic allied products products products products Machinery and equipment Transportation Furniequipture and Nonmement : Misceltallic houseMotor laneous mineral vehicles products hold durables products and equipment i IP.5 i Index for total transportation equipment is not shown but is available beginning December Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components1 Crude materials Year or month All commodities Materials and components for manufacturing Mate- and components For For ComnonTotal For food durable durable ponents for construcmanumanution factur- manu- facturing facturing ing Materials Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Nonfood materials except fuel Fuel Total 92.9b. b : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-49. Wholesale price indexes by stage of processing Continued = ] I Finisheci goods Special groups of industrial products Consumer finished goods Year or month Total Total Foods Other nondurable goods Durable goods Producer finished goods Crude materials InterConmediate sumer materials finished supplies goods exand comcluding ponents foods I960. : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June __ | __ | July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Includes in addition to subgroups shown processed fuels and lubricants containers and supplies Excludes crude foodstuffs and feedstuffs. plant and animal fibers oilseeds and leaf tobacco * Excludes intermediate materials for food manufacturing and manufactured animal feeds Note. For a listing of the commodities included in each sector see monthly report " Wholesale Prices and Price Indexes " January-February Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-50. ~ Percentage changes from previous month in indexes for major groupings of the consumer price index [ Percent ] All items Commodities less food Services l Food Year and month Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted ! Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nnv Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov. Dec ' : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec _ Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Percentage changes for services are based on unadjusted indexes since these prices have little seasonal movement Note. The seasonally adjusted changes for the all items index are based on seasonal adjustment factors and seasonally adjusted indexes carried to two decimal places Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B-51. Percentage changes from previous month in indexes for major groupings of the wholesale price index ( Percentl All commodities Farm products and processed foods and feeds Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Year and month Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted " Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar AprMay June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr_ May_ June July. Aug._ Sept Oct. Nov. Dec ! : Jan. Feb_ Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct_ Nov. Dec -A * : Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr_ May. June July. Aug. Sept Oct__ Nov. Dec i L2 '.4 -j Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics ! -l'.O MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B-52. Money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Overall measures Year and month M2 ( Mi plus time Mi ( Currency deposits at complus mercial demand banks deposits ) other than large CD 's ) Components and related items M3 ( M2 plus deposits at nonbank thrift institutions ) Deposits at commercial banks Time and savings3 Currency i Demand Total Large CD 's * Other Deposits at nonbank thrift institutions U.S Government demand deposits ( unadjusted ) * : Dec : Dec : Dec.. : : : : : : : : : : I960 : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec j : Dec : Dec * : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Dec Currency outside the Treasury the Federal Reserve System and the vaults of all commercial banks Demand deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government less cash items in process of collection and Federal Reserve float plus foreign demand balances at Federal Reserve Banks Time and savings deposits other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government Negotiable time certificates of deposit issued in denominations of $ or more by large weekly reporting commercial banks s Average of the beginning- and end-of-month deposits of mutual savings banks and savings and loan shares Deposits at all commercial banks Note. Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans were reclassified for reserve purposes and are excluded from time deposits reported by member banks. The estimated amount of such deposits at all commercial banks ( $ billion ) is excluded from time and savings deposits thereafter Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-53. Bank loans and investments [ Billions of dollars ] All commercial banks End of year or month : June : June : June : June : June Total loans and investments Investments Loans2 U.S Government securities Other securities Loans plus loans sold to bank affiliates2 Weekly reporting large commercial banks Business loans * Seasonally adjusted v : Jan Feb Mar. Apr May June July Aug Sept * Octp NOVP Deep e i Data are for last Wednesday of month ( except June and December call dates used for all commercial banks ) ' Adjusted to exclude all interbank loans beginning and do-nestic bank loans only beginning January Weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning and weekly reporting member banks prior to < Commercial and industrial loans and prior to agricultural loans. Beginning July loans to financial institutions excluded. Prior to published data adjusted to include open-market paper Beginning January loans and investments are reported gross without valuation reserves deducted rather than net of valuation reserves as in earlier periods e Effective June balances accumulated for payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from loans at all commercial banks and certain certificates of CCC and Export-Import Bank totaling about $ billion are included in other securities rather than in loans Beginning June data include all bank-premises subsidiaries and other significant majority-owned domestic subsidiaries ; earlier data include commercial banks only s Beginning June Farmers Home Administration insured notes totaling about $ billion are classified as other securities rather than as loans Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfinancial sector U.S. Government. Public debt securities Budget agency issues All other sectors Corporate equity shares Debt instruments Debt capital instruments State and local government securities Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages Home ..Other residential. _ Commercial Farm Other private creditBank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Open-market paper Other Total funds supplied directly U.S. Government U.S. Government credit agencies net Funds advanced. Less funds raised Federal Reserve System Commercial banks net. Private nonbank finance Savings institutions netInsurance Finance n.e.c net Funds advanced. Less funds raised Foreign Private domestic nonfinancial. Business State and local government general funds Households Less net security credit Total funds raised See footnote at end of table TABLE B-54. Total funds raised in credit markets by nonfinancial sectors Continued [ Billions of dollars ] unadjusted quarter- seasonally adjusted ly flows annual rates Nonfinancial sector II III U.S. Government III Total funds raised II Corporate equity shares Debt instruments ! s j -l " ! j l ! ! Public debt securities Budget agency issues All other sectors Debt capital instruments State and local government securities Corporate and foreign bonds Mortgages Home Other residential Commercial Farm Other private credit Bank loans n.e.c Consumer credit Open-market paper Other Total funds supplied directly U.S. Government U.S. Government credit agencies net _ Funds advanced Less funds raised _ ' Federal Reserve System Commercial banks net Private nonbank finance Savings institutions net Insurance Finance n.e.c net Funds advaneed Less funds raised Business State and local government general funds Households Less net security credit Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Private domestic nonfinancial Foreign ! ! -5l ! TABLE B-55. Selected liquid assets held by the public [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Time d eposits End of year or month Total Demand deposits and currency2 Commercial -banks s Mutual savings banks Postal savings system Savings and loan shares U.S Government savings bonds U.S Government securities maturing within year * e v : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May June * July Aug Sect Oct Nov p Dec * Excludes holdings of the U.S. Government Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial banks and Federal Reserve Banks. Adjusted wherever possible to avoid double counting Agrees in concept with the money stock Table B-52 except for deduction of demand deposits held by mutual savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data are for last Wednesday of month. Data prior to July have not been revised to conform to the money stock revision Time deposits at all commercial banks other than those due to domestic commercial banks and the U.S. Government ( same concept as in Table B-52 ) Data are for last Wednesday of month except that June and December call data are used where available * Excludes holdings ot Government agencies and trust funds domestic commercial and mutual savings banks Federal Reserve Banks and beginning February I960 savings and loan associations J Effective June balances accumulated for the payment of personal loans ( about $ billion ) are excluded from time deposits at all commercial banks and from total liquid assets fl Estimates for Tuesday December rather than last Wednesday of December J Beginning data have been adjusted to conform to the new budget concept Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-56. Federal Reserve Bank credit and member bank reserves [ Averages of daily figures millions of dollars ] Member bank reserves Reserve Bank credit outstanding Year and month Total U.S Government securities Member bank borrowings : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : D e c : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : D e c : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec : Dec * ._ : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June ._ July... Aug Sept Oct Nov.. Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * All other mainly float Total a Required U,822 31,16C W66 Data from March through April are for licensed banks only * Beginning December total reserves held include vault cash allowed Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Excess Member bank free reserves ( excess reserves less borrowings ) TABLE B-57. Bond yields and interest rates ( Percent per annum ) U.S Government securities Year or month 3-month Treas- month ury bills issues Taxable year issues3 bonds Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) Aaa Baa Average High- rate on Prime Fedgrade shortFHA comeral term municnew mer- Reserve home bank ipal cial Bank loans bonds mortpaper dis ( Stand- to busigage ard & ness months count yields * rate Poor 's ) selected cities M.00 ? * Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec l V fi ? See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-57. Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] Corporate bonds ( Moody 's ) U.S. Government securities Year or month 3-month Treas- month ury issues2 bills i year issues3 Taxable bonds4 Aaa Baa Average Highrate on Prime grade shortcommunicterm meripal bank cial bonds loans ( Stand- to busi- paper ard & ness- months Poor 's ) selected cities : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sent Oct Nov Dec " Federal Reserve Bank Hie rate FHA new home mortgage yields * Rate on new issues within period. First issued in December and issued irregularly in Bills were tax exemp t prior to March and fully taxable thereafter for series includes issues with maturities of more than months Certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues ( fully taxable ) Selected note and bond issues. Issues were partially tax exempt prior to and fully taxable thereafter * First issued in Series includes bonds which are neither due nor callable before a given number of years as follows : April to date years ; April 1952-March years ; October 1941-March years Data for first of the month based on the maximum permissible interest rate ( percent beginning February ) Through July computed on 25-year mortgages paid in years and thereafter 30-year mortgages prepaid in years From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Series revised. Not strictly comparable with earlier data Note. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for short-term bank loans Sources : Department of Housing and Urban Development Treasury Department Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Moody 's Investors Service and Standard & Poor 's Corporation T A B L E B Short- and intermediate-term consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Noninstalment credit Instalment credit End of year or month Automobile paper Other consumer goods paper Home repair and modernization loans f Total Total I960. <_ : J a n Feb.. MarApr.. May.. June. July.. Aug.. Sept. Oct.. Nov.. Dec : Jan.. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. June July. Aug. Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec * l ? 80D Personal loans Total Charge accounts Other Addendum : Policy loans by life insurance companies ? foldings of financial institutions only ; holdings of retail outlets are included in " other consumer goods paper. " 'Single-payment loans and service credit Year-end figures are annual statement asset values ; month-end figures are book value of ledger assets. These loans are not included in consumer credit series * Preliminary ; by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Institute of Life Insurance ( except as noted ) TABLE B-59. Instalment credit extended and repaid [ Millions of dollars ] Other consumer goods paper Automobile paper Total Home repair and modernization loans Extended Personal loans Year or month Extended Re Extended Repaid Extended Re- I960. i Repaid Extended Repaid Seasonally adjusted : Jan. Feb. MarApr. MayJune July. Oct.. Nov.. Dec : Jan.. Feb. MarMay " June July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec * i Preliminary ; December by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-60. Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Nonfarm properties FHA-VA underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Com1- to Multi- mercial family family prophouses erties i Conventional * to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses v ? v v : * II Ill __ IV " _ : IP____ II r___ III p IV P : I P UP.. Ill p IV p.. i Includes negligible amount of farm loans held by savings and loan associations > Derived figures Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System estimated and compiled from data supplied by various Government and private organizations TABLE B-61. Mortgage debt outstanding by lender [ Billions of dollars ] Other lenders Selected financial institutions End of year or quarter Total Total Savings and loan associations Mutual savings banks Commercial banks Life insurance companies U.S agencies Individuals and others l v P p ' : p II p III p IV P : p II p III p IV p II I 'll ! p IV p i Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not bank trust departments * Includes former FNMA and new GNMA as well as FHA VA PHA Farmers ' Home Administration and in earlier years RFC HOLC and FFMC. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as new FNMA and Federal Land Banks. Other U.S agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with " individuals and others. " Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B-62. Net public and private debt * [ Billions of dollars ] Public Private Individual and noncorporate End of year Total FedFederal eral finanGovcial ernagenment cies State and local governments Nonfarm Total Corporate Total Mortgage Commercial and financial Farm Total Consumer i * Net public and private debt is a comprehensive aggregate of the indebtedness of borrowers after eliminating certain types of duplicating governmental and corporate debt > Net Federal Government and agency debt is the outstanding debt held by the public as defined in the " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year ending June " This comprises the debt of federally sponsored agencies in which there is no longer any Federal proprietary interest The obligations of the Federal Land Banks are included beginning with the debt of the Federal Home Loan Banks is included beginning with and the debts of the Federal National Mortgage Association Federal Intermediate Credit Banks and Banks for Cooperatives are included beginning with * Farm mortgages and farm production loans. Farmers ' financial and consumer debt is included in the nonfarm categories * Financial debt is debt owed to banks for purchasing or carrying securities customers ' debt to brokers and debt owed to life insurance companies by policyholders Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Treasury Department Department of Agriculture Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Home Loan Bank Board Federal Land Banks and Federal National Mortgage Association GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B-63. Federal budget receipts and outlays [ Millions of dollars ] Fiscal year Receipts Administrative budget : Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Unified budget : -1,17G Consolidated cash statement : i Estimate Note. Certain interfund transactions are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in For years prior to the amounts of such transactions are not significant Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays starting in Sources : Treasury Department and Office of Management and Budget T A B L E B-64. Federal budget receipts outlays financing and debt [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING : Expenditure account : Recei pts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) Expenditure account deficit ( ) surplus or Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending Total budget : Receipts Outlays ( expenditures and net lending ) Budget surplus or deficit ( ) BUDGET FINANCING : Net borrowing from the public or repayment of borrowing ( ) Other means of financing Total means of financing OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by the public MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions BUDGET OUTLAYS ( EXPENDITURES NET LENDING ) Income security MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions AND National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development Natural resources and environment Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health Veterans benefits and services Interest General government General revenue sharing Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental actions Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes and contributions Unemployment insurance Contributions for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts l BUDGET RECEIPTS trans- See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-64. Federal budget receipts outlays,financing,and debt Continued [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Description RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING : Expenditure account : Receipts Expenditures ( excludes net lending ) _ Expenditure account surplus or deficit ( ) Loan account : Loan disbursements Loan repayments Net lending Total budget : Receipts Outlays ( expendituresand net lending ) Budget surplus or deficit ( ) BUDGET FINANCING : Net borrowing trom the public or repayment of borrowing ( ) Other means of financing Total means of financing OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF YEAR : Gross Federal debt Held by the public BUDGET RECEIPTS MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions BUDGET OUTLAYS ( EXPENDITURES AND NET LENDING ) Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Employment taxes and contributions Unemployment insurance Contributions for other insurance and retirement Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts i National defense International affairs and finance Space research and technology Agriculture and rural development Natural resources and environment Commerce and transportation Community development and housing Education and manpower Health I ncome secu rity Veterans benefits and services Inte rest General government General revenue sharing Allowances Undistributed intragovernmental transactions MEMORANDUM : Federal funds Trust funds Intragovernmental transactions Includes both Federal funds and trust funds ' Excludes changes due to ^ classification and to conversion of mixed-ownership enterprises to private ownershjp. ( See footnotes to Table " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " and footnotes to Table " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " ) Sources : Treasury Department and Office of Management and Budget T A B L E B ~ Relation of the Federal budget to the Federal sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimate Receipts and expenditures RECEIPTS Federal sector national income and product accounts receipts Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Adjustment to accruals Other Total receipts budget EXPENDITURES Total outlays budget Loan account Financial transactions in the expenditure account Government contribution for employee retirement ( grossing ) Other netting and grossing Defense timing adjustment Other Federal sector national income and product accounts expenditures Note. See Special Analysis A " Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June " for description of these categories Sources : Treasury Department Office of Management and Budget and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) T A B L E B-66. Receipts and expenditures of the Federal Government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Expenditures Receipts Year or quarter Indirect Per- Cor- busi- ConPursonal po- ness tribuchases tax rate tax tions of Total and profits and for Total i goods nontax non- social and la A tav actax insurservre * cruals acance ices ceipts cruals Fiscal year : P Calendar year : 1951_ * > Transfer payments To persons Grantsin-aid to State To and forlocal eign- governers ments ( net ) Subsidies less curNet rent insurter- plus of est paid govment enterprises Surplus or deficit national income and product accounts \ \ L.I L.O L.3 L.7 _ ? _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I II. III IV : I IV * Wage accruals less disbursements have been subtracted from total. These were ( in billions of dollars at seasonally adjusted annual rates ) and in the quarters of respectively and in each of the quarters Estimates Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B-67. Public debt securities by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Total public debt securities End of year or month Marketable public issues by maturity class years and over Nonmarketable public issues Foreign and international Matured public debt and debt bearing no interest Special issues1 U.S savings bonds Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec " Within year to years Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Other i Issued to U.S. Government accounts. These accounts also held $ billion of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December * Includes sales of U.S. savings notes from May through June Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-68. Estimated ownership of public debt securities [ Par values,i billions of dollars ] Total public debt securities * Held by private investors Held End of year or month Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept.. Oct Nov Dec : J a n Feb Mar Apr May June July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Held by Govern- Federal ment Reserve acBanks counts Total Mutual savings Combanks mercial and inbanks surance companies State Other and corpolocal rations governments MiscelIndilaneous viduals6 investors i U.S. savings bonds series A-F and J and U.S. savings notes are included at current redemption value Not all of total shown is subject to statutory debt limitation * Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and Territories and island possessions ; figures exclude securities held in trust departments. Since the estimates in this table are on the basis of par values and include holdings of banks in United States Territories and possessions they do not agree with the estimates in Table B-53 which are based on book values and relate only to banks within the United States * Exclusive of banks and insurance companies Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and of Territories and possessions Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Includes savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers Federal oriented agencies not included in Government accounts and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December the international accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund the International Development Association the Inter-American Development Bank and various United Nations ' funds in special non-interest-bearing notes and bonds issued by the U.S. Government Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-69. Average length and maturity distribution of marketable interest-bearing public debt End of year or month Amount outstanding Maturity class r Within year to years to years to years Average length years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Years Months : Jan Feb Mar Apr _ May June -July.. Aug Sept Oct Nov.. Dec : Jan. Feb Mar Apr May.June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. All issues classified to final maturity except partially tax-exempt bonds which were classified to earliest call date ( the last of these bonds were called on August for redemption on December ) Source : Treasury Department T A B L E B-70. Receipts and expenditures of the government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Total government Federal Government Surplus or deficit Calendar year or quarter Receipts v Expenditures national income and product accounts State and local government Surplus or deficit Receipts Surplus or deficit Expenditures national income and product accounts Receipts Expenditures ! o national income and product accounts '7 O ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IV v Surplus of $ million 'Deficit of $ million Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal expenditures and State and local receipts and expenditures. Total government receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis T A B L E B-71. Receipts and expenditures of the State and local government sector of the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts Calendar yearor quarter Indirect PerCorsonal porate business tax tax profits Total and and tax nontax accruals nontax receipts accruals Expenditures Contributions Federal for social grantsinsur- in-aid ance Total Less : Pur- TransCurrent chases fer of payNet surplus govgoods ments interest ofernand to paid ment servperenterices sons prises Surplus or deficit <- ) nationa income and product accounts ? U q * n ( i ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : II III IV : II III IVP i Deficit of $ million Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B-72. State and local government revenues and expenditures selectedfiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function Corpo- Revenue ration from net Federal income Governtaxes ment All other revenues3 Total Education Highways Public welfare All other * ! n ocn An iic * * * S 20,530I 101r264j ) ; Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See footnote 'Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes licenses and other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Mncludes expenditures for health hospitals police local fire protection natural resources sanitation housing and urban renewal local parks and recreation general control financial administration interest on general debt and unallocable expenditures Data for fiscal year ending in the 12-month period through June Data for and earlier years include local government amounts grouped in terms of fiscal years ended during the particular calendar year Note. Data are not available for intervening years See Table B-62 for net debt of State and local governments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B-73. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits ( before taxes ) and inventory valuation adjustment Manufacturing Year or quarter All industries Total i goods industries Nondurable Durable goods Industries Transportation communication and public utilities before taxes Corporate rate Id A tav lia iiabilitv * ity " g All other industries ! tt.6 I Corporate prof- its Total Dividends Undistributed profits ! Corporate capital consumption allowances J Profits plus capital consumption allowances * Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I IV : I Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes depreciation and accidental damages Corporate profits after taxes plus corporate capital consumption allowances Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Sales profits and stockholders1 equity all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers1 ) [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Ye ar or qu arter Profits Profits Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Profits StockStockStockBefore After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Sales Before After holders ' Federal Federal equity ( net ) Federal Federal equity ( net ) Federal Federal equity * income * income income income income income taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes taxes ? " ? ? S : ' II Ill IV ! : .II III IV II Ill- ii Includes newspapers beginning Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting procedures industry classifications sampling procedures etc. Specific information about the effects of the more significant changes and revisions is contained in the following issues of the " Quarterly Financial Report " : third quarter third quarter first quarter and first quarter Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-75. Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders * equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers by industry group Durable goods industries All Year or quarter manufacElecturtrical Ma ing FabcorMomaAir- chinriporator ery ery cated tions Total vehi- craft ( exdurcles and equip- ( ex- metal cept able and parts ment elec- prodand trical ) ucts newsequipsuppapment ers ! ) plies Lum- p. ; Primary iron and steel industries fprruus dus- Stone clay Fur and glass products fiv ber and In- struwood ments prod- and ucts re ( ex- lated cept prodfurni- ucts ture ) Miscellaneous manufacturinff ( including ordnance ) Ratio of profits after Federal income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent3 : II III... IV : II III... Profits after Federal income taxes per dollar of sales--cents : II Ill IV : II III See footnotes at end of table T A B L E B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations { except newspapers1 ) by industry group Continued Nondurable goods industries Year or quarter Food and kindred products Total nondurable a Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and related products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers i ) Chemicals and allied products Petroleum refining Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products Leather and leather products Ratio of profits after Federal income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity percent3 1969> : I II... III.. IV... : I II... III.. Profits after Federal income taxes per dollar of sales cents LI L3 L4 i. i.3 L9 L4 L9 I960... L7 L7 : L II III IV : I. II LI '.0 \ ! \ l ! ! o Includes newspapers beginning Includes certain industries not shown separately Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter only Note. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see " Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Corporations " Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission. See also Note Table B-74 Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission T A B L E B Sources and uses of funds nonfarm nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Sources total Internal sources Undistributed profits i Corporate inventory valuation ad.2 justment Capital consumption allowances ^ Other liabilities Stocks Bonds Mortgages Bank loans n.e.c Other loans Trade debt Profits tax liability External sources * l. * Uses total Purchases of physical assets L3 Nonresidential fixed investmentResidential structures Change in business inventories. Increase in financial assets Liquid assets Demand deposits and currency ._ Time deposits. U.S. Government securities Open-market paper State and local obligations Consumer credit Trade credit Other financial assetss Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) _ -l. * The figures shown here for internal sources undistributed profits and capital consumption allowances differ from those shown for cash flow net of dividends undistributed profits and capital consumption allowances in the gross corporate product table in the national income and product accounts of the Department of Commerce for the following reasons : ( ) these figures include and the statistics in the gross corporate product table exclude branch profits remitted from foreigners net of corresponding U.S. remittances to foreigners ; and ( ) these figures exclude and the gross corporate product figures include the internal funds of corporations whose major activity is farming Foreign investment excludes amounts financed by bond issues abroad and bond issues outside the U.S. are excluded from financial sources of funds above Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Current assets and liabilities of U.S. corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Current assets End of year or quarter Cash on hand Total and in banks1 U.S Government securities Current liabilities AdRevances Fedceiv- Notes and Notes eral Other ables preand and inIncurfrom payacacvenrent Total ments counts come U.S. counts tories astax Gov- receivU.S Paysets * ernGovable liabiliable ties ment3 ernment ^ New series * : : II.... III IV : II III _ IV : II III ? : Net Other workcuring rent capiliatal bilities s > i Includes time certificates of deposit Includes Federal agency issues Receivables from and payables to U.S. Government do not include amounts offset against each other on corporations ' books or amounts arising from subcontracting which are not directly due from or to the U.S. Government. Wherever possible adjustments have been made to include U.S. Government advances offset against inventories on corporations ' books * I ncludes marketable investments ( other than Government securities and time certificates of deposit ) as well as sundry current assets * Generally reflects definitions and classifications used in " Statistics of Income " for Note. Data relate to all U.S. corporations excluding banks savings and loan associations insurance companies and beginning with the new series for investment companies. Year-end data through are based on " Statistics of Income " ( Treasury Department ) covering virtually all corporations in the United States. " Statistics of Income " data may not be strictly comparable from year to year because of changes in the tax laws basis for filing returns and processing of data for compilation purposes. All other figures shown are estimates based on data compiled from many different sources including data on corporations registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission Source : Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B--78. State and municipal and corporate securities offered [ Millions of dollars ] Corporate securities offered for cash Year or quarter State and municipal securities offered for cash ( principal mounts ) Type of corporate security Total corporate offerings Common stock Preferred stock Bonds and notes Industry of corporate user Manufacturing i Electric gas and water Transportation ^ Communication Other I960. p : IL III IV. : II. III IV. : I. IV * Prior to also includes extractive radio broadcasting airline companies commercial and miscellaneous company issues Prior to also includes telephone street railway and bus company issues Prior to includes railroad issues only Note. Covers substantially all new issues of State municipal and corporate securities offered for cash sale in the United States in amounts over $ and with terms to maturity of more than year ; excludes notes issued exclusively to commercial banks intercorporate transactions investment company issues and issues to be sold over an extended period such as employee-purchase plans Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission " The Commercial and Financial Chronicle " and " The Bond Buyer. " TABLE B-79. Common stock prices earnings and yields and stock market credit Standard & Poor 's common stock data Price indexes Year or month Stock market credit { Public utilities ( stocks ) Railroads ( stocks ) Dividend yield ( percent ) Price/ earnings ratio Total ( stocks ) Industrials ( stocks ) Customer credit ( excluding U.S. Government securities ) Total = * : Jan _ Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec * Net debit bal- ances Bank loans to Bank brokers loans and to dealers6 " others " Millions of dollars M,277 i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Monthly data are averages of daily figures and annual data are averages of monthly figures Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by the aggregate market value of the stocks in the group based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of the four or five weekly figures and annual data are averages of monthly figures Ratio of quarterly earnings ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) to price index for last day in quarter. Annual ratios are averages of quarterly data * As reported by member firms of the New York Stock Exchange carrying margin accounts. Balances secured by U.S Government obligations are excluded through and included thereafter. Data are for end of period * Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) to others than brokers and dealers for purchasing or carrying securities except U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday Loans by weekly reporting member banks ( weekly reporting large commercial banks beginning ) for purchasing of 7carrying securities including U.S. Government obligations. Data are for last Wednesday Revised series beginning June ; not strictly comparable with earlier data * Series discontinued beginning July Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Standard & Poor 's Corporation and New York Stock Exchange TABLE B-80. Business formation and business failures Business failures i Year or month Index of net business formation ( ) _ s New business incorporations ( number ) * * Number of failures Business failure rate ' Liability size class Total Under $ and $ over Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total $ Under and $ over Seasonally adjusted : Jan,. Feb.. Mar. Apr.. May. June. July. Aug._ Sept. Oct.. Nov. Dec.. : Jan. Feb. Mar_ Apr.. May. JuneJuly. Aug_ Sept Oct. Nov. Dec Commercial and industrial failures only. Excludes failures of banks and railroads and beginning of real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc * Failure rate per listed enterprises Series revised ; not strictly comparable with earlier data * Preliminary ; based on seasonally adjusted data through October Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Dun & Bradstreet Inc AGRICULTURE TABLE B-81. Income of farm people and farmers Income received from farming Personal Income received by total farm population Net to farm operators Realized gross Year or quarter From From From nona ! l farm Total * farm sources sources sources ProducCash tion ex- Excludreceipts penses ing net from invenmarkettory ings change Including net inventory change * P. Current dollars dollars * Dollars Billions of dollars Net income per farm including net inventory change lb.7 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : L II.. III IV. : I IV P. Net income to farm operators including net inventory change less net income of nonresident operators plus wages and salaries and other labor income of farm resident workers less contributions of farm resident operators and workers to social insurance Consists of income received by farm residents from nonfarm sources such as wages and salaries from nonfarm employment nonfarm business and professional income rents from nonfarm real estate dividends interest royalties unemployment compensation and social security payments Cash receipts from marketings Government payments and nonmoney income furnished by farms ( excluding net inventory change ) < I ncludes net value of physical change in inventory of crops and livestock valued at average prices for the year s Income in current dollars divided by the index of prices paid by farmers for family living items on a base Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-82. Farm production indexes [ = ) Livestock and products Crops Year Farm output i Hay Food Vege- Fruits Feed Total grains and and forage grains tables nuts Cotton Meat ToOil anibacco crops Total mals Dairy Poultry prod- and ucts eggs ( p. Farm output measures the annual volume of farm production available for eventual human use through sales from farms or consumption in farm households. Total excludes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules Includes production of seeds and of feed for horses and mules and certain items not shown separately Includes certain items not shown separately Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-83. Farm population employment and productivity Farm population ( April l ) i Year Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population1 Farm employment ( thousands ) Farm output Crop production per acre Per man-hour Total Family Hired workers workers Per unit of total input Total Index = I960. p Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms regardless of occupation Total population of United States as of July including Armed Forces overseas Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture Statistical Reporting Service differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-22 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected See monthly report on " Farm Labor. " * Computed from variable weights for individual crops produced each year Sources : Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B-84. Indexes of prices received and prices paid byfarmers and parity ratio [ = Prices received by farmers Livestock and products Crops Year or month All farm prodAll ucts crops Feed grains and hay Cotton Food grains Total Tobacco Feed grains Oilbearing crops All livestock and products1 Meat animals Dairy Poulprod- try and ucts eggs : Jan Feb Mar Apr ? ? ? ? _ May June July Augl5 Sept Octl5 Novl5 Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Augl5 Sept Oct Novl5 Dec See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-84. Indexes of prices received and prices paid byfarmers and parity ratio Con [ = ] Prices paid by farmers Year or month All items interest taxes and wage rates ( parity index ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May Junel5_ July 15._ Aug Sept Octl5___ Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Commodities and services Production items Family All All Motor Farm items living maveitems produc- Feed tion hicles chinitems * ery Inter- Taxes ' Wage ests rates Parity ratios Fertilizer ( ) ( ) ) ) ) ( ft ) ) f 9t in ( ? ( 10ft ( ? ft1 ) ft ? ( ft ? ( ( ( ) ( ft ? ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ? ( ) ( ) ( ) ( 7R1 ( ( ) ) ) ( ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C74 ) ( ) ( ) no i Includes items not shown separately s Interest payable per acre on farm real estate debt Farm real estate taxes payable per acre ( levied in preceding year ) * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted s Percentage ratio of prices received for all farm products to parity index on a = base. The adjusted parity ratio ( shown in parentheses in the table ) reflects Government payments made directly to farmers Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-85. Selected measures offarm resources and inputs Index numbers of inputs ( = ) Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) Year Manhours of farm work ( billions ) Farm real estate Farm labor Total Mechanical power and machinery Fertilizer and liming materials Feed seed,and livestock purchases ' Miscellaneous __ -I Acreage harvested ( excluding duplication ) plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and farm gardens * Includes service buildings and improvements on land Nonfarm portion of feed seed and livestock purchases Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-86. Comparative balance sheet of the farming sector [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Financial assets Other physical assets Beginning of year MaHouseDechinhold Real Totat estate ery Live- and Crops equip- posits and ment stock i motor curand vehifurnish- rency cles ings ProReal Invest- Total estate Other prietors ' U.S ment debt debt equisavings in coties bonds operatives v Beginning with horses and mules are excluded 'Includes all crops held on farms and crops held off farms by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The latter on January totaled approximately $ billion Source : Department of Agriculture INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B-87. U.S. balance of payments [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise u Year or quarter Exports Imports Net balance Net investment income Military transactions Direct expend- Sales itures Net bal- Private s Net travel and transus. portation exGovpendierntures ment BalOther ance on serv- goods ices and net services i Remittances penCursions rent acand count other baluniance lateral transfers ^ '2,835 ; il,617 | o _ _ _ ! " " Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I... : L II... III.. IV.. : I...44,120 II... Ill " See footnotes at end of table TABLE B-87. U. S. balance of payments Continued [ Millions of dollars ] Long-term capital flows net Year or quarter U.S Govern- ment Privates Balance on current account and longterm capital AlloNoncaliquid tions shortof term speprivate cial capital drawflows ing nets rights Errors and omissions net Balance net liquidity basis Liquid private capital flows nets Changes in lia- Changes U.S Balance bilities in U.S. official to official reserve official reserve foreign reserve assets trans- officia assets net actions agennet ? ( end of cies basis period ) net e s-1,405 l I960. " Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted annual rates : I I III... I V : II Ill IV.. : II Ill v. Excludes military grants Adjusted from Census data for differences in timing and coverage s Includes fees and royalties from U.S. direct investments abroad or from foreign direct investments in the United States Excludes liabilities to foreign official reserve agencies Private foreigners exclude the IMF but include other international and regional organizations Includes liabilities to foreign official agencies reported by U.S. Government and U.S. banks and U.S. liabilities to the IMF arising from reversible gold sales to and gold deposits with the United States Official reserve assets include gold special drawing rights convertible currencies and the U.S. gold tranche position in the IMF * Not available separately Coverage of liquid banking claims for and of nonliquid nonbanking claims for is limited to foreign currency deposits only ; other liquid items are not available separately and are included with nonliquid claims Includes gain of $ million resulting from revaluation of the German mark in October " Average of the first quarters on a seasonally adjusted annual rates basis Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Treasury Department TABLE B-88. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by commodity groups [ Millions of dollars ] Merchandise exports Total including reexports Merchandise imports Domestic exports Year or quarter Seasonally Unad- Total adjusted justed General imports * Totals Food Crude Food Crude bever- mate- Manbever- mate- ManufacufacSearials ages ages rials tured tured and to- and goodss sonally Unad- and to- and goods ! fuels * adbacco fuels < justed bacco justed I960. I i ! : I II. III IV. : I II. III IV. jl0,930 i : I. IIIII IV Gross merchandise trade balance seasonally adjusted Beginning I960 data have been adjusted for comparability with the revised commodity classifications effective in 'Totals exclude Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program Total includes commodities and transactions not classified according to kind Includes fats and oils Includes machinery transportation equipment chemicals metals and other manufactures. Export data for these items Include military grant-aid shipments * Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Exports excluding military grant-aid less general imports ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted Note. Data are as reported by the Bureau of the Census adjusted to include silver ore and bullion reported separately prior to Export statistics coverall merchandise shipped from the U.S. customs area except supplies for U.S. Armed Forces. Export values are f.a.s. port of export and include shipments under Agency for International Development and Food for Peace programs as well as other private relief shipments. Import values are defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excluding the U.S. import duty and transportation costs such as ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE B-89. U.S. merchandise exports and imports by area [ Millions of dollars ] Area Exports ( including reexports and special category shipments ) : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hem isphere Western Europe ! Eastern Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa General imports : Total Developed countries Developing countries Canada Other Western Hemisphere Western Europe i Eastern Europe-Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Unidentified countries Includes Finland Yugoslavia Greece and Turkey Consists of certain low-valued shipments not identified by country Note. Developed countries include Canada Western Europe Japan Australia New Zealand and the Republic of South Africa. Developing countries include rest of the world except Communist areas in Eastern Europe and Asia and unidentified countries Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of International Commerce TABLE B-90. U.S. overseas loans and grants by type and area,fiscalyears [ Millions of dollars ] Type of program and fiscal period Total Near East and South Asia Latin America Vietnam East Asia Africa Europe Other and nonregional Total economic loans and grants ( net obligations and loan authorizations ) ! average Repayments and interest : average average Loans. Grants Loans._ Grants Economic loans and grants to less developed countries by program : Net obligations and loan authorizations : Agency for International Development : Net obligations and loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Export-Import Bank long-term loans : Loan authorizations : average Repayments and interest : average Food for Peace : Obligations : average Repayments and interest : average Contributions and Subscriptions to International Lending Organizations : Obligations : average Peace Corps and other : * Repayments and interest : average # CM CM Obligations : average Some data are preliminary Countries have been classified " less developed " on the basis of the standard list of less developed countries used by the I basis " considered ' Malta Spain and Yugoslavia > Includes capital subscripts ment Association and the Asian Development Bank * Data for certain programs from Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Source : Agency for International Development ( except as noted ) TABLE B-91 International reserves and [ Millions of dollars ; end of period ] Area and country September November All countries. Developed areas. United States United Kingdom Other Western Europe Austria Belgium France Germany Italy Netherlands Scandinavian countries ( Denmark Finland Norway and Sweden ) Spain Switzerland Other * Canada Japan.. ) Australia New Zealand and South Africa ) U22 Less developed areas 3_ <290 Latin America Middle East.. Other Asia Other Africa.. * ~ * ~ i Not available separately ' I n addition to other Western European countries includes unpublished gold reserves of Greece and an estimate of gold to be distributed by the Tripartite Commission for the Restitution of Monetary Gold Includes unpublished gold holdings not allocable by area * Estimate Note. Includes gold holdings reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange of all countries except U.S.S.R. other Eastern European countries Communist China and Cuba ( after ) Beginning when most of the major currencies of the world became convertible data exclude known holdings of inconvertible currencies balances under payments agreements and the bilateral claims arising from liquidation of the European Payments Union Source : International Monetary Fund " International Financial Statistics. " TABLE B-92.- U.S. reserve assets [ Millions of dollars ] Special drawing rights Gold stock i Total reserve assets End of year or month Total a Convertible foreign currencies * Treasury Reserve position in International Monetary Fund1 M6.964 : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug. Sept Oct Nov Dec '2,781 Includes gold sold to the United States by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) with the right of repurchase which amounted to $ million on December Beginning September also includes gold deposited by the IMF to mitigate the impact on the U.S. gold stock of purchases by foreign countries for gold subscriptions on increased IMF quotas. Amount outstanding was $ million on December The United States has a corresponding gold liability to the IMF Includes gold in Exchange Stabilization Fund Includes initial allocation on January of $ million and second allocation on January of $ million of special drawing rights ( SDR ) in the Special Drawing Account in the IMF plus or minus transactions in SDR < Includes holdings of Treasury and Federal Reserve System In accordance with Fund policies the United States has the right to draw foreign currencies equivalent to its reserve position in the Fund virtually automatically if needed. Under appropriate conditions the United States could draw additional amounts equal to the United States quota Reserve position includes and gold stock excludes $ million gold subscription to the Fund in June for a U.S quota increase which became effective on February In figures published by the Fund from June through January this gold subscription was included in the U.S. gold stock and excluded from the reserve position Includes gai n of $ million resulting from revaluation of German mark in October of which $ million represents gain on mark holdings at time of revaluation Includes $ million increase in dollar value of foreign currencies revalued to reflect market exchange rates as of December Note. Gold held under earmark at Federal Reserve Banks for foreign and international accounts is not included in the gold stock of ths United States Sources : Treasury Department and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-93. Price changes in international trade [ = ] Area or commodity class Third quarter Unit value indexes by area Developed areas Total : Exports Terms of trade l_ United States : Exports Terms of trade Developing areas Total : Exports Terms of trade l Latin America : Exports Terms of trade Southern and Eastern Asia : Exports Terms of trade L World export price Indexes Coffee tea and cocoa Cereals HI Other agricultural commodities * Fats oils and oilseeds. Textile fibers Wool Rubber Manufactured goods : Total __ Nonferrous base metals K Primary commodities : Total Foodstuffs Minerals Metal ores. Terms of trade indexes are unit value indexes of exports divided by unit value indexes of imports Data are for second quarter Excludes Japan * Includes nonfood fish and forest products * Data for manufactured goods are unit value indexes Note. Data exclude trade of Communist areas in Eastern Europe ( except Yugoslavia ) and Asia Sources : United Nations and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of International Commerce ) TABLE B-94. Consumer price indexes in the United States and other major industrial countries [ = ] Period United States Canada Japan France I960 : If Ill IV. Germany Italy Netherlands United Kingdom : II III IV * II III | V i For United States 12-month average ; for all other countries January-October average except Italy and Japan January-September average October-December average for United States ; October data for all other countries except September data for Italy and Japan Sources : Department of Labor and Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : O